TRADE REVIVED, Or a Way Proposed To Restore, Increase, Enrich, Strengthen and
Preserve the Decayed and even Dying Trade of this our English Nation, in its
Manufactories, Coin, Shiping and Revenue.

Whereby TAXES may be lessened if not totally taken away, to the great content
of the PEOPLE.

As also a way showed how the Duty of Excise may be regulated for the ease and
encouragement of this Nations Commerce, both for the outward exportation and
inward consumption of all sorts of commodities.

AND LIKEWISE Certain ways propounded for the raising of considerable sums of
money to maintain the charges of the Government, without prejudice of the
people; as also for the payment of all the Soldiers just Arrears, and the
Peoples just Public Faith Debts.

Set forth by a Wel-wisher to the Nation and its Prosperity.

And for to encourage other men, who by their greater knowledge, and longer
experience, may undoubtedly be hereby engaged to put hereto their helping hand
for the perfecting this work so much desired by all ingenuous public spirited
men.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Holmwood for the use of the People of England, and
its Dominions, in the year of our Lord 1659.

Epistle Dedicatory To all such and only to such as do really desire the
prosperity of this Nation and its Commerce
Most worthy of all honor,
THis discourse is not published in expectation of reward or applause from any,
But merely to stir up those Grandees which sit at the Helm of Government, to
consider of such means as may settle the Trade of this Nation, upon a sure and
lasting foundation.

And if by the ensuing Proposals exhibited to the view both of those in
Authority, and others, in the way to inform them there is any thing
Considerable declared, or worthy observation which may help thereunto it is all
that the Author of them desires.

And when what herein is set forth and written shall not do the work, so it
may incite others endued with a greater Tallent of knowledge to Refine these
proposals, and to advise exacter ways for the accomplishment of that good
which here is intended to the Nation, and its even dying Trade, the Proposer of
these has his end, and as a well-wisher to the public peace and prosperity of
this Nation of England and its Domnions, entreats and begs all persons
interessed therein, both in authority or out of authority to do their duties
that God may bless us in our endeavors, and desires, and that we may see
settled the Trade and Commerce of this Nation upon such a glorious and sure
foundation, that it may flourish and increase so long as this Nation of England
shall endure, never more to be undermined or overthrown by any policy or State
whatsoever.

To the judicious Reader.
I shall not need to commend to you the Reading of this little tract, the
Subject, Matter, and Variety expressed in the Title, will undoubtedly engage
you to it, (which will not prove a painted Sepulcher) for I am sure you will
not think your pains ill bestowed after you have perused the same through; The
sheets are but few in number yet full of many excellent observations of much
value, which only a public spirit, experienced in forain Countries and
Negotiations, could or would have published and will be of great consequence in
this juncture of the even dying Trade of this Nation, through the present
pressures which by Wars and other inconveniences we lie under. That they ought
seriously to be considered of by all persons endeavoring the weal of England,
and its Dominions; But more especially by those that are at the Helm of
Government and (so thereby) in a capacity to establish them for the good of the
concerned, who are no more nor less than the whole body of this Nation both
public and private. First to the public, in reference to the supreme Power
and its maintenance, Secondly to every particular person in reference to their
Trade one with an other.

And although I was by Mr. John Bland Merchant, who was the Author of these
Proposals, enjoined, at the Printing them, to silence his name, and have
accordingly deliverd sundry Books to diverse worthy Persons under a Nonemus, I
have conceived it just, and indeed my duty to correct the error I then
committed.

First in regard of the public, it not being meet a person whose knowledge and
experience may be so useful in these times should be obscured, when as by his
advice and information so great advantages may be made for the common good.

Next to prevent all others from making this work theirs, and challenging to
themselves what they never deserved, or could have attained unto, but by his
ingenious pen.

Lastly, that the Author may have that esteem as is justly to him due, for his
great pains in setting s^^h a Pattern and and laying so infalliable a
foundation, whereupon Englands dying Trade and Commerse may be reedified and
built, which if set up according to the rules prescribed, asuredly will make
this Nation and People both rich and happy in their Trade, as well abroad as at
home. And if by devulging to the world the Author of this work, contrary to his
especial command and will, I shall by him be blamed. I hope those that receive
the advantage and are pleased therewith, will join with me to beg his pardon,
who am,

Your very humble Servant, Thomas Holmwood.

A Proposal to Restore Trade, OR A way Proposed for the Restoring, Increasing,
and Preserving, the decayed Trade of this Nation of England and its Dominions,
Stated under several heads, and Presented to the consideration of all Persons
in Authority and Power, who are, or may be capable to Re-establish the same, by
one who desires the Advancement and Prosperity of this Nation, in its
Shipping, Manufactorie, Comerce, and Revenew.
THis Discourse is not intended to be enlarged, to show The causes of its
decay, as to the Persons Trading, and as to the Commodities in which they
traded.
or set forth the decay of Trade which the Nation at this present lies under,
both in respect of the Persons Trading, as also in the Manufactory of the
Nation in which they traded, because it is obvious to every Eye, and may be
pointed at by every person that has but a very ordinary infight into the
negotiations of the Nation at this time, especially taking into consideration
these few following particulars.

1. The lowness of the Customs.
First, the lowness of the Customs which in the years past 1641. and 42.
mounted to and at this present yield not throughout the Nation above

2 The loss of so many ships with their ladings.
Secondly, the multitude of ships that have been taken from us lately, both full
and empty, not less by computation than 1200 sail, some say 1500. valued, when
least, in a million of money.

3. The weakness of men's Estates trading beyond Seas.
Thirdly, the weakness of men's Estates that are foreign traders, occasioned by
their late vast losses at Sea and seisures abroad, as also through the
continued war and piracies whereby they are hindered in the management of their
trades.

Fourthly, the false making of our English Commodities, contrary to 4. The
falsisying of our native Commodities.
the old Rule and Standard, which has brought them into such dis-repute
abroad, that they be even out of use, and utterly rejected.

Fifthly, the abolishing of Corporations and companies, whereby the 5. The
abollishing of Corporations and Companies.
Comerce is left without support, and open to all people, whose ignorance and
want of experience has not only suffered our native Commodities to lose their
value abroad, but at home, pulling up thereby the foundation of all Comerce,
which the most forwardest in this work heretofore do now see their error, and
by their own losses find how destructive it is to destroy Government in the
least of things, and what advantage arises by Union in Society, and Rule to
walk by: for this very thing has so ruinated the Comerce of this Nation that
it is even past cure, unless some very speedy remedy be applied thereunto.

Sixthly, the admission of Jews among us, a race of people that are The
admitting Jews into England.
the very bane of all trade wheresoever they come, and the Horseleeches of
every Commonwealth, State, and Kingdom, as it is very evident to all, if
observation be but taken of those lately crept into this Nation and its
Dominions, having engrossed into their hands the quintessence of our trade with
all other people and Nations, and not only so, but in our own American
plantations of Barbados, Seranam, and other parts, to the great detriment of
both trader and planter, filling all parts wheresoever they arive, or be
admitted, with false Money and Commodities, Usury and such like, which practice
is so inherent to that people, as they count all Christians strangers, although
by them they be su^^ered to live as Jews never so quietly among them.

Thus having briefly set down some of the most important Causes of our The
smaller causes of decay of trade omitted.
Nations decay of trade, although there be many of smaller account destructive
enough that might have been added; I shall pa^^e them by in this place, and
proceed (with submission to the more experienced Judgments) to show the way
and means, which undoubtedly if put in practice, in a very short time will not
only restore the trade of this Nation Means to increase and restore the trade
of this Nation proposed.
to its former splendour and magnitude, but increase the same, as likewise its
shipping, to the great encouragement of the traders, and advancement of the
public Revenew, whereby the honor and glory of this Nation may be the better
maintained, which is the end and scope for which this Remonstrance is set forth,

In order to which, for the Restoring, Increasing the present decayed trade of
this Nation, its Shipping and Revenew, It is meet that a To have peace
established at home and abroad.
general peace be sought and established with our Neighbors and foreign
Princes, and likewise at home amongst our selves, without which, trade and
ingenious Arts seldom or never flourish, Wars and Insurrections being
inconsistent to Comerce: for where fears and jealousies are raised by Armed
Troops amidst a people, all men of such professions are dis-heartned. Peace is
the Mother of all Arts and Comerce.


Seeing then that it is Peace which produces, and is the Mother of all
Comerce, Trade and ingenious Arts, and being produced, nourishes and
sustaineth them,

Let us see what Issue is to be desired from this noble Stock, which may The
Issue desired of this Mother.
successively maintain the honor of the Progenitor, and raise themselves by
Industry unto a glorious height of Renown.

The Productions that are to be here desired are only two. Only two.
Advantages.


The first how qualified.
The firstborn to have a perfectness in its Members and Body with Unity of
Spirit, not an Hermophrodite, a Monster in nature, and the defect of
Generation. As Companies and Corporations the Foundation and Pillar of trades.


Which by way of Comparison, I mean that all Trades should center in Companies
and Corporations, the only Foundation and Pillar upon which a lasting Monument
of Trade and Manufactories is to be built and preserved: for although
Corporations and Companies consist of many Members, they are but one Body
united, and so consequently Perfect in parts united in Spirit.
being thus compact of one Entire Spirit,

The Advantage arising upon the Settlement of the Comerce of this Nation, by
Companies and Corporations, will be these following.

1. For Council and Safety.
First, Where many are joined in a Company to consult and carry on a Trade,
it is ever more judicially managed, both for Profit and Safety, than its
possible for a particular man to do.

Secondly, By a Company, Trade both abroad and at home, may be 2. For
Regulation at home and abroad.
better Regulated as to the season, for exporting goods vendible in Foreign
parts, and keeping up their value, and then in making Provisions for Returns.

Thirdly, By Corporations our native Commodities may be kept true 3. For
keeping our Manufactories to a Rule.
according to their Standard and Rule, for Weight, Measure, and Breadth, and
all falsifyings of them prevented.

4. For raising money for the Public.
Fourthly, Where Companies and Corporations are established, Brethren of such
Societies are known to each other, and as Pillars of the Comerce upon any
sudden or immergent necessity of the Nation, they will be able among
themselves for supply of the Public to raise considerable sums of money very
easily without trouble or perplexity, until the Incomes of the Nation repay
the same. 5. For settling and discovering of new Trades.


Fifthly, By Companies many excellent discoveries and Trades have been found
out and settled, and more likely to be if encouraged, to the great increase of
our Navigation, Shipping, and Seamen, as also of Comerce by finding vent for
our Manufactories, and introducing others among us unknown, which particular
men as unable, either for parts or 6. For the advancement of ingenious men, and
fitting them for Public employment.
estates, or both, can never bring to pass.

Sixthly, Having Companies and Corporations there will be a means, and that of
great use, for the encouragement of many gallant ingenious men, by placing them
for Heads and Governors of the said Companies and Corporations, as meriting
the same for their industry and knowledge, and so more enabled for the
management of foreign affairs, whereby the Public may be by them the better
served, and they rewarded and supported in honor, when ever they shall be
called to these trusts.

Having thus brought the first born to its full growth, and settled him The
first born settled.
in his proper sphere, with such qualifications as are meet for the support of
his Dignity.

I come in the next place to show you what the second born should be, What the
second born should be.
not twins who are seldom long lived, but of a single body, that having the
more nourishment it may obtain thereby the greater strength and courage to
support and maintain the glory of its birth and succession.

By which birth I understand, I would not that any person in this Nation should
be permitted to use two Trades, but to apply himself to No Person to use two
trades.
one only.

No Shopkeeper to trade beyond Seas.
That is, no foreign Trader as a Merchant to be a retailing Shopkeeper at home,
nor no Ingrosser or retayling Shopkeeper at home admitted to be a Trader, as a
Merchant beyond the Seas, but each to keep to No Merchant trading beyond Seas
to keep a shop.
their Trade and Calling, and if they will not, whoever will from a Shopkeeper
turn Merchant, let him but then to be prohibited from keeping a retailing Trade
in a Shop, the like, if a Merchant trading beyond Seas will set up a shop, let
him then be prohibited The Damages arising thereby, To particular men.
from trading as a Merchant beyond Seas.

There is nothing so mischievous or pernicious to the Comerce of a settled
Nation and its Revenue than this is.

1. To particular men of all Professions who are undone. To the general Comerce.
2. To the general Comercer hereby suffering. 3. To the Public Revenew which is
extremely impoverished. To the Public Revenew.

The Reasons.
The Reasons why it is so Dammageable follow.

The Engrossing Shopkeeper buying commodities abroad and at home with same
advantage as the Merchant, Ruinates him.
I an engrossing Shopkeeper or Retaylor bred, being permitted to trade as a
Merchant into Foreign parts, keeping still his shop, has the same advantage in
buying his goods at home and abroad, as the Trading Merchants, if not more, for
oftentimes it happens that what he sells to Merchants of his own fabric, he
exports the like, buying often of a Merchant, what he vends in his own shop and
imports; and by his thus knowing the Cost of what is imported or exported,
beats down The Merchant does not know how to disperse his goods to Chapmen.
both abroad and at home the price of goods; that he may have the greater vent
by himself, which Ruinates the Foreign trading Merchant.

1. Because the Merchant knows not how to disperse his Commodities to Chapmen
as the Shopkeeper does, being it is his course of Trade to retail. The
Merchant can sell his goods only to such as have not stock.


2. Because the Merchant has no body to sell his Goods and Merchandise unto,
but to the Shopkeepers at home, that has not stock as others to trade with.

3. Because a Merchant cannot sell his goods so cheap as the Shopkeeper The
Merchant is under sold.
trading can, who if he gets only what he used to do by retailing is to him
sufficient, who selling to Chapmen goods, at the same Rate The trading
Shopkeeper Ruinates them of his own Profession.
he should have given the Merchant himself, did he not trade beyond Seas does
extremely prejudice the Comerce.

4ly. The Foreign Trading Shopkeepers Ruinates those of his own Profession,
that have not stock to trade with Beyond Sea, nor no other subsistence but his
Credit to be trusted by the Merchant.

By under selling him.
1. Because he can afford his goods cheaper than any of his own Profession, that
trade not, to all sorts of Chapmen buying them at first hand abroad. By
disabling him to deal with the Merchant.


2. Because he that has not stock to trade, he must repair to the Merchant to
supply himself upon his Credit, and so consequently must allow the Merchant
such a price as that the Merchant may live thereby, who cannot sell his goods
to loss unless to his Ruin.

3. By Reason that the retailing Shopkeepers trade beyond Sea, he By enforcing
him to leave off his Trade.
of his own Profession that cannot, must sit still and buy no goods of the
Merchant, because he cannot afford them so cheap to Customers as he that
trades, and then the Merchant must keep his goods unsold, wanting persons to
take them off, by reason the trading Retaylor does The 2d. Reason the Comerce
is Ruinated.
supply every person, it being the general course of all people to go where
what they want may be had cheapest, and who can afford them cheaper than the
Retaylor that brings them from beyond Seas? By underselling goods abroad.
which really considered, it will most evidently appear this is extreme
destructive to all Traders in this Nation. By exporting golds unseasonably.


II. The second Reason being in reference to the sufferance of the Comerce,
which is Ruinated by the trading Shopkeepers.

1. Because they to supply their Retaylings and shop Customers, Which raises
goods at home.
hasten their returns by ordering the selling their goods which they export at
under rates abroad. Lessons their value abroad.


2. Because that they may have a constant supply of goods, for their shops,
export our native Commodities preposterously and unseasonably, Raises Foreign
goods abroad, and lessons the value at home.
which has those inconveniences.

1. It heightens the prices of goods at home more than is meet. 2. It lessens
the value abroad, more being introduced by them into Foreign Markets, than the
place will Vend. By the want of experience Foreign Nations make avantage.

And in contra it makes Foreign Commodities dear abroad and cheap at home, which
most certainly must needs take Merchants from their Callings to their Ruin,
and those of their own Callings also that have not ability to trade abroad, and
by these persons want of experience, Foreign Nations make their advantage of us,
to the overthrow of the whole Comerce of this Nation.

3. Reason the Public Revenew is lessened in its Customs and Excise.
III. The third Reason shows what disadvantage the trading Shopkeepers
brings to the Public Revenew of the Nation both in its Custom and Excise,
to the Customs which thereby are lessened.

1. In its Custom, By closing Foreign parts.
First, By the Cloying Foreign parts at undue seasons with our goods, and so
hindering Merchants, whose experience guides them to observe time to withold
their Trade, or carry it on as is meet.

Second, By beating down the prices of all Foreign Commodities here at home,
which does discourage the Merchant from trading, which By lessening the value
of Foreign goods at home.
is in the third Article foregoing in particular expressed.

Thirdly, By their disturbing Merchants in their tradings, by their
unexperienced intrusions engaging them to leave off their Trade, By disturbing
Merchants bred up in Foreign Trade.
whereby the exportation and importation of this Nation is lessened, which
consequently must needs lessen the Income of the Custom.

To the Duty of Excise, which thereby is not only lessened but defrauded. The
Duty of Excise is defrauded.


1. Because the trading Shopkeeper keeps all Commodities low by underselling
the Merchant, and those of his own Profession that Trade not, or hindering them
from selling at all, whereby the Excise is not gathered By his under selling
them of his own calling.
in or paid as otherwise it would be, both in reference to the prices of goods
sold, as also the great vent there would be by the Merchant.

2. Because the trading Shopkeeper having entered a parcel of By, his bringing
in of goods Custom and Excise free.
goods in the Custom House, for which he pays Custom and Excise, brings in ten
parcels of the same and pays neither the one Daety nor the other; And who can
call him to account for the same, being Retayled in his Shop under color of
those first brought in by him? which if he traded not beyond Seas, what were
and would be bought of the Merchant, the Excise could not be defrauded but
constantly have its due.

Thus having by the foregoing particulars, made it apparent what damages this
Nation suffers by the trading Shopkeepers as to particular persons the general
Comerce and Public Revenew of the Nation.

It is desired and hoped by all such as wait and long to see The remedy desired.
our dying Trade restored, that an Act, Ordinance, or Order might That a
prohibition he that none use two Trades.
speedily be made for the reviving the Ancient Statute made by our Judicious
fore Fathers, who foreseeing how naturally men are addicted for to entrench
upon one another Callings and Estates, that no person should use two Trades,
as being destructive to the very essence of Trade That no Merchant keep a shop.
and Comerce with mankind. And that where the said Statute is found any way
short, to have it enlarged with strict Prohibitions, that no Merchant trading
beyond Seas should sell by Retayl, or keep a shop to That no Shop keeper trade
beyond Sea as a Merchant.
Retayl in, nor any Shopkeeper that keeps a Shop or Warehouse to trade beyond
Seas, but every one to keep to one way and Trade; if he will trade beyond Seas,
then to leave off his shop, if the Merchant will keep a shop, to leave off his
trading, beyond Sea.

The two Pillars of the Comerce settled.
These two worthies being so settled as the main Pillars to support this Nations
Comerce, and Trade, and advance its prosperity.

In the next place I shall proceed for to describe the means and ways meet,

1. First, to Nourish, Improve, and Strengthen them. 1. They must be nourished,
Improved.
2. Second, To Encourage, Ease, and Enrich them.
The ways and means to Nourish, Improve, and strengthen them are 2. Encouraged
and Eased.
as follows.

1. The first way and means is, that all Bonds and Bills be made salable, The
ways to Improve and Nourish.
and being assigned or transferred from one to another, the Assign to be
capable in his own name to prosecute the Debtor, whose Bond or Bill it is,
without using the name of the Assignor, or any Letter of Attorney 1. Means to
Nourish and Increase Trade.
from him to recover or to require the same.

The advantages that will hereby arise to all men in particular, and the
Comerce in general are these.

By admtting Bills and Bonds to be salable.
First to young beginners that have not stock to trade with, or friends to
engage for them when occasion may ofter to them to want money, for hereby they
may on sale of their goods, taking Bills for payment, with the The advantages,
said Bills return to the Market, and purchase such goods they need to supply
their Trade, and not be enforced to sell their goods at under rates to carry 1.
To young beginners wanting stock.
on their Trade for want of money: withal their Friends that may be unwilling
to enter into Bonds, yet other way willing enough to help them by giving Bills
for such Sums as they would supply their friend with at set times, with these
Bills being good the Trader may always supply himself with moneys as his
business and affairs may require, without trouble or vexation, but in contra
with ease and content.

Secondly, To ancient Traders and rich men upon any important occasion 2. To
ancient Traders and rich men.
of purchasing or other ways without imgaging any person, by their own Bills at
set times of payment they may be supplied with what money soever their
necessities may require, without the least trouble or discontent.

Thirdly, To the Public, who upon any sudden or urgent occasion 3. To the
Public on sudden occasion of money.
(when other their receipts cannot so quickly supply them) may hereby be
furnished at all times for the use of the Nation very easily, until their
daily Incomes by degrees discharge the same again, as the Bills used for the
same shall from time to time grow due.

Fourthly, It will quicken trade, because all men generally to keep up 4. To
the Come ce which will be quickened thereby.
the Reputation of their Bills, will be extreme punctual in their payments,
that their Bills may be current and freely accepted of by the Comerce, when
ever proffered to sale either for money or goods, for every man's Bills will
retayn their value more or less, as he is punctual in his payments, or has
credit with the Comerce, and therefore whoever has in his power good Bills,
will never want moneys to carry on any design he may undertake.

Fifthly, Hereby Interests and Usury will be utterly taken out of the 5. To the
abolishing Interest out of the Nation.
Nation, which is the Canker and Moth of Trade and Comerce; And the covetous
Usurer will have a more nobler way to employ his money by buying in of Bills,
which he may at all times purchase to his advantage, and what money lies by some
generally hoarded up in Chests and not used, will go abroad currently to all
hands for their greater advantage, to the use of the Comerce that now is
starved for want thereof, besides A Cautionary question demanded on admission
of Bonds and Bills to be sold.
Usury being abolished, it may be a great means to redeem many a poor soul from
future misery that even doteth on that Idol of griping Usury to their damnation.

From the permitting of Bonds and Bills to be sold according to what is before
mentioned may arise this cautionary question.

How to remedy the counterfitting men's hands.
If Bonds and Bills are made salable from one to another, and once accepted by
the Assignee as his proper debt from the Assignor, among a people so apt and
ready to deceive, as we of this Nation be, and to counterfeit men's hands, what
course is to be taken to prevent such a mischief?

To which I Answer as follows. Answered.


1. That throughout the Nation there be a certain form of Bill and By having a
set Form of Bills and Bonds.
Bond used for all sums of money lent or due for goods sold.

2. That the original Debtor of such Bill or Bond, before a Notary Public
acknowledge his Debt and Subscription to the said Bond or Bill, By having them
acknowledged before a Notary Public.
which being by the said Notary under his hand testified upon the said Bill or
Bond that the said Debtor confessed to have signed the same for the Sum
contained therein, it will be a very difficult thing for any person to produce
false Bills or Bonds and to pass them for current.

3. That it be made Felony in the highest degree to Counterfeit an By making it
Felony in the highest degree.
man's hand to any Bill, or Bond, or other writing whatever, and to profer the
same as a true Deed, Bill, or Bond, and when not punished with death, at least
to lose his hand for the fact, which strict punishment will undoubtedly deterr
all from presuming to advantage themselves by such fraud.

The second way and means to Nourish and increase the Trade of this The second
means to increase Trade.
Nation is, that all sorts of Commodities fabricated in England and its
Dominions, be made by an exact Rule and Standard, be it Cloth, Stuff, All
Commodities to be truly made.
Silks, or any other things whatever, both for length, breadth, weight, and
measure.

Who falsifies them,
And whoever fails herein,

1. To have the goods burned.
1. To have his goods confiscate and burned before his face, that no person may
make use thereof, no not so much as given to the Poor.

2. To pay double the value, besides the goods to be burnt.
2. Upon the next offense not only to have the Commodities confiscate, and
burned, but be fined double the value, which fine to go the 3. part to the
discoverer, the 3d. part to the Public Revenue, and the 3d. part to the Poor
of that place where such goods are made or sold.

3. To tose his estate as a felon, the goods burned, and imprisoned, and
Corporally punnished.
3. If taken the third time, the goods burned, the parties whole Estate
confiscate, the 4th. part thereof to the Discoverer and Seisor thereof, the
4th. part to the Public use, and the rest to the poor of that place where the
goods were so discovered and confiscated, and the party himself as a Felon
whiped from his abode through the next Market Town on a Market day, and thence
to the house of Correction, there to remain at work for so many years as shall
be thought meet by the Corporation, but when least two years.

4. The Buyer of sale-made goods fined.
4. What ever person he be that shall buy any such unlawful goods ^alsly made,
knowing thereof, and shall not discover it, shall not only lose the goods,
which are immediately to be burned, but sorfeit double their value, one 3d. to
the Seisor, one 3d. to the Public, and one 3d. to the Poor of the place were
such goods were bought.

The Advantages arising hereby both in respect of the true making our The
advantages ar sing thereby.
Native Commodities, and strict care in not admitting them to be falsified or
connived at by the buyer of them are as follows.

1. It will bring again into use sundry sorts of excellent stuffs heretofore
made in this Nation, which by reason of their false making are The recovering
our lost Manufactory.
not worn, but the very Fabric of them almost lost and forgotten.

Bringing them in request in sorein Countries.
2. It will advance their repute in Foreign Countries beyond what shall come from
other people besides ours, in regard of the satisfaction they will have of the
true and exact makings of our native Commodities.

The encouraging our own People to spend them.
3. All persons among our selves will be encouraged to wear our own
Manufactories, and such as trade with us, being hereby ascertained that what
they do buy is good and substantial, and that they are sure not to be deceived
in the Commodity.

4. All people that be the fabricatorof our Manufactories, will be enforced The
hindering all deceitsused by false goods.
to righteous dealing with one another, and kept from using their wonted
deceits which at this present is too frequent amongst us. The 3d. means to
increase trade.
And if not out of Conscience, yet through fear of the punishment,

The third means to Increase and Nourish this Nations Trade, is that That our
manufactories may pay no custom.
whatever is fabricated in this Nation, and exported for any foreign parts, may
pay no custom, or if any, a very little, only by way of acknowledgement. That
all goods imported meet to benefit our manufactories be admitted free of
custom and excise.


2. That what dying stuffs, or other commodities, as raw silks, hair, wool,
hemp, flax, or such like, that are any ways beneficial toward the finishing
of our manufactories, or advantageous for the fabricating of new ones, that may
be imitated of other Countries, and are here imported, to pay a very small
custom at their importing, and no excise at their sale. The advantage will be,
The vent of them greater abroad.


The advantages which will arise hereby to the commerce of this Nation are
these.

1. The vent of our native manufactories, will be in forain parts the greater,
by reason no people will be able to furnish them so cheap as we shall,
especially being so much cheaper than heretofore.

2. Other Nations will be dis-heartned from counterfeiting our commodities, and
from forestalling our Markets in foreign parts, as not able to afford such sorts
of commodities so cheap as we Other people will be discouraged from
counterfeiting them.
shall.

3ly, How much the cheaper goods be from us exported, the Merchants adventures
The Merchants adventure will be the easier.
will be the less, their gains abroad the greater, their returns home the more
profitable, and his stock thereby more securely managed, for his future
encouragement, and he enabled to continue the His gain the more.
longer in trade upon accidents of loss which ever do follow those that His
stock secure.
trade, more or less. The handicraftsmen more set a work.


4. Those people which live upon the fabricating of our manufactories will be
the better set a work, and kept from removing in to foreign Countries Kept from
removing into foreign parts.
for want of work, and carrying the fabric of our commodities into foreign
Princes Dominions, to the general damage of the whole commerce With their
persons and arts.
of the Nation, which of late years experience has made it too apparent the
inconvenience that has arisen thereby. By the cheapness of materials imported.


5. By having the materials imported meet for our manufactories cheap, the
Wool-master will find the better price for his wool; the Carder, Wool will
yield higher rates.
Spinster and Weaver the better wages, to encourage them to go on in their
calling, and not stray abroad; And then the Merchant exporting The workman
greater wages.
our manufactories, enabled to give the Clothier the better prices, by reason
that the goods being cheap made will be cheap bought in, and when The Merchant
enabled to give higher prices to the Clothier.
bought in exported upon small duty, to the great encouragement and advantage
of the comerse.

From the foregoing proposal will arise this Quaere, which diverse unexperienced
A Quaere raised from unexperienced men.
in trade (being stumbled at) do make, whereby many notable advantages to the
commerce of this Nation is hindered. Hindering good designs.


If the custom upon the exportation of our manufactory, and of all imported
commodities beneficial toward the fabricating of them be By pretending the
custom will be lessened.
lessned, how shall the expenses incident to the public affairs be defrayed,
and the charge of the same maintained? The public charge not defrayed.


Answer.
To which it is answered,

The Custom will rather increase.
The duty of tunnage and poundage will not hereby be any way diminished or
lessened, but rather increased, if so be that the following particulars Rules
to be observed therein.
be put in practice, and if the custom should not answer expectation, it will
be made up by the increase of the duty of excise, which will The Excise will
increase Means to raise money without inconveniency promised.
be the greater, and in case both those duties answer not to the charge of the
public maintenance; I shall, before I end this discourse, set forth some way
for the raising of considerable sums to enlarge the revenue of the Nation,
without any prejudice or inconveniency to the people.

1. The first means for the keeping up of the duty of the Custom instead The
first means to increase custom.
of what may be taken there from by the exports of our own commodities, and
imports of what is for the benefiting of them in their fabric, is, The custom
of forain manufactories to be raised.


That all foreign manufactories imported, especially gross goods that cannot be
got in under hand, have a round Custom laid on them likewise on edible and
potable commodities, as fruit, wine, and sugar; and for spice and other fine
goods that are used for vanity and wantonness, to please the fancy and
appetite; if rich goods so rated as may encourage all to pay the Custom, and
yet no way encourage the superfluous importation of them by strangers, for if
too high a rate be put upon rich commodities that take up little bulk, it will
engage Traders to bring them in under hand, and so both Custom and Excise will
be all lost.

2. Secondly, That what commodities be imported any way beneficial The second
means to increase custom.
toward the fabricating of our Nations manufactory, or inventing That certain
goods imported, at their exportation to pay custom.
of new ones (when exported, after brought in) to have no allowance of half
Custom back, but rather a custom outward imposed, equivalent to what they now
pay inwards.

The fourth means to nourish and increase Trade and Commerce in this The fourth
means to increase tread.
Nation, is, The carrying on, and settling by a public hand all Forain
plantations, which is of eminent regard, if maturely taken into To settle
Plantations abroad by a public hand, especially the Collony of Virginia
governning thereof by knowing public spirited men.
consideration; and more especially that large fertile and glorious Colony of
Virginia, which being governed, supplied, and managed by discreet, knowing,
publike-spirited men, would soon be brought to excellent perfection, experience
showing us of what value those American plantations and countries be of; when as
taking into consideration that small dry and Rocky Island of Barbados without
natives, and yet to what a hight it is grown in a very few years? having given
to many men of low degree, exceeding vaste fortunes, even equal to noble men,
as Likewise See Barbados what it has produced.
upwards of an hundred sail of ships does there yearly find employment, by
conveying of goods and passengers thither and bringing thence other Many rich
men.
commodities, whereby Seamen are bred, and Custom increased, our native
Employment to 100. ships anually.
commodities vended, and many thousands set a work abroad, at home, and so
maintained by refining sugars in our own Dominions, which Seamen increased.
heretofore we had from other Countries, and now we can and do furnish Customs
raised.
those same people with our sugars, and all this out of that rocky small Poor
set awork, our own Country supplied.
Island.

How much greater advantages should we make if that vast Country of Virginia
were manured, having therein so many millions of people and natives inhabiting
the same, who would be civilized, and become consumers Much greater advantage
will be had from Virginia.
of our manufactories, and brought very easily and suddenly to assist and help
us in the manuring of the Country, and production of Considering its extent,
Its innumerable inhabitants.
many notable and excellent commodities, for the employment of our people here
at home, furnishing them with livelihoods abroad, supporting of Seamen, and
giving large fraights to shiping, that would be much encouraged and increased
by that Navigation, it being a Country stretching it self so far Southerly, as
capable of producing all Southerly commodities that may be planted therein, and
then in contra running so far Northerly, as all Northern commodities would be
had there in abundance, ordinary care and industry lending but a weak arm to
manage the same. Advantages arising by Virginias settlement.


The advantages that would arise hereby to this Nation and its commerce, are as
follows.

1. The Natives being civilized, and the climat cold as well as hot, A vast
expense of our manufactory, and A production of excellent rich commodities.
would cause a vaste expense of our Native commodities, to the very great
increase of the commerce.

2. Upon the civilizing this people, they would fall into the advantages of
planting and manuring the land, now useless, and thereby introduce an increase
of many rich commodities which we are forced to fetch from other Princes
territories at their own rates which they think meet to put upon us, and that
because we are beholding to them for what we want, which in this place would be
supplied by our own hands and from our Both of Southerly and Northerly growth.
own Dominions, as Silk, Cotton, Curants, Wine, Oil, Sugar, Rice, Spices, Hemp,
Flax, Wool, and Corn, Masts, Pitch and Tar, all which are of use to us, and we
cannot well be without the same.

3. The Mines of the Country would not only be discovered, but Its
plentyfulnesse of mines.
opened, which are in that continent very plentiful and good, as Copper, Iron,
Lead, and of Silver also, which some have not only seen, but Copper, Silver,
Lead, Iron.
have tried the experiment thereof; and being a plentiful Country of Wood, how
easily are these things brought to be wrought, and great advantages obtained
thereby; and I can of my own knowledge aver to An essay made, 100. grains
produced 45 clean metal.
have had Iron thence that proves as good as any Iron in the world; likewise
another Mineral, the worth of which I have had tried in the Tower of London, so
considerable as that of a hundred grains, it produced The Mines to be wrought
on a public account.
clear metal forty five, and by the Say-masters observation thereof, believed
would in working be found much richer, so that if a public stock were laid out
for to improve these Mines, and they wrought upon a public account, what need
we to be beholding to other Countries for that which we can attain unto from
our own territories?

4. This Nation will find an admirable remedy for the disburdening it It would
disburden our land of supernumerary people without wars.
self of our supernumerary people which increase among us, without fomenting of
wars to be rid of them, where in Virginia they would find a present being for
habitation, and plenty for their subsistence, which through the fertility of
the soil, an easy labor would bring to perfection, Give them a plentiful
subsistence. Enrich them.
and vaste multitudes of people transported thither, would not fill the least
part of that place, and yet give them by their industry very great riches.

The poor throughout England that are so burdensome to every parish, D'sburden
the Parishes of poor children.
being sent thither, would have a happy being, and the very money gathered in
every parish to maintain them at home, would suffice to transport them thither;
And in case that were not sufficient for to forward so good a work, it annually
a sum were The money gathered for that use would transport them.
gathered throughout the An annual gathering to help, would willingly be paid.
Nation to add thereunto for the perfecting thereof, it would be freely paid by
all men with much alacrity, and in very few years the poor sent over would
bless God for their prosperity and happiness; and the commerce Commerce
advantage Gallant men would be reared up, Hinder them from begging, And the
Gallows.
of the Nation would be advantaged in supplying them and the Natives with
necessaries; besides, thereby many gallant men would be reared up to wealth and
honor, which now come to nothing but grow to be geggers from Town to Town,
wanting bread, and afterward turn thieves, robbing on the Highway, whose end
is the Gallows.

5. Our shipping would find great employment in conveying over passengers, and
in bringing thence the fruits of the Country, which will daily Shipping would
be employed.
increase more and more as the place is seaced and the ground manared, and other
Nations would seek out for commerce and traffic there, which will very much
advance both the revenue there, enrich the place, and we here at home reap the
benefit.

6. In the well seating the Country of Virginia, and searching out the Other
Nations would seek Trade there, A new way to South Sea found out.
Commodities thereof, there is an unquestionable opinion that a nearer way will
be found out for the carrying on the Trade, in the East Indies, China, and
those parts; for most men, Artists in Geography and Navigation, Most probable
by all knowing men, Besides the Natives testimony.
conclude, that the South Sea undoubtedly does fall upon the back side of
Virginia, as it does of Terra firma and Nova Hispania possessed by the
Spainards, which is all one continent with Virginia, the Natives of Virginia,
having given such satisfactory demonstrations, that there is a Sea on the back
of that part of that continent settled by our people, as its not to be gainsaid,
which discovery would put into our possession diverse brave and rich Countries,
at present unknown, and supposed to exceed in Longitude and Latitude, wealth
and riches, what yet in those parts has been discovered by any Nation.

7. The promoting of this Colony by a public hand, would furnish a means to
reward and employ ingenious spirited-men to perfect and settle Great teritories
and riches acquire to us.
these discoveries, whereby they might obtain noble livelihoods, as a reward It
would employ men of desert and rear them, Encourage others.
for their indefatigable pains, without putting the Nation to a penny cost for
their maintenance, which by reason of the straightness of our Island they
cannot expect, and so are disheartened from employing themselves to ingenious
undertakings.

It would furnish materials for buildinge, and setting out ships, for War or
Peace.
8. All materials may be had from Virginia for the building and setting forth of
shipping for war or peace, the Country being full of good Oaks for Planks,
Pines, and Fir for Masts, Pitch, Tar and Rosin; the land full of Cat^el, Corn
for Victualling, Hemp and Flax for Gordage and Sails, Iron for Guns and other
utensils; the Rivers abounding with Fish for loading ships as well as
provisions, and if from our neighbors these materials for shipping be
difficult to be obtained, we may here in England have supplies from our own
dominions, and in a very few years men civilized fit for our shipping in times
of war, as times of peace.

9. The honor that will accrue to our Nation by settling Virginia, will Hereby
our Nation will reap honor.
be very great, and the more, as being the Instruments of civilizing so By
civilizing so numerous a people.
numerous a people inhabitants of that vast tract of land, who would all be
subject unto us, and by us brought to know God their Creator, By subjecting so
vast a continent.
and Jesus Christ the Redeemer and Savior of them and us, and be the means of
saving their souls, whereby God may be glorified, and we By bringing them to
know God.
repaying to them that good, by showing our thankfulness to God for what others
in former days did for our forefathers, without which mercy of God to us, we
must have continued in darkness, and heathens as they be to this day.

The fifth means to increase and nourish Trade in this Nation, Is,

That out of the public revenew of the Nation, a ship or two should annually
be set sorth by the authority of the Nation, under the command The fifth means
to increase Trade.
of some ingenious knowing publike-spirited person, to discover those parts of
the wo^ld that lie yet unknown, and to bring home exact To send a ship or two
annually on discovery on the public purse.
Maps of what they do discover, what people inhabit those parts, what Commerce
may be had with them, and what Commodities are to be had among those Regions
useful to us, as likewise to discover the Coasts and Ports of those parts of
America that are in part already inhabited by us, and bring descriptions of all
things, and where one leaves off the next to begin and proceed on.

The advantages of discoveries to our Nation will be considerable Advantages
arising hereby.


1 Our Trade will be advanced to an unlimited height, to the exceeding
enriching of the Nation. Our trade advanced and enriched.


2 It will very much increase the public revenew, by introducing new wealth
The public revenew increased.


3. It will be a means to vent great quantities of our manufactories, and cause
new fabrics. Our manufactories vented.


4. It will give occasion here at home to set our people more at work.

5. It will be a great strengthening and glory to our Nation, by Our people
employed Nation enlarged.
adding new and large Countries to our present Dominions.

6. It will secure our Navigation in those American parts of the world, Our
Navigation will be secure in America
in regard of the knowledge we shall attain to of the Coasts, Harbors, Rocks,
Sands, whereby the ships trading that way will be enabled to The art of
Navigation on improved.
manage their voyages more safely, and avoid those storms and tempests which now
they are liable unto for want of this knowledge.

7. It will infinitely improve the Art of Navigation and knowledge of Sea men
and Sailors, to the great benefit of all that delight there in and study the
same.

8. It will breed most able knowing Mariners in this Nation, and engage them to
prepare and fit themselves for such noble employments and It will breed able
Mariners.
undertakings.

9. It will be a means by the enlargement of our territories, to produce It
will advance and raise men of desert to honor and profit.
not only places of great trust, but of honor and profit for to reward
deserving men, to whom these places may be given in recompense of their
services, which will extremely encourage all generous spirits to Encourage
active men
high atchivemements, in hope of such promotion.

10. Hereby the Gospel will be planted and preached among those people The
Gospel will be preached where yet it never was.
and Nations where yet it never was, whereby God may be both honored God
honored.
and served by them and us; and undoubtedly if what we shall act Our Nation
blessed.
herein be sincerely to glorify him, the Lord will bless us and make our The
sixth means to increase trade.
undertakings for to prosper.

The sixth means to increase and nourish the Trade of this Nation, is To
promote the fishing on our coasts.
for to promote the Fishing thereof for Herring, Cod, and all other Fishing at
home and abroad throughout our Dominions; the advantages It will multiply
Seamen.
thereof both for the increasing the Seamen, Shipping, and wealth of the Nation
has by so many pens already been lately set forth, Give good employment for
shipping.
that I will not enlarge this discourse therewith, but refer such as desire to
be informed and satisfied therein to what is printed by many on Enrich the
Nation.
that subject, which perchance will be more exactly declared, than I should have
represented the same.

The seventh means to increase trade.
The seventh means to nourish and increase the Trade of this Nation, is, To
bring in store of Silver and Gold.


1. To enrich it by the bringing in among us store of Bullion, that the To keep
it among us To admit the exportation of all Forain corns, after brought in for
the use of the Commerce.
Mint may be continually employed.

2. To find out the way when brought into the land, to keep it there for the
use of the Commerce.

3. To admit the exportation of all Forain coin useful to manage the
negotiations of the Commerce in those Countries where nothing else can produce
convenient returns, unless supplied therewith, as occasion may The ways to
bring in store of Silver and Gold.
require, and that without prejudice to the Public.

The ways to enrich this land with store of Coin and Bullion, is,

1. To introduce among ourselves the fabrics of all Forain manufactories To
introduce the making of all Forain manufactory.
that we may not be enforced to seek and fetch them else where, or encourage
others to bring them to us.

2. That whatever is frabricated in this Nation and its Dominions, be To make
our manufactories cheaper.
made cheap, that our own people may be animated to consume the same, and
strangers enticed to fetch our manufactories from us, for its the only To
expend them our selves that other people may desire them of us.
engagement that moves Trade, to seek out such places, where the Commodities
used among a people, can be obtained cheapest, and wherever such Commodities
used are to be had, and cannot be obtained by barter or exchange of other
goods, or that in that place they do stand in need Cheap commodities is the
mover of Trade.
of no sort of other Nations Commodities, Coin and Bullion, is that which does
compass all things, and is the wealth desired by all people Gold and Silver the
^niversal riches esteemed.
throughout the universe, that manage Trade with Forain nations; It being an
infallible rule, that all people ever strive to supply themselves with what
they want-where it is to be had best, and best cheap, and to That which
compas^es all things.
compass their desires, what ever is most esteemed, shall be delivered up in
exchange thereof, the esteem of Silver and Gold being the wheel The wheel that
turns ^ound all commerce.
that carrys all Commerce about.

3. That there may be such a duty laid upon all Forain manufactories, To impose
such duties (...) Forain fabrics ^^ought in, that it may ^^nder their
importa^^on.
especially upon such as are fabricated among our selves, which may totally
dishearten all people from bringing them to us in hopes of gain, and also
disrelish our selves from desiring them from abroad, being to be had in our
land at far cheaper rates and truer made.

The means to keep our Coin and Bullion among us for the use of the The means
to kee^ coin and bullion so the commerces use (...)
Commerce, being once imported. The way is,

1. That our Coin both of Silver and Gold be reduced to as pure a finenesse as
any Coin whatever current throughout the universe. To reduce it to (...) purity
of any coin c^rrent.


2. That in coining thereof, it be made neat and thin, as to its proportion of
value, it being to all judicious persons versed in the coynage of money, that
the thicker the coin is the easier to be counterfeited, as experience
sufficiently shows by the false pieces of Eight, Hollands Dollars, and our own
half Crowns.

3. That our Coin to be made may be of a less weight, whereas now To make it
thin to a void falsifying.
our standard is after the rate of five shillings to the ounce, to be made to
To make it of les weight than now it is
be of six shillings and six pence, or seven shillings to go to the ounce,
which will utterly take off all people from carrying of it from us, by reason
of the loss they will sustain by the weight, being less than heretofore.

4 That our own Coin may be reputed as bank money from other Forain To esteem
over own coin as bank money
coyns, and vallewed one or two per cent. more than they in payments, having by
reason of its pureness better estimation put thereon than other money, as the
Florence money and other parts of Italy, have the reputation before all other
Coyns current among them.

5. That for the ordinary use of the Markets and poor people, a certain To have
a token for the poor.
public token be made (that coynageexcepted) may be as valued as if sold in
Metal, which will be a means none will falsify the same, or To be worth as
much in the metal, coynage excepted.
bring it from other parts to fill us therewith, especially it being prohibited
to pass in payments between man and man, and no person to be engaged in any
payment whatever to receive thereof above a penny worth To admit no man to
force it in payment.
or two, merely for change and no otherways, except the party shall desire the
same for his private use of him that is to pay him any sum or sums of money;
for should Copper, Brass, or mixed metal money be The inconveniency is admit it
in payment. See Spains loss thereby.
coined and made current, it would utterly destroy the wealth of the Nation, as
experience shows us by the black money introduced and made current in Spain,
where by the reason of the admission of that money to go current in buying and
selling commodities, their very Silver money is become a Merchandise, and
almost has lost the name of a coin; how prejudicial it is, and has been to
that Nation, all persons who have the knowledge of S^ain can testify, and the
like will happen to us if we should admit it.

6. That Gold be considered of under the same observance, as is expressed To
have Gold pass under the same consideration as Silver.
concerning our Silver, which if lessened in weight and kept to the present
value, will remain with us, and not be carried out as it is every day. To admit
the exporting of Forain coin,


For the admitting of all sorts of Forain coin to be exported after brought in
for the use and benefit of such Trades as cannot well be managed without it,
and that without prejudice to the Nation. The way is, To have Forain coin pass
in payment.


That all Forain coin that is true Gold and Silver, may pass in payments
currently among us according to their value, as they do in Holland, France,
Italy and other Princes Countries and Territories.

The advantages will be. The advantage thereof.


1. Our own coin will ever remain with us unexported. Our own coin will ever
abide with us.


2. All persons needing Bullion and coin to manage their trade, will always
export such Species as are known in those parts, where they go Such only will
be exported as be known where required to trade.
to negotiate, and where only coin is required to obtain their commodities.

3. Hereby all sorts of Forain coin will be continually brought in by every
body when its known to pass curently for the buying up of our own native
commodities, as being readier to purchase any thing for dispatch.

All sorts of forain coin will be imported for dispatch.
4. By this means these Forain coyns will be as Merchandise rising and falling
as its plentifully imported to buy up commodities among us, or as occasion, may
offer to the negotiator to export the same for his forain employments. It will
be as merchandise, rising and falling.


5. There will never want forain coin of all sorts to supply all persons There
will be no want thereof.
that shall need the same to export for their quotidian occasions.

6. Experience shows us, that in Italy, Holland, and other parts In diverse
parts forain coin permitted to be exported.
where the exportation of forain coin is permitted, there never is a want
thereof for any that desire or need the same.

7. The Public Revenue may hereby be advanced, and that upon a The Public
Revenue will be advanced.
very good foundation, engaging every one that exports forain coin or bullion to
enter it in the Custom house, and to pay for the admitting By licencing its
exportation.
its exportation one or two per cent. for license, but more not, by reason that
if too high a rate be set thereon, people will carry it out under hand, and pay
nothing, so the Nation will be berest of its wealth, and the public never a
whit the better.

8. That in order to the foregoing proposals, and benefit of the Nation, To
have it selony to be exported without license.
it be felony to export any forain coin out of the land without paying the
forementioned duty for license, besides the loss of the money so discovered to
be conveyed out, and the strict course for prohibition of conveying our own
coin out of the land to continue in force.

The eighth means to increase and nourish trade in this nation, Is No admitting
our own coin to be exported.


The 8 means to increase trade To guard and strengthen it with warlike ships To
supply it with ships.
1. To guard and strengthen it with stout and warlike ships whereby we may be
defended from Enemies and Pirates.

2. To supply the commerce with convenient ships of burden as well as of force
for all sorts of trades, and that at easy rates, especially for the lading and
fetching of gross goods, as Timber, Masts, Pitch, Tarr, Corn, Salt, and that we
may no longer be enforced to make use of the Hollander, our Neighbors ships
and themselves, to fetch and bring all those Northern commodities, which we
cannot be without, from Norway Fit for all trades.
and the East Country, whereby we enrich them, To take us off from employing
Hollanders.
and increase their shiping, to our own prejudice and infinite disadvantage, and
this merely by our sloth and negligence.

For the Norway and East-land trade.
To remedy the same, and to disable the Hollanders, our only competitors in
trade and shiping, and that to our own advantage in a short To remedy it.
time, the following particulars are recommended to be considered of, To the
Hollanders loss. To our advantage, To re^eal the last Act for shiping which
has been very destructive to us.
and if found convenient desired to be put in practice, the sooner the better.

That the late Act for increase of shiping be repealed, and void to all tents
and purposes; Experience having taught us since it was made, how pernicious and
destructive it has proved to our trade and shipping, especially for the
northern parts of this Nation, we having suffered far greater inconveniences
and loss thereby, than ever it could have any ways advantaged us.

1. Because put in execution too suddenly, before we could supply As put in
execution too suddenly.
our selves with meet shipping for the introducieg among us gross goods from
Norway, and the East-land Countries.

2. Because it was left with so many loop-holes and sally-ports, that Left with
too many sally-ports.
every one got out of it when and how he pleased, being not to be hindered.

3. Because so defective in its self, admitting as many interpretations, Made
defective giving too much liberty of employing Hollanders.
as men had occasion to make use of, whereby the Hollanders got more advantages
of us, both as to our trade and employment of his shipping, especially since
the war began, and has continued with Spain, that never could a happened the
like mischief to a people, coveting Our losses and experience, since the
Spanish war makes us see our error.
trade as we do, and jealous of every thing that has but a color of
intercepting us therein, having been hereby laid open and destroyed by these
crafty and subtle Hollanders by our own permission.

1. In setting our own shipping remain by the walls, and employing By letting
our own ships lie still, and employing Hollanders.
theirs, notwithstanding the Act, which in a manner gave us occasion more freely
to employ them.

2. By our employing of their ships and people we have given them By giving the
Hollander the knowledge of our trade.
the insight and knowledge of our whole trade and negotiations, which thereby
has been discovered unto them, inabling them the better to circumvent us.

3. In giving them hereby the power to betray us, which they have By letting
the Hollander have power to betray us.
done by woeful experience, and upon obtaining their ships and freight, have
delivered up our goods to our enemies, whereby many have been ruinated and
undone, the Nations stock lost, the revenue indamaged, our shipping and Seamen
perishing.

For prevention thereof in the future, and that the Hollanders trade To prevent
it for the future. 1. To prohibit all English from fraighting foreign ships.
and shipping may be decreased, and our own shipping increased;

1. That forthwith a Prohibition be made, that all the Subjects of this Nation
of England, and its dominions, shall not take to freight any Foreiners ships
directly nor indirectly in any of the Ports belonging to England, and its
dominions, or in any other Princes dominions and Ports, if any English ship be
there to be fraighted.

2. That all persons of our own Nation, and its dominions, as well 2. That
English as well strangers making use of foreign ships, to pay double Custom.
as any other Princes or States Subjects whatsoever, importing among us, or
exporting from us, any sort of merchandise in any vessel, not properly
belonging to this Nation of England, and its dominions, and sailed by an
English Commander, and the major part English men, to pay double Custom for
all his Goods and Merchandise, so brought in by foreign ships, or shipped out in
them; and if that double Custom may not be 3. That all strangers employing
English ships pay no more Custom than an English man.
thought enough upon some sort of Goods, to impose treble Custom on such as may
require that charge.

3. That in Contra to the foregoing Article, all strangers, of what Nation
soever, that shall bring into this Nation, or export any Commodities hence in
the ships bona fide, and properly belonging to this Nation; and its dominions;
to pay no more Custom upon the Goods so imported, or exported, in our ships
than an Englishman.

The advantages arising hereby to the Commerce of this Nation, are The
advantages will be. All Nations will employ English ships, especially trading
with us.
as follows.

1. All foreign Nations will make use of our ships, by reason of their strength
and force, able to secure their Goods from Enemies and Pirates, as likewise for
the advantage they will have in bringing their Merchandise to us, and obtaining
thereby the benefit of paying no more Customs than our selves, which will be
very easy to them.

2. Foreign shipping, although they bring their Goods, in reference No foreign
ships can bring their Goods to market cheaper than we.
to freight, cheaper than our ships do, yet they will not forestall our
freight, in regard what is saved in the freight by such as freight them, will
be inhansed upon them again, by their paying double Customs.

3. We our selves in our own ships shall hereby be enabled to bring English
ships will bring Goods to markets as cheap as strangers. Foreiners cannot
under-sell us.
our Goods to market as cheap as any foreign ships can do, by reason of the
easiness of our Customs.

4. No strangers by this course will be able for to under-sell us, because
their Goods will stand them in as dear as ours, and so we shall trade with them
upon equal terms, for undoubtedly, when all the difference that will be betwixt
the stranger and us, who it is that shall purchase his Goods at the best hand,
we shall be both as able, diligent, and We shall obtain Goods as cheap as they.
The pretense of the Hollanders sailing cheaper than we taken away.
quick as they.

5. That great obstacle, or Remora, which our Navigation is stopped with, of the
Hollanders sailing cheaper in their ships than we do in ours, and so by their
easy freight are capable to under-sell us in all places, will be quite taken
away and laid aside, for by this way and course we shall be equal with them.

6. That great trade which the Hollanders do carry on with us now, The
Hollanders trade to the East-land, and Norway, will vanish.
from Norway and East-land, in Timber, Deals, Masts, Hemp, Pitch, and Tarr,
will be ours: And whereas now we do want ships for the management of that
trade, our own shipping being generally unfit, in a short time, we walking in
this prescribed path, all their Prames and Fluts Their ships will be sold to
us. Their Seamen will be ours.
will become ours; and their very Seamen, for want of employment, will remove
to us, naturalizing themselves merely to get employment from us, that they may
have bread to eat and feed their otherwise starved bodies, who must perish as
well as their ships, the one unless they do come over to us for employment, and
the other, unless they be sold to us; then by their Seamens coming over to us
we shall be fitted with people By them we shall be fitted for the fishing
trade. The sole maintenance of the Hollanders. In the Levant and Mediterranean
Seas only English ships will be employed.
understanding in the management of the fishing trade; a thing so considerable
for the enriching this Nation, and that is in a manner the sole maintenance of
the Hollanders trade, Seamen and shipping.

7. Hereby in the Levant and Mediterranean Seas the Hollanders ships will be
slighted and rejected, and want their employment from all Nations in those
parts, who will strive to have their Merchandise conveyed only in our English
vessels,

8. By this Act our English shipping will gain such repute in all It will
increase them in burden, strength, and number.
parts, that it will infinitely increase them, both in number, as well as
strength and burden.

9. Hereby our shipping will never want employment and good They will never
want employment by our selves and strangers.
fraights, for what we our selves cannot lade, strangers will supply, by reason
of their security and advantage which thereby they will receive: And whereas
our great ships have even lost their wonted esteem, and so we have been forced
to send them out upon long and desperate voyages, Our great ships will regain
their repute, and be ready for Public Service when there is occasion.
they will regain it again; and being employed never hand, be ready at all
summons to supply the Public when ever any occasion may offer to make use of
them.

The ninth means to increase and nourish the trade of this Nation is, that
some way may be found out, to agree with the Spaniard, The ninth means to
increase trade, to buy up all the Spanish Wool.
for the baying up the Wool of his Country, prohibiting all other Nations
besides the English, to transport from Spain to any other people, or place, any
of the said Wool but for England.

The Advantages that would arise hereby unto our Nation, and its The Advantages
arising thereby.
Commerce are these:

1. It would very much improve our Manufactories, and make our It would improve
our Manufactory.
Nation the Staple for all sorts of woollen Commodities throughout the World.

2. The Hollander would be utterly disabled from counterfeiting Deprive the
Hollanders from counterfeiting of them.
our Woollen-Draperies, and all his subtleties would come to nothing, which
through our neglect of compassing this work, and suffering him to get into his
power the Spanish Wool, he has even eaten us out of our fine Cloth trade.

3. It would be a means infinitely to employ our own people, and to It would
employ our People.
set them at work, and thereby keep the fabric of these sorts of Goods in our
own Dominions.

4. It would occasion the employment of much shipping, to setch Increase
employment for ships.
these Wools from place to place, and afford owners of ships good fraights to
the great encouragement of building ships.

5. It would notably advance the Spanish Trade, giving the Traders Give good
opportunities for returns to Merchants. Heretofore it was to have been obtained.
that way a most large means, for to make returns from thence when other ways
may fail, and that not only to the Trader for the North parts of Spain, but to
the Trader for the South likewise; It having been in agitation heretofore
between the two Nations, even within a very little of being settled, had not
the unhappy war in the bowels of this Nation fallen out, which frustrated the
completing this so noble a design, which was not misliked by the Councils of
both Nations, who were very well satisfied therein, and of the great benefit
that would have arrived thereby to each other. It being my judgment, if we
were By discreet management likely enough still to be effected. The Spaniard
would reap the benefit as well as we, therefore to be desired.
settled in peace within our selves, and this negotiation of the Wools set
afoot again by some judicious person, with the Public approbation and support,
there might be means used to compass the same, and such terms proposed between
us and the Spaniard, that might be approved of to the liking of them and us;
and therefore to be wished, that a work so advantageous to this Commerce were
estected.

The tenth means to nourish, increase, and revive the dying Trade The tenth
means to increase trade, to have the Statutes against Jews put in execution.
of this Nation is, that all Jews lately crept into this Nation, and its
Donminions, be extirpated and banished, according to the ancient Laws and
Statutes made from time to time to that purpose; it being the Jews whole
design, where ever they are admitted, by degrees for to The ingrossers of all
trade wherever they come.
disperse themselves into all parts of the Nation, where trade is, that they may
thereby the better ingross the same into their own hands.

Their next course being the farming of the Customs and Public Duties The
Farmers of all Taxes and Du^ies.
gathered in those places where they be admitted, whereby becoming both masters
of the money and the trade, they may the better oppress The blood-suckers of
all Nations.
all both rich and poor, sucking the very blood of the people, like
Horseleaches, out of their veins, and lacking their estates with griping usury;
The only Extortioners and Usurers.
it being observable, wherever they have had any time to settle themselves
among a people, they have been the destruction of that Nation The destroyers of
all People wherever they settle.
and People, both in their Trade and Estates, which this Nation of ours, in
former days has sufficiently experienced: As whoever please but to peruse
that worthy Piece of Mr. Prynne against the admission of Jews See Mr. Prynne
against the Jews admission into England.
in England, may easily be satisfied, what a generation of People they be: And
if by our own lamentable experience we cannot be sufficiently warned of them,
let Spain, Portugal, Italy, the East and West Indies, Our own experience can
tell us what they be, Spain, Portugal, Italy, East and West Indies may be
examples.
where they are so numerous at this present, be examples unto us; there having
never any Tax been laid in those parts, but Jews are still the Farmers thereof:
There has never been any false money coined or introduced, but Jews are the
fomenters and contrivers thereof; No false bars of silver made in the Indies,
but the Jews have been the Actors therein: And notwithstanding those exemplary
punishments, which The promoters of all deceits inCoyn orCommodities.
from time to time has been inflicted on them (sometimes) to the cutting off
their whole Posterities, that others might thereby be terrified; yet for all
those heavy punishments they will not leave their villainy, No punishment can
make them beware.
being a stift-necked People, and so continue to this day, without remorse or
any amendment. And if you will look a little nigher into See what they have
done in England since permitted by the late Protector O. C.
the present time with us, observe but since O. C. the late Protector,
seemingly gave them a hope to have admission in this Nation (and that upon the
suggestion of some, that by their tradings among us they would advance the
Revenue one hundred thousand pounds per annum) They have got into all our
American Plantations.
how have they increased, coming from all parts to us? and not only here in
England, but into all our American Plantations, as Barbados, St. Cists, Mevis
and seranam, where by their slaves, whom they use like Engrossed the Trade, and
filled them with false money and goods
Horses, carry on their backs up and down into every corner of those Plantations
all sorts of Commodities, engrossing thereby the whole Trade, filling them with
false moneys and merchandise; and if report be Fired Barbados to the ruin of
many.
true, were the Authors of that first great fire in Barbados, wherein so many
suffered the loss of their Estates to their ruin, and really conceived was
done by the Jews maliciously; but those that give the best construction thereof
say, it happened by their coining of false pieces of eight to deceive the
Inhabitants, the fire beginning at a Jews house, it being a Maxim held by that
People, not to value their own loss, so They value not their own loss so they
ruin Christians.
thereby they can destroy Christians, being such haters of Christianity, that
seldom or never do you see any of them to become Christians; and when any
occasionally do pretend to be Christians, its either for fear They never appear
Christians but for fear of punishment or loss of Estate.
of some extraordinary punishment likely to fall upon them, which they may have
deserved, or else to secure and save their Estates from confiscations, which
Mr. Prynne very fully by many examples in his book before recited has made
appear. And in regard its somewhat pertinent to the present purposes, I shall
by one example in these our days, apparent in the eyes of the whole Commerce,
and worth observation, An Observation thereof now among us to undeceive such as
think them to be as harmless people.
whereby those who think these people a harmless generation of men, and to be
admitted among us in hopes of their conversions, may be undeceived and
satisfied; it has not been without cause, that former ages have made such
strict Laws against them, it being to be feared, considering the fantastical
opinions and heresies now reigning in this Nation, instead of our converting
them to Christianity, they rather They rather likely to pervert us then we
convert them.
may pervert and turn us to Judaism; for who have you seen of these Jews lately
admitted into England, that has publicly been baptized, acknowledging the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In contra, I pray see Antonio
Fernandes Caravahal what he has done after Let Antonio Fernandes witness, who
has been twenty years among us, sixteen thereof professing himself a
Christian. Baptized his own and other Children.
twenty years living in England, enjoying all privileges and quietness among
us, received as a Citizen in this City of London, trad^ng freely without the
least molestation, having for about sixteen years of that time, professed
himself a Roman Catholic; Answered at the Font for many Christian Children
baptized at the Spanish Ambassadors house, nay has there also baptized diverse
of his own publicly, though it seems nevertheless he circumcised them the
eighth day privately: proclaiming himself a Christian (and yet a Jew in heart)
waiting only a fit time to discover it, which he did as soon as there was a
seeming consent of their admission, as is before declared by the late O. P.
Abused the Nation in the business of our Silver Ships.
And this Fernandes Caravahal has notably abused this Nation, for when the
Hambrough Silver ships were taken, many Jews subject to the Hollander had their
Estates owned by him as Portugal Spaniards, but when we fell out with Portugal,
then he was a Spaniard, when At last was neither French nor Dutch, Portugal nor
Spaniard, Italian nor Turk, but an Hebrew Jew.
What greater evidence to discover the temper of these Jews.
the War began with Spain, then he was neither Spaniard, Portugal, French nor
Dutch, Italian nor Turk, but an Hebrew, a plain downright Jew, acknowledging he
never was or would be a Christian, taking upon him the outward profession of
Christianity only for safety, which now he needed no longer to make use of,
being he could live in England a professed Jew, and receive more respect with
O. P. or his Professing Christianity only as a Cloak for his Knavery.
Council in all businesses, either for himself or his Tribe, than any Christian
could have whatsoever. Is not this then evidence enough to show what these Jews
be, and would it not be an extreme piece of Justice in this Nation, and a great
service to God, for to punish this Fernandes for his Hypocrisy, and to banish
both him and all his Tribe out of the Nation, whereby to prevent farther
mischief, that others Antonio Fernandes a fi^^ person to be made an example.
might through the terror thereof be warned from doing the like for the future,
confiscation of his Estate being too small a punishment for his offense.

And for a further experience of these Jews engrossing the trade of The Canary
trade ruinated by the Jews.
this Nation to its ruin, let the Canary Merchants be called to testify who
it is, but the Jews that have spoiled that trade, and brought us to pay twenty
pounds a pipe for Canary wines in ready money (silver By them wines are brought
from 10 l. in Commodities now to 20 l. ready money to the impoverishment of our
Nation.
scarce being liked or able to purchase them at that rate, but it must be
Spanish pistols) when as heretofore they were bought by our Nation trading
thither, part for Commodities carried hence, part for time, and part money, at
ten pound per Pipe, to the great accommodation of all that traded into those
Islands, and the expense of our manufactories, which advantage is now quite
taken away, and instead of having the proceeds of our Commodities returned in
wines, we are fain to carry money Self and private interest the cause of the
Jews admission.
to purchase them, which impoverisheth the Nation, and what can be more
destructive than this is unto us? And although private interest (and Self the
great Sin of this Age) assisted the admission of Jews, under that grand
pretense of their increasing the public revenew by God in mercy to the Nation
stop their admission.
their trade, the design was stopped at that time by Gods providence, through
the prous opposite on of some who are to be reverenced, and never Without the
Jews help the Public may be furnished with money.
to be forgotten for their faithfulness to the Nation, and the Gospel settled
therein, it being not only desired, but hoped that they may never be admitted
by Law among us under what pretense soever, for should the Nation be in want of
money never so much, without having The Jews instead of increasing do decrease
the Revenew and trade.
it from Jews, undoubtedly the public may be furnished, for be sure they will
not do it but on such terms as unhappy should we be to have it from them; it
would not be to the increasing the revenew, but decreasing it and the Nations
trade likewise; for it is evident to all knowing Merchants of this Nation, that
the Stock of England is too great The Nations Stock is great enough, and needs
not the jews to help.
for its own trade, our Country affording such plenty of Commodities, and our
Merchants so numerous and wealthy, that where ever the Nation settles any
factory, its easy to see how they overcloy all parts with All parts to which
we trade can witness.
our goods more than they can vent; and again for returns more is imported by us
of foreign Commodities, than the Nation can spend; being then so, as that it is
so is most apparent, if consideration be had in See if in this Nation there he
any want of Foreign Commodities.
observing how low all sorts of Commodities are in England, and at what easy
rates they are to be had. Its true the present trouble, makes them the cheaper,
yet when a Nations stock is greater than its trade What ever they trade for, we
must not trade in.
will bear, Commodities will always in that place be cheap; and therefore what
need we the Jews Stock to increase our trade, which must of necessity decrease
and spoil it? for did we want Stock in the Nation, If permitted still they will
ingrosse the trade, the land and we must be their Slaves.
then somewhat might be said; but seeing our own is too great already, it must
follow, they trading, we must desist, and if we do desist from trading, and let
them alone, we must suffer them to become Masters of the whole trade of our
Nation, the Ingrossers of all the Land, and at last we must become their
Vassals and Slaves, and if Since their admission the Customs advanced nothing.
the question would satisfy, pray let it be required, that the Officers of the
Custom House declare how much the Customs have been increased since they have
been permitted to live and trade among us; its well if As Christians for Gods
glory, as Englishmen for our one preservation we ought to get them banished.
they have not decreased rather, I am sure the trade of the Nation has, and
that not a little.

Considering all which, and much more that might be enlarged in reference
thereunto: It will behove us all of this Nation, as we are Christians, for the
glory of God and honor of our Savior Jesus Christ and his Gospel, to
endeavor the extirpation and banishment of all Jews from among us; and then as
Englishmen if we desire the trade of this Lest instead of advantage, it brings
ruin, instead of being blessed, we be cursed.
Nation to increase, let us unanimously be instrumental to discover these
people, and divest them of their hold which they have gotten in England, that
they may never settle in this Nation, for fear lest by willingly permitting
them to remain among us, instead of a blessing, we bring a curse upon our
posterity, to the Nations utter ruin and destruction, God will do his own work
in his own time for their Conversion.
not doubting but God in his due time will do his own work in their conversion,
and being their own Country Judea wants inhabitants, its better they return
thither and wait Gods pleasure, where in the In their own Country there is room
to set up their trade, and also for such among us as think of building
Jerusalem.
mean time they may have room enough to enlarge any trade they can manage, and
we may accompany them with our prayers and desires, and permit all those among
us that think of the rebuilding Jerusolem again, to go along with them, and
bless God we are so well rid of such a Generation.

Thus having by the foregoing proposals showed some means for the Thus far of
the means to increase our trade.
increasing the trade of the Nation which is commended to your consideration.

In the next place I shall set down some ways and means, for the Ways
proposed to encourage and case trade.
case and encouragement of the trade and commerce of this Nation, whereby in
these sad and dangerous times wherein we are, the traders into foreign parts may
not be disheartened, but inlivened with hopes, That Merchants may not be
disheartened in these sad times.
that by theirperseverance in trade, they may in time reap the benefit of their
patience and extreme hazards, which since this Nation was a trading people,
never were greater. And it is not to be doubted, but that those that are in
power, considering how necessary a thing Those in Power ought to ease and
encourage Merchants for their own advantage as well as the peoples good.
it is for their own advantage to preserve and encourage trade, without which
as the people of this Nation cannot subsist nor supply their wants, or vent
their commodities, so likewise the Public without trade cannot have any way or
means for to furnish or maintain the charges of the Government; Therefore it
does concern them that are in power to ease and encourage trade all they can,
as well as the people The Nation requires it, and that speedily before it be
too late.
to desire it, it being prayed by all such as wish this Nations prosperity, that
a speedy course may be taken to remedy what is amiss in the Commerce, whereby
to ease and encourage all Merchants tradings, lest by delaying the cure, other
people and Nations get our trade from us, and when the Merchants trading are
ruinated, having nothing left to trade with, it will be too late (according to
the Proverb) when the Steed is stole, to shut the Stable door. Consider the
ways to Encourage and case trade.


The ways therefore which are to be taken into consideration for the ease and
encouragement of the trade of this Nation, are as follows. The fifth means to
encourage trade, is to remove the burdens of the Custom House.


The first means to encourage and ease the trade of this Nation, is, that the
burdens and disturbances of the Custom House and its Officers, be removed,
taken away, or regulated.

1: That the Customs may not be farmed by any under what 1. Not to permit the
Customs to be farmed, but executed by Commissioners able and knowing men.
pretense soever, but executed by Commissioners for the Public, they to be
able knowing men of public spirits, courteous in their carriage, not covetous,
but honest and free hearred, meet to encourage men that do trade, and ready to
ease them when any occasion shall present or offer before them.

2. That those Commissioners so established, may have such authority 2. The
Commissioners to have Power of determining differences of scisures between the
Officers and Merchants, and they freed from attending on Courts and Committies.
and power given them, that they may end and determine all differences arising
between the Merchants and Officers in reference to scisures, or otherwise that
the Merchant trading, may thereby be freed from waiting upon Committees or
Courts of Justice, spending their money in Law, and their time in attendances
upon every petty and frivolous business, which trouble and solicitude, with
their expense and loss of time, produces more damage to the Merchant, them
the loss of his goods, it happening often times in the transactions of
Merchants affairs, diverse accidents arive, having relation to the Customs, of
small importance, and yet vexatious enough to the trader, which cannot be
foreseen till they come to pass, and fit for the Commissioners to determine,
without engaging the traders to run up and down from Westminster Courts, to
White Hall Committees, losing that time which they might better spend at the
Exchange, a place fitrer for Merchants than Courts of Judicature, which is not
only burdensome, but a grrat discouragement to Merchants, these latter years
having sufficiently tired the Commerce in those attendances; a greater Hell to
Me chants upon Earth cannot be undergone.

3. That the Custom-House open for the entering of goods inwards or 3. The
Custom-House to open twice a day from 8. to a 11. and from 2. till 5.
outward twice a day, from eight in the morning till eleven, and in the
afternoon from two till five, whereby all sudden accidents ariving may be
supplied, and the old wonted hours for Exchange meetings no way hindered, which
ought to be from eleven to twelve, and from five till six and no longer,
according to the institution of the founder of that Royal fabric, so
convenient for the negotiations of the Commerce, and so judicially observed by
our Ancestors.

4 That for taking up of goods brought in, and for shipping of goods 4. The
taking up and shipping goods to be from Sun to Sun Winter and Summer.
sent out, the hours to be from Sun rising to Sun setting Winter and Summer,
whereby Merchants may the better manage their business, having time enough to
compass the same, for seeing the Merchant pays the Duty by his industrious
trade, out of which the Officer has his salary and livelihood; If by accident
the Merchant is forced through The Officer ought to attend for Public good,
and why.
business, and so besated in taking up or shipping of his goods, the Officer
should not think much of his pains, seeing what he does is still but his Duty,
and for the advantage of the Public.

5. No Officer to stop any Merchants goods, but upon very good grounds.
5. That no Officer whatsoever be permitted to stop any Merchants goods that are
taking up or shipping out, and are entered in the Custom House, upon every
flight suspicion or humor of the Officer, but The Merchant not being deficient
in his entry, the Officer to make him good all dammag.
with much caution, yet in case there may be a just suspicion of the Officers
which may prompt him to stop and open any Merchants goods imported or exported
to be done, but if no fault shall appear, then the Officer to be liable to pay
for the new making up the said goods so opened, and all charges and damages
arising thereupon unto the Merchant Where the Merchant has committed a wilful
error, his goods to be consiscate and totally lost.
to be made him good to the uttermost farthing by the said Officer.

In Contra, If there be any wilful fault or error committed by the Merchant,
and found out, the goods to be seized and confiscate without mercy, and no
other favor showed therein, but that the owner of the goods may be permitted
to redeem them as they shall be appraised by the Officers of the Public
appointed for that purpose, laying down his ready money for them, the said
proceeds of the goods so Where an error is wilfully done the Merchant to bear
his own damage.
confiscate the one half to be for the Officer that seized them, the other half
for to be applied to the Public treasury.

But if by mistake or ignorance there do happen a scisure to be made, and that
it appear not wilfully, but accidentally done, the party so The Commissioners
to be Judges herein.
erring, to bear all the charges of making up his goods himself, and the
damages that may happen thereupon the Officer to be exempted The second means
to ease and encourage trade, is to have the Duty of excise regulated.
therefrom; the Commissioners to be judges in these cases, and to finish it
immediarely, not admitting the person to be turmoyl'd by Law.

The second means to ease and encourage the Commerce of this Nation, is, that
the duty of excise may be regulated, and put into some better way for the ease
of the Commerce, and people of this Nation; The equallest way to raise a
Revenew in a Nation.
For as Custom and Excise is the most harmlest and rationablest way, to bring
in a revenew for the maintenance of the Public affairs of a Nation and its
Government, so the irregular way of levying these The duty not so burdensome
as the irregular collection thereof.
Public duties makes them abominated and hated, which otherways would be of
great satisfaction, it not being a trouble to pay the duty, but to be turmoyled
and vexed by the under Officers, and the arbitrary ways in the collection
thereof, which makes it burdensome, there being The Excise the most easiest
way to raise money for the Public use.
not any way or duty easier born by all people, than an excise upon the
consumption of goods within the Land, be they Foreign or Native Commodities, it
is the most equitablest imposition to a people that can be, for hereby every
one poor and rich bears his part and proportion Its born by all in proportion
rich and poor.
according to his expenses, for he that spends little pays little, and he that
spends much, pays a great deal of Excise, whereby envy It Is the most
equitablest way, and beyond any other tax, and freest from envy and malice.
is taken away, which is heightened in personal taxes, for many that are the
assessors to spare themselves, lay the hurthen on their neighbors, and that
often times in malice, as indeed who can know a man's personal estate, and how
then can there be an equal way to tax them, some seeming rich, and yet are
poor, others seem poor, and yet are rich, All contribute in Excise according to
their expense but the usuver.
so that it is impossible to lay a tax right? but where a duty is levied on the
consumption of goods in a land, there is no man but contributes according to his
quality, unless it be the miserable Usurer, whose very covetousness is tax
enough to him, the nevertheless often leaving his The Misers posterity makes
good what he saved.
estate to such, as after his death pays treble the duty, by their consuming
what he left, than he ever saved in hording up, so he did but borrow it a while
to have it repaid with advantage: And as it is the impartiallest It is the most
constantest Income of any to a Nation.
way in the World to raise a Revenew, so it is the most constantest income of
any to a Nation, and that without prejudice, especially being regularly
gathered in. The way proposed to collect the Excise with ease and advantage.


That the duty of Excise may be gathered in, both for the ease of the Commerce
and advantage to the Revenew. The following proposal in reference thereunto is
commended to consideration.

The duty of Excise is raised by two ways or means out of which it Two ways by
which Excise is raised.
issues and 1. On imported Commodities.
is gathered, and that is either,

1. Upon Commodities brought into a Nation from Foreign parts, and so consumed
there, or else, 2. Upon Commodities made in the Nation or its Dominions, and 2.
On our Native Commodities. The first proposition stated under two
qualifications. Of persons to be trusted with the Excise. Of persons not to be
trusted. Its easy to secure the Excise in the hands of persons to be trustrd.
The accounts to be kept with them Exemplisied by the importing a parcel of
wines.
consumed upon the place where made.
For the first proposition of Commodities imported from foreign parts I state
thus, the importers may be ranked under these two qualifications following.

1. Of persons known in their abilities and abode, and so consequently to be
trusted. 2. Of persons unknown as to their abode or abilities, and so not to be
trusted.
For the first qualification of persons known in the abilities and abode,
Importers of Foreign Commodities and to be trusted undoubtedly, it is most easy
to secure the Excise in their hands without any scruple.

As for instance the Accounts with them to be kept to be thus staited.

The Importer makes his entry at the Custom House for 100. Buts of Wine, pays
his Custom and becomes liable (an Act being made to that purpose) to be
charged with the Excise, being so charged and having his Wine in Custody, he
sels 50. Butts, gives the buyer a ticket directed to the Excise Office of their
sale, the buyer on that note pays the Excise, and brings from the Office an
order directed to the Seller of the said Wines for the delivery of the 50.
Butts by him sold to the buyer, for that the Duty of them is satisfied or paid,
which order of delivery, the Importer or Seller of the said wines keeps for his
discharge against the time of his accompting, which may be every six Months, or
every twelve Months, as it shall be thought fit and ordained for the most ease
of the Commerce. At the time of Accompting, the Importer having his leakage
taken off, which is by order allowed 22 Butts, and then produces his Warrant
of delivery for 50 Butts more, remains in his Seller to sell only 8 Butts, and
there appears to have been disposed of by himself 20 Butts, for which he is to
pay and clear the Excise, which so soon as the Account is made up, within a few
days limited to that purpose, he pays the same in, so that it appears the 100
Butts entered in Custom House are cleared, and 8 only remains to sell, to begin
a new account withal for the following The account of all other Commodities
stated. The way to secure the Excise from persons unknown. To pay Custom and
Excise together. Ten per cent. to be allowed for advance of their Excise. Known
persons will gladly embrace that allowance. The advantages lately arising.
year.

The like is to be observed for what ever Commodities be imported by such
persons as are known and to be trusted.

For the second qualification of persons unknown in their abode and abilities,
and not to be trusted.

When they make their entries in the Custom-House, and pay their Customs, let
them pay their Excise also, and for their paying their Excise in ready money
immediately down, to be allowed ten per cent. which allowance will countervail
the advance of so much ready money, and they cannot, neither will they complain
for not being trusted; it being certain, that upon such an allowance of ten per
cent. many that might be trusted will not, because of reaping the benefit
granted to unknown persons.

The advantages by settling the Excise in this way, will be thus,

1. The receiving of present many will be of greater consequence to 1. Receipt
of present money.
the Public, than the allowance of ten per cent. can any way be
disadvantageous.

2. The Duty it self by the receiving of ready money, will be better 2. The
securing the Duty. 3. The ease of Commerce.
secured.

3. The whole Commerce will be freed from and eased of those tedious accounts
and perverse officers, who only seek themselves and not the Public good.

4. The multitude of Officers every where may be lessened, who live 4. The
salary of so many useless Officers will be saved.
upon the Public purse, an idle life, vexatious to the people through their
prolling informations, when they might employ themselves in other callings to
the benefit of the Nation, and save the Public a considerable Sum of money
yearly, which issues out for their wages, and that only to maintain them to do
mischief.

5. And lastly those numerous and vaste accounts kept between buyer 5. Tedious
accounts will all men excuse, except such as are trusted who will be but few.
and Seller, importer and exporter, as also with such as pay their Excise in
ready money at the Custom House when they enter their goods, will be useless
and needless, there needing not any account to be kept, but merely with such
as are trusted with Excise, of which number there will be but few, having an
allowance made them for the advance thereof, as is before declared.

There may be here an Objection made. An Objection.


If the Excise be thus settled, the Importer by the connivance of the The
Public may hereby be defrauded.
waiter or searcher at the Custom House, may very much defraud the Public
Revenew, for as much as the Importer having once passed his goods at the Custom
House, there is no farther account taken of the goods, being freely at the
Importers Liberty to dispose of them as he pleases.

To which it is Answered, Answer. To have but one Officer for Excise and
Custom, and he well paid. The Officer abusing his trust to lose his place
without readmssiion.


1. As there will need but one Officer both for the Excise and Custom, let his
salary be the greater, and so considerable, that thereby he may have a good
livelihood for his Family, and not be necessitated to take rewards to be
unfaithful.

2. That whatever Officer shall be found or convinced to have defrauded the
Public by the abuse of his trusts, immediately to lose his employment without
any readmission thereunto, which undoubtedly will so engage him, that he will
not be tempted with a small reward to lose his whole subsistence.

3. The Importers goods seized and totally lost and consiscated without The
Merchant to lose his goods and totally consiscated. If the Merchant do save
part of his Duty yet no loss to the Revenew. The Reason why.
any composure, more than to pay the value down in ready money as shall be
appraised, or another give for them.

If for all this strictness and hazard, the Merchant shall find out a way to
save some part of his Customs (it being the thoughts of many, that stolen
waters are sweetest) and supposing that the excise will also thereby be saved
to him.

The observables followings being duly considered (in this very case) it will
evidently appear that the Public Revenew will not be any ways lessened or
diminished thereby.

1. Because not one in a hundred by reason of the inconsiderateness Not one in
a hundred will adventure it.
of the profit and great hazard therein, will not attempt it.

What is saved by a Merchant is but to enlarge his trade.
2. Because whatever the Merchant saves this way, or indeed any way, it is but
to enlarge his trade, which is increased as his stock increases, and so thereby
the Revenew of the Customs and Excise, have The advantage of the Customs with
the seisures and confiscations will be more than the loss.
the benefit and the only advantage.

3. What the Public may gain by confiscations and seisures with the Income of
Excise and Custom through the Merchants enlargement of his trade, will be of
far greater advantage, than whatever is by them saved with such shifts and
hazards can be disadvantageous.

The Merchant that saves Custom to be connived at before any, and why.
4. If the Merchant by adventuring the loss of his goods by such shifts and
hazards, does save any part of the Duty, who ought to be connived at rather
than he, being all his industry and labor with his great hazards, amounts but
to this; The advancing the Public He Inriches the Nation, advances the
Revenew, maintains Commerce.
Revenew, and enriching the Nation often times to his own ruin (Pelican like)
although its true the hopes of profit leads him to adventure, yet it is the
Merchants trading that upholds the Nation in Glory, increases her wealth to the
good and prosperity of all in general, and Therefore the ease of the Commerce
is to be preferred above all.
therefore whatever can be alleeged to the contrary, the ease of the Commerce
is to be preferred before any thing else, seeing by Commerce the income of the
Nation is raised, increased, and preserved.

The only gainers by Excise are the Ingrossers and Shopkeepers, as its now
established.
Whereas,

As the Excise at this present is managed, the only gainers thereby are the
Ingrossers of Commodities, and retaylers in shops (that buy of Merchants that
are the importers and nourishers of foreign trade, and the only sufferers by
this Duty) and what ever the Shopkeepers and The Shopkeepers increase of their
Stock by Excise, destructive to the Nation.
Ingrossers gain, is most destructive to the Nation and its Commerce, because
as they increase their stocks, it is only for mischief, beating down thereby
the Merchants markets, and when they have ingrosled into their own hands what
the Merchant has imported, in the retailing The second proposition for the
raising Excise by goods wrought in the Nation.
them to the people, inhance their prices to the prejudice of the whole Nation.

The second way or means in reference to the raising of the Duty of Excise is,
concerning Commodities wrought or made in this Nation.

To take rise from the maker of them.
Which comparatively falls under the same order in the gathering thereof into
the Public, as does the goods imported by Merchants To have set places for the
sail of all goods, and there to be entered.
from foreign parts, for taking Rise from the first maker of them, it is most
easy to be gathered in, especially having set places and Markets for the sale
of all inland Commodities, where in the Townhouse or Hall appointed for that
purpose, every man should make entry of all What is bought to be consumed in
the Land to pay Excise, and what for exportation to pay none.
such goods as he brings to market to sell, and what is sold to foreign traders,
or for the consumption of the Land, hereby will be easily known, so that he
which buys for the inland consumption to pay Excise upon the place, and he
which buys any goods to export to any foreign part to pay none; But in case this
way of the Exporters buying of Or else the goods bought to export, to pay
Excise, and reallowed when shipped out,
goods, and not paying his Excise, may occasion a difficulty and loss, its
easily remedyed. Let the Seller of the goods pay it himself, or else the
Exporter, and at shipping of the said goods, let him have the Excise which he
paid reallowed him back at Custom House, which if considered, the advance of so
much ready money will be of great use and accommodation Herely the Public will
be advanced, and the Merchant not damnified. For ease ^f the Commerce to have
Custom and Excise in one place, and managed by one (...) f^r imports and
exports.
to the Public, and the Merchant ^ill not be much hindered thereby, in regard
it will be returned him at the shiping of his goods, part in his Customs
outward, and the rest in ready money.

And for the ease of the Commerce and accommodation of traders, it were good
that the Excise for exports and imports, should be kept where the Customs are,
and the same method used for the Excise, as is for the Custom, and so what is
entered in, shipped out by certificate, which rule would be of great ease to
the Commerce, and peace to the people, who have been and are yet turmoyled with
troublesome and endless accounts, which will never be set to rights; wherefore
it were to be desired that an Act of Oblivion might pass to the Commerce for
what is past, and for the future to be more exact, whereby to avoid what ha h
been amiss.

And for the trausactions of inland negotiations by carriage or other For
inland trausactions, some particular Ossice for the Excise to easethe people.
ways, because it would be a great trouble for all people to go down to the
Custom House to enter their goods, and pay the Duty of Excise, there may be
some convenient place appointed for that purpose, where at set times, one of
the Commissioners of the Custom House may attend the same, to dispatch
business for the inland affairs, and for that it One of the Custom House
Commissioners to attend by turns for dispatch.
would be too great a burden for one, each in their turns by months, whereby
they will be conversant in what passes there, as well as at Custom House, and
so be the better informed to give dispatch in what may ofter in any of the said
places, concerning those Duties of Excise and Custom, and this will be of great
ease and satisfaction to the people and Commerce of this Nation.

The third means to ease and encourage the trade of this Nation is, The third
means to encourage trade. N^ Seaman to be pressed out of Merchants ships till
they have sinished their voyages. Many ships hereby have been lost, and
Merchants undone. Prevention of this mischief, the Captains of such men of War
to make good all damages what they can not the Public to answer it for them.
The 4th. means to encourage trade. That Convoys be constantly sitted out for
the preservation of Merchants ships.
that it may not be permitted out of any Merchants ships bound out, or coming
home upon Merchants employments, having once set sail out of their first po^t,
and begun their voyage, and not arrived at their last port for discharge in
their return home upon any pretense whatever that any Captain or Commander of
any Ship or Vessel in the Public for vice shall press any of the Seamen,
Mariners, or Officers out of the said Merchants ship, or take them away from
them being ashore; for by these actions many ships going out have lost their
voyages, and others coming home lost both ship and goods, to the ruin and
undoing of many honest able Merchants.

And for prevention hereof in the future, That what Captain or Commander in the
public service shall do any such things, he to be liable to make satisfaction
for all damages that may or shall happen or come to such ships and goods, or
voyage, by reason of his taking away or pressing their men from them; and in
case the ostate of the said Captain or Commander is not sufficient to make good
the loss or damage, the Treasury of the Custom and Excise to do it immediately
as soon as the said damage so sustained shall be liquidated: This will be a
great preservation to Merchants, and keeping of the Commerce from destruction.

The fourth means to ease and increase the trade of this Nation is,

That a constant Convoy might be alloted for all Merchants ships which should
every month go out, wind and weather permitting, from the Downs and so along
to the farthermost place in the Mediterranean To secure them from Enemies and
Pirates.
or Levant Seas where we have any trade, taking all such ships that be ready
with them, conducting them as nigh their Port as they can, and as one Convoy
arives, that which was there before immediately to return, No Convoy (...) lade
out of home any Merchandise.
gathering up all the ships that be ready, as he does sail along homewards; And
by this monthly Convoy, oftentimes there may be more A prohibition, penalty,
and punishment, for any that shall.
men of War than one in company, and so thereby be enabled the better to see
most ships that sail with them even into their very harbors, Else the
disadvantage will be greater than the advantage.
however, when least, secure them from the hands of Pirates, that wait up and
down lurking for whom they may catch into their clutches.

Now as convoyes may on the one hand be an advantage for the security of our
Navigation and Commerce, so on the other side there must All men would lade
their fine goods in men of war.
be a care had, that there be a very strict prohibition (with penalties and
punishments, in case of derogating there from) that no Convoy or man of War,
shall carry to any Ports or places whatever upon The Seamen would never fight,
but suffer the Merchants ships to perish.
freight to sell, or otherwise, any Merchandise, Silver, Bullion, or Coin,
either outward or homewards, for should any such things be permitted, it would
instead of an advantage to the Commerce, turn to a disadvantage and their utter
ruin, for the Commanders of such The fifth means to encourage trade.
Convoyes, and the Seamen would be so swayed by the profit that would arise
thereby (for who is it that would not ship all his rich goods That no bills of
entry be delivered out of Custom House.
in a man of War) that when any occasion should offer for them to fight with
Pirates or otherwise, they would not hazard themselves to defend the ships they
Convoy, but even sufter them to perish.

A prohibition for the future made therein.
The fifth means to encourage the trade of this Nation is, that no bills of entry
either of exports or imports, be suftered to be delivered to The Projectors
Patent taken from him, and he punished.
any man directly or indirectly out of the Custom House, or any other place by
any Officer whatever, but that there be a strict prohibition thereof; and that
that Projector that could in the late Protectors day^ O^ What he has got to be
employed thereby to Public use.
contrive a way to get a Patent for the same, should be called to account what
he has gained thereby, the which to be taken from him, and applied to better
uses, and with his Pattent about h^s neck, whipped Entrees delivered out of the
Custom House a very great discouragement to trade.
throughout every Port of England, for an example to others, that none may for
the future dare to undertake the like,

It being one of the greatest discouragements to trade in this Nation, and of
notable consequence if duly considered, the advantages not any, Advantageous
only to Lugrossers and monied men.
but to some particular Ingressers of Commodities, and private monyed men, the
disadvantages many, and that to all persons generally trading throughout the
Nation, especially to merchants, who Disadvantageous to all in general.
ought in their own right and assistance to support trade, petition against this
Projector to get him well punished, that this delivering out of men's Entries
may be never more practiced. The disadvantages herein follow.


And that the disadvantages may be taken into consideration, pray observe the
sollowing particulars, how trade thereby is discouraged.

1. All men's negotiations discovered to ignorant m^n, The ingenious man's trade
thereby ruinated.
1. Trade is hereby discouraged, in regard that by these bills of Entry, every
man's negotiations are discovered, and it gives too much liberty to busy headed
men to pry into the affairs of each other, intermedling therein to their great
prejudice, which ought to be kept secret; many hereby supplying their own
ignorance by other men's ingenuity, and then wanting experience trade only,
because such men, whom they conceive are knowing, trade to such or such a
place, whereby they spoil each others Markets.

2. Trade hereby is greatly discouraged; because all your Ingrossers 2. The
Ingrosser and Retayling Shopkeepers make what Markets they please on the
Seller, as well as on the Buyer, to the prejudice of the Nation. If Entries
were not seen by any, necessitated men would advance their goods as well as
others.
of Commodities, and retailing Shopkeepers having these bills of Entries, are
made acquainted into who^e hands what Commodities that be imported come, and
then joining in company to beat down the Markets, taking the advantage of such
men whom they observe over trade themselves, and thereby become necessitated
for moneys, who for to supply themselves in their wants, must sell at any rate,
whereby its not they alone that are prejudiced, but all other men that trade:
now if so be these bills of Entry were not permitted to be given to any person
whatever, the buyer would not be acquainted with what is imported or exported,
and thereby be encouraged to give the better rate to the Merchant for his
goods, to the great encouragement of traders, for necessitated men then would
obtain as good Markets for their Commodities as others, and no man would be
prejudiced by another man's sale.

3. Hereby arises a general inconveniency to the whole Commerce, 3. The general
Commerce at home suffers extremely.
for that the Ingrosser and Retayler having these Bills of Entry, come to know
the quantities of such goods as formerly were brought in, and again exported,
and thereby observing what may be left not sufficient to supply the Markets,
immediately inhance the price upon the people that need the Commodity, beyond
reason, and so become the only gainers in this Nation to the destruction and
ruin of all foreign traders, by having his trade not only here at home, but
abroad discovered.

4. Our trade beyond the Seas is greatly discouraged and hindered, many 4. The
Trade beyond Seas is destroyed and ingenious men ruinated in their designs, and
Foreign Nations advantaged.
men herby having sustained considerable loss, it often happening by an
ingenious foregsiht, some have got the start of others in conveying their goods
to a Market, in hopes of reaping the fruit of their industry, when by these
bills of Entry being sent over giving notice what has been laden in some other
ship for the same place, which happily might not arrive at their port in many
months after, yet being divulged that store of good were laden for the same
Market, they have forborne, buying what was in the place, and needed, in
expectation of more to come, whereby not only what was upon the place remains
unbought, but at the arrival of fresh goods, the Markets are cloyd and beat
down to so low a rate, that the trade is destroyed thereby, and men ruinated in
their designs for want of vent of their Commodities, which otherwise did none
of these Entries appear, Markets would be kept up continually at a constant
rate within a little more or less, and goods would find quicker vent, to the
great satisfaction and encouragement of the whole Commerce.

5. Hereby the makers of our Native Commodities are extremely indamaged 5. The
makers of our Native Commodities are ruinated and discouraged.
and discouraged, for by these bills of Entry, all persons understand what
goods be shipped off, and for what places, by which discovery, although many
ingenious men to keep their negotiations private, do as the water men, look one
way and row another, entering goods to one part, when designed to another, yet
hereby when men that are settled traders to any one place, and knowing what
those places where they trade usually unto can vent, finding such large Entries
for the same Marker, although perchance alligned for other parts as I said
before, yet they know it not, and so are discouraged from buying what otherwise
they would, keeping their money by them; Whereby the poor maker of our
Commodities loses the sale of his goods, and wanting money to carry on his
calling, is not only discouraged, but many times ruinated, which is not to be
slighted, but of consideration, the whole Nations trade suffering violence
thereby.

6. By making these Entries public, it is not only a general inconveniency 6.
The secret of all trade is laid open, and so becomes its one Executioner, trade
ever thriving when most privately managed.
to the Commerce in reference to Ingrossers and Shopkeepers as in the third
clause of this article it is expressed, but the total destruction of trade
every where; it being observed by understanding and experienced men, that what
ever trade is driven most secretly and out of view, does generally thrive best,
and those men that have kept their trade privatest, have ever best prospered;
And what can be more prejudicial to trade, than that every man be master of
another design, for when an ingenuous man discovers a course to obtain a
livelihood, whilst its nor discovered, he may obtain from small beginning a
comfortable subsistence, but if discovered, some ignorant coveto is monyed man,
strikes into what the others ingenuity found out, and at one blow turns the
other, not only out of his livelihood, but overthrows the same by (...) cloying
the place, many times ruinating the one, and yet getting nothing himself; so
that whoever would have trade consounded, and in a Nation brought to nothing,
let him suffer by these Bills of entries, every one to be master of another
design, for nothing publishes it more to the World, than these bills of
Entries do. Let but these bills of Entry be once prohibited, you shall see and
find trade will presently alter and mend, besides every individual person Let
bills of Entry be once ^rohibited from being made Public, trade will soon
revive. E^^ecially when men by their own hands or by a Brokers may without
discovering their wants dispose of their goods.
trading, when none but himself can discover his negotiations, either in
buying, selling, importing, or exporting, plen^y or want of money, which now in
their tradings by these b^ll, of Entry may shrew^ly be gessed at, how
courageously will he pro^ecute his business, and tak, delight in that which
now proves a burden? and then Brokers will be fie agents to mediate betwixt man
and men, by whose hand the Comtmerce will find great advantages, so by their
hands with more judiciousnesse every man may manage his business as occasion
shall require, and all Commodities in the hands of the Foreign traders, obtain
better markets than now they d^e, and he that is necessitated for money, find as
good a price for his Merchandise as he that is not, and never spoil one the
others markets; Therefore it is heartily desired and wished for the good of
all, that this grand discoverer of all trade in this Nation, may be taken away
being it is so apparently prejudicial.

7. The prohibiting these bills of Entry to be published, will infinitely 7. By
not publishing the Entries at Custom House the Public Revenew will be
increased. The sixth means to ease and encourage trade.
advance the Revenew of the Custom, for when trade shall be with mo^e freedom
managed and not discovered, the increase thereof will increase the Customs both
in and out, and so there will be the larger income for the support of the
Nations charge.

The sixth means to ease and encourage trade and traders is, that the great
trouble and vexations which they lie under, by reason of Car Porters, and
wharfingers may be removed, and the Commerce eased Is to remove the Exorbitance
of wharfingers, Porters, and Carmen.
of the burden, which three sorts of people makes Laws for themselves, and are
the Executors of them upon the poor trader, who is not ransacked or oppressed
by Pirates, nor with the greatest dangers abroad, as here by these people who
do what they list, and will have what they list, taking all advantages to abuse
the Merchants, although by their industry they have their subsistence and
livelyhoods, and there be too too many in Authority, for their private
interest, that admit and give For the ease and Encouragement of Merchants. The
Public authority to establish a rule for them.
them a privilege to affront and abuse the Merchant, who above all men ought to
be upheld and cherished, to prevent which abuses, its fit the power of the
Nation should put a stop to their incroaching exhorbitances, and by fit ways
for all parties, to regulate these things, putting them to walk by a rule, that
every one knowing their due to receive and to pay, all quar^els and disputes
for the ^uture may take end, to the encouragement of traders, and peace of the
people, which often times to bloodshed, and great expense in Law arises, for
want of such settlement.

The ways to put an end to the foresaid exorbitances of Carmen, Porters, The
ways to regulate them are. To manage it by a Public hand.
and Wharsingers, are,

Either to manage it by a Public hand, or else to set rates, and confine them
under strict penalties in the performance and observance of them by fines and
immediate imprisonment, for trade admits not of delay, depending upon winds,
weather, and other inconveniences which are to be considered of. If managed by
a public hand, then the Government The Government of the City to be the
Proprietors to all the wharfs.
of the City is the most meetest for the same, who should be the Proprietors
and owners of all the Warffs and Keys, used for the landing and shipping of
goods that are imported and exported, and setting a convenient rate on tunnage
goods, cask, etc. and to have the Income thereof toward their charge for
Cranes, Liters, to mend the Wharffes, etc.

And for the Institution of Porters belonging to the Companies, that The
institution of Companies Porters of excellent use. The ticket Porters only
disturbers of the Commerce. The Government of the City to be Proprietors of the
Cars. No goods can be landed on any Key, but must pay what the wharfingers
please. Advantage is taken, by reason men are enforced to land their goods near
the Custom House.
order cannot be bettered, it being those that they call Ticket Porters which
makes all the disturbances, who for the ease and quiet of the commerce, to walk
under the same rules as the Companies Porters do, or else to be totally
cashiered.

The Cars to belong to the City, and for each quarter and place a certain
number to be allotted, attended so with men responsable to make good any
damage, which by their neglect shall happen to the Merchants, or others using
of them; and being that particular men have got into their power by
encroachments, and other ways the whole bank of the River claming it as their
proper right (by times permission) and not to be purchased from them; and so
take a privilege to count him a trespasser that shall land upon the said
Wharffs and Keys any thing, without paying them what duty they please to
require, though never so unreasonable, which seeing our Ancestors by their
inconsiderateness have suffered, and that we their posterity are debarted from
the freeness of the River, the present generation of men not regarding how
extortive they be on that forced necessity, that the people must land their
goods near the Custom House for the preservation of the Public revenew that it
be not defrauded, its both just and equitable The Government ought to regulate
and set rates on such thingt to encourage Merchants.
that the power restrain their unconscionable extortions, and limit them to
certain rates and rules, for their Cranidg, Lighteridge, and Wharfidge equal
between both, not permitting them to force what they please from men, for
within less than four years they have raised their Wharfidge, etc. no less
than the third penny upon all goods landed upon their Wharffs and Keys, in a
time when trade was never at so low an ebb and more hazardous, which should
rather expect abatements in such things than rises.

The Ticket Porters likewise claim to themselves an unequal privilege, The
abuses of the ticket Porters to be rectified.
pretending no other Porters must land or ship off any goods going or coming
from the parts of America, but they, shutting out all men from their freedom
of employing their own companies Porters, who are responsable and known men,
and the ticket Porters are so impudent, that they will have their own rates for
what they do, which is double what the Companies Porters have, or ever used to
have, carrying on this their pretense contrary to the will of the whole
Commerce, by reason some in authority have an advantage to themselves out of
these ticket Porters labors, who are a rude uncivil people, and not to be
endured nor suffered, if those that are in authority desire to ease and
encourage the Commerce.

The Carmen want not their extortions as well as the Wharfingers and The abuses
of the Carmen to be redressed.
Porters, to abuse the Merchants and traders beyond seas, joining in Companies
under the notion of taking their turns, or as they see necessity requires, will
have what price they please, else they will not load, nor suffer others to
load, forcing the Merchant to pay double and treble what has always
heretofore been paid, and no order taken therein to the great discouragement of
the Commerce, which the power in whom it lies; ought to redress, by setting
meet rates according to the proportion of the way and weight they carry.

And when Wharfingers, nor Porters, nor Carmen, will not submit to That
Merchants may be free to employ whom they please, and to land and ship their
goods where they please. In Leghorn an excellent way for landing and shiping
goods.
an equal rule and rate settled for the peace of all, to suffer the Merchant to
employ what Porters he thinks fit about his goods, to land or ship them at what
places he pleases, and to take what Carmen he shall like, and pay them
according to the rule, for should these things be any longer permitted, they
would grow to such excess, that our goods should not be our own, but whose
that would have them, many foreign places having excellent rules and ways in
the easement of the commerce concerning this very particular of landing,
shipping, and housing their goods, as Leghorn under the Duke of Tuscany, is a
Pattern fit to be considered of.

The seventh means to encourage and to ease the Commerce of this The seventh
means to encourage and ease trade. That there be but one sort of weight and
measure throughout England and its Dominions.
Nation is, that through England and its Dominions there be but one weight and
one measure permitted or used, for by the diversity of weights and measures,
men are abused and cousened, it occasioning strife and debate every where;
which were they alike, it would be instead thereof a very great ease and
advantage to the people, for by having diverse bushels, as in one place 8.
gallons makes a bushel, in other parts 9. 10, 16, 18, and 23. Also wine
measure, Ale measure, the like in weights, as Troy weights, Haverdep^ys, Venice
weights, then the stone in some places 8 l. some 14 l. and some more, to the
confusion and trouble of the whole land and its commerce, which duly considered
of, and rectified, would be of singular ease and advantage to the Nation. The
eighth means to encourage trade. That all Merchants paying 300 l. per annum
custom outward upon our own manufactories, to be exempted from all other
personal taxes. And upon foreign goods imported 1000 l. per annum.


The eighth means to ease and encourage trade is, That all Merchants rrading
beyond seas, not keeping shops for retailing, be exempted from all taxes that
at any time shall be levied upon the Personal estates of men, provided that
they by their foreign trade shall export of the manufactories of the nation, the
value of what may arise and shall appear to pay in the Custom house 3 hundred
pounds per an. or otherwise, for foreign goods imported, what may arise, to pay
annually in Custom to the Nation, one thousand pounds per annum: hereby trade
will be encouraged, the public revenue increased, beyond what can any way be
expected from the Merchants by taxes, and that inequality of rating men by tax
for their personal estates, when they have none, and only live upon foreign
employments and their credits, who, should they be taxed according to their
foreign trade, would not only be discouraged, but ruinated.

The ninth means to ease and encourage the trade of this nation, is, That in
all foreign parts, as well in our own plantations of America, as in other
Princes Dominions, where any factory is settled, that certain public The ninth
means to encourage and ease trade. That in every factory of trade settled
Consuls be established. To protect from injury.
ministers, under the title of Consulls be established, with some, who by the
consent of the factory residing upon the place, may be appointed, and
nominating two or more from among the rest as assistants to the Consul, which
said assistants with the Consul to be a Court for the following purposes.

1. To protect the Nation there residing from the injuries of the Natives, and
to obtain redress for them when need requires, and if not to be obtained, to
give account thereof to the supreme power in England of such abuses as shall be
offered either to their persons or estates, that by their means restitution may
be made for what injury our Nation in particular or in general shall have
suffered.

2. For the deciding of all controversies that may or shall arise between For
deciding of differences arising among themselves.
any of the Nation there resident one with the other concerning any matter
whatsoever with which judgment, if any shall think himself injured or
agrieved, first complying with the sentence, and laying down one fifth part
more for charges, the party that thinks himself agriev'd may appeal to the next
factory in that Dominion, who confirming, the sentence to have no further
appeal; but if the first sentence shall be repealed, then both to submit the
business to the Court Merchant in England, who upon view of all the
transactions on both sides to give their definitive sentence, without further
appeal, but therein to acquiesce.

3. For the regulating the commerce there among themselves, and For the
regulating of the trade. In reference to sales of our own commodities. 2. For
buying up of the commodities of the Country.
that,

1. In reference to the sale of any of our own manufactories, to keep up the
prices as occasions may offer, that men may not by underhand dealing deceive
one another, to the general disadvantage of their principals at home, and
undervalewing of our manufactories.

2. In reference to the buying up of any particular commodity to be sent to the
principal, that consenting to join together, each person may without fraud have
his proportion.

3. In reference to the fraightment or dispatch of any ship or ships that 3.
For dispatch and fraightment of ships
may be taken, to supply the general occasions of the factory there resident.

4ly. For safety of the Factors there, and their principals and friends at 4.
For safety in case of mortality, as follows. 1. Insecuring men's estates on
any sudden death.
home, in case of mortality, and that by these ways.

1. If any die suddenly, and appoint no body to take care of his estate and his
principals that may be in his hands, the Consul and assistance to appoint one
immediately to take an exact Inventory of the goods and debts left by the
deceased, the original to remain in the Court, and a Copy thereof sent to the
deceased's friends and principals, if he have any.

2. To appoint one or two able honest men of the said factory to receive 2.
appointing able men to manage the estates of those that die with wills, or
without wills.
into his or their custody what the deceased so left in goods and debts, that
thereby the debts may be got in, and the goods sold and disposed of at the best
rates can be made of them, both for the advantage of the deceased's friends, to
whom they may appertain, or to his principals that corresponded with him; and
so soon as the estate shall be got in, and all charges deducted, the neet
proceed to be deposited in the Court for the use of those to whom it shall or
may belong; And further, in case the party deceased shall by Will or other ways
nominate any person to be his Executor, nevertheless for the benefit of those
to whom the estate may any ways appertain, to have an exact Inventory taken as
if there were no such appointment, and if the party so appointed shall not by
the factory there residing be thought a responsable person, then they to
nominate another to receive such effects as shall belong to the principals of
the party deceased, who shall give account of all things as is before recited,
when any shall die without will, or nominating any to succeed him in his
business. The want of care and The want of care in this is the loss of many
men's estates when factors die abroad, especially in the American plantations.
order in this thing, is in foreign parts, but more especially in our American
plantations, the greatest ruin that befalls those that trade thither, whose
estate, upon the death of their correspondence, are the preys of Rogues and
Knaves, which does extremely discourage men to trade thither, and those places
do not prosper as other ways they would do if their losses happening to the
commerce by such as die were remedied, which is easily effected, if the
government in those places will order the same.

5. It will occasion much unity and peace in all factories when 5. For the
maintaining of unity and peace in factories, and civility to each other. 6. For
the honor of the Nation, preserving them from the afronts of the Natives where
they reside, and obtaining satisfaction in case of damage.
so settled, as likewise order and civility, taking away that looseness which is
crept into all factories for want of Government, or some to reprove them for
their unwarrantable proceedings, or of whom they should stand in some awe, and
undoubtedly when young men abroad shall have such as may reprehend them
present, they will live with more circumspection, and so gain from such, in
whose Dominions they live, respect and credit.

6. It will be an honor to our Nation and its Commerce, to have in all parts
where they do reside such a settlement, and the Nations among whom we live,
will not be so ready to affront us or abuse us, when there is one in place that
has authority to make them give satisfaction, and to take cognizance of what
they make us to suffer.

As touching the maintenance of the Consul and his charges, to The
maintenance of the Consul to be by a duty imposed on the goods imported in
that place. The Consul to be for life, the assistants every three years. If any
factor dye without heirs, or bequeathing his Estate how to be bestowed. To
redeem Captives, and transport poor to the American plantations. The tenth
means to encourage trade, Is to settle it well abroad. By procuring good
privileges. By having our own Consulls.
have a Duty laid of half or of one per cent. upon the Merchandise introduced
by the Nation in that place of his Residence, and when settled, not to be turned
out, unless to some better employment, or that he himself shall desire to be
discharged, or else on very just grounds of misdemeanors: As for the
assistants, they to be every two or three years chosen, or as need require, who
are to serve Gratis.

If any in any factory shall dye and leave no Will, or appointment to any to
have his Estate, and has neither disposed thereof in his lifetime, nor any
friends to give it unto, then in such case after all care is taken, to make the
best thereof, and charges deducted, the one half thereof to be employed for the
redemption of Captives, and conveying Orphans and poor people to our American
plantations, the other half to the Public treasury of the Nation.

The tenth means for encouragement and ease of the trade of this Nation is,
That in making peace, and settling our trade and Commerce with any foreign Prince
or S^ate, the following particulars to be observed,

1. That all privileges that our Nation ever had any ways advantageous to our
being among them, and our trade with them, may be confirmed, and what more may
or can be got for our more free living whilst our trade is there.

2. That such Consuls as we shall think meet to settle in any of our factories,
may be of our own Nation and choice, and so confirmed by the Government of the
Country where settled, which in Spain, to the dishonor of our Nation has been
denied us, and such put upon us, neither fit nor meet, and yet their consulidge
has been extorted from us very unjustly to our great prejudice, which is not
fit to be permitted again upon any settlement of peace with that Nation.

3. That our Nation may have freedom to exercise their own Religion To have
freedom to exercise our own Religion not giving scandal. To have burying
places for the dead. In Spain he English (...) burial have had their bodies
taken up and ill created, John Ma^on a Merchant was so used in Civilla. To have
all damages upon arrests and stopping our ships made good.
in any factory where ever they reside in their own houses or families, not
giving any public scandal to those of a contrary judgment in whose Country we
shall reside.

4. That in all factories which we shall settle in other Princes or states
territories, we may have assigned to us places of burial, where we may bury our
dead, without giving offense to the people, in whose Dominions we live, and may
not be of our Religion, it having been done in Spain, that after some of the
English have been buried, their bodies have been taken up by boys and lewd
people, and dragged up and down the City in scorn, and for a reproach, to the
great scandal of our Nation, and discouragement of those that are engaged to
live in places where such barbarism is used.

5. That in what Princes Dominions soever our factories be settled, all arrests
that shall be put upon our Merchants ships, either in hindering them when
loading or unloading, or from sailing away when ready, what ever damages shall
thereby accrue to the owners of such ships, or Merchants loading or employing
them, to be made them good by the said Prince or State where it happens; many
Merchants of this Nation knowing it to their cost, that by such abuses, voyages
have been overthrown, and many men and their ships ruinated and lost, which
discouragement is so great, that if not remedyed, will undoubtedly grow worse
and worse.

6. That no Prince or State with whom our Nation trades, shall have liberty to
take into their service upon any pretense whatever, any To have none of our
Seamen or ships taken into service without the leave of Commander and
Merchants. That no Princes officers shall without consent take any Merchandise
from any residing in his Dominions. That in making peace with any Prince or
State such be consulted with that know the Customs of their Countries and trade.
of our ships or Seamen, without the absolute consent of the Commander of such
ships and Seamen, and Merchants by whom she is employed.

7. That in all places and Princes Dominions where the factories of our Nation
shall reside, it be not permitted for the Officers of that Kingdom or State,
to take any of our Merchandise or goods without the consent of the owner of
them, and what they shall by consent have, to give immediate satisfaction for
the same, as the price current of such goods, at the time of their receiving
shall upon the place rule and be sold for.

8. That care be had in every Country, that as the customs and ways of
negotiation be different one from the other, so accordingly provision may be
made with them in the settling our trade in those parts, that all
inconveniences incident to men residing among them, may be avoided, and all
conveniences needful obtained, whereby every one may be encouraged for to
carry on the trade of this Nation of England and its Dominions with spirit and
vigor, to the advantage of the General, and to that purpose in making Peace
and settling Commerce any where that those be consulted with that have lived,
traded, and travailed, into such places, that can inform what may be needful in
order thereunto.

The eleventh means to ease and encourage the trade and Commerce The eleventh
means to encourage and ease trade is, to have a Court Merchant to decide all
Merchants Causes.
of England is, That there might be a Court Merchant established in this
Nation, wherein all foreign transactions between Merchants and their Factors,
may be tried and determined among themselves, for that the Commerce is founded
and settled upon sundry Laws and Customs, which have been observed and practiced
among Foreign Nations, from whence trade originally has been derived to us,
which Customs and Rules in many things are repugnant to the Common Law of this
Nation, and cannot be decided thereby; And there is no Court capable to
determine Merchants differences in this Nation, but the Chancery, and in that
very Court when accounts are therein brought of Foreign negotiations, the Coyns,
measures, weights, Customs, bargans, and sales of those Countries are so
different from ours; that none of the Lawyers which are to plead the Merchants
Causes, or the Judges that are to hear and Judge of what is pleaded, do
understand any thing thereof, and so are incapable to determine them, and
through the intricacy of Merchants accounts, there is in that Court of Chancery
such delatory proceedings, and so many strange and corrupted ways to stave off
all suits of that nature, especially where dishonesty is one of the parties,
that before any determination can be made therein, most men by their vast
expenses are undone, and yet can have no end of their suits, but at last must
come to be ended by Merchants, or else the Merchants must make report therein,
and state how they find the difference, for the Court to determine, which duly
considered, is a sore aggrievance to this Nations trade and its traders, who
groan under the burden thereof, desiring and praying to be relieved therein.

The twelfth means to ease and encourage the trade and Commerce of The twelfth
means to encourage trade. That the three following grievances may be regulated.
The first grievance to be regulated is, that no Action be laid on any person
for more than justly he owes.
England is, That order may be taken for the regulating of these three
following agrievancies and inconveniences that lie upon all men in generally,
but more especially on foreign traders, who are great sufferers thereby.

1. That it be not permitted for any man upon any debt due to him from another,
to enter any Action against (or to arrest) the said party indebted, for a
greater Sum than is justly due unto him, for hereby many out of malice merely
to destroy one another, will lay on them such large Actions, only that they may
not get bail, but lie in prison, and through the noise thereof be the means of
their ruin, as it has been of many an honest man, who having lost his
reputation by lying in prison, has utterly been undone.

2. That the intolerable and inhumane proceedings of Bailiffs and The second
grievance to be regulated is, to take off the inhumanity of Bailiffs and
Sergeants.
Searjeants may be taken off from the Nation, they being a Generation of men
made purposely to torment both the bodies and purses of poor men, their bodies
by abusing, astronting, halling, and dragging them, though of never so much
respect, if they get men into their power, and will not conform to their
exorbitant expenses and humors; and then their purses when they meet with any
honest man, that not knowing their power, for quietness sake is willing to
submit to their villainy to be cheated and cousened by them, by false pretenses
of keeping them out of prison in their own houses, and using so many tricks to
catch them by the money, as it would spend too much time to discover them,
especially being by all persons for the most part so well known, they never
arresting any man but will be paid twice for doing it, of him that set them a
work, and of the poor man whom they catch, to the great agrievance of the whole
Nation, but especially of the Commerce.

For remedy whereof, because many will say, how shall people get For Remedy
that the (...) Rule for summoning men may he revived in this Nation.
in their debts of diverse, that without such courses, will not pay any thing
they owe to one another.

Let the ancient way used in this Nation of Summons issue out against the party
indebted, to appear at the Court appointed for such causes, and in case at the
third Summons (being left duly at his place of habitation with his servant, or
with the party where he may lodge or dwell) he shall not appear at the Court to
answer what is demanded of him, that judgment immediately to pass against him
and his Estate, and execution to follow the same within certain days after,
whereby the party to whom the Defendant is indebted, may have satisfaction, but
in case it shall appear that this person so condemned, have not directly nor
indirectly wherewith to satisfy what he ows, his body not to remain in prison,
yet if it shall appear that by loose livings, or riotous expenses he have
wasted the Estate he bad, and of other men, then to be condemned to a house of
Correction, there for to work, till he has paid the uttermost farthing to his
Creditors, or till they shall approve and give consent for his releasement; but
if it may appear that his Estate has been lost by other men's failing with him,
or by accident of Fire losses at Sea, no such man's body to be kept in prison,
but to be set at liberty immediately, it being an inhumane and unchristian-like
thing, and against nature, to debar any of their liberty, when afflictions
have fallen upon them by the hand of God, and this is a very sote aggrievance
in this Nation.

3. That when it shall happen for any man to fail in his credit, and The third
agrievance to be regulated is, when any person fails, that if the major part
of his Creditors compound the rest to be tied thereunto.
so break (as the phrase is) and shall call his Creditors together, acquainting
them with his condition, the major part of whom being contented to compound
their debts with the party failed, and to free him out of prison, that he may
regain his lost condition, and live in the world, the rest, to be engaged to
under Write, as the major part have done, that every one may have their
proportion, as the agreement shall be made, and not for the wilfulness of one
or two, whose perverse, harsh, and malicious spirits often times interposing
the finishing such aggreement do, not only ruinate the Estate that would fully
satisfy every one his just debt, but likewise hindering the party failed from
having liberty to use his endeavors to get in the Estate by casting him in
prison, whereby all become sufferers, experience daily showing that by these
perverse ways, good Estates have been brought to nothing, and when the
Creditors might a had 10 s. and 15 s. in the pound, they have not had one
farthing; for when a Statute of Bankrupt is taken out, it likely eats up the
whole Estate, and the parties failing not only perishing in prison, but thereby
others are drawn into the same misery, which aggrievance is considerable, and
merits redress in a trading Nation, other Countries as Spain and Italy, having
wisely for the upholding of Commerce made provision herein, that by the
wilfulness of a few perverse men, the rest shall not be sufferers, but are to
join with the major part, and in case any break out of knavery, and that within
three months after, has bought any goods, he is to be proceeded against
criminally as a Felon, and to suffer death, being counted worse to break
premeditaly, than the robbing on the high ways

The thirteenth means for the encouragement and ease of trade in their Nation
is, That the two abuses following may be remedyed for the The thirteenth means
to encourage trade is, that the two abuses following be remedyed. 1. Statutes
of Bankrupt.
future, and no more practiced in this Nation of England and its Dominions,
being of great consequence in trade.

1. That these Statutes of Bankrupt, which are now so intreaged with
corruption, and deviated from the original cause of them, may be brought to a
rule of justness and righteousness, and that when a man is broken, it be not
permitted that any person having dealt with him before, and paid him money, or
evened accounts with him, should be called upon to repay again, what they had
justly paid, or accounted for, it being brought to this Custom, that if a man
brake, and his accounts not finished, what shall be owing to the party broke,
must go to the general payments of his debts; and what he owes in contra to the
other is to be included with the rest of the other Creditors, and so he to have
but his proportion as the rest have; which things and Course is so unjust, that
among Christians it ought not to be suffered. But for the future remedied, and
accounts being made up between the party broke, and his Debtor, only the
liquidated sum due upon balance of such Accounts to be the Debt, for which
satisfaction is to be given or received; for hereby great abuses are daily in
these causes put upon men of the commerce in this Nation, diverse have been made
Banqueropts many years after dead, and others that have evened Accounts mouths
and years before men do break questioned, to the disturbance and vexation of
honest men, which ought not to be suftered longer to endure in a Nation
professing Christianity, and so much Saint-ship as we do in England. But if any
man break, nothing to be called to account, but from the time of his failing
and no farther back, which would be of great ease and encouragement to this
Nations trade and the commerce thereof.

2. That whereas by the Laws of this Land it is permitted, That if 2. The not
admitting of men to discount their debts one with the other.
one man shall owe another five hundred pounds upon account ajusted, and he to
whom this five hundred pounds is owing, shall owe the other one hundred by
bond, he that has the bond shall (by Law) recover his hundred pound, and not
discount it, out of what on account is owing to him, but must pay the said
bond, and sue the other afterward upon account; and if not able to prosecute,
must be undone and never get a penny. The like is between Merchants trading,
and having accounts one with the other, he that owes the most, often times
holding out a suit against the other with the interest of his own money; which
abuse is so extreme and intolerable in this our Nation, as that diverse persons
have been and are hereby undone daily, which ought to be remedied in a special
manner.

And for remedy thereof may be observed, That each party suing one The ways to
remedy the said inconveniency
the other, to give in his demands upon account made upon oath, and upon
perusing of each parties accounts, which being referred to Auditors and
Accountants for that purpose, being by them stated upon a just balance so made
up, the money due to any person on such Account, to be immediately paid into
Court, that no man be engaged to sue for the money really due to him, or forced
by Law to be kept out of his own with his own money. It would be of infinite
ease and encouragement to the commerce, for then the debate would only arise
upon questionable things, that would be by the Court appointed for that
purpose, decided and determined as they should see cause, whereby dishonest and
litidious men would not be so troublesome in keeping others from their rights as
now they do, were they to go to Law upon their own purse, and not out of
another; men daily being undone by such as are too powerful, either in purse
or friends upon this very foundation, by keeping their rights from them, and
making use of their own weapons to destroy them. And this is a very
considerable abuse, and lies as a very heavy burden on the people of this
Nation, who may earnestly pray and desire a remedy thereof.

The fourteenth means to encourage the trade of this Nation, and to ease the
same, is, that the carriages from place to place by Boat, Cart, The fourteenth
means to encourdge trade is, that the carriages of goods to and again may be
cheap.
or Horse, of all our Manufactures, or foreign Nations brought in to us, may be
cheap and easy; for the cheapness and convenience of Portage of goods,
especially gross goods, is of great concernment to ease trade and the commerce
of a Nation, which that it may be of advantage to our Land, It would be of
notable importance and benefit, not only to the commerce, but the whole people
of England.

If by the Power order were taken for the mending of all Highways in The way
how this may be brought to pass is, to mend all our Highways and Rivers, etc.
England, where narrow, to make them broader; where bad, to make them good. And
where Bridges and Causies be wanting, to build them; mending all such as are
dacayed, and then cutting of Rivers from one into another; where to be done, as
that of Severn into Thames, and so of others where it can be done, making new
where none is, for the conveying of our goods, and Merchandise, Corn, Cattle,
and Provisions, from one Shire to another, Boats going with a hundred times
less charge than Carts or Horses. The means to have it done both with ease and
speed may be as follows.

That seeing we are now in peace among our selves, an Army kept still up only
for fear of what may happen to us by new discontents, or foreign The Soldiers
to do it, and it will be no disparagement to them but honor and advantage.
Princes invasion: and the Soldiery duly paid by a continued Tax upon the
Nation, it would be a noble and generous act of the Power so far to please the
people, as in satisfaction of what is levied upon them, to employ the Soldiers
in mending the High ways, Bridges and cutting Rivers for them; it will be no
disparagement for the Soldiers to do this, if you will but look back to former
times, and view the Histories of those ages, you shall see Greece, Italy, and
other of those Countries flourish in such heroic works, even this Island can
show us patterns very remarkable, made by the Romars, as Camden tells us; It
was the custom in those ages for all gallant men, who kept up great Armies,
ever to employ their Soldiers in such actions, when they were not immediately
fighting.

1. To eternize their memories for time to come.

2. For convenience of their own countries, and such as were conquered 1. To
eternize their memory. 2. To secure Trade and Travelers. 3. To enrich barren
grounds.
by them, to ease and secure Travelers and Commerce between place and place.

3, For the enriching of barren grounds, that for want of water yielded
nothing, which afterward by cutting Rivers to water them, have been made
strangely fruitful.

4. And chiefly to keep their Soldiers to a coastant labor, that when in time
of war necessity required them to build Forts, make Trenches 4. To keep the
soldiers out of idleness.
and such like, it should not seem irksome or tedious, but through custom a
delight to work.

5. For prevention of disorder, which idleness ever produces; it is most
certainly experienced, that idleness draws effeminateness in men, and 5. To
prevent disorders, and to keep them in action.
makes them prone to all wickedness; as it is noted of Hannibal's Army, that
they lost more lying idly in Italy in one year, than they had gained by their
valor in many years wars. And it was the sole means of giving the Romans the
opportunity to overthrow the whole Carthaginian State.

6. That by having so great a multitude together, and under command 6. Its most
easy to be accomplished by them.
what ever can be thought on or attempted for a general good is easilier
compassed and brought to perfection, than it can be done by levying of men for
a particular work, who will faintly begin, and never finish; and yet for the
most part bring with it an excessive charge on the people: which being executed
this way, would be done.

And for the encouragement of the Soldiers to this work, there may be added to
their constant pay as Soldiers, what is levied by the Inland Rates for mending
Highways and Bridges, etc. and given to them; which will be an advantage to
such as are good husbands, who may save money in their purses by this allowance,
bringing to themselves for time to come both honor and renown, and to their
posterity the benefit and use of their labors. And in such Counties where any
thing is most of present use, there to begin first, and so by degrees one after
another.

For the preservation of these works, when done, especially the Highways The
means to preserve the ways when mended.
and Bridges, that they may not be torn up as now they be by our two wheeled
Carts, which make such furrows, as in some places are extreme dangerous for all
Travelers, causing quarrels upon the Highways, by reason of men's
unwillingness to go out of one path into another, in respect of the Cart-ruts.

That no Cart or Wain should travel but upon four wheels, and All Carts to have
4 wheels, and double horses.
with double horses, as Coaches do; then our Highways will never be spoiled
let them carry what weight they will, and go with never so many horses; for as
the feet of the horses goes in the same tract the wheels turn, both will so
beat the way, as we shall have no more ruts to hinder men from going where they
please, the Highways will be plain, all occasion of quarrels from travelers
taken away, and the ease of the Nation by traveling in Coaches, or on
horseback, much bettered, no Country using the way of drawing in Carts, or
setting one Horse before another but England, I having observed in other
Countries, that in their drawing with double horses, they carry as great loads,
if not greater than we do in this Nation, with putting one before another
single; and did they there find any inconveniency, they would not use it.

The fifteenth means to encourage the trade of this Nation of England, The
fifteenth mea^^ to encourage Trade i^ that what Pirates (...) public ships
ta^^ to distribute the sa^^ to such Merchants (...) have had loss by E^^mies
and Pirates.
and its Dominions, is, That whereas the customs of this Nation were originally
settled, and are still gathered and received, for the maintenance of the Navy,
and setting it out to guard our Coasts from enemies, and to protect our
Merchants ships from Pirates, that thereby the commerce of this Nation might be
secured and encouraged; It would be an honorable act of the Power of the
Nation, and but just, to ordain it, there being presidents thereof in the days
of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, That whatever her ships and men of war in
her service took from Pirates or Enemies, the most was made thereof, and
divided to such Merchants, whose goods had been lost by Pirates, or Men of War,
or seized in our Enemies Territories, to each person as his loss in course had
happened, being Registered accordingly, and allowed as their goods appeared to
be valued in the Custom-House, and their ships as really worth; to which end
Commissioners were appointed to receive the proceeds of what was made of the
Prizes taken, and to pay the same (...) ^ach person as his course came; which
did infinitely encourage trade, and preserve many gallant Merchants from ruin,
and would do so still if continued in practice; for as the foreign Trader by his
industry benefiteth the whole Nation, and the people obtain the advantage; It
is not just, that when times of War happen, all the loss shall fall upon a few
Merchants, as generally it does, but that they should be preserved, by having
the satisfaction proposed, the Public being more able to bear a Tax or duty to
be divided for its own weal, than any particular person the loss of his whole
estate, and the ruin of his family.

The sixteenth means to encourage the trade of this Nation is, That The
sixteenth means to encourage trade is, To raise a stock of money to supply
Merchants at easy rates.
there might be some way thought of to raise a Public stock of money, that
therewith such persons that have goods arrived from foreign parts, and want
friends or means to supply themselves with present moneys, to discharge their
Fraights, Sea-mens Wages, Customs, and such like necessities, might be supplied
at easy rates, by the depositing of their goods in custody for security
thereof. And that upon sale of their first goods, to repay what they borrowed,
and the remainder of their goods to be returned: the which stock would in few
years increase to a vast value: public Warehouses to be built for that
purpose. And this very thing would be of infinite use to encourage trade.

The seventeenth means to encourage trade and tradesmen in this Nation, and
its Dominions, is, That all persons Inventers of any new ^he seventeenth means
(...) encourage trade is, to reward all inven^^^s of new Arts and ^rades.
Art, Trade, or Manufacture useful for the advancement of commerce, or the
general good of the people, may be considerably rewarded, and signal preferment
given themwith esteem. And in case he or they cannot by their own purse carry
through the work, to be assisted by the publicktreasury, and that ancient Order
and Rule observed in such Cases put in execution, prohibiting all others for
certain years from interrupting the Inventers thereof, by making the like when
seen, or notice taken of what is made, or done, except it shall be tolerated
to any by the inventer thereof in this Nation; which said admition, or
tolleration to be obtained from the party under his or their hand and seal. And
were this carefully observed, how would it raise the spirits of ingenuous men,
to expose themselves to excellent undertakings, and be a great encouragement to
trade.

The eighteenth means to encourage the trade of this Nation and its commerce
is, that from hence forth to abolish that inhumane and barberous custom used in
this Island of England, whereby the Lords of ^he eighteenth means encourage
trade is, abolish the barba^^^^s custom used con^^^ning wracks at sea, (...).
such Manors as lie upon the Sea coasts appropriate to themselves the wracks
and goods of such poor miserable men, as the raging Sea in their misfortunes
saves them. It happening daily for to hinder discovery; many men coming alive
ashore, have been murdered; the Sea proving less cruel, and more merciful to
poor Merchants and Seamen, than the Land on which they are cast, which the
very Heathens abhor; and yet we Christians, nay among us who deem our selves
Saints, the holiest of all other Christians, do still maintain this abominable
Custom, which former ages did absolutely declare against, as in the judgment
and Laws of Oleroon Cap. 17. appears at large, and that by an Edict of Henry
the third, King of England; which in that place is fully recited to that
purpose; wherein it is so severely set down, that upon whose land soever any
such accident should happen, if the Lord of the Land did himself take, or
suffer any of his people to embesle any goods so cast up on the shore by the
Sea, and detained it from the owner thereof, he was to be criminally proceeded
against as a Fellon, and his estate seized, and made to give satisfaction to a
penny, and in case of any detention or absconding of any such goods,
excommunications and curses issued out till restitution was made. And this was
in those days when trade was only budding in these parts, and from these Laws
of Oleroon do we generally derive all our Sea Customs, and maritine contracts;
and being this was so wholesome, and so Christian a Law, why should it not now be
put in practice; and the other that is so pernicious, abolished: For what is
here done is but reviving a wholesome Law, which time and covetousness has worn
out; and in so doing would extremely encourage all Traders by Sea in this
Nation, and consequently the commerce thereof.

The nineteenth means to encourage the trade of this Nation, and of great
satisfaction to the commerce and whole people of England is, The ninteenth
means to encourage trade is, that all men's lands may be liable to pay their
debts.
That no persons Lands of inheritance, Houses, Leases, Morgages, or Hereditary
Offices shall be exempted from paying their debts, which they may or shall owe
to any person by Bond, Bill, or Contract, but be liable to sale, whereby such
persons to whom they owe may be satisfied; for under pretense of intailing
their Lands, or buying Land in other names in trust, the people of the Nation
are extremely prejudiced and cuzened thereby; which, if remedied, and course
taken therein, would infinitely encourage the trade and commerce of England..
The twentieth means to encourage trade is, to setle a Committee of Merchants
for trade.


The twentieth means to encourage and ease the trade and commerce of this
Nation and its Dominions, is, That there might be a Committee of Merchants
settled, consisting of a meet number, either fifteen, or seventeen, or more or
less, as shall be thought fit, five, or seven of which to be the Little to
settle any business; the which Merchants to be of the ablest, understandingest,
and experiencedst men trading into foreign parts, who should meet (a place being
appropriated to the commerce for that purpose) once in fourteen days or
oftener, as affairs required.

1. To consult of such foreign trade as may be promoted and carried 1. To
consult about the advance of trade. 2. To redress abuses in trade. 3. To
present the same to the Power for confirmation.
on, for the advantage of this Nations commerce and people.

2. To consider of all such inconveniences as arise in foreign trades and
traders, and how to regulate and redress them.

3. To compose what has been consulted of, and to draw up the same to a head,
if found advantageous for the commerce, and so presented to the Power that they
may approve thereof, and order its execution and practice, whereby, as occasion
shall offer, all Traders may by this Committee find relief at an easy
attendance, when any interruption shall be imposed on them, either at home or
abroad, to discourage or destry the trade.

4. To find out by their experienced knowledge, and examination of 4. To settle
trade for the encouragement of all men.
all things in reference to our trade at home and abroad, a means to settle the
same upon such a continued succession of advantages, that it may be an
encouragement to all persons that desire to employ themselves in a foreign trade.

And for the better establishing of this Committee for encouragement The
Merchants of this Committee how qualified. 1. To be men bred up in foreign parts
and Travelers. 2. That every Nation where our commerce is, may have one to be
of this Committee, and how to choose him.
of trade, the rules following to be observed.

1. That those chosen for this Committee to be men bred up in foreign parts, and
if possible such as have travailed and been experienced in most Countries where
trade is settled, that by their general knowledge they may be the abler to
manage what is entrusted to them.

2. That every Nation with whom we have trade settled, the Merchants trading
into that Country to choose one from among them to be of the Committee, first
to nominate two, and one of them two to be approved of by the power of the
nation, and after that way, one for every Countries trade, to complete the
number that shall be thought ^it for this Committee, be it more or less; viz.
One Hamborough Merchant, one East-Country Merchant, one Rushia Merchant, one
Flemish Merchant, one Holland Merchant, one French Merchant, one Portugal
Merchant, one Spanish Merchant, one Italian Merchant, one Turkey Merchant, one
Barbary Merchant, one Ginny Merchant, one East India Merchant, one West India
Merchant for the Cariby Islands, one Virginia Merchant; which number will make
up 15, and if it be thought fit to add two more, then one for New England,
another for New found land* which is 17, and so I believe most of our trades
will have one that will know what is convenient for the bettering of each
trade, and advancing the same.

3. That these so chosen, among themselves to appoint one to be President, and
to keep the Chair for that year, every one afterward to 3 One of the Committee
to be President for the year, and afterward every one to take his turn,
take their turns as they shall be nominated in the Commission, which does
empower them to act by.

4. That they so nominated do remain for life, unless through weakness of body
by sickness, or that they shall be by the public appointed 4 To remain for
life, unless by death or public employment discharged, or any other sickness,
etc.
to foreign employments, or that through age they may not be able to act in that
trust imposed on them, or that by death they shall be taken away, in any such
cases, in the room of any such person, and for that Country for which he was
chosen, the Merchants trading for that place to nominate two others, and one of
them appointed in the room of the other, whose place shall be void by any of
the ways before expressed; and still at every choice to supply that vacancie,
two of the ablest understandingst men reputed of, that have lived in the
factorie of that, Country to be nominated by the traders that way, and one
chosen, by observation of which rule the Committee will always be supplied 5.
To have a Register kept of their transactions, and Officers accordingly to
manage the same. 6. They to have salary for their public service allowed them.
with able knowing men.

5. That having settled this Committee, they may have a Clerk and such Officers
to assist in the work as may keep Registers of what they shall perfect or act
in reference to this their employment.

6. And Lastly, That as it is not fit for men to bestow their time and pains in
promoting the public, and disadvantage themselves, so it will be just that
they may have somewhat yearly allowed them by way of acknowledgement from the
public, to encourage them to meet and take this task upon them for the
advancement of this Nations trade; which Committee thus ordered, undoubtedly
there will offer and be brought to pass many excellent ways to increase,
encourage, ease and enrich this Nation both in its domestique and foreign
commerce, and introducing rare advantages for the fabricating of foreign
manufactories among us, and hereby restore the now decayed and even dying trade
of this Nation.

Having by the foregoing discourse as briefly as I could and the parriticulars
treated of therein would admit, laid down some directions for the restoring,
increasing, enriching, strengthening, easing and encouraging the decayed trade
of England and its Dominions, which proposals, though not all, yet if the most
considerable of them might be put in practice, undoubtedly it would very much
revive our present decay of trade, which lies even desperate, and at its
period, unless a speedy remedy be applied thereunto; the which is recommended
to those that are at helm, and have power to promote the same, who hereby are
called upon to do their duty, and all other persons interessed herein for to
put their assisting hands thereunto, that what we are now upon loosing may be
kept among us, lest by a too late repentance when the error is committed it be
past our skill to recover again.

Many things more might have been set forth, and much said therein, but with
what is here inserted I shall rest satisfied of, having done my part, desiring
that wherein I have been deficient, or not large enough, those whose longer
experience in the trade of the world, by their perfecter knowledge and
conceptions would correct what is here amiss, and by adding their thoughts
carry on this work begun to such an issue, as to bring it to perfectness, for
the good of all the people of this Nation, and the prosperity thereof.

And for as much as I conceive it not altogether impertinent, seeing One
proposal more for the general good of the Nation concerning Woodmongers and how
thereby the Nation is cheated.
that not only the Traders, but all the people of this Nation that now trade
are in some part or other, if not altogether concerned; I shall before I end
make one proposal more, concerning a grand abuse which all I believe are
sufferers in, and show a means to remedy the same, if so be the Power of the
Nation shall think fit to put it in execution, which I am sure does as much
concern themselves in particular, as the people in general; and that is
concerning the infinite cheats put upon the whole Nation, by Wood-mongers in
their sale of wood and Coals, the Wood told out by notches, and that as they
will mark them. Their Char-coal in sacks, and that in such as the Colliers and
Sellers thereof will make them; which is generally complained of: all suffer
thereby, especially Brewers, Bakers, Dyers, and such that prepare goods for the
commerce, and then Householders that are of the commerce, and all in England
that live by commerce, as well as those that do not.

For prevention of this grand deceit in time to come, and to remedy the A
prevention of this che^t of Wood and Coal, to have both sold by the pound, or
C. weight.
same is; That it be ordered by a Law, that all sorts of wood for firing
whatsoever, except Bavins, or brush Fagots, as likewise Char-coal, or other
Coal be bought and sold by weight, either by the hundred weight, or pound
weight; which rule so settled throughout the Nation, it will be of singular
content and advantage to the people, and thereby the Wood-mongers cannot
possibly deceive any, unless those entrusted to receive the same, by negligence
suffer themselves to be abused and deceived. For according to the age and
goodness of the Wood or Coal, the price will be; but as to the quantity, being
weighed, there cannot well be any fraud.

The like order might be observed in the sale and buying of all sorts The like
order might be for sale of fruits.
of fruits, Apples, Pears, Plums, etc. it would avoid debates that arise in
Markets among the people, and be of great use to keep quietness and peace; this
course being in Spain, Italy, and other ingenuous places, used and practiced in
all the aforesaid particulars, and is commended to the consideration of the
Authority of the Nation, to do therein as it shall be thought mere.

I should now rest here and conclude, but that I promised that in lieu of such
deminishments of the Customs and Excise, which many may conceive would arise,
admitting such free exportation of our Manufactures, and the importation of
such Commodities as are imported toward the fabricating of them upon such
small customs as is proposed; although I hope judicious men observing what has
been said therein, happily may be convinced of the contrary, however to make good
what I promised, in case it should in time appear really to be so, which as to
my own judgment, I believe those two Duties will rather increase than
decrease, trade being ordered and settled on the foundation prescribed.

The following ways I do propose, as fit means to settle a considerable Revenue
to maintain the charges of the government of this Nation, Ways proposed to
settle a considerable Revenue in the Nation.
which will be a good supply when the other fails; and I hope to be owned no
way prejudicial, or vexatious to the people, out of whose purses, estates, or
labors it must issue.

It is a maxim approved of by wise and juditious men, and esteemed To raise it
on the vices of a people, most approved of by wise men.
most properest, that when necessity of State requires a duty to be levied upon
a people for public occasions, to raise it upon the vitiousness of the Nation;
for thereby on the one hand it may happily deter them from delighting therein
to save their purses; or if not, it will be sooner accepted of, and not
opposed; which if otherwise laid upon the ingenuous industry of men, it is for
the most part opposed, and when not, ever taken as a burden and a discouraging:
and undoubtedly it is most safe for any Government to punish Vice every way,
and encourage Virtue; not by burdening the same with Taxes, but if any way,
with rewards. There be many examples hereof in foreign parts, as in Rome,
Naples, and other parts of Italy; where the Princes raise great Revenues out of
their Stews, in Spain upon Tobacco in snuff, and other ways taken; then in
Russia Italy, Spain, Russia patterns to us herein.
and those parts, where the Emperor gathers into his Treasury a very
considerable income out of the Alehouses, Strong-water Houses, and sellers of
Beer, and is one of the greatest among many in his Dominions, the which is done
by these Princes and Potentates, chiefly to punish these Vices to which their
people are naturally inclined.

Certainly we of this Nation are not far behind hand with them in all
drunkenness and debauchery, it were well if we did not exceed them especially
considering our knowledge, and then our profession of sanctity; having more
means for to attain to piety than any Nation under Heaven, but none practices
it less than we; and where then can Taxes be better laid than upon our Vices?

In the first place then to raise a Revenue in this Nation, let a view The
first means to raise the Revenue upon Alehouses, Tobacco-Shops, Taverns and
Victualling Houses, and Strong-water Shops, computed to yield annually three
hundred thousand pounds.
be taken of all the thousands of Tap-Houses and Tobacco-shops dispersed in
every corner of the Nation, both in the Towns and Cities. And ordering a set
number to be admitted in every Town, Village, and City, according as each place
shall require; and let such be admitted to sell Tobacco, draw Beer, Wine,
Strong Water, or Ale, or any potable liquor, as can give caution for their
performance; and so upon each Seller of Tobacco, Victualer, Wine, Beer,
Strong-water, or Ale drawer, to pay a certain sum of money at his admission to
keep a Tobacco shop, Victualing House, or to draw Drink, by way of Fine; and
ever after an Annual Rent to the State; and none else but such as are admitted
to sell any Tobacco, potable lequor, or to keep victualing; which revenew will
bring into the Nation at least, three hundred thousand pound per annum. And
this has been computed by very judicious knowing men; so that by this means
the Excise on Brewers so burdensome to the people, may be laid aside, to their
great ease and content, with all what is by the undue practices of Justices of
Peace, and their Clerks got clandestinely from the people, to grant Licenses to
idle people to set up Alehouses, the dens of Thieves and vile persons, to the
scandal of the Nation, will come into the public purse, and none admitted but
those that can give security for their honest behavior and known persons: and
hereby none will be prejudiced but lewd and debauched people.

The second way to raise a considerable Revenue for the affairs of the The
second way to raise the Revenue, is by the four following Offices. 1. To settle
Registers throughout England for registring of lands etc.
Nation is, That the Power of the Nation establish in England these four
following Offices, Inland Registers, Registers for Shipping, public Notaries
and Brokers.

1. Public Registers in all Counties and Cities throughout the Nation, which
places to be made Hereditary, because of their constantly keeping the Records
of the said City or County in one place; and in case of death, where it may
happen to fall to an Infant, or one incapable, then in the nonage of the said
Infant, to be executed by a person fit for the employment; and if it falls so,
as no Heirs sit to manage the same, its value to be made good to the kindred,
and another responsible person placed therein, approved of for his ability and
faithfulness by the Magistrates of that City or County; and he to give good
security for his faithful administration thereof, as none otherwise to be
admitted into such Offices, but upon good security given for their
faithfulness, for which this Register Office is established.

The use of this Register for the first only, to take the gross of every The
uses of the said Office of Register.
man's estate wherewith they are possessed in Lands, Housing, Leases, Morgages,
Reversions, and such like, how many Acres, and of what value esteemed really
worth; not looking after the Title, which every person may keep to himself; but
after the said Registers be settled, from thence forward to Register the Sales
and Purchases, Leafes or Morgages, Rent Charges, and Reversions sold and
purchased by any man, that for the future no man may be cheated or abused, as
now they be, which would be prevented, were this put in execution in this our
Nation. And that after any man shall take a Lease, Morgage, or lend any money
upon his estate, and shall not Register the same within one month, the next man
lending the same party money, and Registering his first, shall be first
satisfied in case of a failer, and the estate come to be sold to pay debts, and
so the second and the rest in order; And if any shall have lent any money upon
a confidence that the estate might produce his supposed thoughts thereof, and
it do not, the last man to lose whatever the estate makes not out to pay him.

Again, after the Registers be settled, that every man shall be limited a time
to register his said Lands, Leases, Morgages, Reversions, etc. and all such as
can lay claim to any man's estate in part or in whole, to put in their claims
with in a certain limited time, as it shall be ordered, or else to be debarted
ever after from molesting or troubling the party possessed thereof, or his
heirs for ever; and where Infants or Orphans are in the case, their Gardians or
friends, and if they have none, they to lay their claim within twelve or
eighteen months after they come of age, and if Femals, and married, within
twelve months after such marriage, if married to persons that are of age, else
within the limited time after their husbands do come to age, and in failing
therein, to be debarred from molesting or disturbing any person that is seized
of the said estate; and this will very much ease the people of this Nation, and
take off thousands of litigious suits managed by troublesome spirited men,
merely upon pretenses to get money from those that are of right owners of what
they do possess and are seized with.

And further where any death happens, all such as be heirs to the estate of the
deceased person, to register their proportions thereof as left them within
three months after the decease of those whose heirs they be, that none may come
to be defrauded for the want of registring the same; It would be an unspeakable
ease to this Nation, were these Registers settled, and save many thousands in a
year which is now spent in litigious suits, to the ruin of many, and their
whole estates, which by the subtlety of some, for want of a word in a Deed are
unjustly wrested from them.

The Rules by which these Registers are to be guided, are as follows. ^^les
for the Regi^^^^s. To be chosen by (...) County or City in ^^ich they are to
^^^cute. To take an oath of ^^^^lity, and to gyve ^^^^rity. To keep a dupli^^^^
of their transac^^^^s, and to send that (...) the grand Office.


1. To be chosen in the City or County in which they are to execute their
office, and then confirmed by the power of the Nation.

2. Upon their admission and confirmation therein by the Power, and having
given security, to take an Oath of fidelity for the performance of that trust
which they have undertaken.

3. To keep a duplicate of all that they do register, and transmit it up every
month to the grand Office and Registry of the Nation to be kept in the
Metropolis of the Land, where the chief concourse of the people is, that
without sending down to any particular place, if they think fit, they may be
satisfied by a search what they desire to be informed of, concerning the
engagement upon any persons estate.

4. That the power of the Nation settle the fees which shall be received 4.
That by the publ^ke authority their fees may be settled.
by the Register of such as do register their estates, and what they shall
receive for searches and certificates, as occasion offers, that all men may
know what to pay, as they to receive, that the people be not abused and
entrenched upon.

5. That if by negligence of the Register or his Clerk any man shall 5. If by
their negligence any suffer, to be made good by the Register. 6. Falsifying his
trust to be punished as a felon.
be damnified in not having the register entered in due time, his damage to be
made him good by the said Register without any demur, so soon as his damage
shall be made justly to appear.

6. That if any Register shall by any Act give out any false Certificate, or
anticipate any Register, or do any unjust things, and convicted thereof, he to
make good the damage which any person shall suffer thereby, and be proceeded
against criminally as a felon, and to forfeit his Office and estate to the
public, and another placed therein, and what his own estate will not make
good, his security to do it for him, by this strict dealings men will be
cautious how they falsify their trust.

The advantages arising hereby to the public revenue may be these. The
advantages to the public.


1. Every Register at his admission to pay to the public a fine, as also 1.
Every Regicter at his admission to pay a fine.
at every alienation of the said Office by sale to another, or upon death by
the successor, which fine to be certain; that is one years reincome that will
venue.

2. That every Register shall pay to the public an annual rent for his An
annual rent by them to be paid.
Office as shall be thought fit, which he may very well do out of his income
that will grow due to him.

3. That as the Nation will receive so great a benefit as to be freed 3. Every
person upon registring his estate, to poy 3d. 4d. or 6d. in the pound according
to the Rent.
from all deceits in purchasing lands, which now they are subject unto, and
also tedious suits and expenses of Law, which will be taken away, so they to
pay to the public 6d. 4d. or 3d. in the pound, according to the annual rents
which their Lands, Morgage, Lease, Annuity, House or reversion is worth when
they do register the same, which the Register shall receive of them, and once
a Month pay it into the public Treasury of the Nation, which, at the first
registring of the said estates, it will amount unto a very considerable sum of
money, and yearly after as men purchase, morgage, or grant annuities,
reversions, lives, or as divisions do happen, it will be a continual spring of
money that will daily be gathered in, to a good value yearly out of the whole
Nation, and be a good support with other duties to maintain the Nations charge,
so that what with the fines of Registers, their annual payments out of their
Offices, and this together, will undoubtedly give a good help to abate taxes.

The third way to raise a revenue to the Nation is, that in and The third means
to raise the revenue is b^ the Registers of shiping in the Seaports of England.
throughout all the Seaports of the Nation there may be the like Registers
belonging to the Commerce by shiping, whose admission into their Offices, and
remaining in them may be as those for the inland, as also for the regulation in
them, which will be of great use to Merchants and owners of ships, and will
hinder those frauds as by Masters of ships are usually put upon the owners,
making many times, and that too often seventeen, eighteen, and sometimes three
and twenty sixteenth parts in a ship, whereby some must be couzened, which by
these Registers will be prevented, taking the rise from the first building of
the ships for the future, and for present as they stand now owned.

The advantage to the Revenue will be, upon having 6 d. 4 d. or The advantage.
1. Having 6 d. 4 d. or 3 d. upon every tun for registring. 2. Hereby the
Public will be furnished the better with the ships they may want.
3 d. for every t^^ at present, and afterward upon their buying, or selling,
or morgaging, after the nature of what is before expressed in matter of the
lands.

2. Hereby the power knowing what ships and boats of burden appertain to each
Seaport or town, may the better know how to cause every place to bear its
equal burden and proportion when any public occasion does administer to use
ships or boats for the public service; And this will be of great satisfaction
to the Commerce, and bring in a considerable revenue for the present, and
annually afterward.

The 4th. way to increase the revenue of the Nation without prejudice is, The
4th. way to raise the revenue is to have Notaries Public throughout England.
The duty of the Notary, and what is to do.
that throughout all England there be in all Cities, Towns corporate, Market
Towns and Parishes Notaries public established, in every place a certain
number of them as is fit to manage the work in the said City or Town, who being
chosen by the Magistrate of the said Town or City, approved of by the power,
taking oath to be faithful in their places, and to give security for their
performances, which said place to be hereditary as the Registers places,
because of the continuances of their Offices, and these men to make all Bonds,
Bills, Releases, Conveyances, Agreements, Leases, Morgages, Certificates, and
all manner of writings whatever, that is to ingross them, a rate to be set upon
every thing, that the people may not be abused or grated upon. The original
writing to remain always on Record in the Office, and a Copy under the Notaries
hand to the party or parties, and that Copy to be authentic to all intents
and purposes, as the original; by which means men's writings will ever be to be
found, and never lost, and so those inconveniences avoided which now daily
arise to men, by losing their Deeds, breaking the seals of their Bonds,
Witnesses dying, which is the occasion too too often of many men's losing their
moneys and estates, which by this way will be prevented, to the great
satisfaction of the whole Nation.

The advantages arising to the revenue will be, that every Notary The
advantages to the Revenue will be the fines of their admission, and annual
vents after. The Rules to be observed. 1. Not to give Copies of any Deeds, or
to discover them. 2. To keep a duplicate of all transactions to be remitted to
the grand Office.
pay at his admission a fine, and then afterward a yearly pension, as shall be
thought fit; and its conceived there cannot be less than five thousand Notaries
places established to supply the occasions of the Nation, which calculate at
five pound fine one with the other, and five pounds a year rent, will come to a
very hansome addition to the revenue, with the daily alienations and changes
that will happen among them.

The Rules for them to observe, are,

1. That they show no man's deeds or writings, nor give copies of them without
the consent of the parties to whom they are originally belonging.

2. That they keep a Duplicate of all they do, and once a month remit it up to
the original Office appointed to preserve those public Notary Records, that if
any Accident happen by fire, or other ways to their Office, none may be
prejudiced thereby.

3. That to prevent fire, etc. their Offices be appointed by the Magistracy 3.
For prevention of fire, their Offices to be made of brick or stone. 4. To be
punished as a Felon for making any false Deeds, c.
of the place where to be kept, and all built of Brick or Stone, for prevention
of fire, and such accidents.

4. If any of them shall counterfeit any Deed, or any man's hand, or falsely to
make Oath, or certify false Witnesses, or make any false Deed whatever, to be
proceeded against as a Felon, his goods confiscate to make satisfaction to the
party damnified; and what he cannot his sureties to do it, to lose his Office,
and to be punished as the Law in such cases shall ordain to such as counterfeit
men's hands, etc.

The fifth means to increase the Revenue of the Nation without The fifth way to
raise the Revenue is to establish Brokers in the Nation.
prejudice is, That for the benefit of the commerce and all trading persons in
this Nation, there may be Brokers established in all Cities and places of
trade, whereby they as the immediate dealers between man and man may take off
the differences arising upon bargaining with each other, whose wirness in all
cases to be of that validity, as to decide any differen^e that shall arise:
whose places to remain only for life, at their admissions to pay a fine, and
afterward a yearly Revenue by way of Rent, and none to use the trade of a
Broker, but such as shall be so authorized; yet no man to be debarred from
selling his goods without a Broker, if he shall think fit so to do; but if a
Broker is employed, only such as be authorized; and if any other person not
authorized, should intermeddle with buying or selling goods (except it be the
party himself buying or selling for his own use) both to be fined, he that
shall personate the Broker, and the buyer and seller that makes use of him.
The income to the State will be considerable; for considering how many there
must be of them, at least thousands throughout the Nation, they paying ten
pounds a piece admission, or upon any alienation, change, or the like, then the
same rate annually by way of rent; it will amount to a good sum of money for
the present, and a handsome addition to the yearly Revenue for the future.
Rules by them to be observed. 1. That a rate be set for their pains.


The Rules those Brokers should observe are,

1. That a Rate be set on them for their pains, which may be one quarter per
cent. of the Buyer, and the like of the Seller; but at most not above one third
per cent. that is, for all Merchandise bought and sold: and as for the
Brokerage of Exchange, two shillings for every hundred pound of the Drawer, and
the like of the Remitter, which is enough. 2. That they keep a Register of what
they do.


2. That whatever bargain is made by the hand of a Broker, the said Broker to
draw the same up in a Book, which they should keep for the purpose, the bargain
to be stated in the presence of the parties, who should set their names to what
is agreed between them, the day, and month, and time of the day when concluded,
which will be the means to avoid many suits and wranglings between dealers.

3. That such as be admitted Brokers, to be men of known understanding 3. That
they be able and understanding men.
and honesty, able to give security for their faithfulness in the executing of
their trust committed to their management; that if so be by their default any
persons receive damage, they may be made liable to give satisfaction to the
parties damnified.

4. That wherein these Brokers shall by any dishonest practice forswear 4. For
falsity to be criminally punished and pay damages.
themselves, or falsify any bargain made by them between any persons, to be
criminally prosecuted, and if convicted, to make good the damage, forfeit his
Office to the Power of the Nation, and never more to be admitted to execute the
same, or any other.

Diverse other ways and means very satisfactory to the people, and advantageous
to the Revenue, might have been declared, were our quiet so as to encourage the
setlings of them; but I hope by the five foregoing proposals, I have made good
my promise for the raising of the Revenue, which if taken into serious debate,
and well considered of, undoubtedly it will appear to judicious men, the
Revenue will be much augmented to carry on the public charges of the
government, and the people no way prejudiced, but pleased and advantaged. But
before I finish this Discourse, I shall add four short proposals more, Four
Proposals more.
which have reference to the Revenue, and to the whole people of this Nation
and its commerce, as also to particular men more immediately interested therein.

The first is, that if so be the Power of the Nation shall settle a 1. For
raising money to bear the charge of the Committee for trade.
Committee of Merchants for the carrying on the commerce of this Nation and its
Trade, according to what is proposed in the twentieth Article for encouragement
of trade, and allow them a yearly stipend for their extraordinary attendance
and pains to perfect what will be expected from them;

I shall show a way how that charge shall be born by the commerce, both freely
and willingly without dislike or prejudice, and raise thereby a sufficient
income to maintain the same without taking one penny from the Public Treasury
of the Nation.

The second is, That if so be the Power of this Nation will perform 2. For the
raising of money to pay all the Public Faith debts in the Nation, and
afterward to maintain the public charge.
what in honor they are engaged to do (especially if ever they expect upon any
immergent occasion for money that the people should assist them freely
therewith) which is to pay to the people of this Nation their just debts due to
them upon the Public Faith, for Loans, Arrears for services, suppplying them
with Arms, Ammunition, or Ships, or otherwise;

I shall show a means how to raise so considerable a Revenue in this Nation,
that without prejudice of the people, being settled, and the convenience thereof
found, will not only be liked, but approved of, and in a very few years not
only pay to a penny all the Public Faith debts that shall be justly due to any
person throughout the Nation, but they being paid, establish a constant annual
Revenue, whereby a stock of money may be laid up for the supply of all future
occasions that may require the same. And besides hereby regain to the Public
their lost Credits with the people. And all this to be effected without
burdening the Nation with unequal Taxes and Impositions which are for present
so vexatiously extorted from them by armed men, who are ever the disturbers and
enemies to all trade, Traders, Ingenuous Arts, either at home or abroad.

The third is, That if it shall be approved of to raise a stock to furnish
foreign Traders with moneys at easier rates in their urgent necessity, According
to the purposes expressed in the sixteenth means for encouragement of trade and
commerce in this Nation;

I shall show a way and means how this stock may be easily raised without
prejudice to the people of this Nation, but rather for their advantage, and
that not only to the traders, but in reference to the general good of all the
whole Nation, whereby the commerce aforesaid shall not only be accommodated for
their occasions, but withal a considerable income over and above gathered for
increase of the public revenue, and also the following advantages of the
Nation, to the great satisfaction and benefit of the people and their posterity
in after ages.

1. That all Orphans estates of what condition or quality soever shall be
secured from the knavish rapine and wicked practices of Gardians,
Father-in-Laws, Executors, Ad ninistrators, and weak Women, who in their
fondnesses, being overswayed by eyil minded and unconscionable men, Ruinate for
the most part not only themselves but their children and their Estates, whereby
whole fanilies are daily undone, which would be preserved were a public care
taken thereof.

2. That all honest and ingenuous persons, who dying and leaving their children
Orphans and remediless without estates, should hereby not only find relief for
their necessities, but means to prefer them in the world by the public,
according as their ingenuity and aptness should administer and give occasion,
be they males or females.

The fourth is, that if so be the government of the City shall think it to 4.
For the easing the Commerce from the burden of wharfingers and their
inchroachment.
be of too great a consequence to purchase the wharfs lying upon the River, and
that they cannot find means to curb the insolency of the whar fingers that have
incroched upon the peoples right, by requiring unreasonable rates, upon their
takings up or shipping of their goods and Merchandise, under which the Commerce
groans;

I shall show a way how this may be done without purchasing the said wharfs and
at no great expense for the government, but of infinite advantage to the people
and Commerce of this Nation, and the curbing of all these incroching
wharfingers.

Having brought to a conclusion what I intended, and showed the way and means
to revive, increase, enrich, case, strengthen, and encourage the Trade, and
Commerce of this Nation, both in respect of its Manufactories, shippings,
Dominions, Coin and revenew, I shall recommend All persons desired to be
instrumental to revive the dying trade of England.
what has been said and proposed therein to the consideration of all persons
that desire the welfare and prosperity of this our English Nation, and
withal entreat them unanimously to use their utmost interest and endeavor
that the power of the Nation may seriously take into their thoughts our dying
Trade, whereby they may be incited to apply a timely remedy, that thereby the
ulcerated wound thereof may be healed, lest if delayed never so little it
gangrene and become incurable, and so both the Trade and Traders therein
utterly come to ruin and perish. The conclusion of thy discourse, and the only
means to increase and revive the dying trade of England.


And for Conclusion of all, if we of this Nation do seriously and really desire
the Commerce thereof to increase and prosper, and to stand firm upon a lasting
foundation, not to be moved or shaken by other Nations, Let us but observe
these few Rules following, and I dare warrant, and will undertake that in a
very short time we shall all see our dying trah revive and flourish, traders
grow rich, the Nation powerful in strengt Wealth and prosperity to dwell within
our Walls, Lands, Towns, and Cities, and God will bless us, yea we shall be
blessed.

1. That we labor diligently and faithfully every one in that way 1. To be
diligent in our own callings. 2. To disparage no man to advance themselves. 3.
To use no deceits in buying and selling.
wherein God has called us, and not for lucre or gain to entrench upon each
others callings.

2. That we asperse no man's goods, or his good name, by disparaging them or
him, thereby supposing to advance our own.

3. That we use no false lights, weights, or measures, nor oaths, to sell or
put off our Merchandise and wares, but to deal uprightly, faithfully and truly
with one another.

4. That we strive not to circumvent any person in our buying or selling 4. To
force no man out of their right by power.
(or to out-wit one another, as the phrase is lately come up) with tricks and
quillets, and then by Law to wrest from one the other what we ought not, and
detaining by force either of Purse or Power the right of each other.

5. That we oppress not each other in necessity, either by griping 5. To
oppress no man by usury.
usury, or rating what we sell to each other, at so high rates, that who is
forced so to buy cannot live by one another.

6. That we would forbear maliciously to vex and molest each other with 6. To
ruinate no person maliciously.
Arrests, and Sergeants, the times being vexatious enough in the ruinating of
the commerce, through the losses all have sustained; and therefore Traders
should consider each other, and not fly upon one the other, because we cannot
have what we would of them we deal with.

7. That the prosperity of another occasion not our envy, nor his living 7. To
believe no man's prosperity is our adversity.
better than we make us to repine, but let us rejoice therein, and not thwart
each other privately, but rather assist each other more and more, and no way to
think by the ruin of another we may reap the greater advantage.

8. That in occasion of difference between one another, we strive to 8. To seek
the peace of all men.
make peace, and rather hinder differences, than widen them, striving to be at
peace with all men, and to have no man, but to seek peace, and to run after it,
that we may expect that blessing assured to such as make peace.

9. That no man's estate or riches entice us to cover the same, or engage 9. To
defraud no man to enrich our selves.
us by force or fraud to lick our selves whole, or to build up our own fame
upon another man's ruins; nor to believe that by Piracy or Robery, being
enriched with an estate so gotten, will last long to us or our posterity.

10. That whatever we may have taken fraudulently, or by force from 10. To make
restitution of all we have ill got. 11. To around in charity to one another.
each other, be it lands, debts, or ought else; Let us follow the example of
Zacheus in the Gospel, and make restitution.

11. That considering these sad and disastrous times, wherewith God has
afflicted this Nation, let us be charitable to one another, by relieving each
other with our substance what we can, in having good thoughts for each other,
good works and actions, and let not poverty cause us to despise or draw us back
from assisting each the other, for with these things God is well pleased.

12. That upon all public occasions happening to each other, we be 12. To assist
others, as we would have them assist us. 12. To submit to one another, and not
to be rebellions in any kind.
ready to help and assist one the other, for no man does know but it may be his
lot to require assistance from others, and to need the same,

13. That we be tractable, civil and courteous to each other, having respect of
one the other as to their parts and persons; also to submit our selves to our
Superiors, and no ways to despise order nor government and to avoid having any
hand in Rebellious practices, either for the destroying of Religion, which is
Gods cause, or of our Princes, or Country, which Trade and Traders are not to
intermeddle with.

14. And lastly, that we be righteous in all our ways toward God, 14. [To
serve God,] and to do to all men, as we would they should do to us the true and
only means to increase the trade of this Nation.
and in our dealings toward one another, observing carefully and strictly that
golden Rule, Let us do to every one and for every one, as we would have them do
to and for us, which is the sum of all that can be said or done; and if we
resolve duly to observe but this alone, how happy would this Nation be in its
Trade and Commerce, in its Peace and Plenty, in its Glory and Honor, which the
Lord in mercy grant; to whom be all Glory, Honor and Praise for ever and ever,

Amen, Amen.
THE END.
Postscript.
If it shall be suggested by any that shall peruse this discourse, at many
^h^^gs herein proposed are lately published by other (...), and he as present
under consideration, the Author hereof is glad to see others concur with him
in opinion, and that there be still some public spirits that will take the
pains to do the Nation service in their Generation. What is here discoursed of
was some years since intended for public View, but as every year almost, if
not altogether, has brought its change with it, I have been forced to change
many things that were prepared, and put in others; and now fearing these our
changes will never leave changing till we are all changed to dust, and so can
change no more, but as God shall change us; I resolved whatever change should
come, to change nothing more herein; but to send it to the view and perusal of
those that will take the pains to cast their eyes over the same; and when it
please not all, I hope it will please some, and then I have my desire. You have
herein my Conceptions, do with them what you please. And if you find any errors
committed of any side, either in the Author or Printer, both are humane, and
the best of men do err; therefore such as do find any faults, are desired not
to blame any for their good will and zeal for the public Good, but to amend
them, making the best of the worst error, it will be both charity and wisdom.
If the curiosity of some are not satisfied, because no man's name is subscribed
hereunto let it suffice them, that it is not done because the Author of these
Proposals is either ashamed to be known, or to own them; you have a Reason
given at the beginning of this Discourse, which may satisfy you therein.

If the Authority and power of the Nation shall approve of any, or of all that
is here proposed, and desire to be farther satisfied in any particular, they
shall not want a means to be informed by him, who desires nothing more, than
that the Lord would be pleased to make him instrumental in his Generation to
serve his Country and people therein, in some acceptable service, whereby the
Nation may receive the benefit, and God the glory.


