A CAVEAT FOR MAGISTRATES.

In a SERMON, preached at PAUL'S, before the right Honorable Thomas Atkin,
Esquire, Lord Major of the City of London, November the third; 1644. Being the
first day of his coming thither after his entrance upon his Majoralty.

By ELIDAD BLACKWELL, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word at ANDREW
UNDERSHAFT.

Published according to Order.

PSALM. 101.8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut
off all the wicked doers from the City of the Lord.

2 SAMUEL 10.12. Be of good courage, let us play the men for our people, and for
the Cities of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Leyburn for Richard Wodenothe, at the sign of the
Star under Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ATKIN Esquire, LORD MAJOR Of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
THis Sermon had waited upon you sooner, had not some interveening accidents,
and occasions hindered. At length, such as it is, It here humbly presents it
self unto your Honor. And truly my Lord, you have all the reason in the world
to own it; for it is more yours then mine. It was your desire (which with me
has, and ever shall have the force of a command) that brought it, first into
the palpit, then into the press; yea so much as the very Text and all was your
choice; which to me is a mighty rock of confidence, that you earnestly desire
to know what it is God requires of you in your place; being willing to do it;
and I am sure you have power. And these three complete a good Magistrate: Skill
to govern, Power to manage that Skill, and will to actuate both. Much of that
blessed work, I was then such an earnest and humble suitor for, I already see
happily accomplished. Your pious care for the more strict observation of the
Lords Day; Your unparalleld zeal for the suppressing of swearing,
drunkenness, and other the like God-provoking, Land-devouring, Soul-damning
abominations: your vigorous activity, fidelity, sincerity, for the
Reformation, preservation, good every way of this great City shall stand upon
record to your everlasting Honor. When I think of it, I cannot choose but say
with Ezra. Ezra. 7.27.
Now blessed be God, who has put such a thing as this into your heart. And
then pray with David, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
Keep this for ever Lord, for ever in the thoughts of the heart of thy servant!
Iam. 5.2^.
To be isntrumental in the reformation, though but of a family, yea though but
of a particular person, it is the most choicest, and most glorious piece of
service that can possibly be accomplished by the sons of men: but to be
isntrumental in the reformation of a City, and such a City, so populous, so
exemplary, so influentiall into the whole Kingdom; Dan. 12.3.
Oh the height, the depth, the breadth, the length of this dignity! Luke 1.16.
The Lord give you an humble heart, that you may not be exalted above measure,
through this abundant honor he has put upon you; which is such, that truly,
my Lord, were there no other end for which you live but this, yet in this you
have great cause to bless your self in God; and in his name we bless you.

And now, what remains but that you gird your sword upon your thigh, and ride
on? that you advance still forward, and do nobly, for your self, your people,
and your God? Consider I beseech you, how great the trust is, this City has
committed to you: It has given you the Keys, the Sword. The Safety, the
Government. They have all cast themselves (as it were) at your feet, saying,
This is the man we will have to rule over us. Thus shall it be done unto the
man, whom London will honor, and thus has it been done to you. And now, will
not you honor London my Lord, that has thus honored you? And wherein can you
honor it more, then in reforming it? It was the honor of that City
Jerusalem, above all other Cities in the World, that it was the Holy City.
Mat. 4.5.
Oh that it might be Londons honor! To say London is rich, or London is wise,
or London is strong, this is something: But to say London is holy, this is more
then all. Ier. 9.23, 24.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, nor the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glories,
glory in this that he understands and knows me, says the Lord. This will make
it honorable in the eyes of God, in the eyes of the Saints of God; Deuteronomy. 4.5,
6, 8.
yea, and in the eyes even of the very enemies of God. You cannot honor the
City more, then by endeavoring to make it a holy City. And my Lord, as ever
you seriously minded and intended any thing, I beseech you mind and intend
this. Its the thing we look for at your hands. Its the thing you must do, or
do what you will, what you can, you do just nothing. Do! nay, you undo
every thing. Reform us my Lord, or you ruin us. what a perfidious thing were
it, for your Honor to betray the City? My Lord, reform it, or you betray it.
And your late solemn Covenant; and the Oath upon Oath you have taken since, o
what mighty engagements should they be upon your spirit? The vows of God are
upon you my Lord; so that its no arbitrary thing. Necessity is laid upon you,
and woe to you, if you do it not. Yet again, reform London my Lord, and you
reform England. If London be wicked, ungodly, profane, how will profaneness
flow from it, as from a fountain, into the whole Kingdom? And on the other
side, if London be pious, religious, well ordered, well governed, reformed, how
will all the Counties, Cities, Villages, Places round about, by its example, be
encouraged likewise to a Reformation? Once more (and I will use the mightiest
argument in the world, and that which so raisd the brave spirit, of that great
Apostle, to such invincible patience and unwearied activeness for Gods glory
and the Churches good) 2 Cor. 5.14
Let the love of Christ constrain you. I read of holy Job, that being a man in
authority (as you are) he was such a terror to wicked and ungodly men, that
they durst not show their heads, but were glad to Job 30.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
fly into woods, wildernesses and solitary places; and there hide themselves
in clifts, and rocks, and holes of the earth, and cut up mallows among the
bushes, and Juniper roots for their meat. It Is a copy penned for you my Lord,
by Gods own hand; write after it. I know you fear not the face of man. Your
Honor knows what it is to lie in a prison for your Countries good. Bear not
the sword in vain. Draw it and cut off those that will not otherwise be
reclaimed. Make wicked and ungodly men afraid of you. Let not Drunkards dare
to go reeling and staggering in the streets; nor Swearers dare to open their
mouths in oaths and blasphemies in the streets; nor children and others dare
to be playing up and down the streets on the Lords Day. Aaron may speak: but it
is Moses Rod that does the wonders. We that are Ministers may cry out against
these things: but you have power in your hands. Let not sin dare any longer to
affront Word and Sword.

Its a precious opportunity God has put into your hands, improve it. You may do
more good, and bring in a greater revenue of glory to God now, in a few
hours, then it may be you shall ever be able to do again in many years. Close
your eyes against all discouragements. Laugh in the face of difficulties. Pass
by with generous magnanimity and brave contempt the derisions of men, viler
then the earth. Job. 30.8.
You are high in place and office: Be higher in affection and resolution. To
the work in good earnest, and go thorough stitch with it. Every eye that
looks upon you, will bless you. The prayers of all Gods people will be for
you. And, though we will not presume to say to you, as Nestorius said to the
Emperor, Socrat. lib. 7.29.
Mihi o Imperator, terram tu haereticis purgatam tribue; and ego tibi coelum
retribuam, Give us London purged of Drunkards, Swearers, Sabboath-breakers,
etc. and we will give you Heaven: Yet Jesus Christ shall say, Well done good and
faithful servant. And not only we that now live, but succeeding ages shall
call you blessed. Your name shall be like a precious ointment to the children;
yea, to the childrens children that are yet unborn.

Your Honors most humble and obliged servant ELIDAD BLACKWELL.

A CAVEAT FOR MAGISTRATES.
2 COR. 19.6, 7. And he said to the Judges, take heed what you do; for ye
judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.

Therefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts.


THese words, they are Jehosophats caveat to his Judges.

In the former verse you have their Commission. He appointed Judges in the
Land, throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City.

To judge, to rule, to govern, Magistracy, Doct.
though it be for every ones good, yet it is not every ones work; but theirs
that are appointed to it. He appointed Judges. There Is their Commission.

And then here is their charge. Wherein two things are required of them:

First, Action, (ver. 7.) Take heed and do it. Judges must be doers. Doct.


Secondly, Caution, (ver. 6.) take heed what you do. Judges must take heed
what they do. Doct.


And then you have the grounds of that caution, and they are two.

The first is taken from the person they represent in judgment, The Lord. For
ye judge not for man; but for the Lord.

Not for man. It is not to be understood negatively, but comparatively. Hos.
6.6.
As that, God will have mercy and not sacrifice. Sacrifice too; but mercy
rather then Sacrifice. So for men too, but for God rather then for men. So
Tremelius, Non tam hominis, quam Dei vices in judicando geritis. As if he
should have said, In this great work ye sustain, not so much my person, as Gods
person; nor are ye so much my Vicegerents, as Gods Vicegerents; my Deputies as
Gods Deputies; therefore, take heed what you do.

The second is taken from the person present with them in Judgment, and that is
the Lord too. But for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. As if he
should say, you do not only represent God in the judgment, but God is
present with you in the judgment. He sits as Lord chief Justice upon the same
bench with you; therefore, take heed what you do.

Thirdly, you have the main help prescribed; and that is the fear of God. Now
therefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you. The true fear of God in the
heart of a Judge, first it will Restrain him from every evil. Other Governors
did thus and thus, were injurious, were oppressing, etc. but Neh. 5 15.
so was not I. because I feared God, said Nehemiah. Secondly, constrain him to
every good, put him upon every duty. Though never so difficult, Genesis 22.12.
Never so dangerous 1 King. 1.18.3.12.

Lastly, you have the main hindrances removed. And they are three. 1 Iniquity,
wickedness, profanesse. A mighty impediment to justice. 2 Accepting of
persons. 3 Taking of gifis. For There is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking gifts.

We will begin with the caution, Take heed what you do: As if he should say,
be not rash, headlong, percipitant; but discreet, wary, circumspect in all your
doings; and very wary, mavelous circumspect; here is a double take heed. Take
heed and do it: and Take heed what you do. Caution upon Caution.

Of all men in the world, Judges, Magistrates, Ministers

All men ought to be so.

The diverse assaults of Satan to deceive us. The sundry inticements of the
flesh to beguile us. The many allurements of the world to ensnare us. All
declare as much.

All have souls to save. All have another world to provide for. All have rules
to walk by. All are subject to err from those rules. All must appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, and give account of all they do. Therefore all
had need to take heed what they do.

But above all Magistrates had need to do so, for why?

First, They have a larger, and greater care, and charge, committed to them, by
the Lord, then others have. And that,

1 In regard of places. Other's, their care, and charge is shut up and
contained within narrower and straiter bounds and limits then their's is.
Ministers to their Flocks: Parents and Masters, Governors of families, to
their families. Their's to Kingdoms, Counties, Cities.

2 In regard of persons. Let every soul be subject, etc. Romans 13.1. That
lawless immunity of the Clergy, as they call it, from the authority and
jurisdiction of the civil Magistrate, ('its the cursed device of Antichrist.

3 In regard of things. Others their care and charge has respect, some to the
spiritual estate of men only, some to the temporal, worldly, outward estate
of men only; their's to both. Again, others their care and charge has
respect, some to the state of the Church only. Some to the outward, civil,
politic, estate of the commonwealth only; Their's to both. The office of the
Magistrate, and the duty of the Magistrate, it has respect, not only to
Religion; but to the civil State: not only to the civil State, but to
Religion. He is Custos utriusque tabulae: must be careful that all duties,
both of first and second Table be performed. All open breaches of every
Commandment in both, punished.

Et quo sublimior gloria, Eo major cura, says Cyprian.



1 Because they have many provocations, which others have not. Ly open to many
snares, which others do not ly open to.

2 Because they want many restraints, which others have; Public and private
admonition and reprehension. Fear of punishment, etc. A terror indeed they are
to others, if they do evil; revengers to execute wrath upon others, Romans 13.
But if they do evil themselves, who shall be a terror to them? and execute
wrath upon them?



A Magistrate he is a public person; and therefore a public good, or a
public evil. If he be careless, negligent, ungodly, unjust, abuse his
authority, neglect his duty, what is the issue? Religion degenerates into
Idolatry and Superstition. The public ministry of the word, and all other
means of salvation, are either wholly neglected, or exceedingly slighted.
Wicked men encouraged. Godly men discountenanced. Nothing but Ataxie, Disorder,
Confusion, in Church, in Commonwealth. Men cannot possess their lives, their
estates, their names, their -- any thing in peace, in quiet. Whereas, on the
other side, if Magistrates be wise, faithful, careful, vigilant, intentive,
God will be worshipped purely; the Ministry of the word prized highly; evil
men punished; good men protected; And all knit together in such an order, that
every one will forward what he can the peace, prosperity, welfare, good,
comfort of another; and every one possess and enjoy his life, his goods, his
good name, his -- all in peace, in safety, in security.

This is clear by the state of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. When they had
good Magistrates, as David; Solomon, Josia, Hezekiah, etc. How did every thing
flourish that concerned either the glory of God, or the profit, and benefit,
and comfort of men, both for soul and body? But when the Magistrates were
Idolatrous, Tyrannous, Vicious, Then all went to wrack. And we see it by our
own sad experience. And therefore Ecclesiastes 10.16, 17. Woe to thee o Land,
when thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. And blessed art
thou o Land, when thy King is the son Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due
season, for strength, and not for drunkenness, says Solomon. That Land is
happy that has good Magistrates; and the contrary, most miserable and unhappy.
For these and many other reasons, Judges and Magistrates, men set apart for the
guiding, and governing, and ordering of Kingdoms, or Counties, or Cities, ought
in a more especial manner to take heed what they do.

And that in all their actions, Natural, Civil, Religious. In their whole
conversations.

The ordering of their Families. There Children. Their Servants; Those they
employ in managing their public Affairs; Those too they employ in managing
their Domestic or Household businesses and occasions; to see that they be such
as be faithful in their duty to them, their masters on earth; mindful of
their duty to God, their master in Heaven. That they be pious, religious,
conscientious, such as fear God, such as will discharge the trust committed to
them. 2 Timothy 3.5.
If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the
Church of God? says the Apostle of Ministers; and it is true of Magistrates as
well. How shall he be able to govern a City, that cannot govern his own
Family?

The ordering of their persons too. Above all men in the world, Magistrates had
need to take heed that their lives be holy, harmless, righteous, religious.
Such as may adorn their profession. Such as may put an honor, a luster upon
Religion. Such whereby they may be an example of good to all, of evil to none.
For why?

First, with what face can a Magistrate punish sin in others, if guilty of the
same sin himself? A drunken Magistrate, A swearing Magistrate, A whoring
Magistrate, A Sabboath-breaking Magistrate, how can he punish drunkenness in
others, oaths in others, uncleanness in others, profaneness of Gods day in
others?

Secondly, The excellency of their office requires it. Magistracy, It Is a
visible character of an invisible Deity. They are called Gods, I have said ye
are Gods: Psalm. 82. And what, a drunken God! a swearing God! a Sabboth-breaking
God! a profane vicious God! It Is no less then blasphemy.

Thirdly, The eminency of their place requires it.

They are as a City set upon a hill. All men's eyes are upon them. Their lives
are exemplary. Men are led by example much; and by the example of Magistrates,
more then by the examples of other men, Reges ad exemplum; etc. Magistrates
lives, they are the peoples rules. And of all things a rule should be strait. A
false rule! a crooked rule! it is most dangerous.

Fourthly, Example in them does more good, or more hurt. A mighty force in the
example of Magistrates. Have any of the Rulers believed in him? John. 7.48. The
example of the Rulers kept many from believing. Evil examples in Magistrates,
is more infectious, more contagious. Jeroboams sin, it made All Israel to sin.
If Magistrates be wicked, how will wicked men be animated, imboldned,
encouraged in their wicked ways? Not a greater provocation in the world to a
wicked life, then a wicked Magistrate. God will be dishonored more; his people
grieved more; wicked men imboldned more; the Land endangered more, defiled
more: from them as from a fountain, prophannesse, wickedness, ungodliness
will flow forth into all the Land, as the Prophet speaks of the wicked priests
of his time, Jer. 23.15. Therefore above all men in the world, Magistrates had
need to take heed wihat they do. And that even in All their actions, in their
whole conversations.

But especially in the administration of justice, in the execution of their
office, in matter of government, in point of judgment, in their judiciary
proceedings. That is, 1 In hearing causes that are brought before them. 2 In
passing sentence when they have heard them. 3 In executing that sentence when
they have passed it ((...).) To these three heads may be referred all judiciary
proceedings. Hearing. Sentencing. Executing.

First, hearing of causes that are btought before them; whether criminal, or
controversall. Ioh. 7.51.
Does our Law judge any man, before it hear him? says Nicodemus.

The Commonwealth, it is a body politic; offenders and offenses in a
Commonwealth, they are (as it were) the peccant and noxious humors, and
diseases in that body; Judges and Magistrates, they are (as it were) Physicians
for the healing and curing of those diseases; and does any Physician prescribe
etc. before he understands the state of a man's body, and considers the nature
of the disease? Genesis 18.21
Descendam ut videam, says God. The sins of Sodom were exceeding grievous;
and their cry came up to heaven: Yet God does not rain down fire and brimstone
presently; No, I Will go down and see first, says he; See whether they have done
altogether according to the cry. And thus in punishing the old world. Genesis 6.5.
Genesis 11.
And thus in confounding the language. And this he did, not for himself; He is
omnicient, knows all things, and therefore needs no inquisition, or
examination, or trial to inform his knowledge; but for our example, Ne mala
hominum praesumamus credere, ante quam probare, says Gregory. Lest we should
credit reports, before we examine them. Judges should herein be (...), as
Plutarch speaks. Living Images of God. The Thebanes pictured their Judges,
sometimes without eyes; sometimes without hands: but never without ears. The cause
I knew not, I searched out, says Job. Examinarion must ever go before
judgment. And here, mighty wariness, and caution, and circumspection is
required of Magistrates; here, they had need to take heed what they do. As
namely, that they do it,

First, speedily. Without demurs, delays, procrastinations, (beyond what is
necessary.)

Secondly. Meekly, mildly, patiently; not in passion, in anger, in wrath: Iam
1.10.
The wrath of man, works not the righteousness of God, says James.

Thirdly. Diligently; not oscitantly, sluggishly, slothfully, sleepily; as
Philip of Macedon once, who by that means gave wrong sentence; so that the
party was fain to appeal from Philip sleeping, to Philip waking.

Fourthly. Equally too, indifferently. Hear small, as well as great; poor, as
well as rich; Stranger, as well as brother. And hear both parties; both sides.
Plutarch reports of Alexander, that when he sat in judgment, he was wont
(alteram aurem praebere actori, alteram vero integram servarereo) always to
stop one ear to the Plaintiff, saying, he kept that for the Defendant.
Condemn no man before he which is accused, has his accuser face to face, and
has liberty to answer for himself, concerning the thing laid to his charge. It
was a Rule among the Romans; And it was a good Rule, for why? Act. 25 16. Pro.
18.17.
He that is first in his own cause is just, till his Neighbor comes, says
Solomon. One man's tale is good till another's is heard. Besides, If to accuse,
be sufficient to make a man nocent, who shall be innocent?

Fifthly. judiciously, understandingly. A Judge, He had need be a man of a most
exact understanding; that he may be able to discern betwixt man and man; cause
and cause; just and unjust; true and verisimilus; false and specious; between
the confidence of accusing or denying, and the truth or falsitie of the
accusation; betwixt impudent guiltiness, and diffident innocence. No cause so
bad, but there are, that by their quirks and devises will make it seem good. And
so on the other side, no cause so good, but through the modesty, or
unskilfulnesse, or unfaithfulness of those that plead it, it may possibly
seem bad. It Is strange to see with what confidence, and what impudence, with
what a brazen forehead that Harlot carries it; 1 King. 3. and how right and
innocence in the other had even like to have betrayed it self, through
modesty and simplicity of earriage and expression. Had not Solomon had (...)
as Basil speaks, a sharp and exact understanding, to discern between the
modesty of the innocent plaintiff, and the malice of the envious defendant, he
had certainly been deceived. Quibus bonestior conscientia, iis plerumque frons
imbecillior, says Jerome. Dishonesty many times (like Tamar) is veiled with a
mask of fair words, and a smooth tongue; when innocence is timorous and
uneloquent. Therefore, Justitia, though it should be coeca in exequendo, yet it
must be oculata in dijudicando, impartially blind in executing, but eagle-ey'd
in searching out a matter.

That Is the first thing, Judges must take heed what they do in Hearing causes.
Let the cause be opened; let evidences be produced; let the accused and the
accuser be brought face to face; Let them get a manifest cognizance of the
thing, by a fair, free, calm, hearing of matters on both sides, before they
pass sentence.

For why? Possibly they may err else. Nay, it is almost impossible but they
should err else. However, unjust they shall be sure to be; yea, ( aequum licet
statuerint, as the Tragoedian) though possibly they should light upon the
right. Though the Judgment should be just, yet the Judge should be unjust.

Those that commence suits; Those that plead and prosecute suits; Those that
testify and give in evidence; Those that bring in verdict. All had need to
take heed what they do, that they carry themselves as in the presence of God;
and do nothing in these cases before Gods Vicegerents, which they would not
do before God himself, whose judgment it is, and who is with them in the
judgment.

But above all, Judges had need to take heed; Because when all have said all
they can, still the judgment lies in the judges breast.

Secondly, In passing sentence. Judges must hear causes speedily, patiently,
diligently, indifferently, understandingly; and when they have so heard them,
they must pass sentence. And here likewise abundance of wariness and
circumspection is required of Judges. Judges had need to take heed what they
do; as namely, that they do it. 1 Righteously. Hear the causes betwixt man
and man, and judge righteously, Deuteronomy. 1, 16. with equability, with proportion.
Proportion, 1 to the mind of the Law. 2 To the quality of the offense. 3 To
the nature and disposition of the party offending.

1 To the mind of toe Law. A Judge must proportion his sentence, square his
sentence, not to his own or other men's passions, affections, humors, favors;
but according to the Mind of the Law. Not the words of the Law, they are but
vestitus legis; but the Mind of the Law, the true sense and meaning of the
Law, the intent of the Law; that is, according to justice, and truth, and
equity, and reason.

2 According to the quality of the offense. Artaxerxes that heathen King, even
by the light of nature prescribed this rule: That every one that should offend,
should be sentenced According to his offense, some to death, some to
banishment, same to confiscation of goods, some to imprisonment Ezra. 7.26. As
there is a difference of offenses, so there must be a difference of
punishments. Greater offenses, greater punishments; lesser offenses, lesser
punishments.

3 According to the nature and disposition of the offender. Respect herein must
be had to that too. It Is true, the letter of the Law is the guide of judgment
(...), for the most part. But yet, because men's actions are infinite; and there
are sundry particular cases which the Law in its general mandats cannot
foresee, and provide for, by reason of diverse circumstances extenuating perhaps
the nature of the fact; and it would seem harsh if every thing should be
censured by the rigor of the Law, therefore much is left to the Judge herein;
and there ought to be in His breast an (...), as Aristotle calls it, a middle
equity, tempering justice by the milder interpretation of the Law. And in this
case Judex non jus dat, sed docet, as Plato. The Judge does not give Laws, but
give the sense of Laws.

And concerning the offender; the Judge is to consider, First, Whether he did
it through weakness, or whether he did it through wilfulness; the one is to
be beaten with more stripes, the other with fewer stripes, Luke 12.47. Again,
whether now remorsefull, humbled, penitent; or stubborn, audacious desperate
in his wickedness. If the incestuous person upon admonition become sorrowful,
and humbled, and penitent, (...). It Is enough, says the Apostle, it is
sufficient that he has been admonished; now receive him, forgive him, comfort
him, confirm your love to him. Cor. 2.2.6. And the reason of this rule is,
because the great design of a Magistrate in all his administrations of
judgementit, should be reformation; not destruction, but reformation. He should
not Sono catenarum delectare, as Seneca speaks, delight in the rattling of
chains and fetters, and the sight of hatchets and haltats, etc. punish that he
may punish, but that he may bring to repentance. ^ Cor 55.
It Is the end of all censures whether civil or Ecclesiastical.

Yet I do not give this for an universal rule neither. There are cases
wherein the Judge must not be milder then the Law, The Law must have course,
Justice must be done. 1 That the Land stand not before God guilty of blood. 2
That others may hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly. As namely, when
the offenses are bloody and crying and heinous; connivencie or impunity, in
these cases, it is not clemency, but cruelty. But in other cases again, in
lesser offenses, but once or seldom committed, and the offender penitent;
there, justice without mercy; it is not justice, but severity, says
Chrysostom.

2 Religiously, piously, sincerely, without any respect at all to any thing in
the world; but merely and only out of love to God, delight in justice, zeal
to the good of the Commonwealth. Otherwise, Christians are no otherwise just
then Heathens were just. Nay otherwise, even while just Judges, they are
murderers; If biassed by carnal interests, private respects, self aims and
ends, as we see in Jehu.

3 Courageously too. Judges, they must be men of courage; not weak and
timorous and pusillanimous. A weak and timorous Judge, will easily be an
unjust Judge. If Pilate fear ( ne non amicus Caesari videretur) Caesar's
displeasure; he will condemn Christ, though it be never so much against his
own conscience, Joh. 19.12. If the Governors fear Jesabels displeasure; upon a
letter from her, they will condemn Naboth, though never so contrary to all
Religion and equity. 1 King. 21. It was Rehoboams fault, He was
tenderhearted, and not able to withstand the Sons of Belial. 2 Chronicles. 13.7.
And so David's too, that he let the sons of Servia be too hard for him; he
durst not censure Joab though a murderer; Why? he was the General of his
Army, and he feared a mutiny; therefore Deus judicet says he, the Lord judge
him. Alas! a private man, every subject might have said so. Solomon's throne was
supported by Lions 1 King. 10.20. Lion-like virtues, courage, and valor, and
resolution, and magnanimity should be in Magistrates; they should not be
terrified, or daunted, or diverted from justice, by the threats of the potent,
or the frowns of the mighty, or the haughty looks of any; or the letters, or
messages, or wills, or pleasures of great ones, be they men or women, Caesar's
or Jesabels, Kings, or Queens. Must not fear the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1.17. but
must be men of bold, undaunted, courageous spirits.

4 Impartially. Without respect of persons. (...), without preferring one
before another; or inclining to one more then to another.

Respect of persons in judgment is every where condemned in Scripture? Thou
shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the rich.
Levit. 19.15. A Judge must not pity a poor man, because he is poor; Nor
favor a rich man, because he is rich; but according to the equity of the
cause, must be the equity of the sentence. A mean man, a great man, an enemy,
a friend, it must be all one in this respect. Exuat personam Judicis, qui
induit personam amici, says one. Let him put off the person of a Judge, that
puts on the person of a friend. A Judge sits in the place of justice, not to
judge of men's persons, but of their causes. And therefore, in former times,
sometimes the bare causes were propounded without any so much as mentioning of
the persons; sometimes again obducto velo judicabant, says Musculus, They
covered the Judges face with a Veil, when he sat in judgment, that so he
might not see their persons. And the Thebanes always painted their Judges
without Eyes. A Judge must be like Melchizedeck, without father, and without
mother. It is Asa's high commendation, that when Maacha (though his own mother)
committed Idolatry, he would not spare her, but deposed her from her Regencie.
And 2 Chronicles. 16, 16. It Is Levies too, In the execution of justice, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
He said to his father and to his mother, I have not seen them, neither knew
he his brethren, nor his own children. Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, It Is
true such a one is my friend, and such a one is my friend; sed magis amica
veritas. The affection of a friend suits not the Function of a Judge. In some
cases it was not lawful for the father or mother to spare there own son,
Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 21. The husband to spare the wife of his own bosom. Deuteronomy.
13.6, 7, 8. etc. A Judge must equally and impartially give to every one that
portion which the Law gives him. No outward respect must move him either to
pity, or to severitie; more then the equity of the cause requires.

Freely. A Judge should not be moved, either minis, or donis. With threats, or
gifts. The motions of justice should be like those of the Heavens, from inward
principles; not like those of Mils, or Clocks, or Iacks, and the like Mechanic
Engines, that stir not but by force of waters, or winds, or waights. Imitantur
hamos dona. Bribes, they are the mighty bane of justice. It Is said of Elies
sons, dilexerunt munera, They turned aside after Lucre, and took bribes: and
what follows? perverterunt judicium, they perverted judgment. A Judge should
not receive bribes, no not in a just cause. A Counselor may sell his advice;
and an Advocate may fell his pleading; but a Judge may not sell justice.
Justice should be as cheap as air. It Is a debt he owes, and can he be just
that must be hired to pay his debts? No difference in Gods account between
briberie and thieverie. Yea, for this very thing, are the Princes of Jerusalem
called thieves, Esaias 1.23. Not for taking purses by the high way side; but for
taking bribes in their chambers; for so it follows, Every one loves gifts and
follows after rewards. And her Rulers love to say with shame, Give ye, Hosea
4.18. And what difference between, Give ye, and Deliver ye; only, one goes in
chains of gold, many times; while the other lies in fetters of Iron; But in
Gods account they are all one. It Is that that turns magna regna into magna
latrocinia, says Augustine. Guildhall into Shuters Hill, DIKE, against
covetousnes.
and Westminster Hall into Salisbury Plain, as one well Englishes it.

6 Speedily. Currat lex, let justice have quick dispatch. A miserable thing
when Judges shall use causes; as unconscionable Chyrurgions use sores; hold
them long in hand, not for any difficltie in the cure, but for gain. Speed is
requisite in justice as well as integrity. And the Judge in the Parable, why
is he called unjust? only for this, he deferred to do justice to the poor
widow, he would not for a while, says the text, Luke 18.4. Even in delaying
judgment unjustly and needlessly, there is injustice. Sentence must be given
speedily. Yet

7 Deliberately. Two things are to be avoided in judgment. Too much delay. Too
sudden expedition. Deliberation ought to accompany judgment. Especially if
the punishment be capital, ultimo supplicio, if it be to life. Life is
precious, death terrible.

8 Tenderly, and with abundance of mercy and clemency, and moderation. It Is
true, excess herein, too much clemency is not a virtue, but a vice. But yet
there is a difference between the exercise of justice, and the severity of
justice. noli esse justus nimis, says Solomon, Eccles. 7.18. Press not
justice too far, do not turn judgment into gall, and justice into wormwood.
Take heed of rigor. Rigor of justice is injustice; where mitigation may be.
Indeed there are cases wherein a Judge must not spare. Notorious malefactors,
Traitors, wilful murderers, they must die: Who so sheds man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shead, Genesis 9.6. Such too in whom is found malicious
wickedness; especially if the ground of the quarrel be laid in irreconcilable
principles to Religion; in this case, qui malis parcit, bonis nocet, says
Scaliger; He wrongs the lambs, and wrongs the sheep, that lets the foxes go,
and lets the wolves go. Therefore the Law must have course, justice must be
done. But yet with abundance of tender-heartednesse, and abundance of
Christian compassion. Seneca reports of Augustus, that he never pronounced
sentence of death, but he did ( ex imo pectore, alta suspiria ducere) fetch
deep sighs from the very bottom of his heart. Yea, even Nero himself, though
otherwise cruel, yet it is reported of him, that being asked to subscribe to a
sentence of death, utinam nescirem literas! says he, I would to God I knew not
how to write. That Is the next thing therefore in the execution of justice.
Qualify as much as may be the rigor of it; mix mercy with it. I will sing
mercy and judgment, says David. Psalm. 101.1. Justice without mercy, is not
Justice, but cruelty: on the other side, mercy without justice, is not mercy,
but foolish pity.

3 In executing sentence. A Judge when he has heard the cause, and pronounced
sentence, must execute that sentence.

Three things make a happy Commonwealth: Good Laws; Upright judgment
according to those Laws; And just execution. And herein likewise, Judges must
take heed what they do. As namely:

1 That they do it with all the grains of allowance, of time, of mercy, of
clemency, that justice will permit; Especially if to life.

2 With all the mitigation that may be. The Jews might give forty stripes to a
malefactor; Deuteronomy. 23.
yet in their greatest corrections they would give but thirty nine. 2 Cor.
11.24. Of the Jews five times, received I forty stripes save one, says Paul.
They bated him one.

3 With abundance of compassion. If the judgment be severe, and such as
cannot justly or safely admit of any further delay, or any remissness or
mitigation, by reason of the haynousnesse and atrocitie of the crime, yet even
then he must do it, not with insolence, and elation, and revilings, and
reproachful speeches, etc. but with all the meekness and demonstration of
compassion that may be. My son give glory to God, says Joshua to Achan; he
calls him his Son. What ever the punishment be, mercy and compassion must be
used in the inflicting of it. Must not by any cruel course make the torture
either greater or longer then necessity requires; for why? Duo sunt nomina
says Austin, homo and peccator; As he is a malefactor, punish him; but yet as
he is a man, pity him.

Thus in all their actions, in their whole conversations; but especially in
matters of judgment, in their judiciary proceedings; as in hearing causes that
are brought before them; in passing sentence; in executing that sentence; in
all these, Judges and Magistrates ought to be men of mavelous caution and
circumspection.

And thus we have done with the explication of the point.

Use 1.
We come now to application. And here, something I will say to all. But yet I
beseech you give me leave to begin with you, the honorable and reverend Judges
and Magistrates of this magnificent and renowned City. And the sum of what I
shall say to you, is only this charge of K. Jehosophat to his Judges here; It is
the charge of the King of Kings, to you this day, by me, who also am in Gods
stead, and am set here to mind you of your duty, Take heed what you do, etc.
Oh that this sentence were painted upon the doors, and gates, and walls of all
your Courts, and all your judgment seats! But above all, oh that it were
engraven deeply in all your hearts! and that you would think you hear it
sounding continually in your ears, (as Jerome did that voice: Arise ye dead and
come to judgment.) Take heed what ye do. And especially, and above all, what
you do in your judiciary proceedings. When Causes are brought before you,
hear them speedily, patiently, diligently, indifferently, understandingly. And
then pass sentence righteously, religiously, courageously, impartially; A
miserable thing when Laws are like Cobwebs which do, Inferiora animalia
retinere, valentiora transmittere, as Anacharsis said; Catch little flies, but
let the great ones break thorough. When one man may better steal a horse, then
another look on. One man better betray a Castle, a City, a Country; then
another parley about the betraying of it: when for one and the same fault some
shall be punishrd, others not so much as called in question. Read superiori,
read inferiori, read aequali, cuique quod suum est read; says Bernard. Be
they superiors, be they inferiors, be they equals, what ever they be give
them their due; encouragement to whom encouragement; punishment to whom
punishment. Let justice be like the Sun, which falls equally and indifferently
upon all; rich ones; poor ones; Palaces, Cottages. Take order for bloody
Joabs; cursing Shimeys; treacherous Absolons; punish sin as well in great ones,
as in small ones; not sparing with Moses, To hang up even the -- Princes of the
people before the Lord. God is no respecter of persons; no more be you.
Remember that message out of Smithfield the other day. Pitts.


Freely too. Let love of justice constrain you to do justice; and desire of
Gods glory; and desire of the public good: Not promises, gifts, rewards,
gratuities. Herodotus has a dreadful story, of one Cambyses a Persian King,
who finding that one Sicanus a Judge, had been hired by money to pronounce a
wrong sentence, ( Eum excoriari jussit, and pellem ejus affigi ad sedem
judicialem) He caused him to be flead, and his skin to be nailed over the
judgment seat, and there to remain for the terror of succeeding Judges. If
all perverters of judgment had been so served, there be many Judges in England
had had but little skin on their backs. Bion was wont to say: A Magistrate,
when he leaves his place, should go out, non ditior, sed clarior; not more
rich, but more righteous. And what is it for a Judge to have lucrum in arca,
and damnum in conscientia? as Austine speaks; Gain in his Coffer, and loss in
his Conscience? A full purse, a foul soul? 'Twill prove (like Judas his bag)
his bane at last. Remember that of Job: Job 13.35.
Fire shall consume the Tabernacle of bribery. Never let it be said of you (as
Eschanes said of Demosthenes) that you incline that way most, that brings In
most. Justice is a debt you owe; scorn to be hired to pay your debts.

Do it speedily too. Jethro was troubled, to see causes hanging from morning
to evening. Surely twould have troubled him more to see them hanging from year
to year; To see causes depending to become immortal.

And then execute that sentence when you have passed it. And if it be to life,
execute it with all the allowance of time, of mercy, of clemency, of
mitigation that justice will permit. And with abundance of compassion.

In a word, do nothing rashly, unadvisedly, inconsiderately: but every thing
gravely, warily, deliberately, with abaundance of caution and circumspection.

To help you a little, consider, 1 the person you represent in judgment: You
judge, not for man; but for the Lord. The Ordinance of Magistracy, it is the
Ordinance of God; Romans 13. The person who judges, is a person sent of God;
(...), the Minister of God, Romans 13.4. The person sustained by the Judge, is
the person of God. He is Gods vicegerent, Gods delegate, Gods deputy The
persons and causes to be judged are Gods. The man is Gods; his life is Gods;
his estate Gods. The judgment too, If righteous and just and good, it is Gods;
God will own it, approve it, defend it, reward it. Consider that. You have your
commission from God; receive your office from God; derive your power and
authority from God; sustain Gods person; do Gods work; execute Gods
judgment; take heed therefore what you do. Do nothing but what God would do,
if he were in your room. Now would God punish the poor, and pardon the rich?
would God justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous? would God pervert
judgment? would God accept persons? would God receive gifts? would God be
corrupted? why; no more be you. You execute Gods judgment, make God your
pattern in the execution of it. Follow his rule, Imitate his example. He
accepts not persons, nor takes rewards ( Deuteronomy. 10.17.) but without respect of
persons, judges according to every man's work, 1 Pet. 1.17. The greatest
potentates, and the highest Monarchs in the world, if wicked and ungodly, can
no more escape the vengeance of God, then the poorest wretches that live upon
the face of the earth: witness Pharaoh, Zenacherib, Nebuchadnezer, Herod,
Hamon, etc. Yea, and his dearest children he corrects, as well as those that
are his veriest enemies. Yea, Judgment (Begins) at the house of God, 1 Pet.
4.17. and tribulation and anguish to every one that does evil, to the Jew
(First,) Romans 2.9. God carries himself equally and indifferently to all in the
execution of judgment. Do you likewise. Set up God for your pattern, your
president; imitate God. Think, would God show mercy now? would God acquit
this man now? or would God condemn this man now? If not, why should I do it?
It is a sweet thing, when a Magistrate lying down at night, can reflect upon
the day, and say: I have done nothing this day, but what God himself would
have done, if he had been in my room. That Is the first reason.

And He is with you in the judgment; That Is another mighty argument, why you
should take heed what you do, The Lord is with you in the judgment. 1. with
you, to assist you. The burthen's too heavy for you; aye, but God will put
under his own shoulders; you shall be assisted by the great God. 2 With you, to
protect you, defend you, safeguard you from wrongs, from hurts, from violences.
Friends may frown; enemies may threaten; aye, but God is with you; and if God
be with you, who can be against you? 3 With you, To behold all your
proceedings. God stands in the assembly of gods. Psalm. 62.1. Stands. Not sits,
but stands. Stands to look this way and that way, and the other way; to hear
what this man says, and what that man does. To hear who gives an I, when the
nocent is to be punished: who gives a No, when the innocent is to be quitted;
Therefore take heed what you do. 4 With you, To reward your integrity; punish
your partiality. Remember that When ever you set foot into the place of
judgment; and say as Jacob, Surely the Lord is in this place; o how dreadful
is this place! The Lord is here, and he hears every word I speak; and he sees
every action I do. I have, not only men to behold me; and Angels to behold
me; but even God himself, he is present with me. There was a Canon made; in the
Chalcedon and Ephesine Council, that upon the Judges Bench, the Book of the
Gospel should be set up, which the Judges were to cast their eyes upon, to the
end they might do every thing according to the mind of Christ. And the
Ethiopians were wont to set up a Chair of State in their Senate, and that to
be empty; as if the God of judgment sat there as Umpire, and Moderator; whom
the Senators ought to look upon in passing sentence, that they might imitate
him in their judgment, to the end they might do every thing as in the sight of
God, who (as the text says) is with them in the judgment. These are the
Reasons in the text: You sustain the person of God; sit in the seat of God;
execute the judgment of God; stand in the presence of God, Therefore take heed
what you do. Execute Gods judgment, as God himself would execute it.

Nay, yet more; you must be accountable to God too. Remember that. You must one
day come to your Read rationem, Give an account. You must appear, before that
exact, and unavoidable, and unappealable Tribunal of the Judge of all the
world: and he will hear all over again; and judge the Cause; and judge the
Judge; Judge you; and judge all. And would you give any sentence now, that
should then be reversed? Would you give any sentence now, you would then be
ashamed to own? Consider that. you must give account to God. Not only to Gods
Deputy, that little God in your bosoms, Conscience; which will sentence you
severely if you do amiss; but to the great God, the judge of all the World;
and Jesus Christ the Judge of quick and dead. God will bring to judgment every
work, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. Take heed therefore
what you do; You will never be able to give up your account with joy else.

Again. The nature, greatness, and waightinesse of the work you have to do.
The easiness of miscarrying in it. The exceeding great danger if you do
miscarrie. All these call upon you to take heed what you do.

1 The nature, greatness, and waightinesse of the work you have to do. 1 It
is Gods work, and therefore requires your utmost circumspection. I have
provided with all my might, says David. Why? The house is not for man, but for
the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 29.1. 2 It is a great work. A work of the greatest and
mightiest concernment, and importance, that ever did, or ever can come under
your hands. 3 It Is a perplex, intricate, difficult work. So many knots; many
Cases so intricate; o what a Labyrinth you will be in sometimes? Your thoughts
how they will be perplexed, twisted as it were, intwin'd one within another? how
you will be troubled to discover your way, to find your rule, to know what to
do? 4 It is an excellent work. 5 An important work too. Your eternal salvation
lies upon it. Your, and our temporal salvation also, Laws, Liberties, Lives,
Gospel, Religion, Church, State, Kingdom, all lies upon it. According as you
manage your work, even so may it fare with England for ought I know. and the
children that are yet unborn, will have cause, either to stand up and bless
you; or to stand up and curse you.

2 The easiness of miscarrying in the work. Take heed what you do; A thousand
to one but you will miscarry else. For why? First, you are but men. Gods
indeed; but yet but earthen gods; Men, weak men, frail men, flesh and blood.
You have the same carnal principles in your hearts, that are in the hearts of
others. You have a principle of pride in you; a principle of self-love in you;
a principle of base, slavish fear in you; a principle of ambition; a principle
of covetousness, etc. 2 You have the same Devil; and the same World to draw
forth those principles too. Such temptations from Satan; such solicitations
from men; such evasions in offenders to avoid justice; friends entreaty;
enemies obloquie; such a world of snares; so many respects to work upon your
affections; so many occasions to turn you out of the way; so many impediments
to justice; This relation and that relation, kindred, acquaintance, fear,
favor, hope of reward, frowns, smiles.

If they be rich ones and great ones that offend, o they must be spared, they
will sit upon my skirts else another time, they will be even with me. And if poor
ones, yet if great ones become suitors for them, o I must gratify such a great
man, etc. Oh how hard it is for a Judge to deal justly, uprightly,
impartially! Take heed therefore what you do, You will certainly miscarrie else.

3 And if you do, Oh how dangerous it is! that is the third thing. The
exceeding great danger if you do miscarrie: Danger to your selves: danger to
others.

First, to your selves. To err in judgment; especially wittingly and
willingly, Oh it is a fearful sin. Called a manifold transgression, and a
mighty sin, Amos 5. 12. And you are said herein, even to exceed the deeds of
the wicked, Jer. 5.28. How many dreadful woes stand registered in the book of
God against this sin? See Esaias 5.20. etc. No sin more sharply threatened; no sin
more severely punished; in persons, in Nations. It Is a sin that makes you
guilty of other men's sins. A man may be guilty of other men's sins; not only
positively, when he consents to them, councels them, incourages them,
countenances them, and the like; but privatively also, when he indulges them,
connives at them, etc. In this case, all the wickedness others do, it is You
that do it; you be the murderers; and you be the Saboth-breakers, and you be
the swearers; and you be the drunkard., etc. It Is not they that do it, it is
you that do it; it is the Court of justice that does it. It Is a sin of blood.
The sin of blood, oh it is a fearful sin; and if you err in judgment, if you
condemn whom God would absolve, or absolve whom God would condemn, you pull
upon your selves the guilt of blood; you take the blood that lies upon others
and lay it upon your own heads. Because thou have let go a man, whom I
appointed to destruction; therefore, thy life shall go for his life, and thy
people for his people, says the Lord to Ahab. 1 King. 20.42.

2 Danger to others too; to the State, to the Kingdom. Take heed what you do;
you will endanger the whole Kingdom else; involve the whole Kingdom in blood; be
State murderers, Kingdome-destroyers. And whereas if you had carried your
selves religiously, piously, sincerely in your work, you might have quenched
the fire of Gods wrath, Psalm. 146.31. you will kindle it more. And whereas had
you executed judgment, you might have removed the judgments that are upon the
Land; you will pull down yet heavier and sorer judgments.

It Is a dreadful place, that Amos 5. Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and
leave off righteousness in the earth; (ver. 7) I know your manifold
transgressions and your mighty sins; You afflict the just, you take a bribe,
you turn aside the poor in the gate from their right, etc. (ver. 12.) well,
and what follows? Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Wailing shall be in
all streets, and in all high places they shall cry Alas, Alas; and they shall
call the husbandmen to mourning, and such as are skillful in lamentation to
wailing, (ver. 16.) And the day of the Lord shall be darkness, and not light,
even very darkness, and no brightness in it. (ver. 20.) So Jeremiah 4. They
judge not the cause of the fatherless, and the right of the needy do they not
judge, (ver. 28.) well, and what follows? Shall I not visit for these things?
says the Lord, shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? (ver.
29.) The want of due execution of judgment, pulls down Gods heaviest judgments
upon a Land. Take heed therefore what you do, you will else undo the whole
Kingdom. And will you be the persons that will undo England?

Suppose God should yet disappoint all our hopes, and bring in all our fears,
and fire and sword should overrun even the whole land, and the enemy should
begirt our very walls, and we should hear the alarm of war in our very gates,
and should see torrents of blood running down our streets, our houses burning,
our wives ravishing, our children dashing in pieces, and our selves running
some of us to the tops of houses, others to the bottomes of cellers, to hide
our selves from the murderer, all in an uprore; London stretching forth her
hands, and crying out to all the world, as Jerusalem once, behold and see if
there be any sorrow like to my sorrow; And in the midst of these sad
combustions and confusions, your consciences should step in and tell you, (as
the Prophet tells those filthy priests of old, Mal. 1.9.) This has been by
your means: England may thank you for this; England might have been a Nation
still, if it had not been for you; Religion, the gospel might have flourisht
in England still, if it had not been for you; The work of Reformation might
have been carried on even to perfection, if it had not been for you. O how
dreadful would this be! where is the man whose very heart within him can choose
but tremble to think, least he should be the man with whom it should be thus?
Now the good Lord of heaven startle you, rouse you, awaken you! The good Lord
of heaven make you serious in the business! God will be dishonored else; his
wrath provoked; against your selves, against the Land; his people grieved;
wicked men animated, encouraged, emboldened in their wicked ways. Maxima
peccandi illecebra, impunitatis spes. Not a greater provocation in the world to
sin, then hope of impunitie. And within, your consciences they will accuse you.
And without, the complaints and sighs, and groans, and tears of the oppressed,
they will cry to Heaven against you. And the oaths, blasphemies, drunkennesses,
uncleanness, prophanations of the Lord's Day, etc. which you might have
suppressed, and did not, they will cry to heaven against you. And will not all
this prevail with you? Why I beseech you, by all that is dear to you; As you
tender the glory of God; As you tender the safety, and security, and
prosperity of this great City; yea, and of this whole Nation; As you tender
the peace of your own consciences; yea, and the eternal salvation of your
souls; in the bowels of Jesus Christ I beseech you, Take heed what you do.

ANd now, my honorable Lord, give me leave I beseech you, to address my self in
a few words to you. Certainly your Honor would never have chosen my text for
me, if you had not intended I should direct my speech to you. Truly my Lord, I
have not the least jealousy or suspicion, either that you will not take heed
and do it; or that you will not take heed what you do. I am confident you have
studied your duty; and I am as confident you are resolved, through the mighty
assistance of Gods grace and spirit, to stir up your self, even to the very
utmost, to do your duty. Yet give me leave to put you in remembrance. Philip,
that great King of Macedon, He knew that he was mortal, and that he must die;
yet he would have his Boy knock at his Chamber door every morning, and tell
him so* My Lord, Take heed what you do.

1 As a man.

2 As a Christian, let those inward and immediate actings of your soul toward
God, be scru'd up to a higher peg now then ever. Love God more. Delight in the
Ordinances more. Prize Jesus Christ more. Be more in communion with him too;
close communion, closet communion. Ply the the throne of grace. Double your
files at heaven. You have more need now, then ever. If you prayed twice a day
before; truly you had need pray thrice a day now. Morning, and Evening, and at
noone will I call upon thee, says David. Be much in seeking God. Josh. 1.8.
Much in consulting with the word too.

And then for your outward conversation, Order that aright. See that your life
be holy, harmless, righteous, religious; such as may adorn your profession;
such as may put an honor, a luster upon Religion; such whereby you may be an
example of good to all, of evil to none. You are as a Beacon upon the top of a
Mountain, All men's eyes are upon You.

Thirdly, As a Master of a Family. Families in Scripture, are called Churches.
Salute Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.3, 5.
and the Church in their house. Let your Family be a little Church, in regard
of frequent reading the Scriptures; Prayer morning and evening, and other the
like duties and exercises of Religion performed there. My Lord (I beseech You,
heed what I shall now say) Religion set up in Your Family, will bring Religion
into fashion (as I may say) throughout the whole City.

And for your servants and your officers, the charge God gives to you, do you
give to them; God bids you, do you bid them, Take heed what they do. Shine the
fixed stars never so oriently and resplendently; yet if the Sun and Moon, the
inferior Orbs, should not give forth their light, what a dark world would it
be? Be you never so courageous, so industrious, so godly, so just, so upright,
yet if your Officers be false hearted, negligent, indulgent, covetous,
timorous, how will every thing go to rack? It Is with a corporation as with a
curious clock or watch, though the spring be never so right, yet if but the
least wheel, yea, but the least pin be amiss, it distempers all. Remember
David's resolution this way, in that 101. Psalm.

It was the happiness of Solomon's time, that not only the Mountains (the
supreme Magistrates) brought forth peace; but even the little hills too, (the
inferior officers) brought forth joy unto the people. Oh that it might be the
happiness of yours, my Lord!

But lastly and chiefly as a Magistrate. In all your actions, in your whole
conversation you ought to be a man of marvelous wariness and circumspection;
but especially in the administration of justice, in the execution of your
office, in matters of government, in point of judgment, in your judiciarie
proceedings; that is, when in judicial places, and in judicial affairs,
hearing causes, sentencing, executing: Then, above all other times; and in
those things above all other things, it highly stands you upon to take heed
what you do. Countenance the good. Curb the bad. Judge the fatherless. Plead
for the widow. Help poor ones. Defend weak ones. Oppose great ones, if ungodly.
Cut off wicked ones. Pull the prey out of the teeth of the Lion. Break the jaws
of the Oppressor. Accept not persons. Take not bribes. Let the fear of the
Lord be upon you. Job 29.14.
Put on righteousness as a Chain, and judgment as a robe and diadem. What
ever corruptions you see, redress them. What ever divisions, compose them.
Ministers that are faithful, encourage them. Christians that walk closely
with God, protect them. Rule for God. Reward for God. Punish for God. Maintain
virtue. Suppress vice. Promote Religion. Bring in Reformation.

It is the great design God has upon the Land; improve all the wisdom of
your heart, and all the power of your place to be therein serviceable and
helpful to God all you can. Do this my Lord, or do what you will, what you
can, you do just nothing. And as one to Antipater King of Macedonia, who being
presented with a book treating of happiness, rejected it with this answer, I
am not at leisure, Noli igitur regnare says he, be not King then if thou art
not at leisure. My Lord, I beseech you give me leave to speak freely to you.
Truly I pity you; and as well as I can, I pray for you; you have much work to
do: but yet, this, this is the work; and if you be not at leisure for this, if
you be not at leisure to reform the City, what do you in the place of
Magistracy?

My Lord, you cannot honor the City more then by furthering a reformation.
What Is the honor of a City? Not Armies, and Navies, and Forts, and Bulwarks,
and sumptuous buildings, and stately edifices, and silver as the dust, and gold
as the stones of the street, etc. But wholesome Laws and Constitutions, and
those duly executed; when the Gosple is propagated, Religion countenanced,
piety promoted, innocence defended, vice punished, equity preserved, and so
Church and Commonwealth jointly and mutually live, and love, and grow, and
prosper, and God has glory from the well ordered co^munities of men, and men
felicity in a blessed Communion with God, happy is the people that is in such
a case. My Lord, do what in you lies to make US such a people. You cannot
honor London more, then by reforming London.

You cannot honor Your-selfe more neither. This will be your everlasting
honor and renown, not that you had the Keys of the City committed to You;
but that You provided for the safety of the City; Not that you (bore) the
Sword of the City; but that you (drew) that Sword to destroy wicked doers, and
to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City. Psalm. 101. ult. Not
that such a year you was Londons Governor; but that such a year you was
Londons Reformer. It was not the honor of Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. that
they were Kings in Israel; so was Jeroboam, and so was Ahab, and so was
Manasse, etc. but that they reformed Israel; pulled down Images, cut down
groves, destroyed Idolatry, restored Religion to its purity, made the Church
pious, the Commonwealth prosperuos. Do it therefore my Lord. 'Twill be your
Renown throughout all generations. And when others, that stand like Ciphers in
their places, and have a name only to be Agents in this great transaction,
shall be forgotten; the children that are yet unborn, shall rise up and call
you blessed; and this shall be your happy memorial, that you was, The repairer
of the breaches, the restorer of the paths to dwell in.

You cannot profit London more neither. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness, it is profitable to all things. Entitles persons, and so places
too, to all the promises, of protection, provision, preservation, etc.

You cannot fafeguard it more neither. Religion, Reformation, it is corporis
politici neruus, the Sinews of a Commonwealth, and so the sinews of a City.
And what glorious things are spoken of such a City in the Word of God? That
God will create upon every dwelling in it, a pillar of a cloud by day, and a
pillar of fire by night, Esaias, 4.5. alluding to that, Exodus 13. That the Lord
will make it a defenced City, Iron pillars, brazen walls, and that against the
whole land, against the Kings (men of power) Against the Priests (men of parts)
Against the people (headie, tumultuous, violent,) Jer. 1.18. yea, walls of
fire, Zach. 2.5. I will be to it a wall of Fire, says the Lord. Zach. 2.5.
If of brass only, possibly some might break through it, or climb over it;
but of Fire, therefore no approach. He alludes to the custom of Travelers,
in those Eastern Countries, who when they pitched their tents at night, were
wont to make fires about them, to scare away Lions, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, etc.
Enemies that for strength are Lions, for fierceness Bears, for cruelty
Wolves, for subtlety Foxes, God will be a wall of fire to scare away these.
Nay, yet more, Walls of salvation, Esaias 26.1. In that day (that is, In the day
of Jerusalems restoration and reformation, as in the former Chapter) In that
day, shall this song be sung: We have a strong City, why? Salvation will God
appoint for walls and Bulwarks. Nay, yet more; Its place of defense shall be
the munitions of rocks; Bread shall be given it; and its waters shall be sure,
Esaias 33.16. A City besieged, though it have walls of brass; yea, walls of
fire; yet possibly it may be starved, and so forced to yield that way; But if
besides these fortifications without, It has also all things for life growing
within itself, Springs of water, fields of corn, Pastures for Cattle, etc. and
so is not subject to want by reason of its dependence upon foreign supplies,
how safe were such a City, and how impregnable, and unconquerable? Why and so
safe, so impregnable, so unconquerable should this City be, were it a reformed
City.

As Persia, the Captive Virgin, said of Athens, being asked, if it were not a
goodly strong fenced City. Truly it is, says she, were but the inhabitants
well mannerd. Si incolaebene morati, pulchre munitam arbitror. My Lord, what an
impregnable, how mightily fenced, and fortified were London, (si incolae been
morati) were but the Londoners pious, religious, well ordered, well governed,
reformed?

My Lord, two or three things I desire to mind you of. what swarms of poor,
lame, maimed, wounded soldiers lie up and down the streets, crying to every
one that goes by, one half-penie for Gods sake, and no man turns back to give a
half-penie! what a dishonor is this to London? and to them what a
discouragement? My Lord! they have ventured their lives for us, I beseech you
let some course be taken, that they may have a livelihood amongst us.

And oh the many poor, sad, desolate, widows; and the many fatherless
children, that this war has made! My Lord, should you come into a family,
and there see the mother sighing; and the children standing about her weeping,
and crying bread, bread; and she has no bread, unless it be the bread of
tears; if you look into her Cupbord, there is no bread there; if you look into
her purse, there is no money there, to buy bread; if you look into her shop,
there is no trading there to fetch in money; no emploiment; no work that she
either has, or knows where to have; would not this be a sad spectacle, my Lord?
would it not make your bowels earn? God knows there are many such families in
this City at this day; I beseech you let them be thought upon. 'Twas Jobs
comfort in his distress, that he had relieved the fatherless, and made the
widows heart sing for joy, Job 39.13.

And oh the throngs of beggars that wander up and down the streets! we can
scarce crowd in at our Church doors for them. Never had any Kingdom better
Laws in that respect, I beseech you take care that they be executed. Why
should there be a beggar in London? There was none in Israel. Deuteronomy 1^ 4
Those that are able to work, let them work; or let them starve. Those that are
not (throughage, or lamenesse, or blindness, or the like) let them be provided
for.

Were all the penal Statutes executed upon Drunkards, Swearers,
Sabbath Breakers, common Gamsters. etc. Of every one, that without reasonable
cause, travels upon the Lords Day, ten shillings. Of every one that carries
any burden, or does any worldly work upon the Lords Day, five shillings. Of
every one that is present at any sport or pastime on that day, if above the age
of fourteen years, five shillings; if under the age of fourteen years,
twelve pence. Of every one that profanely swears, or curses, for every time
he does so, twelve pence. Of every one that is found tippling in an Alehouse in
the Town where he dwells, three shillings four pence; and of the
Alehouse-keeper for suffering him so to do, ten shillings. Of every one
that is drunk, for every time he is so, five shillings. Of every Constable that
neglects his duty herein, forty shillings. Of every one that keeps a common
house or place for bowling, tennis, dicing, carding, or the like, forty
shillings for every day. Of every one using and haunting any such house or
place, and there playing, six shillings eight pence. My Lord, were all these,
and many other the like penal Statutes put in execution; (besides the
restraining of these God-provoking, Land-devouring, Soul-damning abominations)
what plentiful provision would there be for the poor?

Look into the prisons too, my Lord. Oh the world of wickedness that is
there! They are very Nurseries of all ungodliness. Men that once come there,
they learn more villainy there, in one week, then ever they learned before in
all their days. Especially now. Never such a serpentine generation there; such
a viperous brood. Why, what do you mean to nourish them in your bosoms;
unless you mean they shall dig out your bowels? Men that have so often
sought, some by secret conspiracies; others by open hostilities, to take away
all your lives. Your lives! A^, and that that is dearer (or at least should be
dearer) to you ten thousand times then your lives, The Gospel, Religion; Judge
if they are worthy for one moment to enjoy their lives; much less to enjoy
what they do enjoy, their pots, their pipes, their whores, their games, their
sports, their pastimes, people of all sorts so freely resorting to them, etc.
Are ours so used, when they fall into their hands? My Lord those that deserve
restraint, let imprisonment be a restraint indeed to them; and those that
deserve to die, let them die; hang them up before the Lord as the Gibeonites
did Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 21.6. 'Twould be as acceptable a sacrifice to God as
that was; and as pleasing a spectacle to all GODS people.

And one thing there is, which if you would do (my Lord) would stand upon
Record to your perpetual honor; and I beseech you let me beg it at your
hands. That (if possible) you would think of some way, whereby in every
prison of the City, an able, godly, faithful Minister may be maintained to
teach them and instruct them. It Is lamentable to consider, that in such a place
as this, so famous for so many excellent works of Charity to the bodies of
men, the souls of men should be so neglected.

Look into Taverns, and Innes, and Alehouses, and Gaming-houses too my Lord.
Oh the abuses and disorders that are there; what drunkenness, what swearing,
what whoring, what neglect of callings, of families, etc.

Look into the Forts too; and into the Courts of guard. Were some appointed to
take the forfeiture of every oath that is sworn there; there would not be so
many oaths swore there in a month, as are now in a day.

Look into the Exchange too. Scarce any difference to be seen there betwixt
the Lords Day, and other days; such resort of people thither, to walk, to
talk, to tell news, to hear news, etc.

And then for the Lords Day, I confess something has been done of late for the
better observation of the Lords Day; An Ordnance has been passed; But what is an
Ordnance without execution? Execution in policy, it is like elocution in
Oratorie, It Is primum, secundum, tertium, the prime, the main, the all in all;
the very life of the Law indeed. And therefore Aristotle calls the Magistrate
(...), A living Law.

Now the Lord help you! you have more work to do then I can speak; And Oh
that you could even exuere hominem, and induere Angelum; Even cease to be a
man, and become a very Angel! The Lord make my Lord wise, as an Angel of God!

This consider my Lord; what ever sin is in your power to restrain; if you do
not restrain it, you commit it. What ever good is in your power to advance; if
you do not advance it, you hinder it.

This consider too (my Lord) you must be accountable. Give an account of thy
stewardship^, Luke 16.2. and what do you know, but that the Stewardship of
your office, and the Stewardship of your life may end together. Take heed
therefore now what you do; lest then you cry out (with him) what shall I do?
It Is but a year my Lord; your time is but short; take heed what you do in
this little inch of time; lest you cry out to eternity, what shall I do? I
have said ye are gods; But ye shall die like men, Psalm. 82.6, 7. Gods; But
mortal gods. You must die my Lord. That gold chain, and that scarlet robe, and
that magnificent attendance, you must lay it all aside, and stand naked before
the Judge of the whole World, and hold up your hand at that last and great
Tribunal, and be accountable what you have done, how you have lived, how you
have laid out your talent, how you have improved that power and authority and
dignity God has put into your hands. My Lord, I beseech you let it be your
care (It shall be our prayer) that you may give up your account in that day
with joy, and not with grief.

And then, this consider too my Lord; you have such advantages in this Work,
as never man had before you.

Such a Parliament, so godly, so wise, so faithful, so united together in
their desires and endeavors for a Reformation; spending their time, and state,
and strength, and spirits, and all for the common good. My Lord, what can this
honorable City suggest to them, wherein they might be helpful to you in
furthering a Reformation, which they would not as greedily embrace, as you can
suggest?

Such a Ministry too. What course could you put them upon, wherein they might
be servicable to you, in furthering and forwarding a Reformation, which they
would not take? Do but you tell them what you would have set up, that might
set up Christ, and they will pray it up, preach it up, put to their heads,
their hearts, their hands, all they are, or have, or can, even to the utmost to
lift it up.

Such a mighty spirit of prayer in the hearts of Gods people too. It Is
admirable to see how the spirits of God's people are drawn out in this service
every where. God was never so assaulted. The rest of the Almighty was never
so broken. As he said of that day wherein the Sun stood still in Gibeon, Josh.
10.14
and the Moon in the Valley of Aialon, Never such a day as that before it, nor
ever should be again after it: The same may I say of this City in this
respect; There was never such a day in this City, nor do I verily believe
will there ever be again, such a day of prayer. A mighty encouragement. You
are backed with such a mighty gale of prayer, as never any Magistrate in this
City was.

The ice is already broken too. The work begun. Aie, and carried on a great
way too. What Monsters had your Predecessors to grapple with? what a mighty
spirit of Antipathie against a Reformation? what stratagems? what plots? what
desperate designs? what insurrections? what tumults? All was in an uprore; and
we were upon the very brinke of ruin every day. This is all now hushed, and
quasht in a gracious measure. The Cause was then more doubtful; the malignants
here in the City more powerful, higher in their hopes too; how did they
applaud themselves, rejoicing and triumphing as those that put off the harness
after victory? How did Rome triumph? and how did the Romish faction here in
England triumph? It Is otherwise now. God has taken off their chariot wheels
(as I may say) and though they drive still, yet blessed be God, they drive but
heavily. And what herds and droves of vicious, scandalous, superstitious
Ministers were then in the City, what a deal of unsavorie salt? That Is now cast
upon the dunghill. And what swarms of Atheists, Papists, profane persons, that
are now gone? and what a deal of do about a Service Book, and about a
ceremony, and about superstitious pictures, etc? Our Worthies in Parliament
were at a stand, knew not what to do; every one was at his wits end, knew not
what course to take.

The beginnings of reformation evermore meet with the greatest difficulties,
and with the strongest and mightiest obstructions and oppositions. Isreal's
greatest strait was at the red sea. Indeed, when they were in the Wilderness,
there they met with difficulties; full of wants, wanted bread, wanted water,
and (which was worse) wanted faith, wanted patience, and thei'l back again into
Egypt, and 'twas better with them in Egypt, etc. Enemies came out against them
too, fighting enemies, ploting enemies, conjuring enemies. Full of straits they
were in the wilderness; But their greatest strait was at the red sea. Blessed
be God, we are got through the red sea, we are in the wilderness; yea we are
(we hope) upon the very borders of Canaan; and who knows my Lord, who can tell,
but that even You may be the Joshua, that may bring us into the very possession
of that good land? However, flag not in your attempts; let your aims be high.
Do what you can. Let no such (But) stand upon your name, as we find standing
upon the names of some of the Kings of Israel, who yet were good men too; They
did this, and they did that, they did thus and thus (But) But the high places
were not taken away; 1 King. 15.14.
There was an imperfection in their reformation.

A Word or two to the people now, and I have done. And first, Is this so? Are
Judges and Magistrates above all men in the world, to be so wary and
circumspect? Who wonders then to see Saul running away, 1 Samuel 1^.22.
and hiding himself among the stuff, when he should be anointed King? To see
wise, and grave, and conscientious men, that understand the weight and charge
of Magistracy, willing to wave it? unless they see a divine suffrage, a vote
from heaven, a clear hand of providence calling them out unto it. Oh that I
were made Judge (says one) and that every man that has any suit or cause might
come to me! But who was it that said so? It was Absalom, a heady, rash,
inconsiderate young man, a wicked man, a Tyrant, a Traitor. Others, they cry
out as 2 Cor. 2.16
Paul, (...), who is sufficient for these things? It Is true, there is honor in
it; but withal there is burden in it too. And a burden (humeris vel Angelicis
formidandum, as Bernrrd says of the Ministry) too heavy for the shoulders
of the very Angels.

Use 3.
Again. Is this so? Had Magistrates above all men under heaven need to be men
of such mavelous wariness and circumspection? Oh then pity them Christians,
pity them.

Pray for them too. Good people, for God sakes, let me beg your prayers this
day, for them whom God has set over you in the place of Magistracy. There are
diverse and sundry virtues and graces required in Magistrates, Beg them of God
for them. As

First, beg wisdom and understanding for them. 2 King. 3.9
Understanding in the law of God; understanding in the positive Laws of the
Kingdom; that they may be able to discern betwixt good and evil; betwixt
right and wrong. How shall they be able to determine according to Law, if they
do not understand the Law?

Secondly, beg valor, courage, fortitude, magnanimity. Magistrates should be
men of courage; and further then God makes them so, they cannot be so.

Thirdly, Humility too. That their hearts be not lifted up above their
brethren. That they be not proud, haughty, etc. but may behave themselves in a
sweet, lowly, loving way to all.

Fourtly, The true fear of God too. 'Twill restrain them from all evil;
constrain them to all good. Therefore Let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
says Jehosaphat. That they may not only know what is just, and execute what
they know to be just; but that there may be integrity in their executions.

3 Help them. Put to your own shoulders. The burden is great. One man is not
able to bear it alone. Put we under our own shoulders therefore, and help we
in our proportion every one of us. Moses was the wisest Magistrate one of them
that ever was; yet notable to bear the burden of the people alone; therefore
he chooses 70 Assistants, or 70 subordinate Rulers and Magistrates that should
bear the burden with him; He called them in partem solicitudinis. His ease
required it. The peoples necessity required it. And so God ordered it. Numbr
11.17. And such are you the right worshipful Aldermen of this City, in your
several Wards. You the Deputies also. You the Common Council men also. At
least you should be such, you ought to be such; Assistants, namely, to the
supreme Magistrate. Be so therefore. Concur as Assistants. Oh help, help
all you can to to find out offenses; To inform; to reform. See you do it. 1 Timothy 5.21.
I beseech you heed what I say: see you do it. I I charge you before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, as you will answer your neglect in
that last and great day; see you do it. If not (bear with me I beseech you,
I must speak it; I cannot approve my self to God, and to mine own conscience
unless I speak it) I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day,
that all the sins that shall be committed in London, from this very day, caused
by your negligence, connivence, indulgence, they are your sins; you are the
Drunkards of London, you are the Swearers of London, you are the
Sabbath Breakers of London, etc. Help therefore I beseech you, and assist what
you can.

And so let us All; even every one of us in our several stations and
proportions. Oh that we would do so! Oh that the hand of God might be to give
us one heart! 2 Chronicles. 30 12.
as it is said of Judah, in Hezekiahs time. That there might be a concurrence, a
confluence of desires, of endeavors! That we would, even All of us be active,
vigorously active this way! That so all of us in our places, as so many
Rivolets, contributing our strength to the public current, Amos 5.24
Judgment might run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream,
and know no stop nor resistance!

Errata.
PAge 1. for 2 Cor. 19. r. 2 Chronicles. 19. p. 3. l. 2. f. percipitant r.
precipitant. p. 7. l. 7. f. Reges, r. Regis, p. 8. l. 21. f. omnicient, r.
omniscient, p. 8 l. 20. f. language. r. languages. p. 14. l. 12. f. (...) r.
(...), p. 16. l. 30. f. nimus, r. nimis, p. 20. l. 25. f. mortal, r.
immortal, p. 26. l. 2. f. drunkard, r. drunkards.


