CR
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
DIEV ^ ET MON ^ DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES REX.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all the Nobility and Gentry of Our Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and to all other Our Loving Subjects of what Degree and Quality
soever, Greeting:
Whereas Richard Blome of London, Gentleman, has Informed Us, That he has
employed his Time, and been at great Expenses in preparing for the Press a
Volume to be Entitled, The Gentleman's Recreation, Treating of Hawking,
Hunting, etc. as by his Proposals it does further appear. And being given to
understand by the Certificate of several Persons of Honor, That the Work will
be of great use, and acceptable to all Our good Subjects, and especially to the
Nobility and Gentry, We have thought fit, at the humble Request of the said
Richard Blome, to declare Our Royal Approbation to the said Undertaking: And
out of Our Princely desire to promote all such commendable and useful Works;
and the better to embolden him to finish this Volume now in hand with, We do
hereby recommend his said Endeavors unto you, to the end that by your
Subscriptions you may encourage him to perfect and finish the said Book. And,
Whereas we are Informed, That the said Richard Blome will be at great Charges
to perfect the same, by reason of its being Illustrated with diverse Sculptures,
as Engines, Nets, and the like, relating to the said Sports of Hunting,
Fowling, etc. We do by these Presents strictly charge and prohibit all Our
Subjects, within Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, to Reprint the said Book,
in whole, or in part, within the term of Fourteen Years, without the Consent
and Approbation of the said Richard Blome, his Executors or Administrators, as
they will answer the contrary at their Perils, whereof the Master and Wardens
of the Company of Stationers are to take Notice, that the same may be entered
into their Register, and due Obedience to be yielded thereunto.

Given at Our Court of White Hall the 14th Day of February 1682-83, in the 35th
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. SUNDERLAND.

THE GENTLEMAN'S RECREATION by R. Blome.


THE Gentleman's Recreation.

In Two Parts.

The First being an ENCYCLOPEDY OF THE ARTS and SCIENCES.

TO WIT, An Abridgment thereof, which (in a clear Method) Treats of the
DOCTRINE, and GENERAL PARTS of each ART, with ELIPTICAL TABLES, comprehending a
Summary and General Division thereof; being a TRANSLATION from the most
Authentic AUTHORS, by Persons well Experienced therein.

TO WHICH Diverse SCULPTURES, and SCHEMES, are added for the better
Illustration, and Demonstration thereof.

THE SECOND PART, Treats of HORSMANSHIP, HAWKING, HUNTING, FOWLING, FISHING,
and AGRICULTURE.


WITH A Short Treatise of COCK-FIGHTING; for the BREEDING, DYETTING, ORDERING,
MATCHING, and FIGHTING them.

ALL WHICH Are Collected from the most Authentic AUTHORS, and the many Gross
ERRORS therein Corrected, with great ENLARGEMENTS, made by those well
Experienced in the said RECREATIONS.

AND For the better Explanation thereof, great variety of useful SCULPTURES, as
NETS, TRAPS, ENGINES, etc. are added for the Taking of BEASTS, FOWL, and FISH;
not hitherto Published by any.

The whole Illustrated with about an Hundred Ornamental and Useful SCULPTURES,
Engraven in COPPER, relating to the several SUBJECTS.

LONDON, Printed by S. ROYCROFT, for RICHARD BLOME, Dwelling at the Upper End
of Dutchy-Lane, near Somerset House in the Strand, MDCLXXXVI.

TO The most August JAMES THE SECOND, By the Grace of GOD KING of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
HAVING by the Encouragement of His late MAJESTY, and some Hundreds of the
NOBILITY and GENTRY, Completed a Work, which for diverse Years past has been
my utmost Care and Endeavor, (with no small Expense unto me) to render it
Acceptable to the most Ingenious; as only designed for the Nobility and Gentry.

And well knowing how much Your MAJESTY is affected to great Undertakings,
conducing to the Public Good, and Honor of Your Nation; And this (which
without Arrogance) being Inferior to none, I have therefore (with the more
Confidence) taken upon me the Boldness to make this my Humble Address to Your
most Gracious MAJESTY, and to Implore Your favorable Acceptance of these my
Endeavors; which thus Illustrated by Your Name, will give so much the greater
Luster to the Work it self, and Honor to the Publisher thereof, who is,

Dread Sovereign, YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Obedient and Loyal Subject and Servant,
RICHARD BLOME.

HONI: SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE
DIEU ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
Benefactors to this Work
His most Sacred Majesty, James the Second King of England Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith etc.a

1 His Royal Highness George Prince of Denmark etc.a

2 The Rt. Honorable George Lord Iefferies, Baron of Wemm Lord Chancellor of
England etc.a

3 The Rt. Honble. Laurel Earl of Rochester, Viscount (...) of Kenil^orth,
and Baron of Wott^n* Basset, (...) Treasurer of England, and Knight. of the most
(...) order of the Garter etc.a

4 The most noble Henry Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshall of England, Earl of
Arundell Warren, Surrey Norfolk and Norwich, Baron Howard Mowb^^ (...)
Leivtenant of y^ Counties of Norfolk Surrey and (...) Governor of (...) etc.a

5 The Right Noble Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of
Hertford Viscount Beauchamp and (...) Seymore Knight. of ye noble order of y^
^arter etc.a

6 The R^. Noble Christopher Duke of Albemarle Earl of Torington Baron Monck
of Pother (...). champ and Toys Knight of the most noble order of the Garter
etc.a

7 The Rt Noble Henry Duke of Beaufort, Marquess and Earl of Worcester Baron.
Herbert of (...)

8 The Rt Noble (...) Earl of (...) of Petersh^^^ in England, Duke (...)
Viscount Maitland, Baron of (...)

9 The Rt. Honble. The Herbert Earl of (...) and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of
Shu^land Cardiff. Ross of ^^^dale, Pa^^, Marmion, and (...) of the Lordships of
(...) New^rt and (...). and L^. Leivtenant of Wiltshire etc.a

10 The Rt. Honble. John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater, Viscount Brackley (...)
of Elfmer^. (...) Leivtenant of y^ County of Bucks, and one of the (...) of his
(...) most Honble. Privy Council etc.a

11 The Rt. Honble. Henry (...), Earl of Peterborow, Baron of Turvey. Ld.
Leivtenant of Northampton shire Groom of his M^.^^^ stool, and one of the Lords
of his M^^^ most Honorable Privy Council.

12 The Right Honorable Rober^ Spencer Earl of Sunderland Baron, Spencer of
Wormloion, his Majesty's principal Secretary of State etca.

13 The Rt. Honble. (...) Earl of Book, (...)

14 The Right Honble. Robert Bruce, Earl of Alisbury and Elgin, Viscount Bruce
of Ampthill, (...) Bruce of (...) and (...), Hereditary high Stewardes (...)
Honor of Ampthill (...) Levtenant (...)

15 The Rt. Honble. (...) Earl of (...) Viscount Sondes Lord Duras Baron of
Hondenly and Throw (...) Captain of his Maties. Troop of (...) Leivtenant
General of his (...) Forces. (...) of y^ Garter and one y^ Lords of his (...)
most Honble Privy Council.

16 The Right Honorable William Herbert ^ Earl and Baron of (...) etc.a

17 The Rt. Honble. George Berkeley Ld. Berkeley. Mawbray Segravo and Bruce,
Baron of Barkeley Castle, Earl of Berkeley, and one of the Lords of his (...)
most Honorable Privy Council etca.

18 The Rt. Honble. George (...) Privy Council.

19 The Right Honorable Edw. Henry Lee, Earl of Litchfield* Viscount
Quarenton, and Baron Spilsbury etca.

20 ye Right Honorable. Charles Beauclaire, Baron of Heddington, and ^ Earl
of Burford etc.a

21 The Right Honorable. Francis Lord Holles of Ifield in Sussex etc.a

22 The Right Honorable Sr. Edward Dering of Surrenden Dering in Kent. Bar^.
one of the Lords Comissioner^ of his Ma^^. Treasury etc.^

23 Sr. John Rerers by of Thribergh in the West Rideing of York shire Bor^.
Governor of ye City of york and Burtington.

24 Sr. Robert Jason of Broad somerford in Wiltshire Baronet.

25 Sr. John Osborn of Chicksands in the Country of Bedford Baronet.

26 Sr. Thomas Mompesson of Bathampton in Wiltshire Knight*

27 Coll: Robert Werden of Chester Comptroler to his Roy all Highness James
Duke of York, and first Leivtenan^* and Major of his Guards.

28 The Right Honorable Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemaine* and Bar^n of
Limberick in the Kingdom of Ireland etc.a

29 Thomas Stringer of (...) Church nea^ Salisbur^ in (...)*

30 Edward Clarke of Chipl^r in Somersetshire Esqr.

31 Sr. Th^mas Dereham K^. des^^ded of ye ancient family of y^ Dereh^^^^ of
Dercha^^^ Norfolk* Envoy fro^^ late (...)^ ^-Charles (...) K James (...) to y^
(...) of Tuscany.

32 Thomas Davies of ^rising* Temple in Essex Esqr. (...) of Sr. The Davies of
London K^. dec^ased, late Lord ^ajor thereof. (...) 1677

33 Captain Thomas Lucy of Charlcot in Warwickshire Esqr.

34 Henry Drax of Sibsy in Lincoln shire, and of the Island of Barbados in
America Esqr.

35 Sr. John Hobart of Blickling in Norfulk Baronet.

36 Sr. Thomas Hare of Stow Bardolph in Norfolk Baronet.

37 Gabriel Armiger of North Creak in Norfolk, and of the Inner Temple London
Esqr.

38 Sr. William Drake of Amersham in the County of Buck Knight.

39 Sr. Thomas Fitch of Eltham and Meunt. Mascall in Kent Knight and Baronet

40 The Rt. Honble. John Vis^. Massereen Baron of Loughneath in Ireland,
Governor of the County of Londonderry. and Town of Colerain, ^one of the Lords
of his Ma^^^ most Honble pri^y^^ (...)

41 The Right Honorable William Howard ^ Baron of Es^rick in Yorkshire etc.a.

42 Sr. Robert Clayton of the City of Londen knight* and Alderman and Lord Mayor
thereof Anno 1681.

43 Sr. William Courtenay of Powderham Castle in Devonshire Baronet.

44 ye Right Honorable Charles Lord Viscount Mordaunt, of Areland, and Baron
of Rygate.

45 Sr. Gervas Elw^s of Stoke Juxta Clare, in Suffolk Baronet*

46 Tho: Broughton of Broughton in Stafford Shire Esqr. Son and heyr of S^.
Brian Broughton Knight. and Bart.

47 The Rt. Honble (...). Carro^ Sleford* in Lincoln shire Knight. and Bar^.
Chanceller of y^ County Palatine of Lancastei, and one of his (...). most (...)
^rivy Council etca.

48 The Right Honorable Digby Gerard, Baron of Gerards. Bromley etca.

49 The Rt. Noble James late Duke of Monmouth, and (...) Earl of Doncaster and
Dalkeith, Baron of As^^ale, Tendale, and Whitehes^er etca.

50 The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Wiltshire, Son and heir to the Rt.
Noble Charles Marquess of Winchester*

51 The Honble. Henry Coventry Esqr. Son and heyr of the Rt* Honble. The Ld.
Coventry, Ld. Keeper of ye Great Seal of ^^^land*

52 Sr. John Bowyer of Knipersly in Stafford shire Baronet.

53 Sr. Thomas Bellot of Moreton in Ch^shire Baronet.

54 Sr. Walter Bagot of Blithfield in Stafford shire Baronet.

55 Sr* John Elwes of Grove house, in the Parish of Fulham in Midd^. Knight.

56 The Honble. Robert Boil of Staulbridge in Do^set shire Esqr* Bro: to the
Right Honorable Ric. Earl of Burlington.

57 Sr* Godfrey Copley of Sprodbrough in the West rideing of York shire Baronet*

58 The Rt. Honble Francis Lord Brudenell, Son and heyr to the Rt. Honble. Rob:
Earl of Cardigan.

59 The Right Honorable John Lord Crew, Ba^on of Stean in Northampton shire.

60 Colonel Sy^us Titus of Bushy in Hartford shire Esqr.

61 Caleb Banks of the Friars in A^lesford in Kent* Esqr. eldest Son to Sr.
John Banks Baronet.

62 Sr. Iushnian Isham of Lamport, in Northarntonshire Baronet.

63 The Right Honorable John Lord Haughton* Eldest* Son to the Rt* Honble*
Gilbert Earl of Clare

64 The Right Honble. Richard Earl of Ranelagh etc.a

65 Gervas Pierreponts of Tongue Castle in Shropshire Esqr.

66 Sr. Halswell Tynte, of Halfwell in the Parish of Goat hurst, in
Somersetshire Baronet.

67 Thomas Sheridan of Cavan in the County of Cavan in the Province of Ulster
in Ireland. Esqr.

68 Thomas Iolliffe of Coften hall in Worcester shire Esqr.

69 The Honble. James Earl of Perth Lord Drummond and Stobhall, Stewart of
Struthern and Baluhidder by Inheritance: Lord Justice General of ye Kingdom of
Scotland, one of ye Extraordinary Lords of ye Session, and one of his (...)
most Honble pr^^y Council in ye Kingdom.

70 The Right Honorable John Drummond, by Right of Marriage Baron of Lundin
Lord Treasurer Dep^te, and one of his Majesty's most Honble. pr^^y Council in
Scotland etc.a

71 The Right Honorable Alexander Earl of Morray Lord Down and Abernethe and
Ld* High Comissioner of Scotland.

72 The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Bruce eldest* son to the Right Honble*
Robert Earl of Aylesbury and Elgin etc.a

73 The Right Honorable Charles Henry Lord Kirkho^^m Baron Wotton of Wotton in
Kent, and Earl of Bellomont in Ireland etc.a

74 The Right Honorable Thomas Savage Earl Rivers, Viscount Colchester and
Rock Savage, Lord Darcy and Baron of Chich.

75 Sr. Anthony Aucher of Bishopsbourn in Kent Knight. and Baronet.

76 Sr. Thomas Robinson of Kenwell hall in Suffolk Bart, chief Prothonotary of
his Majesty's Court of Com^on Please.

77 The Honble. Charles Heward of Grastock in Cumberland Esqr. brother to his
Grace Henry now Duke of Norfolk etc.a Anno 1683.

78 George Rodeney Bridges of Keynsham in Somersetshire Esqr. Groom of the Bed
chamber to his Ma^^. K. Ch ye 2d*

79 Samuel Vincent of Buckenham house in Norfolk Esqr.

80 The Rt. Honble. Ric. Ld. Maitland Ld* Justice Clarke of ye Kingdom of
Scotland. one of ye Lords of his (...). privy Council for that Kingdom, and
eldest son to ye Right Honorable Charles Earl of Lauderdale etc.a

81 Tobias Eden of the Inner Temple London Esqr.

82 Charles Morley of Droxford in Hantshire Esqr, one of the Masters of
Requests to his Ma^^. K. Charles the 2d.

83 Sr. Henry Calverley of Ery holme in Yorkshire Knight.

84 Sr. Walter Clarges of St. Martins in the fields in Middsx Bart.

85 The Right Honorable Robert Leake, Earl of Scarsdale, and Baron Deyncourt
etc.a

86 Gilbert Gerard Cossein of Brafferton hall in the North Rideing of Yorkshire
Esqr.

87 Richard Stratford of Harvliny and Nether Getting in Glocestershire Gent
descended from ye ancient family of the Stratfords of Farmcoat ye sd Count*

88 Sr. John Chicheley of St. Giles in the Fields in Middsx Knight.

89 Sr. Humfrey* Doleman of Shaw in Berkshire Knight.

90 Sr. Daniel Fleming of Rydall hall in Westmoreland Knight.

91 Sr. Thomas Slingsby of Skriven in the West Rideing of Yorkshire Bart.

92 Nevinson Fox of Stradbrook in Suffolk Esqr.

93 Patrick Trant of Southampton Fields in the Parish of St. Giles in Midd,
Esqr.

94 The Rt. Honble* Hencage Fu^ch, Earl of Winchel^ey, Viscount Maidston Baron
Fi^. Herber^ of Eastwell Lord of ye Royal Manner of W^^e and Lord Leuitenant
of ye County of Rent etc.a

95 Collonell Edward Griffin of Dingley in Northamptonshire Treasurer of the
Chamber to his Ma^^. etc.a

96 The Rt. Honble. Charles Sarkvile, Earl of Dorset and Middsex Baron*
Buckhurst and ^runfeild, one of ye Gentleman of his Ma^^ Bedchamber and Lord
Leuitenant of Sussex*

97 Georg Vernon of Sudbr^^^ in Derbyshir, and of Has^ington in Cheshire Esq^*
descended of ye. Vernons who were anciently Barons of Shib brook in Cheshire.

98 The Rt. Honble. (...) Viscount (...). Baron (...) of his (...) of the ^ords
of his (...) most Hoble. privy Council.

99 S^. Robert Jenkinson of Walcot in Oxford shire Baronet.

100 The Rt. Honble. Antony Earl of Shastesbury* Baron Ashly of Wimbou^ne S^.
Giles, and Ld* Cooper of Pawlet.

101 Sr* William Glynn of Bisister in Oxfordshire Baronet.

102 The Rt. Honble* Richar^ Grayh^m, Visount Preston, and Lord Grayham of Eske
etc.a

103 Sr* Charles Wheler of Burbury in Warwick shire Baronet.

104 The Rt. Honble. Clan^^ Hamilton Earl of Abercorne etc.a

105 Sr* James (...) of Cottesbrook in Northamptonshire Knight. and Ba^t. Sr.
William (...) of Walgr^^e in the Said County Knight: and Sr. Steph^n Langham of
London K* Son^s of Sr: John Langham* (...) deceast.

106 The Rt. Honoble* John Fitz Gerard Earl of Kilde (...), (...) Earl of ye
Kingdom of Ireland etc.a

107 Sr. Thomas Travel of S^. Martins in the fields in Middle sex* Knight.

108 The Rt: Honble: Charles Lord Cheyne, Viscount of New haven in Scotland
etc.a

109 John Hall of ^ Bradford in ^ Wiltshire Esq^.

110 The Rt: Honble. Simon Lord Digby, Baron of G^ashill in Ireland. etc.a

111 Martin Baldwin of Castle Geshell in Kings County in Ireland Esq^:

112 The Rt. Honble. Williams Lord Pugett Baron of Beaudefert in ye County of
Stafford. etc.a

113 Sr: John Williams of (...) house in ye (...) of Fulham in Midelsex. (...)
^on and hey^f Sr. Thomas Williams of Elh^^ County in Kent K. and Baronet.

114 The Rt: Honble: Charles Lord Herbert Marqu^s and Earl of Woorcester,
eldest son to his Gra^e Henry Duke of Beaufort etc.a

115 Sr. John Bellew of (...) town in the County of Mead in Ireland Knight*

116 The Honble. Sr. Henry Goodrick of Ribston Park in Yorkshire K^. and
Baronet, his Ma^^ E^nvoy extrao^dinary to ye King of Spanie Anno Dom: 1682/3

117 Sr: Robert Dashwood of Norbrook, and Wickh^^^ in Oxfordshir Knight.

118 The Rt. Honble* Frances (...) Earl, Viscount and Baron o^ L^ngford in ye
Kingdom^ of Ireland and one of ye L^* of his Ma^^ (...) Honble. privy Councell^
for ye said Kingdom etc.

119 The Rt: Noble George Fitz^ Roy; Duke and Earl of Northumberland, Viscount
Falmouth, Baron of Pontefract and Knight: of Noble order of ye Garter K*

120 Sr. Will. Dutton Colt* Knight. son of George Colt of Colt-hall in Suffolk Esq^.

121 The Rt. Honble* Aubrey Vere, Earl of Oxford* Baron Bulbeck Sandford and
(...) of ye (...), and one of his* (...) most Hon^ privy Council etc.a

122 Richard Gee of Beuerley in Yorkshire Esq^.

123 The Rt. Hon^bl^: Charles Lord Robert^, Earl of Rednor, Viscount Bodmyn,
and Baron of Truro etc.a

124 The Honble: Francis Roberts Esq^* third son to ye Rt. Honble: John Late
Earl of Radno^

125 The Rt. Honble* William Earl of Derb^, Lord Stanley and Ld* (...) of
Lancashire, and Cheshire and Admiral of ye (...) belonging Chamberlain of
Chester, and Ld. of Manas of y^ I^le etc.^

126 Roger Pope of Woolstaston in Shropshire Esq^.

127 The Rt. Honble: John Earl Bristol, Baron Digby of Sherborne etc.a

128 William Cutts of Arks dale in Essex, and of Childerley in Cambridgshire
Esq^.

129 The Rt. Honble* Charles Montag^e Earl of Manchester, Viscount Manclevill,
Baron Kimbolton, and*

130 The Egerton of Broxton in Cheshire Esqr* eldest son of S^. Philip Egerton
of Ege^^ton* and Outon in ye Said County Knight.

131 The Rt. Honble: William Earl of Devonshire Baron C^vendish of Hardwick,
and Lord Leuitenant of Darbyshire etc.a

132 Sr* Thomas Samvell of Vpton, and Gayton (...) the County of Northampton
Baronet.

133 The Rt: Honble: Edward^ Howard Earl of (...), Viscount (...)

134 The Honble: John Noel of Lufingham in Rutlandshire Esq^. 3^^* son to ye
Rt. Honble: Baptist Noel, Viscount Comden.

135 The Rt. Honble William Pierrepent, Earl of Kingston upon ^all, Viscount
^eloark upon Trent (...) etc.a

136 The Rt. Honble. Sr. Thomas Chicheley of Wimpley in Cambrigshir Knight. ^
Chan^elor of ye Duchy.

137 The Rt. Honble: Thomas Bellasi^, Viscount Fo^comber Lord Leuitenant of ye
north ^iding of Yorck^shire, and one of y^* Lords of his Ma^^* most Honble*
privy Council, etc.a

138 Edward Montagu of Horton in the County of Northampton Esqr.

139 The Rt: Honble: Thomas Leanard Earl of Sussex and Lord Dacres of^
Gilesland etc.a.

140 Sr. John Corbet of Stoke upon Teane, and Adderley in Shropshire Bar.

141 The Rt. Honble: George Lord Nevill* Baron of Bergev^nny etc.a

142 Sr. John Shelley of Michelgrove in Sussex Baronet.

143 The Rt: Honorable Charles Lord Cornwallis, Baron of Eye in Sussex* etc.a

144 The Honble: Arthur Herbert Esq^: one of his Ma^^^: Comissioners of the
Admiralty. etca:

145 The Rt: Honorable John Lord Belasis, Baron of Worlaby in Lincolnshire.
etca.

146 Will: Duncombe of Batlesdenbury in Bedfordshir Esq^ son of y^ R^. Honbl^:
Sr. John Duncombe of the S^: place Knight. Chancellor, and under Treasurer of ye
Exchequer, and one of his (...): most Honble: Privy Council.

147 The Rt. Honble: William O Brien, Earl and Baron of Insiquin, and Baron of
Burren in Ireland, and one of ye Lords of his Ma^^^. most Honble: privy
Council for that Kingdom

148 Sr: Thomas Gros^^^not of Eaton in Cheshire Baronet.

149 The Rt. Honble: Robert Lord Kingston, Baron of Kingston, Governor of ye
Coun^^es of Roscomen, Slygoe, May^ of ye fort of Ballymo^ in y^ County of
Galway in Ireland.

150 Sr: John Brownlon of Belton: in Lincolnshire Buronet

151 The Right: Honble: Will: Lord Biron Baron of Rachdale in Lancashire

152 Alan Bellingham of Leaben in Westmore land Esq^:

153 John Basset of Heanton-Punchardon in Devonshire: Esq^.

154 Henry Wallop of Far^^gh-wallop in Hunt-shire Esq^:

155 Sr: Thomas Barnardiston of Kedison in Suffolk Bart. Sr: San: Barnardiston
of Brightwell hall in ye S^. County Bart.

156 Sr: Phillip Carteret of Sr: Oven in ye Island of Iarsey Baronet

157 William Cheyne Esq^: Son and heir to ye Rt. Honble: Charles Lord Cheyne
Viscount Newhauen in Scotland.

158 Simon Luttrell of ^^ttrest in ye County of Dubli^ in Ireland Esq^:

159 Sr. Henry Marwood of little Busby in Yorkshire Baronet.

160 Sr: Thomas Blud: worth of Leutherhead in Surrey Knight.

161 Sr Edward Hungerford of farley Castle in Hamshire Knight: of y^ Bath:

162 William Venably of Goulbu^ in C^eshire. Esq^:

163 Andrew Lant of Thorp underwood in Northampton shire Esq^:

164 Richard Cheyney of Hani^erton in ye Parish of Hackney in Midd^^ Esq^

165 Edmund Turnor of Sr: Paul's Covint Garden in Middlesex. Esq^

166 Arthur Sh^en Esq^: Son and heyr of Sr. James shaen of shine in Surrey Knight:
and Barone

167 John Crew Offley of Crew Hall in Cheshir. Esq^:

168 William Stych of Newbury in ye Parish of Barkin in Essex Esq^

169 The Right Honourble James Lord Bertie, Earl of (...) Baron horris of
Rycot, Lord Leiutenant of Oxford shire etc^

170. Sr. Arthur Rawdon (...) of Rawdon hall in yorkshire Baronet.

171 the Right Honorable (...) E^le of Salisbury (...) Baron (...) of (...)

172 Sr. Richar^. Myddelton of Chirk Castle in Denbighshire Baronet

173 The Rt Honble Richard Butler Baron of (...) in England, Earl of (...) and
Baron of (...) in Ireland (...) James (...) Duke of (...) Privy (...)

174 George Hadley of East Barnet in Hartfordshire Esq^.

175 Sr Theophelus Oglethorp Knight Collonell of the Martine or old Holland
Regiment.

176 Samuel Roll of Heanton-Sachfield in DevonShire Esq^.

177 the Right Honorable John Earl of Exeter Baron of Burleigh etca

178 Sr John Hewett of Warsley in Huntington-Shire Baronet.

179 the Honouralb S Richard Wenman of (...) in Oxfordshire Baronet Created
Baron and Viscount we (...) of Ireland after ye death of ye Rt Honble Phillip
Viscount W^^man

180 Sr Edmund Fettiplace of Swinbrook in Oxford Shire Baronet.

181 Sr. Demus Hampson of Taplow in Bucking^t Ho^^t shire Baronet.

182 Sr. James Butler of Lincolns (...) in Midds Knight Steward of his Ma^^^.
Palace and Marshal^^^

183 Sr Henry Pickering of Whaddon in Cambridg shire Baronet.

184 John Rossington of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Gent.

185 Robert Rossington of West Shean in the County of Surrey Gent.

186 Sr. John Brogr^^ of Hamell in Hartford shire Baronet.

187 the Honble. Thomas Fairfo^ Esq^ eldest Son of ye Rt. Honoble. Henry Lord
Fairfex of Denton in yorkshire

188 Thomas Fa^^ka^ of Farnley in ye County of york Esq^

189 Sr. George Downing of Ganby. and East Hatley in Cambridgshire Baronet

190 Sr. William Portn^^^ of Orchard in Somersetshire Knight of ye bath. and Baronet

191 Thomas Felton of Playford in Suffolk Esqr.

192 Erasmus Smith alias Here of Sr. Jones in Middlesex Esq^. son of Sr. Roger.
Smith of (...) in L^escershirt Knight (...)

193 Sr (...) of Woberton in Buckingham shir Baronet

194 The Rt. Honble: William (...) Earl of Bedford, Baron R^s^ell of (...),
and Thorn^ough, and Knight. of ye not Noble Order of ye Garter etca.

195 Sr. Richard Bacon of Redgraue in Suffolk Bart:

196 The Rt: Honble. Kenneth M' Kenzie Earl of Seafort etca.

197 S. John Baber of ye Parish of S. Paul's Count Garden in Midelesex Knight.
descended of ye ancient family of ye Babers of Somersetshir one of his (...)
and (...) of ye peace for Midelesex.

198 The Rt: Honble: Archibald Lord Lorne, eldest son of ye Rt. Honble:
Archibald Earl of Argyll, Ld: Kinbyre, Campbell and Lorne. Anno 1682

199 Sr. Philip Constable of Everingham in Yorkshire Baronet.

200 The Rt: Honble: John Lord Benet Baron of Ossulston etca.

201 William Bridgman Esq^. one of ye Clerks of his Mo^^: most Honorable privy
Council.

202 Sr: Richard Brown of Debden hall in Essex Ba^^: Brigadeer, and eldest
Leivtenant of Horse in ye second Troop of his Ma^^. ^ef. Guard.

203 Collonell Robert Feilding of Feilding Hall in Warwickshire

204 Sr: Humfrey Foster of Alder maston in Berkshire Baronet.

205 John Rosseter of Somer by in Lincolnshire Esq^

206 Henry Slingsby of Kippax in Yorkshire Esq^: Master of his Man. Mint.

207 Sr. Peter Rich of ye City of Londone Knight. and (...) de^manand Chamberlain
of ye sd. City

208 Collonell Samuel Roll of Heanton sacth field in Devo^ shire.

209 John ^enables of Agdon in Cheshire Esqr.

210 Sr: John Thorold of Marsson in ye. County of Lincoln Baronet

211 William Forester of Wal^in ^^irst, and D^thill in Shrop-Shire Esq^.

212 Robert Monckton of Cavil in ye East Riding of Yorkshire Esq^.

213 Henry Hawley of Branford in ye Cou^^^ of Middlesex Esq^

214 Thomas W^ndham of Tale in Devonshire Esq^ son of Sr. Edmund Windham Knight.
Marshall of his Ma^^^. Household deceased

215 John Speccott of Penh^le in ye County of Cornwall Esqr.

216 William H^wer Esq^: one of the Comissioners of his Mo^^ Navy, and
Treasurer for ye aff^^rs of his M^^^. late Ga^ryson of Tonger

217 John Tanner of Court in the County of Cornwall Esq^.

218 Rowland L^tton of (...) in Hertfordshire (...) son of Sr. Ro^land Lytt^n
of K^^hworth ^n the (...) County Knight: deceased

219 David Ienkins of Hensoll in the County of Glamorgan Esqr.

220 Sr John Fowell of Fort^ellscombe in the County of Devon Baron^t*

221 The Morgan of Tredegorr and Machen in the County of Monmouth Esqr.

222 Sr. William Pennigton of Muncoster in the County of Cumberland Baronet.

223 Francis Annesley of Throganty in the County of York Esqr.

224 The Right Honorable Henry Lord De Gray of Ruthin and^.

225 Richard Hawkings of Marshamin Berks^^^ (...) of Middle Aston in
Oxfordsh^re Esqr.

226 Thilliam Colegrave of Can hall in the County of Essex Esqr.

227 The Right Honble: The: Gray* Earl of Stamford, Ld Ferrers of Grooby,
Banevill, and^^ Harrinton.

228 The Bowdler of Fe^ersham, in the County of Kent. Gent.

229 Sr: John Bolles of S. campton in the County of Lincoln Bar^.

Sr. Ralph Dutton of Shevbo^ in ye* County of Gloucester Baronet

Nicholas Barbon of London M. D* one of ye* College of Physicians of ye. Said
City.



AN ENCYCLOPEDY of ye Arts and Sciences.

To his Sacred Ma^ty

JAMES II.

By ye Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of
ye Faith and

This Plate in all Humility is Consecrated By Richd Blome.

To Philosophy may be attributed the Liberal Arts, which are either

Sapientia est no^^e divina and (...) and h^^um* tawcas.



To the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Wiltshire* Son and heir to ye Rt.
noble Charles Ma^^uess of Winchester.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

Vox Literata, et articulata, clebito Modo pronuntiata.



THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MANY Ages since, and even from all Antiquity, the Liberal Arts have by Just
Right been esteemed most Laudable and Profitable, especially to the Nobility
and Gentry, in all things that concern Human Life; there being nothing more
Noble and Excellent than Instruction, the true Imbelishment of the Mind, and
Proof of a truly Accomplished Spirit. And this is no other than what a great
Philosopher prudently alleged, viz. That Human Life without Learning, was but
the Image of Death. To which purpose the Poet, Ovid, in his first Book of his
Pontus, speaks as follows, Add, quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter Arts,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.


By Knowledge Men aspire to the height of Virtue and Wisdom, and which is more,
to the understanding of Divine things. By Learning we are made worthy the
Favor of Kings, and Princes; and Literature not only celebrates and renders us
Praiseworthy in our Life, but makes our Renown survive to all Posterity. The
Study of the ARTS and SCIENCES entertains Youth, rejoices Old Age; adorns
Prosperity, and gives Refuge and Consolation to Adversity. It Is a Pleasure in
the Closet, a Companion in the Field, and a Fellow-Traveller in a Journey.

Since therefore so great Advantages and Emoluments are proposed to Persons
studious in Learning; how laudable would it be for the Nobility and Gentry to
employ their chief Study therein.

Are we covetous of Riches? Learning brought vast Riches to Aristotle, Cicero,
Virgil, Horace, Seneca, and diverse others. Hunt we after Honor? Learning has
promoted innumerable many Persons to high Dignities. Desire we Recreation? How
many Pleasures does Learning afford. Seek we Glory and Renown? Learning sooner
purchases Immortal Praise, than the desperate Atchievments of War. Are we for
Health, Activity, and Strength of Body? It Is Learning that shows us how to gain
and preserve them.

Now seeing it is so manifest, that Nature has nothing more advantageous, more
delightful and excellent than the Arts and Sciences, which are by the
Industrious so easily attained unto, I have attempted (for the Public Good)
the Printing an ENCYCLOPEDY of the Arts and Sciences in our Native Tongue, to
wit, an Abridgment thereof.

The usual Division of the Arts by the Ancients, were into Seven Liberal, and
as many Servile.

The Liberal were Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic, Geometry,
and Astronomy; all which are briefly comprehended, together with their several
Subjects contained in this Distick.

Gram. loquitur, Dia. vera docet, Rhet. verba colorat,
Mus. canit, Ar. numerat, Geo. ponderat, Ast. colit Astra.
The Seven Servile Arts were known by their several Professors, viz. the
Agriculture, the Huntsman, the Military Person, the Navigator, the Surgeon,
the Weaver, and that sort of Artificer which the Latins called Faber, who
according to the Material he Worked in wa^ denominated; as Faber Lignarius, the
Carpenter; Faber Ferranus, the Smith, and the like. And both the Liberal and
Servile are all enumerated together in another, yet more compendious and
comprehensive Distick.

Lingua Tropus Ratio, Numerus, Tonus Angulus Astram,
Rus, Nemus, Arma, Ratis vulnera, lana Faber.
But in regard this Division is not large enough to comprehend all the Parts of
Knowledge reduceable to a Systematical Method, it is thought necessary to widen
the said Division into a more Ample Sphaere, which might be divided into Moral,
Prudential, Mathematical, Liberal and Mechanical Arts. But lest by this
Distinction many of them should interfere one upon the other, it is judged most
proper, and sufficiently Methodical to treat of them apart, and that according
to the Method as they are encircled about the first and general Table of the
Work.

Nor will it be deemed unnecessary if I here give you a Summary of the said
Work.

PHILOSOPHY, according to the general Acceptance, is the Study of Wisdom,
comprehending the Knowledge of all Things both Human and Divine, as well as of
the Causes whence they are derived, especially as it is now found Methodized in
the several Systems of the Arts and Sciences.

Now Science is nothing but a comprehension of Definitions, Divisions, and
Examples, suitable to the Natural use, by which the said Science, and all its
Parts and Parcels, are Illustrated, and Explained.

Some of the said Liberal Arts are General, and some Special.

Those are called General, and Common, which have reference to all things in
General, and are aptly extended through all the Parts of Knowledge, or Wisdom;
for Men may either speak Purely and Simply, or Ornate and Elegant, and Dispute
of all things. Thus they are the Instruments of Philosophy, and are thence
properly called Organical, for that they appertain totally to Speech and
Reason; and therefore they are likewise called by many Logical.

Some of the General Arts are concerned in Speech, and others in Reason.

Of the First, some in pure and congruous Speech, as Grammar; or others in
Ornate and Eloquent Discourse, and either Free and in Prose, as RHETORIC and
ORATORY; or tied and reduced to certain Measures, as POETRY. That which has
regard to Reason, is LOGIC.

The Special, or Particular Arts (which are also part of Philosophy) are
distinguished and differenced by their Subjects, that is to say, those relating
to the Nature of Things, or to Life and good Manners.

Nature is Corporeal, or Incorporeal. Now the Mathematics, and Natural
Philosophy, Treats of the Corporeal Nature of all Things; for the Mathematics
Contemplate and consider the Quantities of things, and Philosophy the Qualities.

Quantity is either of Number, about which ARITHMETIC is employed: Or
Magnitude and Measure, whereof GEOMETRY Treats, on which depend several Parts
or Branches of the Mathematics; amongst which are SURVEYING, and GAUGING.

The Sense of Seeing Creates OPTICS, DIOPTRICKS, CATOPTRICKS, PERSPECTIVE, and
POURTRAITURE, which comprehends DRAWING, PAINTING, GRAVING, and ETCHING. And
the Sense of Hearing is busied about MUSIC.

The Natural Body of Philosophy is either Simple, or Compound; Simple, whereof
the Natural History of the World Treats, which is either Universal, and is
Termed COSMOGRAPHY, being the Description of the World; or Special, and that
again either Celestial, Treating about the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, which
is Appropriate to ASTRONOMY, on which depends DYALLING, with its Influences, to
wit, ASTROLOGY; or Elementary, concerning the Elements in General, which is
called STAECHIOLOGICKS; or in Particular, as of Fire called PIROGRAPHY, and of
Water called HYDOGRAPHY, upon which depends NAVIGATION. Of all the Earth, as
GEOGRAPHY; or of several Countries and Regions, as CHOROGRAPHY; or of
particular places, as Mountains, Valleys, Towns, and the like, which is called
TOPOGRAPHY.

Natural Bodies compounded are partly Inanimate, and Brute; and partly
Inanimate and endued with Life. Again Inanimate Natures are either engendered,
and bred in the Air, about which the Art therein concerned, is called
Meteorologick; or in the Earth, as Minerals, whence the Art that Treats thereof
is called Metallic.

The Knowledge of Animate, or Rational living Things comprehends the History of
Plants, and Animals, whence follows the Art of MEDICINE.

There are two principal kind of Plants, viz. Herbs and Trees; the Cultivation
whereof belongs to AGRICULTURE, which does Expatiate it self into diverse
Particulars, chiefly tending to Food and Raiment, as by Cultivating the Earth,
Breeding Cattle, etc.

Animals are either rational, as Man; or Irrational, as Beasts. The Description
of Beasts belongs Generally to ZOOGRAPHY, under which are Comprehended
ICHTHYOGRAPHY, or the Description of Fish; ORNITHOGRAPHY, or the way of Keeping
Fowl; and CTENOTROPHY, or Pastoral. And under this Head of ZOOGRAPHY, may be
comprehended the Arts of HAWKING, HUNTING, FISHING, and FOWLING.

ANTHROPOLOGY, teaches the propriety of Man, and consequently ANATOMY and
MEDICINE follows after, as to the Dieases and their Cures.

Moreover, METAPHISICKS Treat of the Simple, and Incorporeal Natures and Things
which are Intelligent, as Angels, Spirits, and Human Souls.

As to the Manners and Life of Men, one is Human and Temporal; the other
Spiritual and Divine.

The Doctrine that Teaches the Moral Virtues of Human Life, has been by the
Ancient Greeks called ETHICA, and by the Latins MORAL PHILOSPHY; (the same
Cicero expresses better by the Name of Offices) of which there are two kinds,
one in Administration of Household Affairs, called OECONOMICKS; the other in
that part of the Commonwealth, called POLITICS; to which is to be referred
JURISPRUDENCE, or CIVIL LAW; and likewise HISTORY, both Profane and
Ecclesiastical, whence proceed's CHRONOLOGY.

ETHICS contain General Theorems and Propositions; Jurisprudence, more special.

To this part of Life and Manners belongs ARCHITECTURE, both Civil, as the
Building of Houses, etc. and Military, as FORTIFICATION; also TACTICKS or WAR;
with the Distinctions, as Rewards of Honor, which is HERALDRY.

And whereas this Work is designed for the Accommodation of the Nobility and
Gentry, 'its thought convenient to make an enlargement of those Arts,
Peculiarly Appropriate to their Diversion, to wit, Field-Sports, as
Horsmanship, Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling, with so much of
Agriculture as befits the Qualification of a Gentleman to understand; In which
said Arts, great care has been taken to make them more correct and perfect,
(according to the Practick Part now used in this our refined Age,) as does
appear by the Work it self, which is Illustrated with great Variety of useful
Copper Plates; as also Traps, Engines, Nets, etc. for the better Explanation
thereof, and the taking Beasts, Fowl, Fish, etc. the like never performed by
any.

But for the Satisfying the Curious, it is thought Convenient to give some
Account of the Building up of this elaborate Work, which has taken up my whole
time for these Seven Years past, and not without great Expenses, as well to
Designers and Engravers, for the Sculptures, as to Authors, Printers, etc.

When first my Thoughts were for the undertaking this Design, I consulted
diverse Eminent and knowing Persons, not only as to the first parts of the Arts
and Sciences; but chiefly to the Second, which relates to Field-Sports, etc. to
which our Nobility and Gentry are most addicted; And all approved thereof so
well, that they gave me great Encouragement, to prosecute my Intentions; freely
Contributing their several Assistances, giving directions what Measures to
take, what Authors to make use of, and what Persons to address, that were
esteemed Proficients in such and such things.

As to the first part, Relating to the Arts and Sciences, some French Authors
were by their Advice Translated by Approved Scholars, and in particular a
System, or Compendium thereof; which in a Brief and clear Method, Treats of the
Doctrine and General Parts of each Art, with ELIPTICAL TABLES, Comprehending a
Summary, and General Division thereof, Wrote by the Famous and Learned Le Sieur
de Savigne, and Published by Monsieur Bergeron, Advocate of Parliament, for the
Accommodation of the French Gentry. But by reason the said Book comprehended
not all the Arts here Treated of, and that some were too short; Their Advice
was to Insert those that were omitted, and to Enlarge those that were too
short, and that by those that were well Experienced therein, whose Advice I
have in all respects followed.

GRAMMAR, RHETORIC and LOGIC, were Translated from the said Author, with
Enlargements by Mr. Edward Philips, who followed their Directions; THEOLOGY,
METAPHISICKS, and PHILOSOPHY, both Moral and Natural, were done by Dr. Thomas
Sault; ARITHMETIC, and GEOMETRY were Translated from the said Author, with
some Additions from Galtrichij, by the Advice and Directions of the Right
Honorable Roger Earl of Castlemain; to which the Practick parts of SURVEYING
and GAUGING were added by an Experienced Mathematician. COSMOGRAPHY, and
ASTRONOMY were Translated from the said Author, and Galtrichij, by the
Directions of the Earl of Castlemain; GEOGRAPHY also Translated from the said
Author, and Galtrichij; with Enlargments from Varenius his Cosmography, and
Sansons Geography; NAVIGATION was taken from the said Varenius, and some Modern
Authors of Esteem; and Digested into a Body by an expert Navigator, whose Name
I am obliged to Conceal; HISTORY and CHRONOLOGY were Translated from the said
French Author; with Enlargments taken from Eminent Authors, by a Student at
Oxford; DYALLING was a Translation from Galtrichij, by the said Mr. Phillips;
ARCHITECTURE was Composed by Sir Henry Hobert of Blickling in Norfolk; WAR and
FORTIFICATION were Writ by Mr. George Lesslie, and approved by several Knowing
and Experienced persons, both here and beyond Seas; Music was Translated from
the said Author, with Enlargements made by a Person of Honor; OPTICS and
PERSPECTIVE were Translated from the said Author, and Galtrichij; POURTRAITURE,
and PAINTING were taken from a Manuscript, recommended to me by Sir Peter Lely;
And HERALDRY I Composed, being an Abridgment of the Body thereof.

Thus in brief, I have given a Candid Account of the Building of the first
Part. The Second Part was gained with far more Difficulty, by reason of the
many gross Errors committed in all Books; who for the Generality, follow the
Footsteps of one another, without endeavoring the Corrections in any
particular.

My first Foundation of this Second Part, was a Translation from a French
Author, Entitled Le Ruises Innocent, being recommended as the best of that
Subject, extant in any Language; This Book being Translated, my next Business
was to Collect all our English Authors of the said Subjects, worth the
Supervizing, as Turbervile, Markham, and others, (although stuffed up with more
Errors than Truths,) and Methodically Digested the whole into one entire Body;
Next followed my Laborious Task to get them Supervised, and Rectified by such
Sports-Men as were approved Excellent; which took me up above four Years, as
being Constrained to Consult so many; for some I found Expert in some part of
HAWKING, and Deficient in the rest that their Genius was not Addicted unto; as
some for Short-winged Hawks, as the Goshawk, etc. not regarding Long-winged
ones, as the Gerfalcon, Falcon, etc. which to others were in the highest
Esteem; others were good HUNTSMEN for the Chase of the Fox, as being their
chief delight, but indifferent for the Hare; whilst others delighted therein
more, than in that of the Fox; and others were principally for the Stag and
Buck; others were good in some particulars in each Art, as some for the
Setting-Dog and Partridge; others for Training up, and making Dogs for the Gun,
and Setting; others for Shooting Flying; others for knowing the Haunts of
Beasts of Chase, and Fowl; and how to take them by Traps, Snares, Engines,
Baits, etc. some again Boasted themselves great Sportsmen in the whole, having
some Notions and Smatches in common things, talking a great deal to no purpose;
And for FISHING and AGRICULCTURE, I met with the like Difficulties, especially
in the latter, some being expert in Flowers, others in Seeds and Plants, others
in Raising, Grafting and Inoculating Trees, and others for the Improvement of
Grounds; so that I was forced to make use of (for the Generality) as many
Persons as I had Subjects to Treat upon; and for many, had the Assistance of
two or three; nor was it without great Difficulty, to get many of them to
impart their Knowledge unto me, as unwilling to make it public; neither did I
rely upon that which I received from one, but showed it to others, also expert
therein, who often made Corrections and Enlargements; so that I presume in
Modesty to say, it is a Work Worthy the Acceptance of any Gentleman, as not
being too long to weary the Reader with Tedious Discourses; Thus observing the
humor of our Age, which is for Multum in parvo, makes me hope it will meet
with a favorable Reception.

In all these Tracts of the second Part, there is only two that were done by
Particular Persons, the one is HORSMAN-SHIP writ by John Cuts of Childerley in
Cambridg-shire Esquire, a Person of approved knowledge in all things relating
to the said Subject; and the other of HAWKING, which was composed by the
assistance of Sir Ralph Dutton of Sherborn in Gloucestershire, and George
Russel of Abbots-Aston in Buckingham-shire, Esquire, Sergeant of his Majesty's
Hawks, both long experienced Falconers; and I doubt not but that they are so
well performed that they will give general Satisfaction. The other Treatises
went through so many hands, that it were tedious to repeat their Names.

Nor do I doubt, but that the Nobility and Gentry will reap Advantage by this
Work; for by this means they are furnished with what is esteemed sufficient for
the true Knowledge thereof, in a pure and clear Method, and are freed from the
great charge and trouble in gathering together many Volumes, and those perhaps
after a Confusion of their Opinions in Method, or otherwise, not profitably
useful unto them.

AN ACCOUNT of the several ARTS AND SCIENCES Treated of in this WORK.
In the First Part.
GRAMMAR, Folio. 1 Rhetoric, Folio. 6 Logic, Folio. 9 Theology, Folio. 11
Metaphysics, Folio. 15 Philosophy, Moral Folio. 24 Natural Folio. 33
Arithmetic, Folio. 45 Geometry, Folio. 55 Surveying, Folio. 60 Gauging,
Folio. 77 Cosmography, and Astronomy Folio. 80 Astrology Folio. 97 Geography,
Folio. 104 Navigation, Folio. 127 Dyalling, Folio. 148 Architecture, Folio. 157
War, Folio. 165 Fortification, Folio. 170 Music, Folio. 190 Chronology, Folio.
193 History, Folio. 201 Optics, Folio. 205 Perspective, Folio. 211 Drawing,
and Painting, Folio. 214 Heraldry, Folio. 230
In the Second Part.
HOrsemanship, Folio. 1 Hawking, Folio. 27 Hunting, Folio. 67 Fowling, Folio.
119 Fishing, Folio. 177 Agriculture, Folio. 207 Cock-Fighting, Folio. 277
The Division of the abovesaid Arts and Sciences as to their Parts does appear
in the Eliptical Tables at the beginning of each Art.

GRAMMAR.
PART I.
GRAMMAR is the Art of well Speaking, whether in Prosodie or Orthography; that
is, in true Pronuntiation or Writing, and consists of two Parts, Etymology and
Syntax.

Etymology is the first part of Grammar, declaring the proprieties of Letters,
Syllables, and Words.

A Letter is one Indivisible sound in a Syllable, whereof there are two kinds,
Vowels and Consonants.

A Vowel is a Letter, which simply of it self makes an entire sound; and
amongst the Alphabet of Letters there are these five Vowels, a, e, i, o, u (as
to y it is Greek.) Out of these Vowels variously disposed, are composed five
Dipthongs, viz. ae, au, oe, ei, eu; besides Tripthongs, composed of three
Vowels joined together, as eau.

The rest are Consonants, whereof eight are called Mutes, viz. b, c, d, g, k,
p, q, t; the other Semi-vowels, viz. f, l, m, n, r, s, x, z.

A Consonant is a Letter, which cannot make an entire sound of it self, but
requires thereto the assistance of a Vowel.

Of the Semi-vowels, some are called Liquids, as l, m, n, r; and some Solids,
as s, x, z.

The Liquids are so called, not as being never solid; but because they are
sometimes liquified, and as it were dissolved in their sounds.

S is a Letter that has its proper power.

The Solids are those which are never liquified, as F, and also J and V, which
oft-times become Consonants when they are set before other Vowels in the same
Syllable, as in Juno voluntas, etc.

The Mutes are so called, because they begin by their own power, and have the
sound of the Vowel after them, of which some are pronounced more open and from
the Teeth, as T and D; others from the Palate as K and Q; and some Lips, as B
and P. H is not properly a Letter, but a Note of Aspiration before a Vowel,
only sometimes amongst the Poets it obtains the power of a Consonant: and it
never comes before a Consonant, but always before one of the five Vowels and Y;
as in Habeo, Habes, Hiatus, Horo, Humus, Hydra, etc.

The Alphabet consists of these following Letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I,
K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z; and all these Letters are written
in greater or lesser Characters; and with the greater are generally begun all
proper Names, every Sentence after a full Period, and each several Verse in
Poetry.

A Syllable is that which expresses one entire sound in a word, and consists
either of one Vowel only, or of Vowels joined one with another, or of Vowels
and Consonants together, as Simple, Double, Triple, Quadruple, and Quintuple.

A joining together of two Vowels is called a Dipthong, as ae, ai, ei, oe, oi,
ou, and of three a Tripthong; but this is never known in Latin, but sometimes
in French, as aou, eau, jau, jeu.

A Syllable is either long, and then it is thus marked --;or short, which is
thus marked ^; or Common.

A Word consists of one or more Syllables, and admits of Accent, Apostrophus,
and Notation.

Accent is the harmony of Language, and is otherwise called Tone, being either
Acute, marked thus; or Grave or Mean, and marked thus.

Apostrophus is a cutting off of any of the five Vowels, especially of the four
first, as a, e, i, o, when the following Word begins with a Vowel. This
Apostrophus is seldom marked, in the Latin, but only intimated by a quick
passing from one Vowel to the other, and that chiefly in Verse.

Notation is that, by which the Species or Figure of a Word is distinguished.
The Species denotes, whether it be Primitive o^ Derivative; the Figure, whether
Simple or Compound.

Of Words there are two sorts, some with number, and some without Number. A
Word with Number is that which consists of two Numbers, Singular and Plural;
varying directly or obliquely, and that in Signification only, or in
Signification and Termination.

A Word of Number is either Noun, or Verb.

A Noun is a Word of Number with Gender, in which besides the two Numbers,
Singular and Plural, distinguished from each other by the difference of
Termination; there is to be considered the variety of Cases, which are six,
viz. the Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Vocative, and Ablative; as
also of Genders, to wit the Masculine belonging to the Male Sex, the Feminine
to the Female, and the Neuter to neither.

From the difference of Gender, a Noun is called Substantive and Adjective. The
Substantive is commonly of one Gender, and sometimes of two; but the Adjective
is of all three Genders. Moreover the Adjective admits three Degrees of
Comparison, viz. Positive, Comparative, and Superlative, and is specially
divided into Article Pronoun.

The Article Hic denotes the Masculine Gender, Haec the Feminine, and Hoc the
Neuter.

Pronouns are principally divided into Demonstrative, as Ego, Tu, Sui, etc.
into Relative, as Qui, Qu^s; and into Possessive, as Meus, Tuus, Suus.

The Declensions of Nouns in Latin are five, and each distinguished by their
several Terminations.

A Verb is either Finite or Infinite. A Verb Finite is a Word varied by
Conjugation, Mood, Tense, Number, and Person.

The Conjugations are four, differenced by A, E long, E short, and I.

The Moods are three, Indicative, Imperative, and Potential.

Tense, or Time in Verbs, is generally Threefold, Present, Praeterit or Past,
and Future or to come. The Praeterit is also Threefold, Imperfect or
Imperfectly past (as the Vulgar Introduction to the Latin Grammar phraseth it)
Perfect or perfectly past, and Plusquam perfect, or more than Perfectly past.

Number is common to a Verb with a Noun, and equally divided into Singular and
Plural.

Each Number of the Verb consists of three Persons, the first speaks of
himself, the second speaking to another, and the third also to another:
Hereupon a Verb, as to its figure, is differenced Personal or Impersonal.

A Verb Personal is that which is formed with all the three Persons throughout
all the Moods and Tenses.

A Verb Impersonal runs all along in the Third Person Singular.

A Verb Personal, as to its form, is divided into Active, Passive, or Neuter.

A Verb Active is that which signifies Action, as Amo, I love.

A Verb Passive is that which signifies Passion, as Amor, I am loved.

A Verb Neuter is that which signifies Being, as Sum, I am; Caleo, I am warm.

A Verb Infinitive has three Gerunds, ending in Di, Do, and Dum; two Supines,
the first in um, and the latter in u; and four Participles, two Active, and two
Passive.

A Word without Number is that which contains in it self no signification of
Number, as an Adverb and Conjunction.

An Adverb is a Word without Number, and is of Quantity and Quality, General or
Special.

Quantity Special is in Number, Time, and Place; Quality, in Similitude,
Affirmation, Negation, Optation, Appellation, and Exhortation.

Moreover under the Word Adverb are comprehended Interjections and
Praepositions, which are used either in Composition, as Produco; or Apposition,
as In Vrbem; besides those inseparable Particles Re and Dis, which being
reckoned in the rank of Praepositions are never used but in Composition, as
Resilio and Dispono.

A Conjunction is a Word without Number, by which Parts of Speech are joined,
and is either Enunciative or Rationative.

Enunciative is when the Parts are ascertained, being twofold, viz.
Congregative and Segregative.

Congregative is that by which the Parts are signified to be true together,
whether Copulative or Connexive.

Copulative is when the Parts separately are adjusted one with another, as and
etiam, etc. Connexive, or Conditional is when the Consequent is joined by a
Condition of the Antecedent, as si, nisi, etc.

Segregative is when the Senses, as not true together are separated, and is
either Discretive or Disjunctive.

Discretive is, when the Parts are separated upon a Rational Account, as
Although, nevertheless, however, etc. Disjunctive is, when the Parts are
separated by Effect, in such sort as more than one cannot be true, as Or,
otherwise, etc.

Ratiocinative is, when one of the Parts is concluded by another, to wit,
Rational or Causal. Rational is when a Reason proceeds, as Then, wherefore,
etc. Causal, when a Reason is rendered afterward, as For, to the end that,
because that, etc.

Next follows SYNTAX, which is the Second Part of Grammar, teaching the
Conjucntion or Association of Words one with another, as to Concord and mutual
Propriety; as of a Noun with a Noun, in Number, Case and Gender; of a Noun with
a Verb Personal, in Number and Person; of an Adverb and Praeposition, with the
respective Words which they attend upon.

This Conjunction, or intercourse of Words one with another, is called by
Grammarians, Oration, or Speech, being either Simple or Compound, the Form
whereof is either continued or interrupted, which last is called Dialogue; and
these two manners of Speech are indifferently used both in Prose and Verse.

Finally, A Great^part of Orthography consists in the right distinguishing of
Sentences.

The three Notes of Distinction generally in use, but received from the Latins,
are the Sub-distinction, the Middle-distinction, and the Plenary or
Full-distinction; but known by their Greek Appellations, viz. Comma, Colon, and
Period.

The Sub-distinction, or Comma, is only a very short Pause of Respiration or
Breathing time; and is expressed by this Note or Mark (,).

The Middle-distinction, or Colon, is that which stops the Carier of a Sentence
much about the Midway, leaving as much of the Sense behind, as has been
already past over, and this is thus Marked (:).

A Full-distinction, or Period, is that which comes after the perfecting or
finishing of a Sentence, and is Marked only with one single Prick (.).

To these some add a Semi-Colon; which indeed is much the same with a Colon, or
at least but a small diminishment thereof, only differently Marked, as thus (;).

There are also some other Distinctions of Grammatical Observations in
Sentences, as first, Interrogation, or Asking of a Question, the Note whereof
is thus (?). Secondly, Admiration, or making a Wonder at a thing, the Note
whereof is thus (!). Thirdly, Union, or the Joining of Syllables together for
the making up of a Word, being one of them at the end of a Line, and the other
at the beginning of the Line following; and this is thus Marked (^). Fourthly,
Parenthesis, which is the intercepting, or intercluding of one Sentence with
another; the said intercepted Sentence being so entire of it self, that it may
be wholly taken away, without spoiling or doing any great prejudice to the
rest of that which remains.

As to the Curiosity and Elegance of Language, it depends not so much upon any
Rule or Precept of Grammar, as upon the Wit or Floridness of him that Writes or
Speaks.

There is apparently in all Languages, one and the same reason for the
Distinguishing of all expressive words in discourse into several Classes, which
Grammarians call parts of Speech; however we find that every Language has some
or other Greek has more variety of Tenses in the Verb, than the Latin; also
three Numbers both in the Noun and Verb, viz. Singular, Dual and Plural; so
likewise the Hebrew, besides the differing Modes of Regimen in the Syntax; but
a Noun is a Noun, and a Verb a Verb as well in Hebrew, Caldee, and Syriac, as
in Latin and Greek; the Notion and Idea of them is the same in all Idioms
whatsoever. This distinction of parts of Speech is Grammar; wherefore making
the Latin Tongue an Exemplar for all the rest, it will not be from the purpose
to examine how well our common Latin Grammarians acquit themselves, when they
divide Speech into eight parts, viz. four of them Declinable, as Noun, Pronoun,
Verb and Participle, and four Indeclinable, as Adverb, Conjunction,
Preposition, and Interjection. For the first four I will leave to the
consideration Pronouns (except Ego and tu, which may be accounted each of them
a sort of Hermaphrodite, part Substantive, and part Adjective) are palpable
Adjectives both in their Nature, use, and Declination, as Meus Liber, my Book;
Ille Homo, that Man: And for the Participle, whereas there generally proceeds
from the Verb a numerous Nouns both Substantive and Adjective, the Participles
are a more peculiar sort of Adjectives, derived from, and depending upon their
several Verbs. It Is true that a Participle has in it something of the Nature
of a Verb; for it is capable of Governing Cases absolutely in the same manner
as the Verb it comes from; but in all other respects it is perfectly Adjective.
In like manner it may easily be made out, that in stead of four Indeclinable
parts, two might well enough serve the turn; for all that the Indeclinable part
has to do, is to wait either on the Noun, or Verb. That which attends the Noun
is only single indeed, by the Name of Preposition; that which at tends on the
Verb, is divided into two Terms, Conjunction and Adverb. The first leads a
Sentence, or couples the Classes of Sentences, and sometimes single words
together; the other adds some Circumstance or other to a Verb, according as it
happens; and for that which is called an Interjection, it seems to be no other
than a more than ordinary passionate adverbial expression; so that in fine the
Indeclinable Particle might in my Opinion be well enough divided into two
parts, by whatsoever Term distinguished, namely the Attendant on the Noun, and
the Attendant on the Verb. But since doubtless there has not been wanting all
along something of finess and subtilty of Argument, strong enough to prevail
with the common Learner, who takes all things upon trust, in the maintenance of
this Octuple division of parts, let it pass, since Custom and received Opinion
must sometimes obtain in spite of Sense; yet still there will be found
remaining some absurdities so gross and rank, that nothing could have suffered
them so long uncorrupted, but the easiness of the World to be imposed upon, of
which the very principal of all is the raising of seven Genders out of Hic,
Haec, and Hoc, as if the Addition or Complication of any three things, could
produce a fourth: Nor is the Fallacy much less to make three Moods of one, by
the Advantage of some Particle added, as Conjunction, Adverb, or the like. By
this that has been said it may be Collected, that more mistakes have been
committed in our common, Grammatical Systems, than have been observed in the
System of any other Art or Science whatsoever. It would be too teedious to make
farther Instances, having already insisted upon the most material, but wave
them to some other opportunity, and proceed to that part of Grammar called
Prosodie.

PROSODIA.
THere is also belonging to Grammar that which is called Prosodia, which may
also be reckoned an Introduction to Latin and Greek Poesy, because it directs
to the Knowledge and Composition of Latin and Greek Verse, in order to which it
treats first, of the quantity of Syllables, Secondly, of the various
Denomination of Feet in Verse, Thirdly, of the Distinction and Names of Verses,
Fourthly, of the various Distinction of Poems, and lastly of the Attributes of
Verses.

Of the Quantity of Syllables.
OF Syllables some are long, some short, some doubtful or common, that is,
either long or short at pleasure. Long and Short Syllables amongst the Latins
and Greeks are known eight several ways. First, By Position, that is, when two
Consonants, viz. a Mute and a Liquid, or a double Consonant follow a Vowel.
What Mutes and Liquids are has been already treated of. Seconly, By Diphthong;
a Diphthong is long among the Latins, except a Vowel follow; but among the
Greeks it varies. Thirdly, By Preposition, for the Prepositions a, de, e, di,
dis, pro, and, se, are Long only in some few Exceptions, unless a Vowel follow.
Fourthly, By Derivation. Derivatives follow generally their Primitives.
Fifthly, By Composition, Composites follow the Rule of their Simples. Sixthly,
By Vowel before a Vowel, vvhichin the same word is for the most part Short.
Seventhly, By Rules, as Dissyllable preterperfect Tenses are long except Scidi,
Fidi, Tuli, Steti, Dedi. The First Syllable of a double preterperfect Teuse is
short, as in Momordi, Fefelli, Pependi, Totondi. The First Syllable of a
Dissyllable Supine is Long, as in Satum, Cretum, Itum, Motum. The final
Syllable in A of the Ablative Case Singular of Declension, as Petra. The final
Syllable in O, of the Dative and Ablative Singular of the second Declension, as
in Animo; the final Syllable in I of the Nominative Plural, as in Animi; In Is
of the Dative and Ablative Plural of the same Declension as in Animis. The
final in As of the Accusative Plural of the first Declension, as in Mensas; of
the Nominative Singular of acute Crescents of the third Declension, as in
Bonitas. The final Syllable in Es in most words are all Long. The final
Syllable of words in B, C, D, and T, are ever short. The final Syllable in Us
of most words is short. The final Syllable in V, for the most part is long.
Eigthly, By Examples and Authority of the Ancients; thus the first and
middlemost Syllables of words are known by the frequent reading, and
observation of Authors, as Ma in Matter; Mu in Musa; No in Nobis; Pa in pacis,
Pu in Pudor, etc. are Long. A in Aqua, E in Equus, Ma in Matter, O in Opus are
Short.

Of the several Feet in Latin Verse.
FRom Syllables of various quantity, various Feet arise, which are of two
sorts, viz. Simple, and those compounded of the Simple: The Simple Feet are
either Dissyllable or Trissyllable; the Dissyllable a Spondee, consisting of
two long Syllables, as Re^gi^s; a Pyrrichius, consisting of two short, as
Sumus; a Trochee, consisting of Iambus, consisting of one short and one long,
as Mos; The Trissyllable are the Molossus, consisting of three long, as
Pre^di^co; Tribrachys, consisting of three short, as anr^mus; a Dactyl,
consisting of one long and two short, as Carmna; an Anapaestus, Bacchius,
consisting of one short and two long, as Qure^la; Antibachius, consisting of
two long and one short, as Martal; Amphibrachys, consisting of one long in the
middle and two short, viz. the beginning and end, as Prote^rvus; Amphimachrus,
consisting of one short in the middle, and two long at the beginning and end,
as Vi^rgne^s. The Double or Compound Feet are Dispondees, consisting of two
Spondees, as Conturbabant; Proceleusmaticus, consisting of two Pyrrhichius's,
as Mi^se^re^us; Diiambus, consisting of two Iambuus's, as Mi^nori^tas;
Ditrochaeus, consisting of two Trochees, as Transi^e^re^; Antispastus,
consisting of an Iambick and a Trochoe, as Rpe^nti^nus; Choriambus, consisting
of a Trochee and an Iambes, as Solli^ci^ti^; Ionicus Minor, consisting of a
Pyrrichius and Spondee, as Proprante^s; Ionicus Major, consisting of Spondee
and Pyrrichius, as Clari^ssi^mus; Pean first consisting of Trochee and
Pyrrichius, as Susti^ne^o; Pean second, consisting of Iambus and Pyrrichius, as
i^magi^n Pean third, consisting of Pyrrichius and Trochee, as ani^matus; Pean
fourth, consist-of Pyrrichius and Iambus, as Rgmnans. These Feet are common to
Greek and Latin Verse.

Of the distinction and denomination of the several sorts of Latin Verse.
LAtin Verses are variously denominated, either from the sort of Feet of which
they are composed, from the Inventor, or from the kind of Poem, to which they
are most proper, and in which they are most used, and sometimes from the Number
of Feet or Syllables whereof they consist, as Iambick or Trochaick Verses, from
the Iambick's or Trochees of which they are composed: Sapphic from Sappho, the
first Inventress of that kind of Verse; Pindaric from Pindarus; Heroic and
Elegiac from Poems of that nature; Hexameter and Pentameter, from the number of
the Feet, the first six, the other five; Hendecasyllable, from the number of
Syllables, viz. Eleven.

The most usual sorts of Latin Verses, are these that follow, The Hexameter,
the Pentameter, Iambic, Sapphick, Adonic, Phaleucian and Asclepiadean.

The Hexameter is composed of six Feet, Dactyl and Spondee, only variously
disposed at pleasure; but in the fifth place of a Dactyl, and in the sixth a
Spondee, as Virgil; Incipe Maenalios mecum mea Tibia Versus. Yet not always,
for sometimes though, very rarely, a Spondee is found in the fifth place; as in
Ovid.

Hanc decet ornari, testudine Cyllenea. This kind of Verse is also called
Heroic, as being commonly used in Poems of a Heroic Subject.

The Pentameter is so called, as consisting of five Feet, reckoning the two
long Syllables in the middle and end, which put together, make a Spondee
according to the common way of Scanning, as thus; In the first place a Spondee,
in the second a Dactyl, sometimes a Spondee, or in the first place a Dactyl,
and in the second a Spondee, then a long Syllable, in the third and fourth
place Dactyls, and at the end a long Syllable; but in my mind it may be scanned,
in a more facil and proper manner, with four Molossus Feet, thus; In the first
place a Spondee, in the second a Choriambus, sometimes Molossus: Or in the
first place a Dactyl, in the second a Molossus, in the third a Dactyl, and in
the last a Choriambus. An Example of the first is this following, in Ovid.

Nona signa dabunt exoriente Lyra. Of the Second, which is far more frequent in
this, Vulgus amicitias Vtilitate probat.

This sort of Verse is seldom or never used alone, but still following an
Hexameter; as, Ex ego non paucis quondam munitus amicis,
Dic flavit velis aura secunda meis.
Fera nimboso tumuerunt aequora vento,
In mediis lacera nave relinquor aquis.


The Iambic, so called from the Iambic Foot, Verse, being either Diameter,
Trimeter, or Senarie; but the most usual of all is the Senarie Iambic,
consisting most of Iambic. Feet, but now and then a Spondee, or a Trochee: The
most Genuine is only composed of Iambic Feet; as, Suis and ipsa Roma viribus
ruit.

Diameter is seldom used, but with other Verses; Trimeter is a stately sort of
Iambic; as, O carminum dulces notae,
Quas ore pulchra melleo
Fundis Lyraeque succinis.


The Sapphic, so called from the Greek Poetress Sappho, who first invented and
used it, consists of five Feet, a Spondee in the first and second Dactyl in the
third, a Trochee in the fourth and fifth; as, Nullus argento dolor est avaris.

The Adonic is a Verse consisting only of Dactyl and Spondee, and is seldom or
never used but with Sapphics, that is, after every third Verse; as, Jam satis
--
Grandinis misit pater, and rubente
Dextera sacras jaculatus arces,
Terruit urbem.


The Phaleucian consists as the Sapphic does of five Feet, made up of eleven
Syllables, and therefore is called as the Sapphic, also might be
Hendecasyllabum; the Feet of the Phaleucian are in the first place a Spondee,
in the second a Dactyl, in the third, fourth and fifth a Trochee; as, Passer
deliciae meae puellae.

The Asclepiadean consists of four Feet, a Spondee, a Choriambus, and two
Dactyls; as, Sublimi feriam Sydera vertice.

This sort of Verse and the Sapphic are very much used by Horace in his Odes,
as the Phaleucian by Catullus.

Of the various division of Poems.
POEMS are divided into manifold kinds; but the most general division of them
is threefold, viz. into Dramatic, Examatic, and Mixed.

Dramatic Poems are so called from the representation of things acted or done,
and are chiefly of two sorts, Tragedy and Comedy; the last treats of mean and
vulgar Actions, the first of more high and noble.

Exegematic Poems are those which are carried on by the Author in one entire
contexture, without any interposition of Persons.

Mixed are those wherein sometimes the Author speaks, sometimes other Persons
are brought in speaking.

Of the Attributes of Verses.
THe Attributes of Verses are chiefly four, Scansion, Caesura, Figura, and
Permissio.

Scansion is the measuring and adjusting of a Verse by its Feet.

Caesura is the making of a short Syllable long at the end of two or three
Feet, the first is called Pentimemeris; as, Pectoribus inhians, spirantia
consulit exta. The other Heptimemeris.

The Figures are usually the same as in Prose, and are particularly treated of
in Systems of Rhetoric.

Mixtion is the composition of several kinds of Verses in the same Poem. The
first Mixtion is called Dicolon distrophon; that is, of Hexameter and
Pentameter together, as has been noted in the description of those kind of
Verses. The next is Dicolon Tetastrophon; that is, when after three Verses of
the same kind a fourth of another kind follows, as in the Sapphic and Adonic
before noted: The last is Tricolor Tetrastophon; that is, when after four
Verses of three kinds a return is made to the same again; as, Dianam tenerae
dicite Virgins,
Intonsum pueri dicite Cinthium,
Latonamque Supremo
Dilectam peritus Jovi.
Vos laetam fluviis and memorum coma,
Quaecunque aut gelido prominet algido.
Nigris aut Erymanthi,
Sylvis aut viridis cragi.


RHETORIC.
RHETORIC is the Art of well speaking, or Elegantly discoursing, being
according to the Eliptical Table, divided into two parts, Elocution and
Pronuntiation; To which it is thought not improper to praefix Invention and
Disposition, as being handled in several accurate Systems of Rhetoric; and
therefore not wholly to be omitted here, before we proceed to the two parts
mentioned in the said Table.

Invention is the Contriving, or bringing of matter together, for the Composing
of any Argument, Discourse, or Oration. The Topics or Heads whence Arguments
may be invented are these following, First, Definition or a Speech declaring
what a thing is. Secondly, Division or the Distribution of the matter
propounded into its parts. Thirdly, Notation or Etymology, which is the
interpretation of a word, showing both its Original and Signification.
Fourthly, Conjugation, which shows either the various endings of words, or the
derivation of several words from one Primitive. Fifthly, Genus is that which
comprehends several things under it. Sixthly, Species, any of those things that
may be restored to their common Genus. Seventhly, Similitude, or the comparing
of two or more things together. Eighthly, Dissimilitude, or the disagreeing of
two or more things in some particular. Ninthly, Contraries, or things which
cannot both at the same Opposites or things that can never agree. Eleventhly,
Comparison, or the comparing of one thing with another. Twelfthly, Causes, that
is, such things by which any thing is in any sort produced, being Fourfold,
Essicient, Material, Formal, and Final. Thirteenthly, Effects, that is, things
propounded by their Causes. Fourteenthly, Adjuncts, or Things that are joined
to the thing, or person propounded. Fifteenthly, Antecedents, Consequents, that
is, things which do necessarily follow after the thing or matter.

Disposition is the orderly placing of those things which are Invented; hence
results Discourses or an Oration, the parts whereof are commonly reckoned these
five; First, Exordium, by which the Orator does prepare the minds of the
Auditors for that which is to follow, by bespeaking Proposition, in which the
Orator does briefly deliver the Sum of the whole matter of which he intends to
speak. Thirdly, Narration, in which a relation is made of the matter or thing
done. Fourthly, Confirmation, in which Arguments are brought to prove the
Proposition, and if need be, to contrary the Opinion of any Opposer. Fifthly,
Peroration or Conclusion, in which the Orator uses such Figures as are most
proper to move the Affections of the Auditors.

Elocution is no other than the Ornament and Enrichment of Speech, which is
also Twofold, viz. Trope and Figure.

Trope is a part of Elocution, by which the Natural or proper Signification of
a word is changed into another. There are two sorts of Trope, at least a double
Modification thereof; viz. simple as Metonymie and Ironie, and compound as
Metaphor in respect of a comparison, and Synecdoche in respect of Distribution.
If a Trope be a little harsh, or far fetched, it may be called Catachresis, or
Abusion; which if it be somewhat too ruff to the Ear, it may be sweetened and
softened by such like excuses, as the Latins call Praemonitions. If the
Signification be raised, or carried on to any excess, it is called Hyperbole;
If any ways multiplied and continued, an Allegory.

Metonymie is a Trope, by which a word first designed to signify properly the
cause of any thing whatsoever is made use of to signify the effect, where that
which is properly used for the Subject, is transferred from its proper and
natural Signification, to signify a Circumstance, or contrariety, where words
designed to signify Effects or Circumstances are converted to signify Causes
and Subjects

He reads Ovids works, that is a Metonymie of the efficient cause for the
Effect.

Man's life prolonged, must yield to crooked Age, that is, Age which makes
crooked; this is a Metonymie of the Effect, for the Efficient Cuuse.

My Friend I see has got a chirping Cup; that is, as much Wine or strong Drink
as a large Cup will contain; this is a Metonymie of the Subject for the Adjunct.

I yield much reverence to your hoary Hairs; that is, you who have hoary Hairs;
this is a Metonymie of the Adjunct for the Subject.

Ironie is when one contrary is understood by another; that is to say, when any
word is made use of in a Signification, contrary to what it ought to be; and
therefore may otherwise be called Simulation, or Dissimulation.

You are a Man of your word indeed; that is, a Faith-breaker. It is simple or
continued, and hereunto may be referred Preterition, as a Species of
Dissimulation; that is, when we make semblance of not being willing, to say
that which To The Worshipful William Stych of Newbury in the Parish of Barkin
in Essex Es^ This Plate is Humbly Dedicated By Richard Blome.

nevertheless we at last do utter, as

He was a wary Man, I might say covetous.

Metaphor is, when one like is understood by another, that is, when one word of
a proper Signification is made use of for another like it. It may otherwise be
called Translation, which is as Comprehensive as Similitude; for there is
nothing in Nature whose Name and Appellation may not be applied to some thing
else.

When Spring appears the very Heavens smile; that is, look pleasantly.

Synecdoche, which we call Conception, and Intelligence is, when a part is
taken for the whole; or on the contrary, the whole for a part.

His happy Reign full forty Summers last'd; that is, forty Years. This is
Synecdoche partis.

A Figure is another part of Elocution, by which the Phrase of Language is
advanced from the simple and vulgar manner of speaking; for as of words some
are proper, some Translate; so in Language, and manner of Speech, one sort is
simple and vulgar, another Figurative, that is to say, a little changed or
altered from the common and Familiar way.

There are two sorts of Rhetorical Figure, one of Diction, and the other of
Sentence.

Figure of Diction is that which renders Language sweet and harmonious, by a
resonancy of words called number, which affects the Ear, with a certain
delight, being a kind of pleasant Modalution Syllables made therein, or by a
pleasing Repetition of words of the like sound.

The Observation of Syllables in Speech, is altogether Poetical; and is either
Rhythm, or Meetre; Rhythm is made by the Observation of the ultimate Syllables
of one, two, three, or four, or more Verses answering to each other in sound:
But Meetre or Verse is the Observation of Feet, Syllables, according to their
long or short.

The Repetition of Sound is agreeable, as well to Prose as Verse, and may
indifferently be used by Orator and Poet at pleasure. This Repetition is either
of the like sound; and that continually in the same Sentence, as Epizeuxis; or
in diverse Sentences, as Anadiplosis and Gradation; or separately, and that
either in a successive order, as Anaphora, Epistrophe, and Symploce; or
promiscuously Epanalipsis and Epanodos; or of an unlike sound, as Paronomasia,
and Poliptote.

Epizeuxis is a Rhetorical Number, in which one and the same sound is
subsequently repeated.

Time flies, Time flies, never to be recalled.

Anadiplosis is the same ending of one Sentence, as the beginning of the
following.

If why I take not leave she ask, ask her again, etc.

Gradation is the carrying on of any expression, from a lower to a higher
Degree.

Desert begat Admiration, Admiration Esteem, Esteem procured love it self.

Anaphora or Relation, is the Repetition of one and the same sound, at the
beginning of several Sentences, or Members of a Sentence.

By Art of Sails, etc. Seas are divided.

By Art the Chariot runs, by Art Loves guided.

Epistrophe or Conversion, is the contrary of Anaphora, that is, a Repetition
of the same sound, at the end of several Sentences, or Members of a Sentence.

What braver People than the Romans; who more Renowned in Arms than the Romans:
More Flourishing in Arts and Eloquence than the Romans?

Anaphora and Epistrophe joined together, produce the Figure Symplote or
Complication.

The more he strove to bring his end about, the more he failed to bring his
ends about.

Epanalepsis is a Repetition of the same sound, both at the beginning and end
of Sentences.

Great was his Actions, as his Fame was Great.

Epanodes or Regression is as it were a Reflection of the like sound, at the
beginning and middle, or at the middle and end of a Sentence.

The Prince desired above all things to oblige the People.

The People feared nothing more than to displease the Prince.

Paronomasia or Agnomination, is an Allusion or Resemblance of one word to
another; and it is either of a whole word, or of a part thereof: Paronomasia of
a whole word is called Equivocal, and sometimes is the same thing with Rythm of
a Verse: Paronomasia of a part of a word is in certain Syllables; for sometimes
words resemble one another in the first and last Syllables, sometimes in the
midlemost and last Syllables.

Polyptoton is comprehended under Agnomination, and is vulgarly called
Traduction, by which often times the last case is changed, yet there remains some
Similitude betwixt the words.

Swords Clash with Swords, and Shields against Shields do hit.

Figure of Sentence is a Rhetorical Figure, extended and continued through a
whole Sentence: It consists either in Logism, or Dialogism; Logism is when a
Sentence is Figured without Collocution, or Interchange of Discourse; and of
this there are several kinds, as First Exclamation and Revocation; and Secondly
by Apostrophe and Prosopopaea. Exclamation is an Elevation of the Voice, for
the better heightning and amplifying of what is expressed, and consists of
several Affections, as Admiration, Optation, Derision, Indignation, Salutation,
etc. To which may also be referred Epiphonema and Licentia.

Epiphonema is a kind of Exclamation, which comes in voluntarily at the end of
the Narration of any thing.

Such horrid things Ambition brings to pass.

License is a Figure which pretends a kind of boldness, in speaking that which
seemed to have been designed to be concealed.

Revocation is a calling back upon mature Deliberation, of something that was
spoken in heat and vehemence in the foregoing Sentence. To this Figure belongs
Correction and Reticence.

Epanorthesis or Correction, is a Bridling, or checking of our Speech, the
grace whereof consists in the ingenious, and subtle calling in of what was
before spoken. As,

Died did I say, alas he did not dye.

Apos^opesis or Reticence is the shortning, or Retrenching of a Sentence by
abruptly breaking off in the midst of something that seems designed to have
been said.

Many such Injuries have I received; But if I live.

Apostrophus or Aversion is a Diversion, or

Be Witness O ye Heavens.

Prosopopaea or Sermocination is a Figure of Sentence, by which on a sudden
one turns from his former manner of Speech, and speaks in the person of
another; and it is either imperfect, or perfect. Prosopopaea is called
imperfect, when the fiction of another Person speaking is only intimated, that
is by recounting, or rehearsing what

I am, said he, of Noble Parentage.

Perfect and plain Prosopopaea is an absolute representing of another Person,
by our manner of Speech.

Jove me begat, things both to come and past, and also present are by me
revealed.

Dialogismus is either in Interrogation, or Answer. Interrogation consists in
Deliberation and Occupation. Deliberation or Consultation consists in
Addubitation Communication.

Addubitation expresses the Affection of a Man, in Doubt and Perplexity. As

What shall I do, or whither shall I fly?

Communication is a Deliberation and Consultation with others, as in the
following Figure with our selves.

Prolepsis is a Figure of Sentence, by which we readily answer, as it were to a
demand or Objection before it is made: It is sometimes called Occupation, and
sometimes Subjection.

Answer is in Permission and Concession.

Permission is when we give leave and power to do any thing. As,

Follow your own desires, I envy not.

Concession seems to be an Approbation of a thing proposed in such sort, that
as Permission is in deeds, so Concession is in words and arguments: As when we
grant that which he who disputes against us, demands to have granted.

But we will grant that all you have said is true.

Pr^nunciation is another part of Rhetoric, which expresses Elocution, and
utters in Speech what was first conceived in the mind; and consists of two
parts, Voice and Gesture. Whereof the first presents it self to the Ear, and
the second to the Sight: By which two Senses all Knowledge is apprehended.

Vocal Pronunciation consists much in the goodness of the Voice, which is a
principal thing to be desired, for the uttering and putting forth of Accent,
and Tone of Speech, all which Figures of Diction and Sentence, and all the
Affections and Passions of the Mind, so that the utterance may be agreeable to
the Subject spoken of.

Gesture consists in Action, and the handsome disposition of the Body, and all
its parts.

To the R^. Worshipful Sr. Richard Brown of Debden Hall in Essex Bdron^t, Mr.
of Arts. and fellow Commoner of Queens College in Combridge. and Baristr, at
Law. Brigadeer. and Eldest Lei^etenant of Horse in the Second Troop of his
Majest^. Life Guard* and Caryer in Ordinary to ye King. This Plate is humbly
Dedicated by Richard Blome.



LOGIC.
DIalect or Logic is an Art of well disputing or reasoning; and consists of
Two parts, Invention and Judgment. Invention is the first part, and serves for
the raising up of Reasons and Arguments.

Argument is that which is designed for the beter declaring of any thing that
is to be discourst of, and is either artificial or inartificial.

Artificial takes upon it to make out it self and its own nature, and is either
Primary, or proceeding Primary.

The Primary is either simple or compared: The simple is Consentaneous or
Dissentaneous. The Consentaneous consents with the thing which it argues and
declares, and is of four kinds, Cause, Effect, Subject, and Adjunct.

Cause is an Argument whence proceeds some Effect, and is also of four kinds,
Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

Efficient is the cause by which any thing is effected, viz. First; It is
either Procreant, or Conservant. Procreant is that which first effects any
thing, and Conservant is that which maintains it in its first State.

Secondly, The Efficient cause is either sole, or joined with another. The sole
is that which does a thing by its own efficiency or power. The Efficient joined
with another, is either Principal or Subservient, and assisting to the
Principal.

Thirdly, The Efficient cause is either of it self, per se; or of it self, as
that which acts by its own proper motion, as by Council, by Nature, etc. The
Efficient by Accident, is that which acts by an external motion, as Necessity,
which is a force upon the Effect: Fortune is also a cause by accident, acting
without constraint upon its Effect.

Matter is a cause of which a thing is made.

Form is that by which any things what it is, and by which it is different
from all other things.

The final cause is that from which any thing is made or done.

The Effect is whatsoever issues or proceeds from the causes: The Subject is
that to which any thing is adjoined: The Adjunct is that which is joined to the
subject.

Dissentaneous is an Argument which dissents and contradicts the thing which is
argued or declared, and is either Diverse or Opposite; Diverse is that which
contradicts by reason alone; Opposite Opposite is either Disparous or Contrray;
Disparous is an Opposite not differing very much as to Singulars, that is to
say, one from one, but plurally, or one from many. Contrary is where one is
absolutely opposed to one, and is either Affirmative or Negative. The
Affirmative is either Relative or Adverse. Relative is a contrary Affirmative,
whose essence is mutual; Adverse is a contrary Affirmative whose essence is
separate. A contrary Negative is where one thing contains a negation of the
other, and is either Privative, or Contradicting; Privative is a contrary
Negative, where one is the Habitude, the other the privation of the Habitude;
The Contradicton is the Contrary Negative, where one affirms, the other totally
denies the same.

Comparate is where one thing is compared with another, and is of two kinds,
one in Quantity, and the other in Quality.

The Comparison of Quantity is by Mathematicians called Ratio, or Proportion;
and it is either equal, or unequal; equal Proportions are those whereof there
is one and the same quantity; unequal are those whose quantities are unequal,
and are either more or less unequal: the more unequal is that whose quantity
exceeds, the less whose quantity comes short.

Comparison of Quantity is that by which things are said to be so, and so that
is to say, like or unlike. Like are those whereof there is one and the same
quantity; unlike are those whose quantities are diverse or different.

Arguments proceeding from the primary are Conjugation, Notation, Distribution,
and Definition; Conjugation is the various mutation of Nouns by their diversity
of Cases,

Notation is the Interpretation of a Nounn, or name. Distribution is a
distinction of the whole into parts, that is, by the Causes, Effects, Subjects,
or Adjuncts: Of the second^kind of distribution by Effects, is the distribution
of the Genus into its Species, which is properly called Division: Genus is the
whole of several things alike in Essence or alike Essence of many things:
Species is a part of the Genus.

Definition is that which properly declares what any thing is, and it is either
Imperfect, or Perfect: That is properly called Definition, this Description;
perfect Definition is a Definition composed of Causes constituting the Essence.

Description is a description composed also of other Arguments.

Inartificial Argument is that which by it self and by its own force creates no
belief but as it borrows its force of some Artificial Argument: This Argument
is commonly called Authority, or Testimony, and is either Divine, or Humane;
Divine as the Oracles of God, or Prophesies; Humane is common, or proper;
Common as the written, or unwritten Law, famous Sentences, Proverbs or Sayings
of wise Poets, Philosophers, and other renouned Persons Testimony proper, as
Obligation, Confession, Question, and Oath.

Judgment is the second part of Logic, and treats how to dispose arguments to
judge by a certain Rule of disposition; whence this part is called by one and
the same signification Judgment and Disposition: Judgment is either without
Discourse, as an Axiom, or Discursive as a Sylogism and Method.

An Axiom is the disposition of one Argument with another, by which it may be
judged whether a thing be or not; where we ought to consider first the parts
Antecedent and Consequent; Secondly the common Affections, and Proprieties of
Affirmation and Negation, of Truth or Falsity; and Thirdly the Species Simple
or compound.

An Axiom is affirmed if the Copulative be affirmed, and contrariwise denied if
that be denied; Also an Axiom is true when it is pronounced Axiom is either
necessary or contingent; A necessary Axiom is always true and can never be
false: An Impossibility on the contrary cannot be true. Moreover it is either
Homogeneous, that is, when the parts are Essential amongst themselves; or
Reciprocal, that is, when the Consequent is affirmed, and verifyed of its
Antecedent, not only totally, and of it self, but also reciprocally.

An Axiom is either simple, or compound: An Axiom simple is comprised under one
word, so as from thence to make any Affirmation or Negation: An Axiom simple is
General, Particular, or Proper.

General is when a common Consequent is generally attributed to a common
Antecedent.

Particular is when a common Consequent is particularly attributed to the
Antecedent.

Proper is when the Consequent is Attributed to its Proper Antecedent.

A Compound Axiom has many Sentences conjoined, of which the Copula is not a
Verb but Conjunction: This compound Axiom is in respect of its Conjunction,
either Congregative, or Segregative; the Congregative being either Copulative
or Conditional; the Segregative either Discretive or Disjunctive.

An Axiom Copulative is a compound Axiom whose Copula is a Conjunction
Copulative; An Axiom conditional is that whose Copula is a Conjunction
Conditional; An Axiom Discretive is that whose Conjunction is Discretive. A
Disjunctive is that whose Conjunction is Disjunctive, and so in all others of
the like nature.

Judgment Discursive is when one Axiom is drawn from another, and is either
Syllogism, or Method.

A Syllogism is a Discursive Judgment by which a Question is so disposed with
the Argument that the Antecedent being granted the Conclusion must necessarily
follow. Of a Syllogism we are first to Parts, next the several Kinds.

The Antecedent of a Syllogism has two parts, Proposition and Assumption; but
the Consequent is that which contains the parts of the Question, and there
concludes, whence it is the Complexion, or the Conclusion.

The Proposition is that by which the Consequent of the Question is disposed
with the Argument. The Assumption is drawn from the Proposition; The Conclusion
compriseth the parts of the Qestion which it concludes.

A Syllogism is of two kinds, Simple and Compound; the Simple is when the
Consequent part of the Question is put in the Proposition, the Argument in the
Assumption: And it is Affirmative when its parts are affirmed; Negative when
one of the Antecedent parts together with the Conclusion is denied; It is also
General, that is, when the Proposition and the Assumption are General. Special
when one of the two only are General; Proper when both of the parts are Proper.

A Simple Syllogism is either restrained in its parts, or entire; A Syllogism
restrained is when the Argument is so adjusted to a particular Question, that
preceding one or the other part, and being Affirmed of the Assumption it is so
much the better understood.

A Syllogism entire is when the Proposition is General or Proper, and the
Conclusion like to the Antecedent, or the weaker part. Of this there are two
kinds; in the first the Argument is always Consequent, and concludes only the
Question denied; and it is first General, second General, and first and second
Special.

The second kind of Syllogism entire is when the Argument is the Antecedent of
the Proposition, the Consequent the Affirmative of the Assumption; and it is
Affirmative General, Negative General, Affirmative Special, Negative Special,
Affirmative Proper, and Negative Proper.

A Compound Syllogism is when all the Question is one of the parts of the
Proposition affirmed and compounded, and the Argument is the other part. This
Compound Syllogism is either Conditional, or Disjunctive.

The Conditional Syllogism is that whereof the Proposition is conditional, and
it is of two kinds; The first kind takes back the Antecedent, and concludes the
Consequent: the second takes back the Contradiction of the Consequent, and
concludes the Contradiction of the Antecedent.

A Disjunctive Syllogism, is a Compound Syllogism whose Proposition is
Disjunctive, as also its kinds; The first Disjunctive kind takes back the
contradiction of the one and concludes the contradiction of the other.

Method is a Judgment discursive of diverse Homogeneous Axioms which are
proposed to be wholly absolutely preceding nature, more evident, more clear and
notorious.

Method is twofold, the Method of Doctrine, and the Method of Prudence.

The Method of Doctrine is an artificial and perfect Method taken and deduced
from general Propositions more clear and notorious than nature to those that
are short in the knowledge thereof.

Method of Prudence is a Natural, inartificial and imperfect Method; so called
because it can hardly be Governed by any certain Art, but is almost totally
managed by the Prudence and Judgment of Man.



THEOLOGY.
THEOLOGY is the Doctrine of the knowledge of God and Divine things, in order
to his glory, and the eternal Salvation of the Soul of Man.

I have endeavored in the precedent Scheme or Table to make use of such a
Method or short Body of Divinity as might be plain and easy, and yet comprehend
that which is necessary.

For this reason I have divided it into its Speculative and practic part, that
is, into Knowledge Practice.

The Knowledge is of what we are to believe and understand, and the Practice of
what we are to do to obtain Everlasting Life.

The former of these is contained in the several Symbols of the Croed; the
latter in the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, which both together are, as it
were an Epitome, or Synopsis of whatever is contained in the Holy Scriptures,
necessary to Salvation.

This Divine Speculation consists principally in a right knowledge and belief
of these Three things, to wit, the Knowledge.

1. Of the Essence of God.

2. Of the Faculties, and Immortality of the Soul.

3. Of the State after this Life.

And these three are all taught us in the Apostles Creed.

The knowledge of Gods Essence or Nature, may in regard of the Degrees and
manner of attaining Revelation.

That which we have by the Light of Nature is from the consideration of his
Works, both of Creation and Providence.

God Almighty is easily perceived in his Works of Creation, whether we look
upon the great, or the little World; I mean, whether we consider the
Structure, Beauty, and Symmetry of the Universe, World, the beauty and Variety
of the Creaturs, the constant order of their Dissolution, and re-production,
their wonderful Harmony in the mutual support and Preservation of one another,
we cannot choose but imagine that all this is the Product of some Higher Power,
than any we met with in the World, and this is the first Notion of God.

Again if we look into our own Bosoms, we shall there meet with strange desires
and Breathings after Eternity. And after the Enjoyments, of all Sorts of
Pleasures of this World, we are still weary and Dissatisfied, having a
Principle within us that (unlike all the rest of the Creation) meets with no
Adequate, proportionat Object below the Moon; a strong and Violent Presumption
that it has it true Object somewhere else; which can be nothing but the
Enjoyment of that God which Created it. Yet further, the very Checks of
Conscience, and those natural inbred Notions we bring into the World with us of
Right and Wrong, of Virtue and Vice, of Rewards and Punishment, are very strong
and Pregnant Proofs of a Deity.

And so far the very Heathens arrived to know that there was a God,
supream-Power that guided and directed all things as it pleased; and hence
proceeded their worshipping and Sacrificing to whatever they found did them
good, or what they were afraid might do them hurt, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, and
all the Host of Heaven.

When I consider how great a part of Mankind the Heathens have been, and (many
of them) how entire in their Morals, me thinks I cannot with the bold Censurers
of the Age pass a final Sentence of Damnation upon their immortal Souls; but,
if it were possible, interpret St. Paul's words in their favor, where he tells
us, That they having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. And though we are
told there is no other name under Heaven by which we can be saved, but only
by Jesus Christ, yet, it may be, those words are to be understood of such as
have had Jesus Christ sufficiently proposed to them; for we Read, that what the
Law speaks, it speaks to those that are under the Law.

The other Branch of Gods works whereby he manifests himself to our natural
Reason, are those of his Providence, which considered either in its ordinary or
extraordinary effects and productions, is such that Seneca (though a Heathen)
could not believe that any Man was so blind or ignorant as not to believe a
Deity; his own words are these. Qui dicit se credere Deos non esse, mentitur;
He that says that he believes there are no Gods, dissembles or Lies.

Thus you see how by the light of Nature only. Men understand, that God is, and
that he is to be worshipped. But for ever blessed be his holy Name, he has not
lest us here, but has given us a more sure word of Prophecy, the holy
Scriptures, wherein he has revealed himself to us; and which is here the most
material, he has confirmed the truth of them both by Prophecies and Miracles,
such as some of the Gentiles could never boast of, Miracles truly so, and not
feigned, like those of the Egyptian Sorcerers, and the Juglars of our days,
that only seem to do things.

The Egyptians experienced (but too truly) that their Plagues were real, and no
dreams. The Children of Israel did pass through the Red Sea; they did drink of
the Water, that came out of the Rock in the Wilderness, and their Thirst was
quenched; they did eat of the Quails and Manna and were satisfied, and
sustained for forty years together; and the Miracles at the delivery of the Law
on Mount Sinai, deserves mentioning, for we read that the Mount burnt with
Fire, and Thunder and Lightning, and the sound of a Trumpet, which sounded
louder and louder, and the Mount trembled; and this was done not only in the
sight of the Elders of Israel, but in the presence of all the People, who
quaked and trembled thereat.

To the Miracles we may add the Prophecies which we meet with in Holy
Scriptures, some of which were very particular, and circumstantial. Abraham
that the Children of Israel should be Strangers, and in Bondage in Egypt 400
years before, which Prophecy was fulfilled to a Day. The Prophecy about Josiah
and Cyrus, named the very Men, and that of Daniel of the four Monarchies was
very remarkable, he had seen only two of them, for the Grecian and Roman were
then unthought of.

To these I might add the Prophecies concerning our Savior, and how in every
little circumstance Christianity it self.

To what has been said I might add, that the Word of God has never been
opposed, or contradicted by any, although it be sound to agree both as to Time,
Place and Story, with many profane Historiographers.

Now the Truth of Gods Word confirms to us the truth of that Sacred Mystery of
the Trinity, or the Three Persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. The Father Created all things of nothing: The Son Redeemed us from
everlasting Death, when we were lost in Adams Disobedience; The Holy Ghost
inspires all God's Servants with his Grace, and comforts them in all their
Troubles and Afflictions; as if all the Three Persons in the Trinity had
successively undertaken

And yet we are not here to expect those extraordinary and supernatural
Influences of the holy Spirit, which the Prophets and Apostles had in speaking
with Tongues, they had never learned, in Prophesying, casting out Devils, and
working all sorts of Miracles: Not that Gods hand is shortened, or that he is
not able to do what he has formerly done, but for Reasons best known to
himself (at which we can at the best but guess) Holy Ghost works only (or for
the most part) in the use of means. And this shows the Vanity of our Sectaries
and Enthusiasts, who pretend extraodinary Revelations, when we all know that
they are long ago ceased.

Another thing we are assured of from the Revelation of Gods Word, is that we
have Souls distinct from our Bodies, immaterial, rational and discursive in
respect of their Essence, and immortal and incorruptible in regard of their
duration; and this is that wherein we are said to represent God Almighty, and
to be Created after his Image.

And to this Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, is also annexed and
declared in Holy Writ, that of a future State, Rewards and Punishments.

Rewards of Everlasting bliss, and joy ^o the good and virtuous, which are
commonly shadowed to us under the Notions of those things we have the greatest
esteem for; as Crowns, Treasures which fade not away, Rivers of Pleasures, etc.

Punishments o^ endless Woe and Torment to the Wicked and Ungodly, figured in
Gods Word by those things that to Flesh and Blood are most terrible and fullest
of Horror, as Everlasting Fire, the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone,
utter Darkness, etc. Of both which we may truly say, that they are such as
neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive. Let it suffice us then, that there shall be a Resurrection of the
Body, and a reunion of it to the Soul to receive its Reward; though the Manner
and Circumstances both of Rewards and Punishments be to us very obscure and
unknown. And thus much of Speculative Theology.

Practical Theology.
PRactical Theology, which is the other Branch of our Division is that which
contains our Duty to God and Man; and this we have briefly comprehended in the
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, wherein we are always to observe, that every
Affirmative Precept, includes a Negative, and every Negative an Affirmative.
That is to say, where we are commanded to Honor our Fathers and Mothers, we
are forbidden to dishonor them; where we are forbidden to Kill, we are
commanded to our power to preserve; and so of all the rest.

But to being with that part of our Duty, which does immediately respect God
himself; It consists in our diligence and sincerity in his Worship, and is
briefly laid down in the four Commandments of the first Table.

The Subject Matter whereof may be reduced to these main heads of Adoration,
Prayer, and Praises.

Prayer for those good things we stand in need of, and hope to receive from God
Almighty, who is the giver of every good and perfect gift; and Prayer for those
Mercies and Favors which he has already given us.

Both these are either public or private; Public when we join with the
Church, or any lawful public Assembly of Christians to make our requests known
to God, or praise his holy Name for Mercies received; Private when we do the
same things alone, or in our Closets.

There is this only difference between them, that our Public performances
should be more wary in Circumstances, as forms and gravity of Words, decency,
and respect of Behavior, and this so the sake of our Neighbor, that we give
no occasion of scandal; though after all it must be confessed that it is the
integrity and soundness of the heart which God chiefly regards in both.

Next our Duty toward God, follows our Duty to Man, that is, our Duty toward
our

First of all, there are some Duties we owe our Selves, and these are all
briefly comprehended in the vvorking out our own Salvation, which is the main
business for which we were at first created and came into this World.

The means and Instruments we are to make use of herein are principally these
Three, Faith in Jesus Christ.
Repentance from dead works.
Obedience, or newness of life.


Faith is a free Grace bestowed upon us by God Almighty, whereby we lay sure
hold on the Promises made to Mankind, through the Merits and Intercession of
Jesus Christ.

In which Definition we may observe in the first place, That this grace of
Faith is not attainable by any human endeavors, but is the mere voluntary and
free gift of God. And yet since he works (as is said before) in the use of
Means, we are still Read and Preached, to converse with good Men, to desire
and pray for his Grace, and no doubt but he will give it us.

Again, We may take notice, that it is not a bare Historical Faith, like that
whereby we believe Profane History, or any thing else of that kind, but it is
that whereby we lay hold on and apply the Promises which God has made to
Beleivers generally, to our selves particularly, so that a true Believer does
not only believe that Jesus Christ died for the sins of the World, but for his
particularly, and so claims a part and portion in that Satisfaction which he
has made to Gods Justice.

The next thing in order is Repentance, which is a hearty Sorrow and Contrition
for sins past, joined with settled purposes and resolutions of a new life.

I know not which of these two ought in right to be first placed, for there can
be no true Faith Repentance, nor no true Repentance without Faith. They are
Twins, as born at a Birth, nor can the wit of Man devise to separate what God
has put together.

Repentance in the Greek is called (...), which signifies not a bare
Compunction, or Attrition, as the School men speak, but such a Sorrow and
Affection of the Mind, as produces a Change or Reformation; and hence it is
that amendment and newness of life are the only Demonstrations

And this leads us to the last of these Instruments; whereby we are to work out
our Salvation, and that is a ready Obedience, and a universal compliance with
those Laws and Precepts which God has laid down in his Holy Word as a Rule for
us to walk by. And because Reformation and Obedience are more descernible than
our Faith and Repentance, which are only Acts of the Mind and Spirit, we must
endeavor to satisfy both our selves and the World of the truth of the latter,
by the sincerity of the former.

For trial then of our Obedience, there are Three things to be enquired into.
If it be willing and cheerful, and not for fear or by constraint; If it be
universal and not partial; and if it be always growing and increasing, daily
getting new Advantages and Ornaments. These are the infallible Marks of a good
Man and a good Christian, and the only assurance we can have of Heaven and
Happiness, whist we are in this World. This is what we owe to our Selves; and
now we shall take a short view of that Duty we owe our Neighbor.

And here (1). let me put you in mind of our Duty toward our Holy Mother the
Church, both in owning her Doctrines, and submitting to her Discipline.

There are many Companies, or Sects of Men in the World, that pretend the next,
and some the only way to Heaven. To say nothing of the obstinate Jews, who had
once the keeping of those sacred Oracles that contain the Types and Figures of
our Christian Religion; nor yet of the Ignorant Mahometans, whose miscellaneous
Worship seems rather formed and modelled to preserve an earthly, than to get a
Heavenly Crown. I shall only put you in mind of the purity of our Church of
England by comparing it with some others in point of Ceremonies, etc. that call
themselves Christians.

And amongst these, the Greek Church and the Lutherans will find no room in
this small Tract. I will only speak a word or two of the Romanists, and the
Dissenters of our own Country; Men of very different Principles (if you will
believe them) and that agree in no one thing, but in their violent Hatred and
Ill Will to us. The Romanists complain for our quitting some Ceremonies, that
are by us adjudged Useless and Superstitious; and the Dissenters, for that we
retain some, though never so grave and decent; these accuse us still of
Superstition, those of Sacrilege; whence it appears, that even in these things
we have still kept a Middle^ way between both, neither burthening the weak with
superfluous Impositions, nor yet descended to those base and slovenly
Familiarities with God, which the Fanatics have both in Words and Behavior.

I suppose this Tract will not be looked upon as Demonstration to prove the
Excellency of our Church above others; the Learned Men of our Church have done
it sufficiently; however, if a Person unbiassed and disinteressed were to
consider but this very thing alone, he would be apt to think, even without
Argument, that ours had the fairest Pretense, being placed in the middle, the
Seat of Virtue her self.

Now since we find our selves thus befet with Scylla on the right, and
Charibdis on the left hand, let us mind our Course and Steer steady, lest we
suffer Shipwreck on the Rocks of Heresy, or be swallowed up in the Gulf of
Schism. Let us beware of the Force and Insinuations of the one and the other,
and never doubt our safety as long as we keep within our own Ark, that is,
within our own Pale, which without doubt is the best and surest Bulwark in the
World against the Menaces and Dangers of them both.

2. We must be very careful of our Duty to our Magistrate; not only because our
own Lives and Interests are bound up in his, but also upon a Gods Minister and
Vicegerent, and he that resists him, resists the Ordinance of God.

Our Duty to the Magistrate is briefly concluded in these two things, Honoring
and Obeying him. The Particulars that these may be branched into would be too
large for this little Tract, and make such a Body as this show
disproportionable; and therefore I refer you to such as have purposely writ
upon this Subject.

The Third and last Obligation we have to our Neighbor, are the Duties we owe
our Fellow Subjects, and these are briefly comprehended under the Notion of
Charity, that Grace which shall last and endure when the Sun shall be darkened,
and the Moon be turned into Blood, which shall be one part of our Happiness in
Heaven to all Eternity.

It consists briefly, In doing them all the good we can, and forbearing to do
them any Evil. Or giving and forgiving. Giving according to the capacity
wherein God has placed us, to such as stand in need of our Charity; and
forgiving such as have any way injured us, as we hope that God for Christ sake
will forgive us.

Nor must we think our Neighbors Bodies the only object of our Charity; their
Souls are yet of more value, and as occasion may be offered must always
experience our Love and Kindness in Exhortations, Reproofs, Consolations, etc.

And thus I have finished this small Piece wherein though I have swerved from
the Method which others have made use of, yet I hope I have omitted nothing
that was altogether necessary to a Discourse of this kind, though a Lock of
Hair may be wanting, or a Finger not so well shadowed, yet I hope I have not
forgotten any of the principal Limbs and Members of this Body.

The Doctrines of our Chuch in general are comprehended in the speculative part
of Theology, whereof I was saying the Articles of our Creed were a short
Abridgment.

As to those Doctrines which distinguish us from other Churches, and are in
especial manner said to be of the Church of England, I refer the Reader to the
39 Articles.

That there ought to be some kind of Discipline in the Church, no body that is
well in their Wits will deny; But there are but too many that will not only
deny the Church her due Power in it, but will needs make themselves Judges
where they have nothing to do but to obey.

We believe that in things indifferent, that is, in such things as are in their
own natures neither good nor bad, the Church has absolute power of injoyning
or forbidding them as she sees cause, for the sake of public Order and
Decency, of which I am sure she is the only, and indeed the only complete
Judge; And I cannot but wonder that those very Men should make so little esteem
of the Churches Authority in some things, that are so positive and severe for
it in others: For Example, that will deny her power of appoynting Rites and
Ceremonies and prescribing a set Form of Prayers, whereas they are so ridged
for the same Translation of the Bible which the Church of England uses, and
also for the observation of the Lord's Day, of which I am sure they can give no
other Account or reason than the Churches Authority.

To the Right Honble: Charles Sackvile Earl of Dorset and Meddlesex. Baron
Buckhurst and Cranfield one of Gentlemen of this Mo^^^^. Bedchombe^ and Ld.
Leiutenant of Sussex. This Pla^e is humbly Dedicated by R. Blome



METAPHYSICS.
METAPHYSICS is a Science which contemplates Beings as Beings; that is to say,
abstracted from all Matter.

The Etimology of the Word is from (...), which signifies praeter, post, or
trans, and (...), naturalis; that is, something besides, above or beyond
Nature. Above or beyond Nature, because this Science transcends Natural things,
and is above that part of Philosophy which we call Physics; and besides
Nature, because in her Affections and Divisions of Ens or Being are not
handled, which Metaphysics treats of.

And for this Reason it is called Philosophy, absolutely and in opposition to
all other, because it is the most sublime and noble part of it.

Again, sometimes it is called the first Philosophy, because it treats of the
first Conceptions and first Principles, upon which the Principles of all other
Sciences are founded.

Sometimes it is called Natural Theology, because it handles immaterial,
incorruptible, and the highest things, as far as they are discernable by the
light of Nature.

And sometimes they call it Wisdom, because it disputes of First Causes, and of
the highest and most difficult things.

The Material Object of Metaphysics is Being, the Formal Object or Manner of
considering Being is as Being: so that Ens or Being is in this Metaphysics the
Subject; Quatenus ens, or as Being, is the Predicate, and makes the Object of
this Science.

The Division of Metaphysics is into General and Special: The General Part
treats of the Nature; Distinctions, and Affections of Beings. The Special or
Particular treats of their several kinds, as Substance and Accident.

A Being is that which has a real Essence, that is, a true and not a feigned
Essence, and such an

There is a distinction between Essence and Existence. Essence is that which
has a real Being, though it do not Exist, that is, though it be not in Act, as
a Rose in the Winter. But Existence supposes that Act also, as a Rose in its
Season.

Again, Ens or Being is divided into that which has a Being in Nature, as an
Horse, an House, Fire, Water, etc. or that which has no other Chimera, or any
Monster we can imagine that never yet was. And this is called Ens Rationis, or
a Being in our Reason.

These are the most ordinary and general divisions of Ens, or Being; and now we
come to its Affections.

That Ens or Being has Affections is certain, because there are some things
reciprocated with it, which are not at the first Conception we have of it, but
follow that first Conception: For Example, Unity, Verity, Goodness, to be in
Act, or in Power, and these Metaphysicians call simple Affections.

There are some other that are not reciprocated with it, but divide it not as
Genus is divided into Species, but as a Subject is divided into its Accidents;
and so they cannot be so large, or extend as far as the Being it self. Such
kind of Affections are Cause, Effect, Necessary, Contingent, and many other of
the like kind, and these are called Disjunctive.

First, We are to treat of those Affections of Being which are reciprocated
with it, and they are these three, Unity, Verity, and Goodness.

By Unity we must by the way observe, that the Unity which is the reciprocal
Affection of Being is Unity in General; so Color is general in the Adequate
Affection of a mixed Body; for it is truly said, No Body is without a Color,
and no Color without a Body: But this is not to be understood of any one
Color in particular, but of Color in General.

One Division of Unity is into that which is one by it self, and one by
Accident.

Another is into Indivisible and Undivided. Indivisible is that which is
neither divided in Act, nor yet in Power: Undivided is that which is not
actually divided, but yet has a power or capacity of being divided.

The last division of Unity is into Universal, Formal, and Individual.

That which is opposite to Unity is Many, actually divided.

Verity is the Conformity in the Conformity of any thing with the Understanding.

This is the general definition of Verity; but as it is Metaphysically
considered to be an affection of Ens or Being, it is said to be that by which a
Being may be known or apprehended by the Understanding, to be real and such as
it is: And the conformity and relation of the Being with the Understanding is
founded in this Truth. Thus we distinguish between that which is true Go^d, and
that which only appears to be such: for true Gold has a certain entity
particular to it self* cognoscible by the Understanding, which ca^^t be said of
apparent o^ seeming Gold. And thus we distinguish betwixt a true Body an^ a
Fantastic Body, or that which only appears ^o be a Body. The true Body is
apprehended ^y us according to the essential and proper conception of Body, but
the other cannot apprehend so.

Ens Verum then (or a true Being, as Philosophers speak) is that which is
apprehended by the Understanding to have a Being, like that which is proper and
Essential to such a Nature. So the Office or Business of this Verity is to
distinguish Real Beings from Apparent ones, and therefore excludes all sorts of
Entia Rationis, or such things as only have a Being in our Understanding, and
no real one of themselves.

The opposite or contrary thing to this Verity Falsity, which Falsity is
founded in the Understanding only, and not in the things; for Example, That
Metal which only seems to be Gold is false, not but that it has in it self a
true Nature, as a Body of another kind; but it is false Secundum quid, and in
this sense, that it agrees not with that conception which we have in our
Understandings concerning true Gold.

The last simple Affection of Being, is Goodness. Things or Beings are said to
be Metaphysically Good, as they have that Essence whereof they are capable; or
more plainly, as they have that Essential perfection which is convenient or
agreeable to them. And in this sense every thing in the World, whether
Substance or Accident, is said to be good.

The other Affections of Being we said were called Disjoined, because they do
divide and disjoyn it, and they are either Immediate, or Mediate. Immediate, as
Act and Power, Principium Principatum, that is, the Principle of a thing, and
the thing it self; The Cause, and the Thing caused; Necessary and Contingent.
These are the Immediate disjoined Affections of Ens or Being.

We shall begin with Act and Power.

By Act we are to understand a Being that does exist, and by Power that which
does not always exist, but is capable of existing.

Thus a Log of Wood is a Statue in Power we Statue may be made of it; but when
the Carver has wrought it up, it is a Statue in Act. So that this Division of
Beings into Actual and Potential is Universal, and comprehends all the Beings
in the World, for whatsoever it is, either in Power or in Act.

But here we are to observe, that sometimes the Power and Act do consist
together, and the Act does not always take away or deny the Power: For Example,
The Act of Laughing in Power. And yet sometimes the Act does wholly take away
the Power; for Example, A Rule of two Foot long has a Power of being divided
into two Rules of a Foot long apiece; but as soon as it is Actually divided, it
has for ever lost that Power.

But to give you some of the Divisions of Power.

Power is either Univocal or Equivocal, as they Power either properly or
improperly so called; that is Power improperly so called, which is attributed
to those things which are never really in Act. And this Power is either
properto the Mathematicians or Logicians.

A Mathematicol Power is that which Mathematicians feign to themselves, or
suppose, abstracted from all kind of Bodies or Matter, as when they say, A
right Line is in Power a Triangle.

A Logical Power is a mere denial of a Contradiction; as when they say, The
Earth may or has a Power to be removed higher or lower from the place where it
is, because such a Removing does not destroy its Essence, and implies no
Contradiction. And to this Logical Power is referred that which in Metaphysics
is called Objective Power; that is, a Non-repugnance of any thing to be
produced by such or such a Cause. Whence it is plain that this Objective Power
is not real, because it only consists in a bare Negation of an Impossibility.

Besides this Negation was true of the World, before any thing of it was
Created by God, and therefore is a formal Non Ens, or no Being at all.

That Power which is Univocal or Proper, is either Active or Passive. An Active
Power is in that which transmutes and produces any thing in another Subject:
The Passive is the Power of being produced, or changed in the Subject.

The Active Power is either Infinite, as that of God; or Finite, as that of the
Creature.

The Active Power of God is called Omnipotence, whereby he can do every thing
that is not contrary to his own Essence, or implies not Contradiction; for we
must not believe, that Gods Omnipotence consists in doing whatever we can
conceive. So God cannot Lie, because it is contrary to his Essence; nor Create a
Man which should be Irrational, for then at the same time he should be a Man
and no Man, Rationality being his very Essence.

The Active Power in Creatures is either Rational, or Irrational.

Rational, which is indifferently free to several kinds of Acts, as is the Will
of Man.

Irrational, which is determined to one Act alone; As the Power of burning in
Fire is to burn, which if it be applied to Combustible Matter cannot suspend the
Act, but must needs burn.

A Passive Power is divided, first into that which may either be, or not be,
which Philosophers call Power of Contradiction. Such properly the Power of
Contingent things is said to be.

Such a Power has all Matter under the Moon of becoming a Body Animate, or
Inanimate; and such a Power has a piece of Timber, of being made either a
Statue, or a Chair.

Again, this Passive Power is divided into Physical, and Metaphysical. Physical
is a power of Matter to receive Forms, either Substantial or Accidental:
Metaphysical is the power of any Substance, whether Material or Immaterial, to
receive Accidents.

Act is divided into First and Second.

The first Act is the Essence of any thing, as Reason is said to be the first
Act; but to Reason or Discourse is the second Act.

Again, Act is divided into Perfect and Imperfect; A Perfect Act is that which
is directed to no further Act: An Imperfect Act is that which is directed to
some more Perfect.

Thus Motion is an Imperfect Act, because it is the way to a more Perfect Act,
to wit, the Form which is acquired by that Motion; but the Form it self,
because it is no further directed, is said to be a perfect Act.

The next immediate disjoined Affection of Being is Principium and
Principiatum, the Principle, and the thing Principiated, if we may so speak for
want of Terms.

A Principle is that from which any thing is

To give any thing the name of a Principle, there are these two things
required; viz. 1. That it be before the thing Principiated, for so the very
Name alone informs us. Secondly, That there be some connection between the
Principle and the thing Principiated; for the Child that was born yesterday
cannot be said to be the Principle of the Child which was born to day; because

The main Division of Principles was implied in the Definition, and that is
this, Principles are either of Things, or of Knowledge.

There is also another Division of Principles, into such as are Causes; As the
Father is the Principle, and likewise the Cause of the Son: And such as are not
Causes; As Privation is the Principle, but not the Cause of this or that

Principles are before the things that are Principiated by them, both in Time,
Nature, Order, and Knowledge or being known.

The thing Principiated, is that which has the same order to its Principle,
which latter has to former. And from what has been said of Principles, we may
judge of things Principiated.

We come to speak of the Cause, and the thing Caused, or the Effect.

A Cause in general, is that by whose Power any thing is.

Its Principal, and first Division, is into first and second.

That is said to be the first Cause which is first and highest in the order of
Things, and that is God alone. Or else, that is said to be a first Cause which
is the next to, and does immediately produce the Effect: As for Example,
Rationality is the first Cause of all the Properties which are

The second Cause, if it be taken in opposition to the first Cause in the
former sense, it is then every Cause in Nature, every thing but God only; and
so the other first Cause is also a second Cause.

But if it be taken, as it is opposed to the first Cause in the second
signification, it comprehends all remote Causes; that is, all those other
Causes which have this Cause (called the first in the

Causes are these four in Number, Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

The Efficient Cause is that which by it self produces any Effect, and so it is
distinguished from all the other three. It is divided into Physical and Moral.

Physical is every Cause that has any real influence upon the Effect, or which
does truly and by it self contribute to the Esse or Being of the Effect.

Moral Cause is such, as though it do not really operate in producing the
Effect, yet it has such an influence upon our Manners (as they speak) that it
seems to confer something to the production of the Effect. Such Causes are
Counselors or Instructors; and such as do not hinder when it lies in their
power to do it.

Again, The Efficient Cause is divided into the Principal Cause and the
Instrument; As the Smith and his Hammer.

It is further divided into Equivocal and Univocal. Equivocal, as when God, the
Sun, or the Stars are said to produce any thing: And Univocal; when any thing
produces another of its own Species or likeness.

The last division of Efficient Cause is into Immediate and Mediate. Immediate,
as when the Sun gives its light to the Earth by its self; and Mediately, when
it reflects its light to the Earth from the Moon.

But to speak something more particularly of God Almighty; We must know, that
in Metaphysics God is considered either generally, as he is the first Cause of
all Beings; or specially, as he is Himself the first of all Beings.

As He is the First Cause of all things, He may fall under a threefold
Consideration in regard of his three Operations, viz. Creation, Conservation,
and Cooperation, or concurring with second Causes in producing their Effects.

Concerning Creation, there are many things that may be enquired into, which
because they properly belong to Theology we shall omit, and only consider
whether a Man by the mere Light of Reason may understand and prove, that God
is the Efficient Cause of the World, and likewise what he can by the Light of
Reason discern of the Circumstances of that great Work.

As to the first, it is believed, that by the Light of Natural Reason alone a
Man may arrive at the knowledge of a first Cause, by which all other things
were produced, supposing no precedent Matter at all. And of this Opinion were
Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Halensis, Durandus, Suarius, and other Learned men.

But to come to the Proof: The first Argument shall be taken from the nature
and condition of the Materia Prima or first Matter of all things; for if we can
prove God to be the Creator of all this visible World. We proceed thus:

The first Matter was either from it self, or from something else: It cannot
have its being from its self, for then it would have the highest Perfection
that any thing can have; that is, to have infinite Power and Virtue, and to
depend on nothing but it self for its Being. I say, If it had its Being from it
self it is Ens perfectissimum, the most perfect Being of all other, which is
absurd; for it is the worst and most imperfect of all Immaterial Substances.

It must needs therefore have its Being from something else; that is, it must
needs be produced by some other cause. Now if it be produced by something else,
it must be either produced by Matter that was pre-existent to it, or by no
Matter. Not from some Matter that was pre-existent to it; for that were absurd
to say, there was some Matter before the first Matter (for we speak now of the
first and most simple Matter.) And if it were produced by no preexistent
Matter, then of necessity it must be Created (that is to say, made of Nothing.)
If Matter be by any Cause created or made of Nothing, that Cause must needs be
of Infinite Power and Virtue; for no Being can produce something out of
Nothing, but that which is of Infinite Power; the Reason is, because there is
an Infinite Distance between Something and Nothing, which requires an Infinite
Power.

Now if the Power of this Cause which produced the first Matter be infinite, so
must also its Essence; for to be Infinite in Operation, supposes Being also.
Again, If this Cause be Infinite, then all other Beings are Finite, and depend
upon it; for there can be but one only Infinite. And this I think sufficient to
prove a first Cause, not only of all Visible, but all Invisible things
whatsoever, which is God.

To this Argument some have thus Objected, That to Create there is required an
Infinite Power; but no such Infinite Power can be demonstrated, and therefore
there can be no Creation.

To which we Answer, That it is not necessary first to demonstrate an Infinite
Power, and thence to prove the Creation; but it suffices to demonstrate the
Creation, and thence to prove an Infinite Power, which I think is done in this
Argument.

As for the Argument they draw from that Axiom, Nothing is made of Nothing, we
say the Axiom is only to be understood of Finite or Second Causes, and so does
not reach the thing in hand.

Thus it is proved, that by the Light of Natural Efficient Cause and Infinite
Essence, which is all one as if we said, God. But the Doubt that remains is,
That if it can be demonstrated that God created the World, may it not be as
well demonstrated that he created it from all Eternity? Or can it be
demonstrated, that it was made at the Beginning of Time, that is, at a certain
time?

So that there are three Opinions to be examined; Peripateticks, who think it
demonstrable (that is, by Natural Reason) that the World was created by God
from all Eternity.

The second Opinion is Theirs, who think that it can neither be demonstrated,
that the World was Created by God from all Eternity, nor yet that it was
Created at the Beginning of Time; and so they think it possible either of the
Natural Demonstration.

The third Opinion is, that it is demonstrable by the Light of Nature, that the
World was Created at the Beginning of Time. To every one of these we shall
speak apart.

We shall begin with the first, where we shall prove against Aristotle's own
Principles, and a third, which though it be not evidently set down in his
Philosophy, yet it is plain to Natural Reason.

The first Principle is, That there is one first Efficient Cause of all things;
and this they admit who hold a Creation from Eternity.

The second is, That the first Cause or Being is endued with Understanding and
Will; which is plain in Aristotle.

The third is, This first Cause acts freely, and is not constrained by any
Necessity of Nature: And this is plain, because Liberty is the very Essence of
the Will. And again, If this first Cause did act by the Necessity of Nature, it
should have a more imperfect and ignoble way of Acting, than Men themselves
have.

Thus having laid down the Principles, the Argument follows.

That which Acts freely, can Act when it will, and also forbear Acting when it
will.

But the first Cause in the Creation of the World did Act freely.

Therefore it could Create the World when it pleased, and forbear the Creating
when it pleased. And so it is not necessary that the World should have been
from all Eternity, but it might be Created in time.

And now let us consider of those Arguments, that Aristotle brings to prove the
Eternity of the World.

His first Argument is this, If the Motion of the Heavens be not from Eternity,
then there was some other first Motion. If there be another first Motion, then
that Motion began; and if it began, then there was a Motion before the first
Motion; for the beginning of that Motion supposes a Change or Motion, because
without Change or Motion nothing begins or is generated.

To this we Answer in short, That in the Beginning of Time, both the Heavens
and their Motion began to be at once; but they were not produced by any Motion
or Change, but were Created, and Creation they tell us is no Motion or Change,
because Motion or Change is nothing but an altering of state or condition; and
this cannot properly be said of that which before had no state or condition, as
the World had not, because it was simply Nothing.

His second Argument is from Time. If Time (says he) had a Beginning, once it
was not, and afterward it began to be; but Before and After, or Sooner and
Later, are the very Specific difference, and cannot be without Time; therefore
it follows, that Time was before Time, which is absurd.

To this we Answer, That when we say that once Time was not, and that
afterward it began to be; that same Once does not import the difference of
real and true Time, but only Imaginary, and that was always. Just as
Philosophers say, There was before the World was made, an Imaginary Space in
which afterward it was made.

His third Argument is this, That either God could have made the World sooner,
but would not, or would but could not; or else, that he neither would nor
could. The first of these three things is not to be said, because that would
argue envy in God. Nor the Second, because that would argue Weakness; Nor the
Third, because that would argue both. Therefore it remains that he always both
could and would Create the World and so it was Created from Eternity.

To this we answer, That God had from all Eternity both a Power and a Will to
Create the World at the beginning of Time; and that it was Glory and Power;
Because from that late Creation it appeared plainly that God did not work by
the necessity of Nature, and that he needed it not, but was from all Eternity
happy in himself.

We come now to the second Opinion, the asserters whereof are at some
difference amongst themselves.

Some say the World was just as it is from all Eternity, with its continual
changes of Generation and Corruption; and shall also continue to all Eternity
just as it is, but yet with some dependence on the Creator.

But this Opinion cannot be defended, by reason of the Absurdities that would
follow upon it; for instance take this one. If the World has continued, and
been as it is from all Eternity, and Men have from all Eternity been born, and
Souls separated from Bodies; which is point blank contrary to that Opinion of
Aristotle, that there can be no infinite number actually. And if they say that
this he speaks only of Bodies, and not of Spirits, they may consider, that if
already there be an infinite number of Souls, and this number is daily
increased; then Infinity may be increased, or something added to it, which is
absurd.

Others there are that would limit the Opinion a little, and say, that the
World and the motion of the Heavens has been from all Eternity, though it may
be Man has not.

To these may be answered, That it is impossible that infinite revolutions of
Years, Months, and Days should be past and gone; because Infinity cannot be
past, no more than it can be increased; and then again there would be as many
Days and Months as Years, for they would be all Eternity; for infinite Days are
as many as infinite Hours, one Infinite being no greater than another.

There are others, that seeing the Absurdities of both these, would yet limit
the Opinion of the Worlds Eternity thus. That it may have been from all
Eternity, but without all Motion, or Operation till the beginning of Time.

To these we answer, That this were inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, who
does nothing in Aristotle says* Always does that which is best: Now it is
better, and more convenient things should not exist, than that they should
exist without any Motion or Operation, that is, without any use or fruit.

It may be therefore concluded, That they who assert the World to have been
Created in the beginning of Time are in the right, and that according to
Natural Reason the World may (now it is created) endure to all Eternity,
because it depends upon an infinite Being, which supports it. And yet on the
other hand it may be destroyed again when God pleases; because his Power is
infinite; and he that made All things from Nothing, can again if he pleases
bring all things (I mean except such as he has declared to be Eternal, as
Rational Souls) to nothing again.

And thus we may arrive to the knowledge of the first Cause, and the Creation
of the World by the Light of Nature.

We come now to the second Operation of the first cause, which is the
Conservation of the World, or Providence. And we assert, That God from the
first existence of any thing, does continually give it Being by his
Conservation, which is the same Action in him with his Creation of it; just as
the Sun at first enlightens the Air with darting its Rays through it, and
conserves and keeps that light with the same Action of darting its Rays through
it; So that we have no Principle that is sufficient to distinguish these two
Actions, (if we may so call them). Again they are the same in their Principle,
and in their Terminus or End; for both proceed from one first cause, and both
terminate in one thing, to wit the Being of the thing conserved. But this
belongs properly to Theology, and so does the third Operation of the first
cause, which is called its Cooperation with the second cause; and therefore we
purposely omit to speak any thing of them here.

Thus far of Efficient Causes; the next of Final Causes; and both these are
External Causes, whereas Matter and Form are said to be Internal.

The end or Final Cause is that for whose sake or cause any thing is done.

It has several Divisions; as 1. It is divided into Finis Cui, and Finis
Cujus; that is, the end for whom any thing is desired, as for the Sick Man,
Cure is desired; here the Sick Man is the end for whom, or to whom.

Finis Cujus, the end of which is not the Subject for whose sake a thing is
desired, as the other is, but something different from it, as Cure is desired
for Healths sake; here Health is the end of which (as they speak) that is of
the Cure.

2. The End is either Formal, or Objective. Formal is the Action about any
Object. Objective is the Object it self of the Action. For Example, the last
formal end of Man is the Beatifical Vision of God, the Objective end of Man is
God himself.

3. The End is either Vltimate, which is referred to no other; or Intermediate
which is not. Thus the Intermediate end of Eating is Health. The Vltimate or
Matter is an inward Cause, out of which any thing is made by its own passive or
receptive Power concurring. And it is either Ex qua, In qua, or Circa quam,
that is, out of which, in which, or about which.

Matter out of which any thing is made, is 1. either First or Second, or 2
Permanent or Transient.

1. Permanent is that Matter out of which something is made, and yet the
Essence of the thing remains, as a Cup is made of Gold. Transient Matter is
that which does not retain its own Essence when something is made out of it, as
when a Chicken is made of an Egg.

Matter is called in which, in regard of the Form existing in it.

Matter is called about which, in regard of the Agents operating about it
disposing it to receive

Form is the Reason of any things Essence, or that which makes a thing to be
what it is, and distinguishes it from other things.

The first division of Form is into Inward and Outward; By outward Form they
understand nothing but the Copy or Pattern after which and in whose likeness
any thing is made, and the Exemplars, or Copies. Or Copies are either Real or

Real are those Exemplars which do subsist, and are without the mind of the
Artificer, and are obvious to sense, and such as Artificers have for the most
part by them.

An Intentional Exemplar is the Image or Idea of the thing to be made in the
Mind of the Workman.

Intrinsecal Form is that which constitutes the formed, either Substantially or
Accidentally; and hence we have that division of Intrinsecal or Inward
Substantial and Accidental.

Accidental Form is that which subsists in the substance, either in part of it,
or in all of it; As Whiteness in a Wall.

The Substantial Form is that which informs any body, and distinguishes it from
other things, and is called Forma partis, in opposition to the Matter of that
body.

And these Substantial Forms are such as are either separable from their Bodies
(that is can, exist Inseparable Forms are only Rational Souls, all other Forms
whatsoever are separable.

The Causality of Forms in general consists in the manner of their union to
Matter, and their actuating and possessing it.

All Inseparable Forms in Bodies are concluded to be nothing but Matter; But
the separable, towit, the Rational Souls are perfectly Immaterial. Philosophers
concerning the Original of the Soul.

1. The first I shall mention is that of Philo Judaeus, who teaches that the
Rational Soul is a particle of the Divine Essence, and is neither immediately
created by God, nor yet derived from the Seed of the Parent, but miraculously
inspired from God himself. But this Opinion is so absurd, that I scarce think
it worth the naming, since the

2. The second is, that the Souls of Men were all created in the beginning of
the World out of nothing, at the same time with the Angels, and growing weary
and disdainful of Heaven and good things, began to love Earthly things, so that
they were cast down by God into Bodies as into Prisons for their punishment.
But this we must not allow, because of the many Absurdities that would follow
upon it. For why then should God in the Deluge have delivered so many wicked
Souls out of Prison, and have left his Servant Noah behind? The same also might
be said of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the preservation of Lot.

Again, it would follow hence that the Resurrection of the Body would be
nothing but a returning to Prison again, even to the Righteous themselves.

Again, this would destroy all Philosoply, because this asserts that the
Rational Soul was not appointed to be a part of Man, but is a complete
Substance in its own nature, and that Man* consisting of Soul and Body, is but
an Ens, or Being by Accident.

3. The Third is, That all Souls were created at first with the Angels, and
sent into Bodies, as the Bodies were prepared by Generation. This Opinion
differs form the former, because it does not say that Souls sinned in Heaven,
and for their punishment were sent down into Bodies. But the chief Reason why
it affirms that all Souls were created at first, is because that Text of
Genesis tells us, that God rested or ceased from his Works.

The Error of this Opinion appears, in that we understand or remember nothing
of that former State. Nor will it suffice to say, that being sunk into these
gross and earthly Tabernacles the Soul has lost all its Memory of former
things; for since it is natural for the Soul to be joined to the Body, it is
not reasonable that by being joined to its proper matter it should thereby
receive so great detriment and disadvantage.

And whereas they object, that of Gods resting from his Works, we understand
that only thus, That he then rested or ceased from producing any new Species of
Beings.

4. The Fourth Opinion is, that the Souls are begotten by the Parents, and that
the Sons Soul is from the Fathers as his Body is. To this we shall answer by
and by.

5. The Fifth is, that the Original of Souls is not known, nor should we
adventure to determine any thing in the matter. A modest thought indeed, but
such as Baronius thinks below a Divine and a Philosopher.

6. The Sixth, and that which we hold is, That Men's Souls are not from their
Parents, or from any Matter, but created by God, and put into the Matter when
it is conceived and prepared for Animation.

The Arguments for confirming this Opinion and refuting that of Souls being
begot by Parents, are these.

1. If the Soul were Generable; it would be Corruptible. To this, those of
another Opinion Answer, That the Soul is Corruptible, because it depends upon
Matter, both in its Production and Being, they say; but that it shall endure to
Eternity, because God has determined to preserve it: And if you ask them, Why
the Soul considered in it self should be Corruptible, They Answer thus; Because
if God should cease from that Act whereby he keeps and preserves the Soul, it
would presently return into Nothing.

But this Answer does not satisfy us, Because, first of all, when Divines and
Philosophers divide into eternal and fading, they do not then mean that any
Substances are eternal, because God does not preserve them by his influence,
but because they cannot be destroyed by any action of any Creature; and in this
sense not only Angels and the Heavens, but also the Souls of Men are said to be
incorruptible. Again, our Adversaries own Physical or material Action; and
hence we infer, That they cannot be produced by any material Action. And why
cannot they be destroyed by any material Action? Because their Substance is
spiritual. For the same reason they cannot be produced by any material Action,
because their substance is spiritual.

2. A Second Argument against their Opinion is, That God would have the Soul of
Man subsist bodily Matter; And if the Soul in regard of its Essence does not
depend on Matter, then it does not necessarily presuppose Matter out of which
it is made, nor is it Matter, Matter does not concur to give it its Being; for
if Matter did concur to give it its Being, then the Soul as to its Being should
depend upon Matter.

3. The Third Argument is this. No active Power acts beyond its own Genus; But
the Intellective Soul exceeds the whole Genus of bodily Nature, because it is a
spiritual substance, therefore Soul.

Now every Action of the seminal faculty is from a bodily Power, for it
proceeds from the vegetative Power; Therefore an Intellective Soul cannot be
produced by that Power; for so an Agent might produce an Effect much more noble
and excellent in nature than it self, which is impossible.

4. Fourthly, Those that maintain the contrary Opinion are forced to admit of
many Absurdities to avoid the force of such Arguments as are Soul is not a
spiritual Substance; That the Soul might be destroyed by a Physical Action, if
God did not by his special Influence preserve it; which Assertion derogates not
only from the worth and excellency of our Souls, but also from the Divine
Wisdom, which intending our Souls should exist without the Bodies, gave them no
fit or proper Nature to do so.

The next Affections of Ens or Being we are to Necessary and Contingent; and
this Division is very well placed immediately after the former, because things
are said to be necessary or contingent, chiefly in regard of the causes from
whence they proceed.

A necessary thing is that which cannot be otherwise.

They are to divide Necessity into the Necessity of the Proposition, and the
Necessity of the Thing; Where note, that the Necessity of the Proposition is
always founded in the Necessity of the Thing. For Example; because God cannot
but be Just, therefore this Proposition, God is Just, cannot but be true.

And likewise we may here observe, That all those Divisions which are
attributed to the Necessity of the Thing, may also be attributed to the
Necessity of the Proposition: For if the Thing be thus necessary, the
Proposition must needs be so too.

The Necessity of the Thing is twofold; there is one kind of Necessity which
belongs to a Thing by it self, considered alone; and there is another kind of
Necessity which belongs to a Thing in its order and relation to another Thing,
as they agree or disagree.

The former of these they call the Necessity of Existence, or simple Necessity,
or incomplex; and the latter they call Necessity of the Relation or Cohesion of
Things, and likewise compounded, or complex Necessity.

The former is of it self, and in its own nature necessary; the latter as it is
conjoined with such and such causes.

The Necessity of Existence, as to speak, is either absolute, or secundum quid,
or in part.

Absolute Necessity of Existence only belongs to God, because he only so exists
as to depend on nothing, and cannot have his Being taken from him.

Necessity of Existence secundum quid or in part, belongs to incorruptible
Creatures; As Angels, the Heavens and rational Souls, because absolutely they
may not be, because they depend on a free Agent.

The necessity of Cohesion belongs not to things considered barely by
themselves, but as they are related and cohere to other things.

And if we consider the Cohesion, we shall find that in some it is Necessarium,
and one of those things cannot be without the other; for Example, Socrates and
his Nature. There is another Cohesion amongst things which may be dissolved,
and this is said to be Contingent; As Cohesion between Socrates and his several
Accidents.

The Necessity of Existence then is a Necessity in any by it self; the
Necessity of Cohesion is that, whereby two or more things do adhere or stick
together, not to be separated.

This Necessity of Cohesion is by Philosophers divided into the Necessity of
the Consequent, and the Necessity of the Consequence. The Necessity of the
Consequent is when one thing so follows another, that they cannot by any means
be separated; As, That Man is a living Creature. The Necessity of the
Consequence is that Necessity, whereby things that are not by their own nature
determined or forced to adhere together, do yet so stay together as for the
time they cannot be separated, and that by reason of the determination of some
outward Cause or Supposition. Thus we say, That he who by an irresistible Force
has changed his place, did it by Necessity; because though the Man and
Changing of Place be things which are by no means determined to stick together,
yet by this outward Force they are so united, that for the time they cannot be
separated; for supposing an irresistible Force, the Man must of necessity
Change his Place.

Contingent is said to be that which may be otherwise. And this Contingency is
either equal on both sides, that is, it may equally be so, and not be so; or
else Contingency may be said of those things which are so for the most; or
lastly, Contingency may be of those things that are seldom so.

There are other particular disjoined Affections of Being, which are Mediate,
as Simple and Compound.

1. Simple is that which cannot be resolved into more; Compound is that which
may: For Example, The Heavens are a Simple substance, because they can be
resolved into no more kinds of Substance; but the Earth is a Compound, because

Composition is either Real or Imaginary.

Real, which either consists of Matter and Form, or of Integral parts, or of
Degrees of Intension, or of Essence and Subsistence; As Angels.

Imaginary Composition is the Act of Reason, whereby we do in our minds join
two different things together, and make a third of them.

2. Whole, and its Parts. The Whole is that which contains the Parts contained,
so that they are one.

There are two Things to the making up of that which is called Whole.

A Plurality of Parts, and a Union of them besides.

The Whole is said to be either.

1. Essential is that Whole whose Parts are different in Power, but one and the
same in Act: Physical, as the Soul and Body make one Man; and Logical or
Metaphysical, whose Parts are only distinguished by our Reason, as the Species
are in any Genus.

2. Integral is that Whole which contains many Parts only by Continuity, or
Contiguity, as they speak: And these Parts are either Similar, as Drops of
Water in a Glass; or Dissimilar, as the Eye and the Hand in the Body.

3. Universal in regard of its Parts, which are Genus, in respect of Species;
Animal, in regard of Man and Beast, and the like.

4. Numeral, as Ten contains so many Ones.

5. Potential, or Potestative. This Whole contains several Powers or Faculties,
which like Parts make up the Whole; as the Soul contains the Understanding,
Will, etc.

Part is a portion of the Whole, which together with its Fellows is sit to make
the Whole.

Parts are also like the Whole, said to be Essential Integral, or Similar and
Dissimilar.

The next Affection of Being, in the Order of our Method, is The same and
Another.

The Same is that which cannot be divided, or distinguished from it self; and is
divided into, The Same by it Self, and the Same by Accident.

The Same by it Self is either generical, as when Man and Beasts are said to be
the same as to their Animality; or specifical, as Peter and Paul are of the
same Species; or numerical, as Peter is the same Peter being old, that he was
when young.

The Same by Accident is said of those things which agree in their Accidents,
as when an Horse and an Ox are both White, etc.

Another thing may be understood by what has already been said Of the Same.
Some other Things are only distinct, and some are opposite.

Distinction barely distinguishes one thing from another, with supposing any
contrariety in them. And is either Real, and such as is found in the things
themselves; or else Imaginary, such as we make in our own Minds.

Opposition is a repugnance of things, which will not let them be in the same
Subject after the same manner.

Opposition is either Negative or Positive.

Negative Opposition is either Contradictory, as Being and not Being; or
Privative, as Sight and Blindness.

Positive Opposition is either Contrary, as Heat and Cold; or Relative, as
Father and Son.

The next Affection of Ens or Being, is Universal and Singular. And this
Division of Being is only the Act of the Mind; for in Nature there is no such
thing found as an Universal. But we understand by it something, which contains
under it many Singulars of the same Species, or such as we imagine it to be.
Singular, or Individual, is that which cannot be divided into more things like
it self. Thus Humane Nature is the Universal, in regard of the Nature of Peter
and Paul; but the Nature of Peter is Singular, and cannot be divided, nor does
it comprehend any more Humane Natures than his own. There are some that refer
Universal and Singular to the common Place of the Whole and its parts.

Another Affection of Ens, is Finite and Infinite. Finite Beings are such as
are contained in certain determined Bounds and Limits; as all the Creatures
which are said to be Finite, either in regard of their Number, Quantity,
Duration, Perfection, or Essence.

Infinite is that which is contained or comprehended in no Bounds, and is only
God, who is said to be in all those respects wherein the Creatures are Finite,
and more if there be any.

And thus we have done with the general Part of Metaphysics; We come now to
speak briefly of the Special, which treats of Substance and Accidents.

Substance is a Being which subsists by it self, and is not in any other thing
as in its Subject; and it is either Complete, or not Complete.

Complete Substances are either Finite, or Infinite. Finite are either
Corporeal, as Body; or Incorporeal, as Angels and Spirits.

Infinite is only God.

An Accident is that which is in another thing, as in its Subject; and it is
either Primary or Secondary.

Primary Accidents are either Quantity, Quality, or Relation.

Secondary Accidents are either Absolute, or Relative.

Absolute, as Quality, which contains Action and Passion; and Quantity, which
contains When and Where.

Relative, as Situs or Situation, which signifies the disposition of Parts in
order to Place; and Habitus, which signifies those things which are adjacent
and near to any Body.

And thus I have finished this short. Tract of Metaphysics, wherein I have for
Method in most things observed the Ancient Philosophers; but in Difficulties,
those whom I judge to have the most Reason.

MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
MORAL PHILOSOPHY, or ETHICS, is that which teaches Men to live well and
happily according to Virtue: It is commonly called that Part of Philosophy,
which Instructs and Regulates our Manners; and thence it has its Name, both in
Greek and Latin. Manners are the frequent iterated Actions of Human Life,
whence at length Habits are produced either Good or Evil.

It has been often controverted whether Moral Philosophy be an Art, or a
Prudence, or a Science; but the most Learned of our Modern Authors conclude it
to be a Science; for an Art they say it cannot be, because Arts are only
conversant about Corporal Actions and Things: And though it be true, that
Liberality, Temperance, Justice, etc. are referred to External and Corporal
things, yet Moral Philosophy is only concerned about the Relation which the
Mind or Will has to those Actions.

Again, a Prudence it cannot be, because Prudence Moral Philosophy may be in the
worst men living, as well as Craft or Subtilty of Mind. Like Medea they may
know and approve those things which are good, and yet in the mean while be
stark naught themselves.

Furthermore, Prudence consists in a deliberation about the single Actions of
our Lives, according to their present Circumstances; but Moral Philosophy is
constant, of undoubted Truth and of certainty, and concerns all our Actions; as
for Example, It is not at all doubted, nor can it possibly be the Subject of a
Dispute, Whether or no we are to give every Man his own.

In short, That it is a Science, appears from the Definition of Science it
self; which is this,

That is properly said to be a Science, which teaches any thing certainly and
evidently from true Principles; and such is Moral Philosophy,

The proper and adequate Object of Moral Philosophy are Human Actions, as they
may be directed to a Moral Good, or an End agreeable to right Reason; where by
Human Actions we are to understand, the free and voluntary Actions of the Mind.

It is defined to be a Science, directing Human Actions in order to a happy
State of Life.

Now whereas a Man may be considered singly and as a private Person, as a
Husband, Father, or Master of a Family; and likewise in his relation to the
Public, the parts of Moral Philosophy, in regard of these three several
Capacities are also three; which we call Ethick or Monastic, Oeconomic and
Politic.

The Ethick or Monastic part, which is the principal, is again divided into
three parts, whereof the first Treats of the End of Human Actions, which is
Happiness; The Second of the Principles of Human Actions; And the last of the
Actions themselves; and likewise of the Passions, Virtues, and Vices.

We shall begin with the first, to wit, the end of Human Actions, or Good in
general.

Good is defined to be that which all Things desire or seek, as it appears
good, or convenient to their Natures.

It has been a great Question in the Schools, Whether any thing that is evil
in it self, canbe the Object of Appetite. To which we Answer with this
Distinction, That Good is either real or apparent, and that which is really
evil or dishonest, may be represented unto us as Good, under the notion of
Profit or Pleasure; and so become the Object of our Appetite or Desire, but yet
we desire it not as evil, but under the show, or appearance of Good.

The most ordinary and best Division of Good is into Honestum, Vtile, and
Jucundum, which may be thus rendered into English.

Honor, Profit, and Pleasure. And every one of these are the proper Object of
Appetite or Desire, and the end of Human Actions.

And here arises a Question amongst our Moral Philosophers, Whether Good and
the End be one and the same thing. To which is Answered.

1. That they are not formally the same, because Good is defined, That which is
convenient: But the End, that for whose sake any thing is done.

2. They are not the same, because they are not reciprocally converted; for
though every End or design of an Action be some Good, yet every Good is not the
End.

3. But yet they are Potentially the same; for every thing that is good may be
the End of Human Actions, as certainly, as that every End is good.

And here they enquire again, Whether every thing in the World acts for an End
or not. To this it is answered with this Distinction, That to act for an End
may be considered either as it is known, with the means that leads to it, or as
it is not known. As the End is not known, so every thing in the World (as well
as Man) acts To the Rt. Honorable William Pierrepont, ^arle of Kingston upon
Hull, Pijcount Newark upon Trent Baron of Holme Pierrepont Ma^^rers and Herris
etc.

This Plate is Humbly DD. by B. Bl^m^

for an End, because there is always some End, and means are known, so nothing
but a Rational Creature can be said to act for an End.

To conclude this, there is always some ultimate and absolutely last End of all
human Actions; and that is Beatitude, or Happiness, which every one proposes to
himself, though their Opinions of that Happiness be different, some placing it
in Riches, others in Honor, and some in Recreations, and the like

And now we come to speak of Beatitude or Happiness it self, which is the chief
Good, or last End of Man; and that is Twofold, Objective and Formal.

Objective Beatitude or Happiness, is that Object or thing that makes, us
happy, which is something without us; and Formal Beatitude is our own Enjoyment
of that Happiness, or the way of its being Communicated to us, and that is
within us.

And hence it follows, that this Objective Beatitude is something more
excellent and Noble than Man himself; because it is that which makes him happy.
And this is the very same thing with the last End of all our Actions.

It will be our next business to determine wherein this Objective Beatitude
does consist; and,

1. Negatively we say it does not consist in outward good things, those which
we call the Goods of Fortune; and that because they do not

2. Because they are not desired for their own sakes, but for their use;
because they are Subservient only to the more ignoble part of Man, to wit his
Body; Because they are not in our own power, that is, they are many times taken
away from us against our Will; And lastly, because many of them, as Honor,
Praise, Glory, etc. depends oftimes upon the false and mistaken Opinion of the
World, and many times on mere

3. Again, it does not consist in the Goods of the Body, as Beauty, Strength,
or the like, nor yet in the Pleasures of the Body, as Recreations, etc. Because
they are things not desirable for their own sake, but as they are referred to
the Soul; Because they are not in our power, for we are not Strong, or
Beautiful or Healthful as we please. To this may be added, that these things
are common to Beasts as well as to our selves.

4. And lastly, this Objective Beatitude is not placed in the good things of
the Mind or Soul, that is, in the excellent Faculties, Habits, or Operations of
it.

It cannot be in the Faculties, or Habits of the Mind, because those are not
desired, or sought for themselves; but for some other thing, to wit in order
and for the sake of the Operation of those Habits, and the bringing them forth
into Act. And then again it cannot be in the Operations Actions and Operations
are in Man himself; and this Happiness or chiefest Good we are speaking of,
must needs be without him, and of a more Noble Nature than he is.

To conclude therefore, that God alone is the Objective Beatitude, or chiefest
Happiness of Man, and the great end of all his Actions; because in him only are
found the most excellent Conditions, and he only can satisfy our wishes and
desires.

This Objective Beatitude that we have hitherto been speaking of, is without
the Man, we come now to speak of the Formal Beatitude that is within a Man, and
is really found in him who is truly happy. Let us see now in what part or
Faculty this Formal Beatitude is placed.

This Beatitude then is in the Mind; because there can be nothing in the Body
to deserve it, especially when we consider that the Body is wholly subservient
to the Mind.

Now whatever is in the Soul, is either a Power which is natural to it and
inbred in it, or a Habit, which is acquired by the Repetition of many single
Acts, or else the Act and Operation it self.

In neither of the two former we know it can be placed, because they are only
desirable, not for their own sakes, but only for the Act and Operation; whence
it is plain, that this Formal Beatitude must needs consist in some excellent
Operation of the Mind. And hence by Boe^^us it is described to be A State
perfect by the Aggregation of all good things. Now to entitle any Man to this
Happiness, it is not absolutely necessary that he should be always occupied in
these Operations; but it suffices that he be conversant in them, so often as
his Reason judges meet, and human Infirmity will permit.

We assert again, that this Formal Beatitude must be placed in that Operation
of the Mind, by which (as far as our condition in the World suffers us) we
enjoy that Objective Beatitude before spoken of, to wit God Almighty. Now that
Operation of the Mind is Twofold, the Contemplation of him, and the Love of
him. And that this Operation of Mind consists in contemplating on him, and in
loving him both together, but in neither single or alone, is proved, I^ that
the fruition or possession of the chiefest Good, consists in being united to
it; and hence it is ^^at not Contemplation, but a most firm and constant Love
is required in this Operation. For as Contemplation excites and stirs up Love,
so Love promotes and helps Contemplation. For the oftener we think on any thing
that is good, the more vehemently we love it; and the more we love any thing,
the more we think upon it.

Again, because the Operations of the Mind do very much depend upon the
habitude, or good disposition of the Body, it is also necessary that the Body
be in Health, or at least free from such Diseases, as by their grievous pains
may hinder the mind from these Operations. The like may also be said of outward
good things, as Riches, etc. For he who is always employed in getting what is
necessary to sustain Nature, must needs want leisure to attend on Divine Love
and Contemplation.

And last of all, Virtue, or the Exercise of Virtue, is not properly said to be
this Felicity or Operation, but rather is referred to it. This Felicity
consisting in Contemplation; and the Exercise of Virtue is only in outward
Actions.

Thus much of Natural Felicity, or Beatitude. Supernatural Beatitude consists
likewise in the clear Vision of God, and a perfect Love toward him; but that
is proper for Theology.

We are now come to the second part of Ethics, or Moral Philosophy, which
Treats of the Principles of Human Actions, which are either Internal or
External.

Again, the Internal Principles of Human Actions are either such as are
Natural, and inbred Faculties Powers; or such as are acquired by Exercise and
Action, and they are called Habits.

Those which are natural to us, and born with us, are the Understanding and the
Will; and to these two both the Phantasy and the Sensitive Appetite, (and if
there be any other in ward Principle of our Actions) may be reduced.

The Understanding moves the Will; for it is certain there can be nothing in
the Will, which Understanding; and then again the Will moves the Understanding,
for we find we can easily consider of any thing as we please, and let it alone
again when we please.

And now let us see how the Interior Powers or Faculties are moved by the Will,
and what command she has over them. And yet we must take notice (here by the
way) that there are some of the Inferior Powers of the Soul, that are in no
ways under the command of the Will; for Vegetation or growing is perfectly
without the Power both of our Will and Reason.

The Will moves the inward Senses, which are Common Sense, Phantasy, and
Memory, but not absolutely, and altogether as it pleases; for they are in a
great measure at their own liberty, and many times are contrary, and refractory
both to the Will and Reason also. But the Will moves the outward Members in
their Natural and proper Motions, just as she pleases, without any Resistance
at all. Whence it is plain, That the Memory, Phantasy, and Common Sense are
much freer, and more at their own Liberty, than the Locomotive Faculty is,
which seems to be wholly in the Power of the Will.

The other sort of Internal Principles are Habits. A Habit is defined to be a
Quality or Disposition of the Subject; which gives it not the first Power of
Acting, but makes it Act more

And we may observe that this Definition distinguishes Habit from Natural
Power, because it is said Habit gives not the first Power; and also from these
Habits which are not Operative, or produce no Action, as Beauty, Strength, etc.

And lastly, it distinguishes it from the Action it self; because it remains in
its Subject, to wit the Soul when the Action is not present.

Habits are gotten, or produced by the Repetition of many single Acts; but
those Acts must always be of the same Power, or faculty of the Soul, wherein
the Habit is produced.

Thus Prudence being an Intellectual Habit cannot be acquired but by Acts of the
Understanding. And Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance being in the Will, cannot
be attained unto but by the Acts of the Will.

Some have been of Opinion that Habits are begot by the first single Actions;
and that all the Subsequent Actions do but serve to confirm and strengthen the
Habit already begot. Others think the Habit acquired by the last Action, and
that all the former did only dispose the Power, or Faculty of the Soul to
receive the Habit; But it is not probable that every single Action contributes
something toward the acquiring of the Habit.

Again, no Habit can be increased but by more intense Actions than those by
which it was gotten; whereas it is weakened by those Actions which are more
remiss, and only cherished and kept in the State it is by those Actions, which
are just equal to those which produce it.

There are others of Opinion that Habit is a great help to that Faculty of the
Soul in which it is, as to its ready and easy Operation; but deny that Habit is
it self alone a Real Principle of Action, since the Action wholly proceeds from
the Faculty. To which we Answer, That a piece of Work may depend at the same
time both on the Tool, and the Hand of the Artificer. And so may any Action
both be Attributed to the Faculty, which immediately performs it, and also to
the Habits ready and easy Disposition of the Faculty, so that we conclude it to
be a True and Real Principle.

Habits are Corrupted and Destroyed, either by the Destruction of the Subject
they are in (as well as all other Accidents); if either the Soul, or the
Faculties of the Soul Perish, it is likewise certain all the Habits in it must
Perish; and also they are sometimes utterly expelled by their Contraries, their
Subject remaining still whole and Entire. For Instance, The Habit of Justice
may be quite expelled, and banished out of the Will by Acts of Injustice.

But the great Difficulty is whether a Habit of Virtue can be utterly destroyed
by a bare Cessation, or forbearing the Exercise of it.

Some Distinguish very subtilely (but I know not how well) That it may, as to
its use, but not as to its Substance. And indeed if we search the matter to the
bottom, we shall find that it is very hard to conceive how the bare Cessation
should utterly destroy the Habit; but when Sloth and Idleness lulls it asleep,
the Appetite gets new Strength, and so the contrary Habit destroys the former;
though it seem to perish of it self, by a bare Cessation of Operation.

And hence it is that the Ruin of good and virtuous Habits is commonly
attributed to Sloth, which indeed does really proceed from the Prevalence and
Increase of the contrary Vice.

Thus far of Inward Principles. We shall proceed next to the Outward Principles
of Human Actions. And first of that Principle of Human Actions, which always
moves Effectually, and that is God.

And here we must know that God is not only the External Principle of Human
Actions, as the Final Cause is, (that is, as he is that Objective Beatitude,
and End of all Actions); But also the Efficient Cause. And that either as he is
the Universal Cause of all things, and works in us both to will, and to do, or
as he Influences and directs that Principle of choosing, which he has planted
in us. In either Sense he may be said to be the External Principle of our
Actions.

That God is the Principle of our Actions, in the first Sense is evident,
because he Governs and Orders all other second Causes as he pleases; Action.
But God does so. Therefore it must be so.

And this he does two several ways, either by concurring with our Freedom of
Will, or else Moving and Inclining our Will to this or that thing. And first
God concurs, as the first Cause with the second to produce the act, by this
means

But yet we are told that this general Influence or concurrence of God
Almighty, does not produce the Effect with the concurrence of the Second Cause
too, which is our Will. Whence we may learn by the way, That Gods general
Concurrence as the first Cause, lay no Fatal Necessity upon our Actions, since
the Will is still Free, and Indifferent.

And now we come to speak of Gods moving the Will to Act, besides the Univeral
Concurrence Will seems to be determined by God, before she has made her own
choice.

The Schoolmen salve this Difficulty thus, They say that God moves second
Causes with such a Motion as is convenient, or agreeable to their Natures; Now
since the Will is a Faculty not determined to one thing, but indifferently can
make choice of any; God does not move it with such a necessity, as does
determine it to one thing, Thomas Aquinas. But we believe that God moves our
Wills sometimes irresistably, and necessarily; For I do not think that St. Paul
or Mary Magdalen (though they would never so fain) could have withstood their
own Conversion.

There are some other Outward Causes, which sometimes move our Wills. As the
Persuasions and Arguments that Men may make use etc.

So likewise Angels either good or bad, may by changing the Fantasy; move the
Will. And this may be done not by producing any new Phantasm, which was not in
the Brain before; but by stirring and moving the Spirits and Humors which
reside there; and so bring to their Mind some past Species or Images.

This they may possibly do likewise by changing the Sense, and that these two
ways, viz. Spirits in the Brain, and after bringing them into the Organs of
Sense; or else by some change of Disposition of the outward Object.

We come now from the Principles of Human Actions, to the Actions themselves,
where we shall also treat of the Passions, Virtues, and Vices.

Philosophers do not call all the Actions of Man Human Actions; but only those
that proceed from a Free Principle of Acting, which is the Will. Hence is that
Division of Actions into Voluntary and Involuntary.

First then, Voluntary is taken largely, for that which we call Spontaneity;
and is defined to be a Principle in the Agent, which knows the thing about
which it Acts. And here it is required that the Principle of Acting be in the
Agent it self; and likewise that it be carried toward the Object, with some
sort of Knowledge. And therefore those things which have the Principle of
Acting in themselves, but no Knowledge of the Object, are said to act
Naturally, but not Voluntarily. And hence we have that common Description in
the Schools, of an Action into Spontaneous, Natural and Violent.

A Spontaneous Action has the Principle of Action in it self, with some
Knowledge of the End. The Natural has in it the Principle of Action, but no
Knowledge of the End. And the Violent has ever the Principle of the Action
Separate from it, as when a Stone is cast upwards.

Again, if we take Voluntary strictly, and properly, it is only found in Man;
and may be defined, A Principle in the Agent with perfect knowledge of the End,
such as is not found in Beasts.

Now we must remember, that there is a Perfect, and an Imperfect Knowledge. The
Perfect is when the End is known, and the way likewise by which the means lead
to the End; and this is found only in Man, and is the Voluntary that we are
here speaking of. The other is imperfect, when the End is in some measure
known; but the Reason and Proportion of the Means, which conduct to the End is
not, and this is found in Fools and Children, as also in Beasts.

That which is Voluntary, and the product of our Wills, in this case one would
think should be always free (speaking properly:) And yet we find it is not; for
though the Will in Man cannot be compelled or constrained, yet it may be
necessitated: As for Example, To Will that which is Good is necessary and
natural to us, and so in this sense is not free. So that we see, that to Will,
and at the same time to be Necessitated, may consist together.

Lastly, These Actions of the Will, or what we call Voluntary, are said to be
deliberate; not that the Will it self deliberates, but that it follows the
Guidance and Direction of the Understanding, which it has well deliberated.

Involuntary in its largest sense is opposed to Spontaneity; but in the
stricter sense it is either through Violence or Ignorance. Through Violence, as
when a Man is carried whether he would not go; through Ignorance, when through
some default in his Judgment or Reason, he does that which afterward he
repents of.

The most common division of Ignorance is into Vincible and Invicible.

Invincible is such, as with all diligence and industry could not have been
avoided; But Vincible is such, as if care and pains had been taken, might. And
it is the former of these two which makes an Action Involuntary.

Here Moralists enquire, whether nothing else but Violence and Ignorance make
an Action Involuntary. The greatest Question is of Fear or Desire, whether they
do not do the same thing: For Example, When a Man to save his life in a Ship
casts his Goods Overboard; it is questioned, whether this Action be Voluntary,
or not?

It is Answered, That such Actions as these are partly Voluntary, and partly
Involuntary. Involuntary they are, if you consider them simply and in
themselves; but Voluntary, if you consider them with their circumstances: for
the Man was willing to lose his Goods rather than his Life.

Thus far of Actions Voluntary and Involuntary; Goodness or Badness of Actions

The Goodness of an Action is the conformity of it with right Reason, and the
Badness of it is its deformity or alienation from Right Reason: I call Right a
good Mind, free from all Fantastic Opinions, knowing the Laws of God and
Nature, and making a prudent Judgment of the Action to be done, according to
the intent of the Law.

And this makes a vast difference betwixt one and the same Action, which
Physically and Naturally considered has no difference at all. As for Instance,
To kill a Man by private Authority is an Evil Action; but to do it by public
Authority makes it Good, though the Action in it self absolutely considered is
the same.

The Goodness or Badness of the Action is taken from the goodness or pravity of
the Will, for the most part: But Actions may sometimes Object, their End, and
their Circumstances.

And though it may be here objected, That nothing can be the Object of the
Will, or the End of the Willing, but that which is Good; yet we must still
remember, that Good is so really or apparently, and when only an apparent Good,
it is a real and an absolute Ill. Thus, that which seems Good, as it has
either Profit or Pleasure in it, may yet be Evil in its deformity or digression
Right Reason, and so may neither deserve Praise nor Reward, and by consequence
not be Bonum honestum, that is, an Honest Good, which is one Branch of the
division of Good.

The last Question about the Goodness or Badness of Humane Actions is, they be
all necessarily either Good or Bad, and whether some of them be not Indifferent.

And to this may be Answered, that many Humane Actions, as Walking, Sitting,
Standing, and End, they must needs be either Good, or Bad; that is to say, as
they regard this or that End, they are, or are not conformable to Right Reason.

The next thing which Philosophers consider in Human Actions is the
Circumstances, that is, those things which are placed, or stand about the
Actions. They are generally reckoned in this old Verse, Quis, Quid, Vbi, Quibus
auxiliis, cur Quomodo, Quando. That is, the Person which does the Action, the
Action it self, the Place where, the Helps with which, the Reason why, the
Manner how, and the Time when.

Here note, that the Circumstances many times add very much either Good or Bad
to the Action, nay, sometimes they change the very nature of it; as the
Stealing any thing dedicated to Holy uses makes the Offense Sacrilege, which
otherwise would have been but simple Theft.

Thus of Human Actions in general; Now of the Species, or several kinds of them.

The ordinary and common division of Human Actions is into Elicite and
Imperate; By Elicite is to be understood those Actions whereof the Will her
self is the first Principle, and produces them in her self. By Imperate we mean
Actions of which the Will is not the first Principle, which yet are not done
without the Power or Jurisdiction of the Will.

The Elicite Actions of the Will are either about the End or the Means.

Those about the End are these three; Volition or Willing, Fruition and
Intention.

Those about the Means are also three; viz. Election, Consent, and Use.

And now because our Passions have a great influence upon our Actions, in
making them either Virtuous or Vicious, it will be convenient to speak
something of them both generally and particularly, before we come to speak of
the Virtues and Vices.

The Spring or Fountain of the Passions is the Sensitive Appetite, which
(though it be found as well in Beasts as in Men) we speak now of it as it is
peculiar to Men.

The Sensitive Appetite is either Concupiscible or Irascible, and it is
necessary it should be so, for the seeking that which is good and convenient,
and avoiding of that which is hurtful; and in these two are founded all the
Passions of the Mind.

A Passion of the Mind is defined, to be a Motion of the Sensitive Appetite
from the Apprehension either of Good or Evil, with some unnatural change of the
Body, Good or Evil, that is, as it seems or appears.

They are called Motions in distinction to the other Faculties of the Soul,
which are either Powers or Habits. Powers they cannot be, because they are not
always ready like other Powers, to be produced into Act; And Habits they cannot
be, because they are many times stirred up before any Habit of them is gotten:
And they are called Passions, because both Soul and Body suffer by them.

The Stoics were wont to number but four of them, to wit, the Passion of Joy,
Sorrow, Hope, and Fear; But the Peripateticks have made them by Subdivisions
Eleven, attributing Six to the Concupiscible, and Five to the Iracible part of
the Sensitive Appetite. The Six first are Love, Desire, Joy, Hatred, Flight or
Avoiding, and Sorrow. The five last are Hope, Despair, Fear, Boldness, and
Anger.

That Passions are not all Vicious or Blameworthy, appears in that Good Men, as
well as Evil do Love, and Fear, etc. Again, no Man can commit a Fault, but with
his Will, and Passions sometimes cannot be avoided though we would. And then
again, because Virtue is conversant Passions, as about its proper Subject; It
would follow, that he who wanted Passion, must needs want Virtue also; and thus
it appears, that every Passion is not Evil.

And now we come to speak of the Virtues and Vices in General; and first of
Virtue in General.

Virtue is defined to be an Elective Habit, consisting in a Mean, which prudent
Men judge, and make use of in all their Actions.

Virtue is an Habit of the Mind, which consists in a Medium; and there are two
sorts of it; the one proper to the Understanding, as Prudence and Wisdom; and
the other proper to the Will.

Virtue is said to be a Habit, that is the Genus, under which it is
comprehended, as well as Vice.

It is said to be Elective, to distinguish a Moral Habit from an Intellectual
Habit.

We say it consists in a Mean, to distinguish it Vices which do not; for though
Vices may truly be said to be Moral Elective Habits, yet they offend always
either in Excess or Defect, (which Prudent Men judge and make use of in all
their Actions:) This is inserted in the Definition, to inform us that Men must
judge of their Actions, and the mean spoken of, according to the Rule of right
Reason. And this Definition agrees with every Moral Habit, except it be
Prudence, and that is rather an Intellectual one.

It is here questioned Whether Virtue consists Vices. The Answer is, That all
Moral Virtue, except Justice, consists in the Mean, or middle between two
vicious Habits; As Liberality between Prodigality and Covetousness; Fortitude
between Cowardness and Foolhardiness; so Prudence it self between a Crafty
Slyness, and Folly or Ignorance.

But Justice must always be excepted; for whatsoever Justice, and so Injustice
is alone and on either side opposed to Justice. And yet the Virtue always comes
nearer one of the extremes than the other, because one of the extremes is
always nearer to right Reason.

All the Moral Virtues, except Prudence (which is not purely so) are seated in
the Rational Appetite, that is, in the Will; Because all Moral Virtues being
Elective Habits, must needs be in Soul which makes the Election, and that is
the Will.

The Cardinal Virtues (so called, because all other Virtues turn upon them as
Doors do upon their Hinges) are these Four; Prudence, Justice, Temperance and
Fortitude.

Prudence has a particular reference to the Reason, Justice to the Will,
Temperance to the Concupiscible Appetite; and Fortitude to the Irascible.

It is a generally received Opinion amongst Moral Philosophers, That he that
has one Virtue has them all; And it is thus proved, Every one carries along
with it Prudence; and Prudence cannot be destitute of all the other Virtues, and
hence we conclude, That the Virtues are tied together in one common Bond.

Prudence, which is the Governess of all the other Virtues, is defined by
Aristotle, To be a Habit of acting with right Reason, about those things either
good or bad for a Man.

The Subject in which it is, is the Understanding, and therefore properly it is
an intellectual Virtue; But the Object about which it is coversant, is Human
Action in general, or whatever is to be done.

The general Office of Prudence is to dispose the Means in order to the End;
that is, to direct other Moral Virtues about fit Means to attain their Ends,
which is done these three ways.

By finding out fit and proper Means, and this is called Invention.

By making choice of those which are most proper, and this is called Judgment.

By teaching and instructing us in the use of them, and this is called
Government, or Command.

The Integral parts of Prudence are the Memory of things past.

The Knowledge or Understanding of things present.

And providing for the Future.

Prudence is a Virtue which consists in the knowledge of Truth, with a
quickness of Apprehension, so that it requirs a diligent search, and a certain
Knowledge of what is true: for according as any one is apt to discover what is
most true in any thing, and to find it out with great Sagacity, and withal to
give a Reason for it, the same is commonly and deservedly called a wise and
prudent Man: Then Truth is the subject he applies himself unto, and to take
right Counsel in order to do what is good, and conducive to a happy life; and
such a Uniformity should be kept in all our Actions, that all the Passages of
our Life may agree together.

Justice, which is termed the Queen of all Virtues, tends to the conservation
of human Society, by giving every one his due, and justly observing all
Contracts and Bargains, not doing Jnjury to any; but to do as you would be done
unto.

It has its Name from the Latin Word Jus, which signifies to do that which is
required by the Law both of God and Man.

It is either Universal or Particular. Universal Justice is that which respects
our Duty in order to the conservation and good of the Public, and the Notion
of this Justice is as large as that of Virtue it self.

Particular Justice is that which regards our Dealings with private Persons, and
is either distributive, or commutative.

Distributive Justice is the giving every Man his due, both as to Rewards and
Punishments, etc.

Commutative Justice is the doing right in Contracts, in buying, selling,
exchanging, etc.

The former of these belongs properly to the Prince, and the latter to the
People one amongst another.

And here we cannot without a breach in our Method, omit to say something of the
Law, which is the Standard, and Rule of Justice, and from whence it is said to
receive its very Name.

Law is a System of rational Precepts, showing

There are Three things necessary in a Law, (1) That it be just, and according
to right Reason. (2) That it be made by those that have Authority, and to whose
care the Public Good is committed; And (3) That it be lawfully promulgated, or
proclaimed, or else it does not oblige.

Law is divided into Human and Divine (which is properly the business of
Theology).

Human Law again is either Civil or Ecclesiastic.

Civil is that which is in the Power of the secular Magistrate, considered
merely as such Ecclesistical is that which is administered by the Church, either
as to Doctrine or Discipline.

The Effect or consequent of the Law is Right; that is to say, a Reward
proportioned to the merit of the Fact; And so the Law, the Fact, and the Right
makes up a demonstrative Syllogism.

Every Murderer; ought to be punished there is the Law.

Milo is a Murderer there is the Fact.

Therefore Milo ought to be punished, and thereis the Jus or Right.

Justice is also twofold; the one relates to God, and the other to Men; the
first is called Religion or Piety, whereby we pay to God the Religious Duty we
owe unto him; Opposite to which are Distributive Justice must be considered
Fidelity and Gratitude, as amongst these several Relations of Subjects to their
Princes, and Princes to their Subjects; of Parents to their Children, and
Children to their Parents; of Wives to their Husbands, Husbands to their Wives;
Brothers, and Sisters; Masters and Servants; Benefactors, and such as have
received any Kindness from them; And as we ought to be just and equitable to
all Men, so we are more especially bound to do Good for Good, and to retaliate
Kindnesses.

To corrective Justice belongs the punishment of Crimes.

Fortitude is a certain constancy of Mind, both in undertaking Dangers, and
performing Labors.

It is either Active or Passive, as you see in the Definition; Active in
undertaking great and difficult things, and Passive in suffering the like. The
Integral Parts of them both are Magnanimity or Greatness of Mind, Patience, and
Perseverance.

Temperance may in general be said to be any Virtue which observes a mean in
moving of the Mind; But especially and most properly it is that Virtue which is
concerned in moderating our Pleasures, that is, the sensual Pleasures of the
Body. There are three Acts peculiar to it, (1) Avoiding all excess in Meat,
Drink, etc. (2). Directing us in the use of them, (3). Seeking what is
necessary, to wit, Meat, Drink, etc.

The Subjective parts of this Virtue are Abstinence, Sobriety, Chastity, and
Modesty.

And thus considered it will direct us also in the use of Clothes, and what
else is for the outward comfort and support of the Body.

There is another sort of Virtue, which consists in the Will, which has its
proper Matter in its true Object, and relates to Pleasure, Fear, and Boldness.
But there are two sorts of Pleasuers, the one of the Body, and the other of the
Soul. To moderate Bodily Pleasures there is a Virtue called Temperance, which
consists in a right ordering of our Words and Actions.

This is the Virtue that Governs all our Affections and Carnal Lusts, which is
an Enemy to all unruly Appetites, directing us to be ruled by our Reason, when
we come either to covet, or refuse any thing be it good or bad. This is the
Virtue that calms and sedates, that allays and softens our Minds by a certain
Harmony. Now this Virtue extends not only to Food and Raiment, as also to
Buildings, but likewise to Luxury and Carnal Pleasures.

Temperance in Eating is called Abstinence, in Drinking Sobriety, and in
Clothes, and Building, Frugality.

In opposition to Luxury is Chastity or Continence, which relates both to a
single and Conjugal Life.

As for the Pleasures of the Mind, they proceed either from Riches, Praise, or
Society.

Liberality is a Virtue which is most sutiable to the Nature of Man, and is the
disposer of Riches; but there are many things therein to be considered.

First, That Liberality be not hurtful to those who receive it; Secondly, To
those that may participate thereof; And Thirdly, That it be proportionable not
only to the Donors ability, but likewise to the Persons Estate and Condition
whom it is bestowed upon: And herein must be considered his Manners, what
Affection he bears us, what Acquaintance we have with him, and what former
Kindness he has done us. Now there are five different Degrees of Human
Society, 1; Of all Men together, 2; Of Men of the same Nation, or Country, 3;
Of the same Society, 4; Of Friends, and 5; Of Kindred. And we ought to be most
kind to those that are nearest unto us and from whom we have received most
kindnesses.

In Society two things are to be considered, viz. Anger and Familiarity. Now
there are two Virtues that moderate Anger, viz. Lenity and Severity, that
excluding, and this admitting of Revenge; And as there is nothing more
praiseworthy, and becoming a Great Man than Lenity and Humanity; so a
Magistrate must sometimes use Rigor and Severity, as a necessary Ingredient in
point of Government: But when he inflicts Punishments, he must forbear Anger,
because an Angry Man can never keep a Medium.

The three Virtues that belong to Human Society are Truth, Humanity, and
Vrbanity; therefore that which is true, simple and sound, is most sutiable and
proper to the Nature of Man; and

The Second Virtue required in Human Society is Humanity, which may be
otherwise Termed Civility, Gentleness, Affability, etc. it is well known how
efficatious obliging good Language does beget the good Opinion and Love of Man;
Virtue will be the more conspicuous, so it will be the more admirable.

The Third Virtue is Vrbanity, which relates to Pastines and Recreations, a
thing we were not altogether Born unto, but only fit to be used as a Relaxation
in our several Callings or Professions. We should use it as we do Sleep and
Rest, for our Minds or Bodies are wearied with the Affairs of the World: and
let the Game, or Diversion be Innocent, and free from Vice.

Hitherto we have spoke of those Virtues, that relate to the Pleasures of the
Body and Mind; the next shall be of that which concerns Fear and Boldness,
termed by Philosophers, Courage and Magnanimity.

Its Objects are all manner of Dangers and Hazards, Prosperity and Adversity;
for this Virtue raises a Man's Courage, and makes him slight such Accidents as
usually happen to Man. In Prosperity it makes him Moderate, and keeps him from
Haughtiness, and Insolence; and indeed it is a great want of Virtue in a Man,
when he cannot keep a Medium in Prosperity and Adversity; and as in Prosperity
we ought not to be Insolent so in Adversity we ought not to be Dejected. It Is
Prudence to prevent Adversities, as far

And thus much of the Virtues; It follows now to speak a word or two of the
Vices which are contrary to them.

Vice is an Elective Habit, erring from the Mean, either in excess or defect.

They have the same Seat or Place in the Soul, whence they continually
endeavor to expel one another, to wit, the Will.

Here Moralists are to enquire, Whether Vice be against a man's Nature, or not?
In answer to which we must consider, that though man's Nature be really, and
truly but one, yet it may be considered either as Animal and Sensitive, or as
Rational and Intellective.

The Sensitive part of Man is inclined to that which is sensibly Good, or seems
so, though it be many times far distant from it: and yet such apparent Goods,
whether they be Profit or Pleasure, are many times quite different from that
which is honest.

And thus Vice may be said not to be against man's Nature, that is, his
Sensitive Nature. For Sensitive Nature delights not in Vice, as it is Evil, but
as it appears Good. In short, Vice is absolutely, and simply against man's
Nature, as he is Man; for nothing is more agreeable to Man, as he is Man, than
right Reason, which is Vices mortal Enemy.

Again, We see that all Men have a natural inclination or love for Virtue,
because every Man that is in his right Wits praises it, and effects to have it
believed he is virtuous, by a most industrious concealment of his Vice. Which
is enough to prove, That Vice is against man's very Nature.

Here they again enquire Whether Virtue and Vice can consist together; that is,
in their Habit in the same Person.

If we speak of Evangelical Virtues, as Fidelity and Infidelity, or the like,
we say they cannot; Or if we speak of the Will, it cannot at the same time will
one Virtue, and its contrary Vice. But yet a Virtue, and its contrary Vice, may
be outwardly acted by one and the same Person at the same time. And again,
Virtuous and Vicious habits, that are directly opposed one to another, may at
the same time be in the same Person, to wit, in gradu remisso, non intenso. In
a remiss Degree not in its highest or most intense.

Concerning the division of Vice into its several Species or Kinds, we shall
need say nothing; For what has been already said of the Virtues, may give us a
full and perfect sight of their Excesses and Defects.

And thus much for that part of Moral Philosophy, called Ethics, or
Monasticks. Now follows Oeconomicks and Politics; the one teaching, etc. our
Duty in our Family; and the other our Duty to the Publicks.

Oeconomicks teach a Man how to rule and govern his Family. It has two general
Parts; to wit, he that Governs, those that are Governed.

A Master, or he that Governs, may be considered in a threefold capacity; viz.
As a Husband, as a Father, and as a Master; And every one of these have their
particular Duties or Obligations; to wit, Conjugal, Paternal, and Magisterial.

The Obligations of a Wife, Children and Servants, are likewise parallel to
these, and are briefly comprehended in Love, and Obedience. As the Master of
the Families Duty is in Love and Care, and providing for them according to
their several Capacities or Qualifications. For the Duty of the Master of the
Family is one thing toward his Wife, another toward his Children; and still
different from them both toward his Servants. And the several Duties of the
Wife, Children and Servants are distinct and several in regard of their
Relation to him again.

Politics, which is the other part of Moral Philosophy, concerns the
Government of the Public, a Country or Kingdom, and that by good Laws; whereby
both King, Prince, and Subjects may live happily, and the Subjects in a perfect
Union amongst themselves.

A Politic State is divided into Public and Private Persons. Those are
Public Persons, who Magistrates to Rule over the Rest, either in Church or
State. Such were amongst the Ancient Romans, their Consuls, Aediles, Censores,
Praetores, Dictators, Tribuni, Questores, and Senators.

The Private Persons are the Gentry and Commonalty; in which are to be
considered such as are eminent, either in point of Extraction, Riches, or
acquired Parts, both Civil and Military.

Next the Persons, must be considered the Method of Government, the Courts of
Judicature, the Jurisdictions, Laws, Contracts, Crimes, Trespasses, Judgments,
Sentences and Decrees.

Public Governments are Administered either By One, By a Few, or By Many.

When a Government is Administered by One, it is called Monarchy: When by a Few,
it is called Oligarchy or Aristocracy: And when by Many, it is called Democracy.

And here we are to observe, That though according to the Order of Nature,
Democracy does preceed both Aristocracy, and Monarchy, (because all, according
to the Law of Nature are born free, and are hard to be brought under
Government), yet according to the Order of Dignity, and also for its excellency
and convenience, Monarchy is to be preferred before both the one and the other,
as being likest to the Government of God Almighty himself.

Aristocracy, or the Government by a Few, holds the next place to Monarchy and
Democracy, or the Government of Many, being in the Power of the People, who
Govern by Deputies, or the like, is the lowest.

NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, OR PHYSICS, BOTH Ancient and Modern.
NAtural Philosophy, or Physics, is the knowledge of Natural Bodies. The
Subject or Object of Physics is Natural Bodies, considered as Natural.

The first division of Natural Philosophy is into General and Special. The
General treats of the common Principles and Affections of Bodies; and the
Special or Particular treats of the several kinds of Bodies, as hereafter shall
be handled.

The common Principles (as Philosophers speak) of Bodies are these three,
Matter, Form, and Privation.

By Matter is to be understood the first Matter out of which all things are
made, considered absolutely without Form or Accidents, and this Matter is
purely passive and susceptible of all Forms whatsoever.

Form is that which makes a Body what it is, and distinguishes it from other
Bodies; and there are several degrees of it. Some Forms only give Bodies their
Esse or Being, as the Forms Inanimate Bodies. Some again give Being, Life, and
Sense, as the Forms of Brutes: And some give Being, Life, Sense, and
Understanding. And this is the last and highest Degree of Forms, which is only
the Rational Soul.

Privation is the absence of Form in a Body, or Subject, that is fit to receive
one. Now because no Form can be where Privation was not supposed before, it is
by Philosophers numbered amongst those Principles which constitute Bodies.

The Affections of Bodies are either Internal or External. The Internal
Affections of Natural Bodies are Motion, and Termination of Quantity. Motion is
defined to be any change of Body, and is directly opposed to Rest. In all
Motions of Bodies there are principally considered the Terminus a quo, or point
from whence; and the Terminus ad quem, or Point whither, and the Time; for no
Motion is made in an instant, but is successive.

The division of Motion is into Natural and Violent. Natural Motion is that
which proceeds from the Natural Principle of the Body; as when Fire ascends, or
heavy Bodies descend toward the Center of the Earth. So the Locomotive Faculty
or Power in Living Creatures, of removing themselves from one place to another,
is also said to be Natural. Violent Motion is that which is contrary to the
Bodies Natural tendency, as when a Stone is cast upwards.

In all Motion we are still to remember there is a Circle, that is, a
Succession always of a new Body into the place of the Body moved; and this
Nature does to avoid a Vacuum.

The several Notions of Motion are so difficult to be understood, that some
have Problematically undertaken to maintain, that there is no Motion at all in
the World: For Example, The Motion of a Wheel thus marked, we will suppose this
to be turned or moved upon its own Axel. That part marked with A we know is
moved, because (according to the definition of the Ingenious De Carts, of
Motion) it has changed its relation to the several Bodies about it, say the
Sides of the Room wherein it is. Now whatever is moved, is moved either into a
Full, or into an Empty place: Now if A be moved into a Full place, then there
is a penetration of Bodies, and it is moved into B; if its moved into an Empty
place, there will be a breach in the Wheel, besides a Vacuum in Nature. And
what has been said of this Motion of the Whole, may in some measure be said of
all Motions, as being Circular. All that I know to Answer in this case is, that
a Circle being Infinite, and our Capacity but Finite, we are not able to
comprehend its several Phenomenon, no more than we are the Essence of God
Almighty. The same may be said of Infinite, or rather the Indefinite extension
of the World, and the Division of Bodies.

And thus from Motion we come to the other common Affection of Bodies, called
Finiteness or Termination of Quantity; for all Bodies have their Superficies,
and are circumscribed by Place, and if we take away the Notion of a Bodies
Superficies, you take away the very Notion of the Body it self; it being the
very definition of a Body to be measurable three ways (to wit, on the
Superficies) in Length, Breadth, and Thickness. And therefore that distinction
of the Schools, That Bodies are not Actually, but Potentially extended in
infinitum, might well have been spared.

The External Affections of Body are Place and Time. Place is that which
contains or circumscribes Body, and is just as large as the Body contained, and
yet is no part of it; notwithstanding several things are said to be in a place
several ways, as Bodies are said to be in a place circumscriptively, Angels
definitively, and God repletively.

To Place is opposed Vacuum, or rather the Notion of it; for it is a mere Ens
rationis, and there is no such thing in Nature.

Time is that whereby things are said to be sooner or later one than another.
The Only (if it may be so called) is that which is not Circular, but goes
strait forward.

Time and Motion measure one another.

Thus much of the general Part of Natural Philosophy, which treats of the
Common Principles Affections of Bodies; We come now to the Particular and
Special, wherein are handled the several kinds of Bodies, which are divided
into these six Parts.

1. The whole Machin of the World considered all together, as it makes one
Sphere, wherein are contained both Heaven and Earth, the Planets, Stars, etc.

2. The Elements, as they are the Causes of Mixtion and Natural Changes.

3. Of Bodies imperfectly mixed, or Meteors.

4. Of Bodies perfectly mixed, both Inanimate and Animate.

5. Of the Parts of Man's Body.

6. Of the Soul; Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational.

The first is of the World in general, or considered all together, as it makes
one Fabric.

The first thing in this great Body which Philosophers are wont to discourse of
is Coelum, or Heaven, which they call a Natural Body Simple, Spherical,
Transparent, and Incorruptible, which contains within it all the rest. That it
is a Body they prove, because it consists of Matter and Form. That it consists
of Matter is proved from its Density, Rarity, and Quantity, which are every one
of them proper to a Body only. And then its very Esse or Being proves its Form;
for without a Form no Body can be, although it must be confessed, that this Form
is no Soul; because Actions which are peculiar to any of the three sorts of
Souls are observed in it. Matter and Form then are its Principles; Its
Affections are Motion, Figure, and Operation; its Motion is Circular, and its
Figure is so too, which of all others is the most perfect and capacious; Its
Operations are by its Motion, Light, and Influence.

It Is the Opinion of the Peripatetick Philosophers, That the Heavens are a kind
of fifth Substance, distinct from all the four Elements, Ingenerable and
Incorruptible; though the Elements themselves are said to be Corruptible.

The Parts whereof the Heavens consist, according to the Aristotelian
Philosophy, are these two, Perspicuous or Transparent, and Bright or Shining.

Perspicuous, as the several Spheres or Orbs; viz. 1. The Sphere of the Moon,
2. That of Mercury, 3. That of Venus, 4. That of the Sun, 5. That of Mars, 6.
That of Jupiter, 7. That of Saturn, 8. The Firmament, 9. The Chrystalline
Heaven, and 10. The Primum Mobile, or highest of all. But of this I refer you
to the Treatise of Astronomy or Cosmography, to which it properly belongs.

The other Part is Bright or Shining, and comprehends the Stars, which are
either fixed or wandering, which also belongs to Cosmography.

Besides these Stars, there is observed in the Heavens that which we call
Galaxia, or the Milky-way, which is thought to be a confluence of many little
Stars, which by reason of their smalness cannot be discerned one from another,
and yet by their joint Light make up that bright place of Heaven so called.

Under this common Place of the World next to the Heavens they use to place the
four Elements; and these they consider either absolutely, as they are Parts of
the World; or respectively, as they are the Causes of Mixtion and Natural
Changes in other Bodies.

An Element is defined to be a simple Body, into which other Bodies are
resolved; and it will be hard to find any Body that has not some of the four
Elements in it. They are oft-times also changed into one another, as Water into
Air, Air into Water, and the like. In their own places they are neither light
nor heavy, but being set in an Unnatural place, the heavy, as the Earth and
Water, tend downwards; and the light, as Fire and Air, fly upwards.

But to speak a word or two of each in particular, I shall begin with the
highest in place, which is Fire.

Fire is a dry Element, and is the lightest of all other, which is the cause
that it has the highest place of the Elements, under the Concave or Sphere of
the Moon.

And whereas some have frivolously objected, That then it would feed upon all
the Bodies next it, as upon Fuel, and so destroy whatever there is of mixed or
compounded Bodies below it. We are to take notice, that there is a great deal
of difference betwixt this Elementary Fire and our Culinary Fire, or that which
is of ordinary use. For shining, or giving light and burning is not Essential,
or Part of the Being of Fire, as it is an Element; but it is an Accident, which
proceeds from the Subject or Matter which burns. And this is easily proved from
the density or rarity of it, or from its degrees of intension, according to the
quality of the Matter in which it is: For Example, The flame of Pitch is much
hotter or more dense, than that of Spirits of Wine; and a Red-hot-Iron will
burn much more than any Fire in Straw, or the like; so that it seems the
Elementary Fire does not burn as our ordinary Fire, because of its rarity of
thinness: And this is also the Reason that it is not seen, it being much
thinner or rarer than either Wind or the Air; whereas dense or thick Bodies
only are the Object of Vision.

Again whereas our Culinary Fire stands in continual need of Fuel to preserve
it, this Elementary Bodies, and such as do naturally destroy it, as too much
Water, or the like.

Air is a light Element, moderately Hot, but the most Moist or Fluid, and fills
every place below the Fiery Region, which is not filled or supplied by some
other Body.

It is divided into three Regions, the highest, middle, and lowest. The highest
reaches from the Fiery Region to the Middle Region, and is hot, by reason of
its vicinity to the Fiery Region, and also from the violence of the Motion of
the Heavens. The middle is that which lies between the highest and the lowest,
and no Vapors or Exhalations arise higher than this Region; and it is Cold,
because the Beams of the Sun are reflected no higher from the Earth than to the
uppermost part of the lowest Region.

The lowest Region of Air takes up that space Earth and the middle Region, viz.
just as much as is warmed by the reflection of the Sun. Now because the
Sunbeams are reflected higher in Summer than in Winter, it follows, that the
lowest Region of Air is greater in Summer than in Winter, and the middle Region
less.

That the Air, considered as an Element, is moderately hot is proved, because
it is generated from Heat; as when Water is made Air by Fire, and contrariwise,
because its reduced again into Water by Cold, as we see on the Surface of
Marble and other Stones, in Sellars or Damp places. Again, the Air is light,
and we know that lightness is a consequent of heat.

Water is a moist and ponderous Element, the coldest of all others, flowing
between several parts of the Earth, and with it makes one entire Globe.

That it is the coldest of all the Elements is proved, because it is the most
contrary, and makes the greatest opposition to Fire, which is the hottest.

And that the Surface of the Water, as well as of the Earth is Globular,
appears from this Experiment in Navigation; Men do by little and little lose
sight of the Earth as they Sail farther from Land; first they lose the sight of
the Earth, then of the Trees, and lastly of the Hills and Mountains, which
cannot possibly proceed from any other Cause than its round or rising Surface,
interposed betwixt the Ship and Land; but this is the proper entertainment of
another Science.

Earth is a cold Element, the dryest and most ponderous of all others, and is
placed in the Center, according to the Ancients. That it is dryer than the
fiery Element, is proved from the definition which Philosophers give of
Dryness; Siccity or Dryness of any thing (they say) consists in its being
easily contained in its own bounds, by which they mean no more than this; That
thing is said to be Dry whose parts are easily kept together, as all Bodies of
a firm consistence, such as the Earth is. Humid, on the contrary, is that whose
parts are not easily kept together; so that according to the definition for
Humidity, I think we may very well and properly use Fluidity, and for Dryness,
Consistence. And then it will be plain and easy, that the Air is more humid
than the Water, because it is more fluid, which appears, because it enters
where Water cannot. And so the Earth is dryer than Fire, because it is of a
finer consistence, or is not so easily separated. And this same consistence or
closeness of the Parts, which they call Density, is the reason also, that the
Earth is the most ponderous of all Elements.

I shall here take further notice only of these two Affections, its Figure and
Motion.

As to its Figure it is Globular, as aforesaid.

This they prove by many Arguments; but I shall only in passing give you these
two. First, From its Shadow, which is round, and so must the Body be also:
Secondly, From the Rising and Setting of the Stars.

It has been much controverted amongst Philosophers, whether the Earth have any
Motion, or not. Aristotle, and some others of the Ancients, that thought the
Earth had no Motion, were wont to use this Argument; If the Earth have any
Motion at all, then that Motion is either Natural or Violent; but it can be
neither Natural nor Violent: Ergo, It cannot be Natural, because being in its
own Center and place where it would be, it must like all other Bodies (in their
proper places) rest and be quiet. And Violent it cannot be, because that
Violence would in time cease; it being a received Maxim, That no Violent thing
is perpetual.

To this I answer, That its Motion may be as Natural to it, for ought we know,
as that of the Primum Mobile; for its weight and gravity can never be supposed
to make it stand still, because nothing is heavy in its own place, whence it is
confessed the Earth is situate, and cannot weigh at all. This I would have
understood of the Earths being moved about its own Axel; and I believe you may
as well say, the Motion of the Primum Mobile may come to cease, because at
first it was Violent. We are not therefore to enquire into the Cause or Reason
of its Motion, it will be enough for us to solve all the Phenomenon in Nature,
that depend thereupon, by supposing it; for those Postulata are common in all
the Doctrine of Astronomy, whither of right this Motion of Earth pertains.

But methinks again, it is contrary to the order of Nature that the Earth
should stand still, and the rest of the World move round about it, because
Nature does always things the shortest way. Now for the Heavens to be moved
about the Earth, as their Center, must needs suppose such a rapidity and
violence, especially in the highest of them, as is scarce conceivable; whereas
this may easily be avoided, by supposing the Earth it self to be moved.

And now we come to consider the Elements as they are, the Cause of Mixtion and
Natural Changes.

In the Elements as they make up Mixed Bodies, we are to consider these several
things.

Qualities, Action and Passion, Alteration, Generation, and Mixtion.

Qualities are either first or second, or hidden Qualities, as Philosophers say.

The first Qualities are these four, Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness; and
from these arise no less than fourteen Second Qualities, as they call them,
viz. Density and Rarity, Gravity and Levity; Hardness and Softness; Thickness
and Thinness, which proceeds from Dryness and Moistness; Slipperiness and such
a Degree of Dryness as is directly opposite to it; Toughness and Brittleness;
Roughness and Smoothness.

Their Occult Qualities are scarce worth the Naming, because when they are able
to give no Natural Reason of any thing, they use to say it is a hidden Quality,
or it is done by Sympathy or Antipathy, which in plain English is as much as to
say we know not how.

In the next place we are to speak of Action and Passion, and this we cannot do
without speaking of Contact or Touching, which is the necessary

Now this Contact is said to be proper, or improper. Proper is a true and
Corporal touching, as when the Superficies of two Bodies do so meet and touch
one another, that they move one another, and are moved one by the other.
Improper or Vertual, is when the Virtue or Emanations of one Body, at a
distance work upon another so as to produce some effect, as the Sun warms the
Earth, the Loadstone draws up Iron, etc. By both these ways of Touching the
Action and Passion, or Agent and Patient, work one upon the other. That which
works or produces the effect in the other, is called the Agent, and Work it
self in respect thereof, is the Action; that which is wrought upon, or in which
the effect is produced is called the Patient, in respect of which the Work is
called Passion. And it must be always remembered, that as there is some likeness
between the Agent and the Patient, otherwise

Alteration is the change of any Quality or Accident in a Body, and differs
from Generation, in this, that Generation alters the whole Substance; and yet
Alteration is as it were the way and Companion of Generation.

Generation is a Change from Privation (that is an Aptitude, or readiness to
receive a Form) to Form (that is, an Essence which distinguishes any thing from
all things else) in matter.

The Causes of Generation are four, The Efficient, the Matter, the Form, and
the End.

The Efficient Cause in Generation is either Remote, as the Influence, Light
and Motion of the Heavenly Bodies; and the next which is the thing begetting,
which endeavors to produce another thing like it self.

The Material Cause is also either Remote, which is the first Matter which
carries always with it the Principle of Privation, and is capable of all Forms,
or next which is a Mixture of the four Elements.

The Formal Cause is the very Substantial Change it self, that is, from
Privation to Form.

The Final Cause of Generation is the Conservation of the Species, because
Nature abhors Destruction.

Corruption is directly opposite to Generation, and implies a Change from a
Form to a Privation again. And hence it is, that the Corruption of a thing is
always the Generation of another; for Matter (I mean that which I called the
next Matter of any thing) which is a Mixture of the four Elements, cannot
possibly subsist without a Form, but so soon as it lays down or loses one
Form, it takes up or receives another.

Mixtion is the Union of two different Bodies, which are capable of being
Mingled.

The Word is taken in its largest Sense for any sort of Mixture, as that of
Barley, or any other Grain with Wheat. But strictly and Philosophically for such
a Mixture of the Elements, whereby they wholly lose their first Forms, and
acquire a new one, which is the Form of the Mixed Body.

The Conditions or Circumstances required herein, are either such as belong to
Bodies mingled, or such as belong to the Act or Mixtion it self.

In the Bodies mingled, it is required that they should both be Agent and
Patient, so that this be easily made small, that there be an exactness in the
Quantity and Proportion.

In the Act or Mixtion it self are required a due meeting, or joining of the
Elements together, their Acting one another, and a Division of them into very
little parts, which cannot be done without Humidity. And the Consequence of this
Mixtion is called Temperament; which is nothing else but the Complexion of the
four first Qualities, as they are found in the Mixed Body, to wit Heat and Cold,
Dryness and Moistness.

The next thing in our Order to Treat of, are Bodies imperfectly Mixed, or
Meteors.

Meteors are Bodies imperfectly mixed, which are generally from the Exhalations
of the Earth or Water, being Raised by the Heat of the Sun, or the Virtue of
the Stars.

In this Discourse of Meteors, these three things, are to be taken notice of,
their Causes, Place, and Division, or several Kinds.

Their Remote Causes are the Heavenly, which by their Influence exhale and
raise up the matter of them.

The next or Instrumental Cause is either Heat or Cold. Heat by piercing into
the Earth or Water Rarifies them, and raises them up into the Air, and Cold
unites and condenses them above, when they are thus raised.

This for the Efficient Cause, the Material Cause is either the Remote with the
Elements, but for the most part Water or Earth, or the next Cause, which is
either Vapor or Exhalation.

A Vapor is hot and moist, and proceeds from Water; an Exhalation is hot and
dry, and comes from the Earth; and there are these two sorts of it, one which
easily takes Fire, being Matter of Fiery Meteors, the other not, being Matter
of Winds.

The place of these Meteors is for the most part Air. For even those that are
generated in the Caverns of the Earth, are generated in the Air, that is, the
Air that fills those Caves.

They are divided into these two sorts, viz. into Hypostatical, that is, such
as are Real Substances, and Emphatical, or such as only make a show or
Appearance.

Those that are Substantial are again Subdivided into three Species or Kinds;
Fiery which are from Exhalations easily Inflamable; Watery which are Vapors;
And Airy which are produced by Vapors and Exhalations mixed together.

There is another Division of Meteors into pure and mixed, pure are such whose
Matter is simple and pure, and are either Generated in the Highest, Middle or
Lower Region of the Air. Those that are generated in the Highest Region, are
called Torches, Beams, or Perpendicular Fires, Fiery Darts, Dancing Goats,
Flying Sparkles. etc. A Torch is a Meteor of a thin and rare Substance, Fire,
all the upper end resembles a lighted Torch. A Beam, or Perpendicular Fire is
long and more compact, and being set on Fire shows like a Beam, hanging right
downward. A Fiery Dart consists of grosser and subtiler, or rarer Parts equally
mixed together, which being kindled and flying upwards, resembles a Dart or
Arrow. Dancing Goats are so called, when the Meteor is divided into Two Parts,
and being set on Fire, seems to leap and skip like Goats.

Meteors generated in the Middle Region of the Air, are either Falling Stars or
Burning Lances. A Falling Star is a round Meteor, which being set on Fire, and
by some Cloud droven downwards, shows as if a Star fell from Heaven; others are
of Opinion that the Exhalation it self is as long as the Line, in which the
Stars seem to fall, and being lighted at one end like a Train of Gunpowder,
takes Fire in a Moment.

A Burning Lance is of the same Substance with Star, only the Matter differs in
Figure, representing a Lance or Spear all the way it falls.

Meteors generated in the Lower Region of the Air, are either Fiery Dragons, or
Ignes Fatui that is, Going Fires. A Fiery Dragon is a Great Exhalation, which
being raised a great Height in the Lower Region of the Air, and there sets on
Fire by its oblique and crooked Motion, resembling a Flying Serpent or Dragon,
as our Philosophers

Ignes Fatui, or Going Fires are of two Sorts, the grosser is commonly seen in
Low Grounds, or Marshes, often times making People mistake their way.

The more Subtle or Finer is called Ignis Lambens, because it sticks sometimes
to Men's Cloths* to Horses Heads or Mains, to the Shrouds and Rigging of Ships
and the like, and yet does no hurt, by Reason of its great Subtilty.

Now the manner of setting most of these Meteors on Fire, is conceived to be
either the Swiftness and Violence of their Motion, as Millstones and the Wheels
of Carts and Coaches, which sometimes by their Motion produce Fire; or else by
an Antiperistasis as they speak, which is a Violent Fighting or Opposition
between Heat and Cold, just as Stacks of Hay laid together before they be dry,
grow hot, and sometimes take Fire.

These are the Meteors which are called pure, by Reason they consist altogether
of Exhalations from the Earth. And now we come to speak of such Meteors as the
Philosophers call Mixed; because the Exhalation is mixed with Vapors, which are
drawn up, as we said before, from Water, and are more impure, gross and Viscous.

And these mixed Meteors are such as continue for a certain Space, as Comets, or
else such as by Reason of the little quantity of Mattter are suddenly
Dissipated, as Thunder.

A Comet has its Name from the Beard, or Tail which always accompanies it. Some
have been of Opinion that Comets are either a Conjunction of several Planets
together, or else an extraordinary Appearance of one Single Planet. The former
Opinion is refel'd; because a Comet is sometimes seen when there is no
Conjunction of the Planets; as likewise because the Planets are never seen,
without the Zodiac, whereas Comets often times are.

Again, no Comet can be a single Planet, because the Planets are always, or at
least for the most part seen in Clear Nights, but Comets never; as also because
no Planet, or Fixed Star is ever Increased or Diminish't, which as Experience
teaches us Comets are.

A Comet is defined to be a Fiery Meteor, composed of a Dry Viscous and
plentiful Exhalation close compacted together, raised up into the Higher Region
of the Air, and being there set on Fire, shows like a great Star.

Philosophers say that all Comets are set on Fire, either by the violent Motion
of the upper Region of the Air, or else by some little Sparks of the
neighboring Elementary Fire, which fall upon the Exhalation. The Matter of
them appears to be a Fat, Gross, and very Plentiful Exhalation; because at such
times as Comets appear, there are commonly great Winds and Droughts, the reason
of which is the great Plenty of Terrene Exhalations, which at that time fill
the Air.

The Affections of Comets are Place, which is the upper Region of the Air; and
Time either of their Apparition or Duration.

The time of their Apparition is for the most part in the Autumn, there then
being the greatest Plenty of such Exhalations, as are the Subject Matter of
them.

The time of Duration is uncertain, which is determined by the Quantity of
their Matter, though few are observed to continue more than Six Months, or less
than seven Days.

Their last Affection is Color, which is different according to the rarity or
density of their Matter.

Thunder is a fiery Exhalation, which breaks from the Clouds with great force
and violence.

It is generated by being enclosed, as in a Coat or Skin, and afterward set on
Fire, either by the violence of its Motion, or by an Anteperistasis. Its Motion
is very regular for this Reason, because Clouds presses it downwards.

The Accidents of it are these, its great Sound, and its sudden Shining. The
reason of the Sound or Noise is its breaking through the Cloud, which is no
longer able to contain it, by reason of its rarifaction, as soon as it is set
on fire, like Powder in a Gun.

Its Shining, which we call Lightning, is nothing Fire at the breaking of the
Cloud, which we see a good while before we hear the Blow or Noise. Sometimes we
see the Lightning, and never hear the Thunder, which is either, because the
Cloud is broken with less violence, or it may be by reason of the great
distance, or both.

Watery Meteors are begotten either in the middle Region of the Air, or in the
lower, or in the Caverns or Hollows of the Earth.

Those that are begotten in the middle Region of the Air are either Clouds, or
Rain, or Snow.

A Cloud is a Vapor raised up into the middle Region of the Air, and there
condensed by the coldness of the Place.

The Efficient Causes of it are the Sun and Stars, which exhale Vapors from the
Sea, Rivers, and moist Grounds; and the Cold gathers and condenses those Vapors
into the consistence of a Cloud.

The Material Cause is the Vapor it self, so raised by the Sun, and condensed
by the Cold.

Rain is a Cloud dissolved into Water, and is either Natural or Prodigious;
Natural, when it falls down in great or small Drops of Water only. Prodigious,
as when Frogs, small Fish, or the like, descend with it, which are generated in
the Air from the same Vapors or Matter, which were fit to have generated them
below, before they were raised by the power of the Sun or Stars.

Snow is a Cloud frozen together before the Vapor be dissolved into Drops, by
the intense or vehement Cold of the middle Region of the Air, and the reason of
its whiteness is the many little Particles of Air frozen up amongst it, which
if the Pores were strait, as in Horn, Glass, or Ice, the Body would be
transparent.

Watery Meteors, which are generated in the lowest Region of the Air, are
either Hail, Dew, Hoar, Mist, or Ice.

Hail is Rain frozen in the Air, and is made by the Freezing of the Drops of a
Cloud dissolved into Rain, as it falls to the ground.

Dew is a subtle or thin Vapor raised from the Earth by the heat of the Sun,
but to no great height; so that as soon as the Sun is Set, is condensed by the
Cold of the Air, and so descends upon the Earth again by its own weight.

Hoar is also a thin Vapor, raised not far from the Earth by the Sun, which in
the falling down is again frozen into the form of Salt.

Mist is a thick Vapor, raised from the Earth most commonly by the Rising or
Setting of the Sun, which being condensed by the Cold obscures the lowest part
of the Air.

Ice is Water congealed in Ponds, Rivers, Lakes, etc. by the extremity of Cold.

In the Caverns or Hollows of the Earth are generated Fountains, Rivers, and
Seas.

Fountains without doubt are generated in the Caverns of the Earth of Air,
which striking against the Sides of them is there condensed into Water, as we
see on the Walls of Vaults and Sellars; where, as the Drops grow big, they
trickle down, and meeting in the lowest place they join together, and come out
in Springs or Fountains.

Thus Supposition makes it very intelligible, how Fountains should be
perpetual, because the Air perpetually enters those Caves, and is perpetually
there condensed.

Nor do I think by any means impossible to make an Artificial Spring, by
building several Arches or Vaults of fit and convenient Stone, whose Sweating
or Drops might by little Channels on the Ground be brought to make a Spring or
Fountain.

Furthermore, it adds something to the likelihood of this Opinion, that
Hilly-Countreys, as the Alps, etc. have more Springs than Plain-Countreys (as
Holland, where are very few) because there are more Caverns in the Earth there.

Rivers are a confluence or meeting of Fountains, and so is the Sea of Rivers;
only there are some Qualities and Affections of the Sea, which will be very
necessary in this place to enquire into; viz.

1. Since all Rivers flow continually into the Sea, how comes it to pass that
it does not overflow its bounds, and cover the whole Earth? The Reason is,
because as much Water as is brought into the Sea by the Rivers, is exhaled up
again by the heat of the Sun, which rarifies it so, that it is scarce or very
seldom perceived. So that in this, as well as in many other Courses of Nature,
there is a perpetual Circulation.

2. Another thing we are to enquire after, is the Saltness of the Sea. Since
all the Rivers that flow into it are fresh, how comes it to pass that the Sea
it self is Salt?

To this may be Answered, That the Sun by lying upon its vast Surface
continually exhales many of the thinnest and subtilest Parts of it, and leaves
the more Gross and Earthy behind, which being in some measure concocted and
heated in the Sun, do thereby acquire that Salt savor. There are many Reasons
that confirm this; As,

1. When we boil Salt Water, we find that the Parts which evaporate are Sweet
and Fresh, and those that remain become the more Salt.

2. Another Argument is, That the Water of the Sea in Summer is salter toward
the South; which is, because the heat of the Sun has there exhaled more of the
Sweet or Fresh parts.

Lastly, The Seawater is by experience found to be salter at the Top than the
Bottom; which is, because the Sun has taken away the Fresher and Sweeter parts
next the Surface.

3. The last Affection of it is the Tide, or Flux and Re-flux.

That the Great Philosopler Aristotle should Scholars, and most of the old
Philosophers, having considered the exact correspondence between the Tide and
the Moon, and also between the Moon, and many other Watery Bodies have ascribed
the Tides to the influence of the Moon; though for my part I cannot see any
Natural Connection between the Cause Effect, which is the first thing should be
enquired into. And if there be no other Reason to be assigned, but their exact
keeping of Time. I cannot see why the Full Moons may not as well be said to
depend on the Spring Tides; but it may be there is a third thing yet
undiscovered, which is the cause of both. In short, whatever has been offered
hitherto by any, has given some Men no great Satisfaction, especially when
they call to mind the setting of Currents, and the vast Tides, both in respect
of Time and Measure. However all conclude, that the end or design of Nature
(which still does every thing for the best) is hereby to keep the Waters of the
Sea from any Stench, Putrefaction, or Corruption, which of necessity must
happen if they did stagnate or remain unmovable.

Airy Meteors are either Winds, or Earthquake; Wind, the Philosophers say, is
a copious Exhalation raised by the Sun and Stars to the middle Air, and thence
violently driven back again by the coldnesss and density of that Region: The
Matter of this Exhalation should seem to be hot and dry, because it is observed
that Winds are most frequent at such times as these Exhalations do most abound.

An Earthquake is a Trembling of the Earth, proceeding from certain hot and
dry Exhalations, shut up within the Bowels of the Earth, and endeavoring to
get forth.

Thus of Substantial Meteors; Those Meteors 1; Vocugo, which is a Gulf or
Ditch, 2; Halo, which is a certain brightness about the Moon, or any Star, 3;
Virge, or Rods, from the resemblance which the Beams of the Sun make by
refraction, when they fall upon a Watery Cloud, 4; Parrelins, which is the
Image of the Sun, refracted in some thick and Watery Cloud near its own Body,
and which seems to stand still sometime according to the disposition of the
Clouds about Sun; and there are more of them than one: The same happens
sometimes also to the Moon, 5; And last, is the Rainbow, which is nothing but
Reflection of the Rays of the Sun from a Watry-Cloud near the Earth; It is
always a part of a Circle, but greater or less, as the Sun is nearer or further
from the Horizon.

The next thing in our Method is to speak of Bodies perfectly mixed.

A Body perfectly mixed, is that which has a perfect Form of its own, distinct
from that of the Elements.

The Affections of the Bodies perfectly mixed proceed from their Qualities which
are either Active, as Heat and Cold; or Passive, whereby they are said to be
capable of Melting, Softning, Bending, Breaking, Sharpning, and the like.

Bodies perfectly mixed are either Inanimate or Animate. Inanimate as Metals,
Stones, and Half or Bastard Metals.

A Metal is an Inanimate Body perfectly mixed, made or growing in the Bowels of
the Earth of Sulphur and Mercury.

Their principal Efficient Cause is the Virtue of the Stars, but especially of
the Sun.

The Instrumental Causes are Heat and Cold.

Their Affections are these three; First, They may be all melted; but these
which have more of the Terrene Concretion, with more difficulty. Secondly, All
Metals are ductile and Malleable; but especially those which are more compact
and soft. Thirdly, They are all weighty by reason of the closeness and
compaction of their Matter.

Their Species are either Pure, as Gold and Silver, or Impure as Lead, Tin,
Brass, and Iron.

Stones are Inanimate Bodies perfectly mixed, of a hard Earthy Substance,
mingled with a sort of unctuous Moistness, and in length of Time grown together
by the Virtue of Heat and Cold.

They are divided into Vulgar or Common, as the Pumice, Free stone, Marble,
Alablaster, Flint, etc. and into Precious, as the Diamond, Ruby, Saphir,
Carbuncle, Amethist, Chrysolite, Jasper, Emerald, Onix, etc.

There are other Bodies distinct from these which are placed in this Topic by
the Name of half or Bastard Minerals. And these are such as have (as it were) a
middle Nature, between Stones and Minerals, and partake of something with each
of them, and yet in something differ from them both.

Some of them may be softened but not melted, as some kind of Earths, viz.
Chalk, Plaster, Oker, Potters Clay, Terra Sigillata, so called, because they
use to set a Seal upon it.

Some again may be melted, as Salt, Alom, Pitch, Sulphur, Vitriol, etc.

Bodies Animate have either no Sense, as Plants: or that have Sense, as Animals.

Plants are Animate Bodies, which grow or increase, and have the faculty of
Nutriment and Generation.

The Parts of Plants are Principal, or less Principal. The Principal Parts
again are either Similar or Dissimilar. The Similar Parts are the Juice, which
is as it were their Blood; Their Tears are those Humors which Naturally and of
their own accord sweat; Their Flesh or Pulp, which is like the Muscles in an
Animal; Their Fibers resemble the Veins or Nerves, and their Bark resembles the
Skin. The Dissimilar Parts are the Root, which is like the Mouth in the Earth
to receive Nourishment; The Stalk, which receives the Nutriment from the Root,
and carries to all the Parts of the Bodies; The Marrow or Pith is the inward
Part of the Stalk. The Branches are spread abroad every way like Arms.

The less Principal Parts are such as are neither of the Plants Essence, nor
yet necessary for its Propagation, as Leaves.

The Corruption of a Plant is either Natural or Violent. Natural is when the
Natural Heat has overcome the Natural Moisture, and so it withers and dries of
it self: Violent when it is Corrupted or Perishes by any outward Principle,
Heat, Frost, or the like.

Their several sorts are Trees, Shrubs and Herbs.

An Animate or Living Creature is an Animate Body, which has Sense, and moves
it self from one place to another, and is either Rational or Irrational. The
Irrational are either imperfect or perfect. Imperfect as Insects, which have
Bodies distinguished into certain Joints or Sections, and the life almost
equally spread through all parts; Wings as Flies, Gnats, Wasps, Bees, Beetles,
etc. The other not, as Gnats, Spiders, Flees, Locus, etc.

Perfect Irrational Animals are either Amphibious, that is, such as live in
both the Elements of Air and Water, As Otters, Frogs, Tortoises, Rats, etc. Or
such as live but in one of the Elements; and those are either Fish, as Whales,
Salmons, Herrings, Pikes, Eles, Carps, Tench, etc. which inhabit the Water; or
Beasts, as Horses, Cows, Lions, Dogs, Deer, Hares, Foxes, etc. which live on
the Land; or Fowls, as Turkeys, Pigeons, Pheasants, Partridges, Woodcocks,
Snipes, Black-Birds, etc. with innumerable others of each sort, too tedious to
repeat, which live in the Air.

Rational, as Man. The Masterpiece of the visible World, for whose Use and
Service all other things were made. As also the Structure of his Body is the
most curious of all others. His Parts are Body and Soul. And here we shall take
notice, first of his Body; because thereby we may also at the same time arrive
to a good Degree of Knowledge in the Bodies of other Animals.

The Parts of Man's Body are divided into these Parts, which are contained, and
those which contain. Those contained are either Humor, or Spirits. Humor in
General is defined by a liquid Part of the Body, contained in certain Vessels,
for the Conservation of the whole Body. Humors are either Excrementitious as
Sweat, Vrin, Dung, etc. or not Excrementitious, but of use; as Blood, Chyle,
Choler, and Melancholy.

Spirit is a Substance the most Fine and Aerie in the whole Body; and it may be
the immediate Instrument, whereby the Soul Acts upon the Body.

Spirits are divided into Natural, Vital and Animal. The Natural Spirits are
such as are generated Liver of the purest Blood, for the support of Nature. The
Vital Spirits are those generated in the Heart of the Natural Spirits; and from
thence by the Arteries, spread into every Part of the Body. The Animal Spirits
are those generated in the Brain of the Vital Spirits, which are the immediate
Instruments of Sense.

The Parts of the Body which contain the Rest, are either Similar or
Dissimilar; Similar, as Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Membranes, Fibers,
Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Flesh, Skin.

Dissimilar or Heterogeneous Parts are either External or Internal. External,
as the Head, the Trunk, the Limbs. The Parts of the Head are the Skull and
Face. The Parts of the Trunk are the Breast and the Belly. The Limbs are the
Hands and Feet. The Internal Parts of the Body are such as are in the lower, or
middle, or the highest Ventricle of the Body. The Lower Ventricle contains
those which we call the Natural Parts, which are either for Nutrition or
Generation. Those that are for Nutrition are again divided into two Classes the
first and second.

The first contains the Gullet or Neck of the Stomach; the Stomach it self; the
Intestines or Guts, which are either Small or Great.

The Small ones are Duodenum, Jejunum, and Ilion. The Great ones are Caecum,
Colon, and Rectum; the Messentery.

Those of the second Class are the Liver, Milt, Spleen, Reins, and Bladder.

Those Parts which are for Generation are either such as are common to both
Sexes, as Testicles and Seminal Vessels; or to either Sex apart, which are the
Pudenda.

The Middle Ventricle contains the Vital Parts, which are the Heart and the
Lungs.

The upper Ventricle contains the Animal Parts, which in one word is called the
Brain; wherein we are to consider the Membranes, being two, which in Latin are
called the Dura Matter, and the Pia Matter; one thicker than the other, and both
encompassing the Brain.

The Parts of the Brain are two, the former and the hinder; the former has
three Ventricles, the Right, the Left, and the Middle.

We come now to the last thing to be considered in Natural Philosophy, and that
is the Soul, which in Vegetables is that by which they grow; in Animals, that
by which they grow and have sense; and in Men, that by which they grow and have
sense, and are Rational.

The Faculties of the Vegetative Soul, which is found in Plants, are these
Three; First, That by which they are nourished and preserved. Secondly, That by
which they increase and grow bigger: And Thirdly, That by which they generate
other Bodies of the same Species or likeness.

The Effect or Consequence of the Vegetative Soul is Life.

The Nutritive Faculty of the Soul is that, whereby it converts another
Substance into its own, for its own preservation; so that herein there are
Three things necessary, viz. something that nourishes, and that is the Soul;
something which is nourished, which is the Animate Body; and something by which
it is nourished, which is the Aliment it self.

That which nourishes is the Soul, wherein it makes use of the Natural heat as
its Instrument.

That which is nourished is the living Body, which as it wastes is still
repaired with fresh Nutriment.

The Nutriment it self is such as has a Power, or is capable of being Animated
by the same Soul, after Digestion and Concoction.

That Faculty of the Soul, by which the Body grows, has by some been thought to
be the same, by which it is nourished, because it has the same Object, viz.
Nourishment; the same Subject, viz; An Animate Body; the same Efficient Cause,
viz, the Soul; and the same Instrument, which is Natural Heat.

Hence Scaliger, and some others, have thought the Nutritive and Augmentative
Faculties of the Soul to be the same.

But it appears that they differ. First, In regard of their End. The End of the
Nutritive Faculty is only the restoring or supplying of those Parts which are
continually consumed and wasted. But that of the Augumentative Part is the
Acquisition of a just Magnitude or Proportion to do those Operations that are
proper to the Body.

2. The different Form. The Form of Nutrition is the bare hanging, or
Assimilation of the Nutriment to the Body; But the Form of Accretion consists
in a Motion of Extension.

3. They differ in regard of the manner of Mutation or Change In Nutrition
there is no Change of the Body as to its Place or Extension; but in
Augmentation there is.

4. They differ in regard of Time. The Nutritive Faculty indures as long as the
Body has the same Form. But the Augmentative no longer than till Body arives at
a certain Magnitude.

The third Faculty of the Vegitative Soul is the Generative, whereby it
produces another thing like it self, for the perpetual conservation of its own
Species, and this is the most noble Faculty of all the three.

Here we are to observe, That nothing that has Life can have this Generative
Faculty, except it be perfect in its kind, and not mutilated, or castrated,
Eunuchs, etc. And except it self be generated by the ordinary, or Natural way,
as all those things that are generated of Putrefaction.

The Affections of a Vegitative Soul, as well of the Sensitive as Rational, are
Life, and Death.

Life is the Conjunction or Union of the Soul with the Body, and consists in an
equal temperament or proportion of the Natural Heat, and Radical Moisture.

Death is the Separation of the Soul and Body,

The Sensitive Soul is that by which an Animal, or Living Creature perceives or
apprehends those things which are without it (to wit, Sensible Objects) so as
to desire those things which are for its Preservation, and by which also it is
moved from Faculties.

The Cognostive, or that of the Senses.

The Appetitive, or the Faculty of Desiring.

The Locomotive, or the Faculty of Moving up and down.

The Cognoscitive, or Faculty of Sense, is that whereby Living Creatures by the
mediation of the Instruments of the Body, perceive and judge of Sensibles
Objects, and direct them to a certain End.

This Faculty is commonly called Sense, and its operation Sensation.

The Senses are either External, or Internal.

The External are Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting and Feeling.

The Internal Senses are such as retain Sensible Objects, and represent them to
the Animal, or Living Creature; not only Present, but Absent; and are these
three, viz. Common Sense, Phantacy and Memory.

The Affections of the Senses are Sleeping and Waking. Sleep is a binding up
(as it were) of all the outward Senses in order to the Repose, and Refreshment
of the Body.

The Remote Cause of it is the Natural Heat, which forces gently the Uapours of
the Aliment received up into the Brain: The next cause is the Vapors
themselves which are thus raised from the Stomach, and stop those passages
through which the Animal Spirits have their course.

The Affection of Sleep is Dreaming, which is an Apparition presented to the
Body Sleeping by the Internal Sense.

Some of these are Natural, and they proceed from the Image or reflection of the
Thoughts, or Actions of the Day; and some are Supernatural, and sent either by
God himself, or Good Angels, and do many times presage things to come; or else
by the Devil, or Evil Angels to work and terrify us, and both these last kinds
are proper only to Man.

Waking is the Freedom, or Liberty either of all, or of some of the Senses; and
the cause of it is either Internal, or External.

Internal, as the finishing of the Concoction of the Meat, for after
Concocction and Separation made in the Stomach the Vapors cease, and so the
Body Wakes, or else the Native Heat, which by degrees dissolves and dissipates
those Vapors, or it may be both together.

The External Cause of Waking are such outward things or Accidents as may
disturb us, as Noise, Motion, and the like.

The Appetitive Faculty is that, whereby the Animal, or Living Creature is
moved to seek that which its Senses tells is good, and avoid that which its
Senses represent to it as Evil. This Faculty is called the Sensitive Appetite,
as it is taken for the power of desiring; and the Action it self is called
seeking or desiring.

The Object of it is every thing that is the Object of the External Senses,
which the Fantasy judges good, and desires them; or Evil, and avoids them.

The Sensitive Appetite is either Concupiscible, whereby the Living Creature is
carried to desire any Good which seems pleasant and delightful; or Irascible,
when it is carried to desire any Good which cannot be obtained without
difficulty and labor. The Affections of the Sensitive Appetite are either
Simple or Mixed; the Simple are either good, as Joy, Love, Hope, etc. or Evil,
as Grief, and Fear.

The mixed are Anger, which is an Affection compounded of Sorrow, and desire of
Revenge; and its Kinds are Hate and Shame. Or Zeal which is a mixed Affection of
Love and Anger, when the thing Loving is angry with that which offends the
thing Loved.

The Locomotive Faculty is that whereby a living Creature is moved from place
to place, either in whole or in part to seek Good or avoid Evil; and in this
there are three things required.

(1). That which moves it, which is either the Final or Efficient Cause.

(2). The Bodily Instrument which moves it, which is remotely the Brain, whence
the Animal Spirits Flow into the Nerves, which the Soul makes use of in moving
the Body, and Proximately or Particularly the Muscles, which are formed so, as
to be easily contracted or extended in the performance of all Locomotion.

(3). That which is moved, to wit either the whole Body, or some certain part
of it, as the Tongue, Hand, Foot, Eye, etc.

The Rational Soul is the Form of Man, whereby he has the Power of
Understanding, Reasoning, and Willing.

The Faculties of it are the Understanding and the Will.

Here they lay down certain Theorems or Speculations, containing in general
Terms the Nature of the Soul: As (1) That the Rational Soul is a Substance
Spiritual, and Immaterial. (2) The Rational Soul is Incorruptible, and
Immortal. (3) The Rational Soul is not the same Numerical thing in all Men.

The Understanding is a Faculty of the Rational Soul, by which a Man
Understands, Knows, and Judges things that are Intelligible.

The Word Understanding which the Latins call Intellect, is taken for the Mind,
or Soul it self, in which it does Understand.

Sometimes it is taken for a Habit or Knowledge of Principles, and is called in
Latin Intelligentia.

Sometimes it is taken for the Act of the Mind or Soul, which in Latin is
called Intellectio.

Sometimes it is taken for the Faculty of the Power of Understanding, and so it
is in this place.

The Understanding is said to be either Speculative, when it takes Knowledge of
any thing only for Truths sake, and rests in the bare Cognition. Or Practical,
which takes Knowledge of a thing, not only for Knowledge sake, but also in
order to the doing it, when it considers it a thing to be done; and hence it
begins to move the Appetite, not by compelling, but by directing and showing it
what is to be done.

The Operations of the Intellect, or Understanding, are these three, (1) The
Apprehension of simple things, when a Man conceives only one thing alone, as
the Heaven, the Earth, a Man, a Beast, etc. (2) Composition and Division, when
simple Conceptions are joined together, so as something is affirmed or denied,
but yet without any Discourse or Reason; as when he conceives that a Man is a
Living Creature. (3) Discourse or Reasoning, when the Understanding gathers one
thing from another.

And here we are to take notice, that Sense is only concerned, and only
comprehends Singulars, but the Understanding Vniversals: As also, That nothing
is in the Understanding, which was not before in the Sense.

The Will is a Faculty of a Rational Soul, whereby a Man desires, or avoids
things known from the Understanding, and this is called the Rational Appetite.

The Object of it in general is any thing which is Represented by the
Understanding, as Good; and also its contrary, any thing which is represented
to it as Evil.

The Will is either Simple or Determinate. Simple or Universal is that whereby
a Man is carried to every thing that is good in General, whether Real or
Apparent.

Determinate or Particular, is that whereby our Will is determined upon this or
that particular Object.

And thus much in Brief of the Philosophy of the Ancients. Now follows a short
or Brief Discourse of the Doctrins of the Modern Philosophers, wherein they
Receed from the Ancients.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF Des Cartes's Philosophy; BEING The New and general Received
Philosophy.
IN all Sciences there are certain Principles or Postulata's supposed, upon
which the whole Frame or Contexture of the Work depends. In this Philosophy*
Des Carts has made use of new ones distinct from all that ever have handled
that Subject before him.

He calls his Book the Principles of Philosophy, which he has divided into four
several Parts.

The first concerns the Principles of Human Knowledge, wherein he shows, that
they who enquire after Truth, must once doubt of every thing in the World, even
of Sensible Things, and Mathematical Demonstrations.

Of Sensible Things, because we find the Senses often err; and also because in
our Dreams we often think we see those things which neither are, nor ever were;
and there are no certain signs to a Man thus doubting, whereby he can
distinguish Sleeping and Waking.

Of Mathematical Demonstrations, because we can have no certainty of the truth
of our Faculties; But that we our Selves really are he proves, because we
Think; for even out Doubting or Thinking necessarily supposes or implies
something that does doubt or think.

And hence he infers, That our Minds are more cognoscible or obvious to our
Knowledge than any Substance or Body; because by their help and assistance it
is, that we come to understand Bodies Notions and Affections; and the more we
learn of the Nature or Being of our own Minds.

Nor can we (as he says) having finite Minds; judge or comprehend any thing
rightly concerning Infinity. And hence it is, that we are always at a loss
about Infinite Extention of Body or Space, and Infinite Divisibility of Matter;
and hence he would teach to distinguish betwixt Infinite and Indefin^te. And
then he concludes his first Book of Principles with showing the Principal
Causes of all Errors, which he reduces to these Four:

1. The first are the Prejudices of our Infancy, before we come to the right
use of our Reason.

2. The second Cause of Error is, because we cannot forget or drive out of our
Minds those Prejudices.

3. The third is, That we weary and busy our selves in attending to those
things that are not present or obvious to our Senses; and so we do not judge of
them from our own Perception, when present; but from a former conceived Opinion
or Imagination.

And 4. The Fourth and last Cause of Error is, That we tie our Conceptions to
Words and Terms, which do not rightly and justly answer the Nature of things.

His Second Part of Philosophy treats of the Principles of Material Things.

Here he proves the Existence of Things Material, or such as are without us,
because they do affect our Senses. Now we cannot make our Selves perceive one
thing more than another, so that this Affection of our Senses must needs
proceed from the Things themselves, and consequently those Things must be.

He places the Nature or Essence of Matter in its Extension, and not in any
other of its Affections; and hence takes occasion to show the Prejudices which
we commonly have of Rarefaction and a Vacuity.

His Notions of Place and Motion are also new; to which he adds (after he has
spoken God as the first Cause and Mover of all Things) the Laws of Nature. And
in short In this Book of his Principles he shows that, which in Aristotle's
Philosophy is called, The Affections of Body in general.

His Third Part treats of the Visible World, and of its several Parts.

He places the Sun in the Center, and supposes all the rest of the Planets to
be moved about it.

And according to this Hypothesis he solves all the several Phenomenon of the
Earth, the Planets, fixed Stars, and the like.

Afterward, for the Exposition of the Phenomenon of Nature, he assumes certain
Principles; to wit, That one part of the Matter or Substance of the Heavens
consists of many little Particles, and these he calls his Globuli. And then
about these Globuli, or little Parts, he places another Matter, whose Parts are
much less, and much more Materia Subtilis, which fills up the Corners or
Spaces, as he supposes, amongst his Globuli. And then he supposes some other
Parts of Matter, whose Figures are not so apt or fit for Motion; and these he
calls his Particula Striatae. And out of these three, as out of so many
Elements, he supposes all Bodies to be made.

According to this Supposition he expounds the Nature of Light, and how it is
dispersed by Sun, and the rest of the Luminary Bodies; as also the Nature of
the Comets, with their Motions.

He assigns every Star and Comet its several Vortex or Whirl-pool; and
according to that Supposition, he demonstrates their Spots and Changes.

According to his own Principles, he shows how all the Bodies might at first be
generated; and gives an Account of their several Changes and Revolutions,
together with the Reason of the Equality of those Motions which are found in
all Bodies.

His Last Book of Principles contains a Discourse of the Earth and Sea, with
the Nature of the several Bodies therein. And here he gives you his Notion of
Gravity and Levity, and tells you why Bodies are not heavy, according to his,
as well as Aristitle's Hypothesis, in their own Natural places. How it comes to
pass, that heavy Bodies tend toward the Center of the Earth, whence proceeds
the Flux and Re-flux of the Sea, and how it comes to differ upon several
Shores, and how it comes to pass that there is none in Pools, Lakes, and
standing Waters.

He treats also in this Book concerning Heat, Vapors, Spirits, Exhalations, and
the Saltness or Freshness with the different Tastes of Water.

He treats likewise of Metals and Minerals; of Fire, and Combustible Bodies; of
the Motion of Nitre, and the spreading of Gunpowder when set on fire; of the
Lodestone, and how it is that it draws Iron to it; as also of the Attractive
Power of Jet, Amber, and such like Bodies.

And in the Latter end of this Book, he treats of the Senses, both External and
Internal; wherein his Notions are all New and Curious. And indeed the Design of
Philosophy being principally to quicken and perfect the Judgment, this of his
being of a more fine and sublime Nature than that of Aristotle's, and the other
Old Philosophers, must certainly very well deserve Reading, especially since
(as he tells us) he has omitted nothing in Nature (yet excepting those things
which Philosophers in former times used to call Occult Qualities) whereof he
has not given an Account, or at least laid down such Principles in his
Discourses upon other Subjects, that any of those may easily be solved by them.

And whereas some may possibly think his Hypothesis (especially about the
Creation, wherein Moses is very particularly) may seem to be different from all
received Doctrines of the Church, he at last entirely submits all his Writing
to her Censure.

T^ ye. Worshipful Gilbert Gerard Co^sine of Brafferton hall in ye. north
Rideing of Yorkshire Esquire? son and heyr of Sr. Gilbert Gerard Knight. and Baronet by
Mary Daughter to ye. Rt. Rererend father in God John Cossu^ late Ld Bishop of
Durham. This plato is humbly D. D: by Ric. Bl^m^



ARITHMETIC.
ARITHMETIC is the Art of well numbering, which is divided into two parts,
Simple and Compound.

The simple is that which simply considers the Nature of Number.

Number is that by which every thing is counted, either by an entire Number, or
by Parts, where first must be considered the Notation, and then the Numeration.

The Notation of Number has 10 Characters, viz. Thousands, Thousands; as in the
fourth place we count 1000, in the fifth place 10000, and in the sixth 100000,
In the third Period 1000000, 10000000, 100000000; So likewise in the fourth
Period, Thousand of Millions, where there are also three Degrees which are
repeated in like manner with the rest, and so to Infinites.

Numeration finds by two Terms proposed a third, and if it cannot be performed
altogether,

Numeration is either Primary, or conjoined, the first, or principle is that
which joins once one number with another, as Addition and Subtraction.

Addition is the first Numeration, by which

Subtraction is the first Numeration, by which

Conjoined Numeration, compounds Number with Number as often as it may be
proposed, which is Multiplication or Division.

Multiplication is that by which the Number that is Multiplied is adjoined or
made use of, so often as the Unite is contained in the Number which Multiplies;
and so the Product of both is found.

Division is that by which the Divisor is so many times taken from that which
must be divided, as it is contained, and then you have the Product which is
called Quotient.

From Division proceeds the difference of Number equally even and uneven. An
equal or even Number, is that which may be divided into two parts without
Fraction, as 2, 4, 6, 10, 16. An unequal or odd Number is that which cannot be
divided without Fraction, as 3, 5, 7.

Again, an Even Number is subdivided into equally even, or equally uneven, and
into unequally uneven.

An equally even Number, is that which may be divided into equal parts, to 1,
as 4 is divided into 2 by 2, and 2 by 1. In like manner 32 into 16, 16 into 8,
8 into 4, 4 into 2, and 2 into 1.

Equally uneven is that which can only once be equally divided, as 10, 30, 50.
Unequally even is that which has several equal parts, but cannot admit of
Division as far as to one, as 12, 24, 36, 48.

Secondly Number is principal, or compounded; A principal Number is not divided
by another Number of Multitude, as 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and others; It is also
called an uncompounded Number, that is to say, it does not consist of any other
Number of Multitude.

A Compounded Number is that which may be divided by another Number of
Multitude, as 4 is divided into 2 by 2.

From these arises another difference of Number, viz. principals, and
compounded between themselves; The principal Numbers between themselves, are
such as are not commonly divided by any Number of Multitude, as 2 and 3, 5 and
6.

Compounded Numbers amongst themselves, are such which are frequently divided
by a Number of Multitude, as 4 and 6 are compounded between themselves; because
they are commonly divided by 2, which is a Number of Multitude.

But before the Parts of Number be Counted, they require some proper Notation
and Reduction.

Notation is of the Parts which has only two Marks, which are separated by an
interposing Line, the Number above is called the Numerator, that below be
Denominator.

Reduction is of Terms, Intigers and Parts.

Reduction of Terms is made of the least Term proportionate, and is General or
Special; the General is a Division of Terms composed amongst themselves, by the
greatest and most common Divisor, as 8 by 4; Special by the Species of
Numeration to the Terms of two parts.

Reduction of Intigers is a Multiplication of Intigers by the Name of the
parts.

Reduction of parts or Fractions to Intigers, is a Division of parts by its own
Name; Reduction of Parts to Parts, is a Multiplication of Terms, by a Name
Alternate to two proportionals of the same Name.

Reduction of Parts to Equal Unites, is a Reduction of several Parts.

The other compounded Part of Arithmetic, shows the Composition of Numbers in
Quantity and Quality.

The Terms of the Ratio of a compounded Ratio, or Reason; the Consequent is the
second.

Composition in Quantity is either of Equality, which is alone, and individual,
as 1 to 1, 2 to 2, from 4 to 4, from 9 to 9; or of Inequality which is called
difference, or Ratio.

Difference is a Composition of as much as a Term, differs from a Term; and so
it is known by Subtraction; so the difference of 2 to 3, of

The Ratio is a Composition so long as one Term is contained in another, and
therefore it is known by Division; and so after the Ratio or Rule is given, the
Terms are known by contrary Multiplication, as the Ratio of 3 to 2, is 2 and a
half, because 3 contains 2 once and a half. The Ratio of inequality is either
more or less. The Ratio of the greater inequality is Termed the Major Term, but
of the lesser by putting the Sub before, as the Ratio of 2 to 1 is called
double, of 1 to 2 Subduple.

Ratio is either Primary or conjoynd, the first has a Species of Ratio, and is
simple, or Multiplied; simple when the Major Term contains the lesser but once
and something more, as the Superparticular and Superpartient.

The Superparticular Ratio is when the Term comprehends one Term once, and one
part more; so one Second, Third, Fourth, or Fifth is called

The Superpartient Ratio is when one Term comprehends another, once and some
part over and above, so 2 thirds, 3 fourths, 4 fifths is called Superbipartient
third; Supertripartient fourth, superquadripartient fifth, and so of others; as
for Example 5/3, 7/4, 9/5.

The Multiplied Ratio is, when one Term exactly contains another more than
once, so twice, thrice, four times is called the Double, Triple and Quadruple
Rule, as 2/1, 3/1, 4/1.

The conjoined Ratio is that which contains diverse sorts of Ratio's, as the
manifold Superparticular Ratio, when one Term contains another more than once,
and some part more, as a Double Sesque Second, a Triple Sesque Third, a
Quadruple Sesque Fourth, as for Example 5/2, 10/3, 17/4.

The Multiplied Super partient Ratio, is when one Term contains another more
than one, and several parts more, as the double Superbipartient third, that is
2 and, the Triple Supertripartient fourth 3, the Quadruple Superquadripartient
fifth 4, as for Example 15/4 24/5.

The Comparison of Number in quality is called proportion, which is either
Arithmetical, or Geometrical.

Arithmetical proportion is an equality of differences; Geometrical proportion
is in the equality of the Ratio; this is properly the Portion of Numbers, and
are called proportionable Numbers, as 3, 6, 4, 8.

Partly direct as 3 to 6, so is 4 to 8; partly reverst as 8 to 4, 6 to 3, and
alternately as 3 to 4, 6 to 8.

Proportion is separate or continued; proportion separate or disjoined, is that
in which there are actually 4 Terms, as 12, 8, 6, 2, for throughout the
difference is 4.

Proportion conjoined, or continued, is that whose middlemost Term, is compared
to all the Extremes, which also is comprehended in 4 Terms, as in 8, 6, 4, the
differences are equal, for the Number of 2 is throughout, and the middlemost is
taken twice, for as 8 is to 6, so is 6 to 4.

Separate proportion is Simple, or Multiplied; the simple is in 4 Terms and is
direct, as the Golden Number so called from its singular use, in which amongst
many other things is chiefly comprehended all the Invention, and supputation of
Parts and Ratio's; where it is reciprocal, when it is as the First Term of the
First Ratio, to the First Term of the Second Ratio, so the Second Term of the
Second Ratio, is to the Second of the First.

Separate Multiplied Proportion is when more than Four Terms are used in
Composition, or Continuation; Composition of Terms is either Primary,
Secondary; Primary as Addition, and, Alligation.

Addition, which is called the Rule of Fellowship, is when the Terms of
proportion given are added, and is Triple 1, 2, 3; the First is the Addition of
the Antecedent with the Consequent, to the Consequent, as 4 to 3, so 8 to 6;
then as 7 to 3, so 14 to 6. The Second is an Addition of diverse to one
Consequent, or of one Antecedent to diverse Consequents, as 2 to 4, so 3 to 6,
and 8 to 4. The Third is an Addition of all the Antecedents to all the
Consequents.

Alligation, or Deduction, is a mixture of the, several kinds, whereof the Mean
is tempered.

Alligation is of a Mean either acquired, or given; the Alligation which seeks
the Mean is that, which having the Terms proposed seeks the Mean in the
Division, of those which are added by their Number, as if there are 2 Terms by
2, 3 by 3, and so consequently. The Alligation which gives the Mean is the
Equation of the Mean proposed by reciprocal differences to that of unequal
Terms.

The second Composition of Terms is made by the Multiplied Terms, when for 2
simple we take 2 which are made by them.

Multiplication is sometimes alone, which is Vulgarly called the Double Rule,
or the Rule of Six quantities. Sometimes there is both Multiplication and
Addition, which First Multiply the

Proportion continued by the Terms is when any Term of the Antecedent Ratio is
continued to the consequent, as the Invention of less Numbers into proposed
Ratio's and Equation, that is, the continuation of two proportionate Orders in
two Numbers, which is orderly, or confused.

Orderly Equation is that which is according to the same order of Numbers, so
the First are proportionable

Confused Equation is when all as the First of the First Order is to the
Second, so the Second of the Second is to the Third; and as the Second of the
First is to the Third, so the First of the Second is to the Second; as for
Example, 9/24, 8/18, 6/16, for as 9 is to 8, so is 18 to 16; and as 8 is to 6,
so is 24 to 8.

Proportion continued is when the whole Ratio of the First Term is to the
Second; In like manner it is of the same with the Second to the Third, as in 2,
4, 8.

Proportion continued, as separated, is simple in Three Terms, or Multiplied in
those which are long continued, as the Invention of Terms, and the sum of the
Geometrical Proportion, and so the Ratio of the First to the Second is doubled
to the Third, tripled to the Fourth, and so consequently Ratio 1 to 4 is the
First Ratio doubled to the Second, that is to say, twice put down and so
Multiplied by it self. So much for the Invention of continued, or conjoined
Numbers: Here follows the sum of Geometrical Progression.

If the First is taken from the Second and Last, it will be as the Remainder of
the Second to the First, so the Remainder of the Last to the Last all
preceding; and then if 4 (which will be equal to the Remainder of the Last, as
the Remainder

Amongst the many Assistances I received from Volume, I had this following
Compendious Tract of Arithmetic recomended unto me by a Person of Honor, as
worthy to be inserted for its Excellency, being (Multum in Parvo) which said
Tract I was the rather induced to insert as being Composed by an Ingenious
Gentleman that has freely contributed his assistance in some other parts of the
Mathematics, and in particular in Fortification, wholly composed by him. The
said Tract is as follows.

NVMERATION.
NVmeration is a Series of Numbers by a Decimal Progression, every place
toward the Left Hand being 10 times the Value of the next place to the Right.

The best way of reading any Number is to distinguish them into Hundreds, as in
this Example, 986, 157, 432; Or Nine Hundred Eghty Six Million, a Hundred Fifty
Seven Thousand, Four Hundred Thirty two; and so of any other Number.

ADDITION.
HAving placed the Unites of the respective Progressions in Ranks and Files:
begin and add together the Unites of the Right Hand File, setting down the Sum
underneath (if it be under 10), but if just 10, then set down a Cipher (viz. 0)
and carry 1 to the next place, and if above 10, set down the Excess, and carry
for every 10 an Unite. ^

The reason of this is nothing else than all the Parts added together make up
the Whole, as in the Line a, c, a, b, (14), and b, c, (24), together make the
Line ^

The best proof of Addition is thus; After you have added all the Numbers, cut
off the first Line, and then add the rest; then Subtract the one Product from
the other, and the Remainder is equal to the upper Number, for the Product of
the one Addition is lesser than the other by the First Number only, therefore
their difference must be equal to the First Number.

In Numbers of diverse Denominations, when the Sum of them amounts to an
Integer, or Integers of the next greater Denomination, add these Integers to
those of the next Denominations.

4 Farthings make a Penny; 12 Pence, a Shilling; and 20 Shillings a Pound.

7 92-/100, Inches make a Link; 160 square Links a Perch; 40 Perch a Rood;
and 4 Rood an Acre.

SVBTRACTION.
HAving placed the less Number under the greater, according to their respective
Progressions, beginning at the Right Hand, Subtract the lower Figure out of
that above it set down, the Remainder under it; but if the Figure chance to be
less, then there must be a Unite borrowed from the next place, or Progression
to supply the Unite to the next lower Figure on the Left Hand, which is the
same thing as if the Figure above it was diminished by an Unite; and for a
Proof of the Operation, the Number subtracted, and the Remainder must still
take that out of which it was subtracted.

For out of a Number a, c, let a less Number a, b, be Deducted; then by the
Hypothesis a, b, with the Remainder a, c, are equal to the whole a, c, seeing
the parts united are equal to the whole, ^ From 28 34 405 Subtract 15 7 26
Remain 13 27 379 Proof 28 405

In Number of diverse Denominations, when the Number to be Subtracted is greater
than the other, then Borrow one from the next Denomination.

MVLTIPLICATION.
FIrst, To Multiply any Number betwixt 30 and 100. In the two Numbers proposed
you are to observe how many Unites each of Fingers being open) lay down so many
Fingers as the Numbers want of 10.

Note, All that stand up are Tens, those that are down Multiplied one by
another are Unites, which added to the Tens gives the Number,

Place the Numbers one under the other, as in Addition, then Multiply the last
Right Hand Figure of the Multiplicand by the same of the Multiplicator, and set
the Product (if less than 10) under; but if greater, carry the Excess (that is,
for every 10 one Unite) to the next place: And if the Multiplicator have more
places than one, Figure of each respective Product under that figure of the
Multiplicator, by which it was made, and so on to the Left, observing ranks and
files.

CM. XM. M. C. X. V. 4 2 6 3 2 7 1 4 2 1. Product 2 1 4 0 3 2 8 0 0 4 1 2 0 2.
Product 5 4 0 0 6 8 0 0 0 7 1 8 0 0 3. Product 8 6 0 0 0 9 1 2 0 0 0 0 Total
Sum 1 3 9 3 2 2 426 Multiplicand. 327 Multiplicator. 2982 First Product. 852
Second Product. 1278 Third Product. 139332 Sum of all the Products.

The reason of which (as in the Table) is, that if all the particular Sums of
the Products of the Multiplicand, arising from each Multiplicator be set down
and added together, they will equal the Sum of all the Products taken together.

Example.
If a Soldier having Weekly 7 Shillings, how many Shillings must you have to
pay 7693.

7693 7 53851 Soldiers to Pay.

DIVISION.
DIvision is nothing else but the Deducting a less Number from a greater, as
often as may be, and so finding at last the Number, by whose Unites that less
Number being repeated, makes a Number equal to the greater, or near to it.

The greater Number is called the Dividend, the lesser the Divisor, and the
last the Quotient.

Set the Figures of the Divisor under an equal number of figures of the
Dividend on the Left Hand; if those figures of the Dividend be of greater, or
at least of equal value with those of the Divisor; otherwise you must place the
first figure of the Divisor under the second of the Dividend: Then having set
down the Divisor right, make Points over the figures of the Dividend from the
Unite place of the Divisor inclusive; the number of Points denote the number of
Figures in the Quotient.

For facilitating the Division prepare such a Table (if your Number to be
Divided, or your Divisor, consist of many figures) as this following, by which
you may find how often the Divisor is contained in the Dividend, or the
respective figures in it; by which Multiplying the Divisor, deducing the
Product out of the upper figures of the Dividend, what Remains must be
considered in the next Operation, if there be more places than one in the
Dividend: The next figure of the Dividend must be taken down, and set next to
the Remainder (if there be any,) and the Divisor must be again set under, if
the value figures be sufficient; if not, there must be a Cipher set in the
Quotient, and then the next figure of the Dividend taken down, and the very
same Operation repeated until the Work be done.

The Reason of the Table is, if you Multiply Divisor by 2, and you would find
the double value of it; if you add the double value to the Divisor, you will
find the Triple, and so on.

REDUCTION.
REduction is performed by Multiplication and Division, in bringing all sorts
of Coins, or Measures to a greater or lesser Species; that is, Multiplication,
and to a greater by Division. As for Example, 20 l. Multiplied by 20 s. makes
400 s. divided by 20 s. makes 20 l.

The GOLDEN RVLE.
THis Rule is either Single, or Double.

The Single Rule of Three is when three Numbers are given, and a fourth
demanded; and

The single Rule of Three Direct is when three Numbers are given, and a fourth
is demanded, which bears the same proportion to the third as the second does to
the first. For Example, If four Acres of Ground cost 80 l. what will eight cost
of the same Ground.

Note, That in all Questions the several Coins and Measures must be expressed,
and made known.

Secondly* The Number to which you are to find a Proportion, must be the last
in order.

Thirdly, The Number which is like in quantity to that whereunto you are to
find a Proportion, must be first set down, and if it be not alike in quantity,
it must be brought to it. As if 7 l. maintain 15 Men a Mouth, how many will 9
l. 10 s. maintain: Here the Pounds are to be brought to Shillings.

Having stated the Questions, they are to be resolved thus:

First, If the Number that asks the Question be greater than that of the same
Denomination, and also require more, or if it be less, and yet require less;
then the Number which is of the same Denomination with the Number asking the
Question is the Divisor, and the Rule is Direct: But if the Number that asks
the Question be greater than that of the same Denomination, and requires less,
or if it be less, and requires more; then the Number asking the Question is the
Divisor; and if thus, the Rule is Inverse.

The Reason of the Operation of the Direct Rule is demonstrated from the 19th
Proposition, Lib. 7. Euclid. viz. If there be four Numbers in Proportion, the
Number produced of the first and fourth is equal to the Number produced of the
second and third; and if it be so, then these four Numbers shall be in
Proportion, as in the Example, the fourth Term found, 160 being Multiplied by 4
(the first Term) the Product will be the same with the Product of the third,
Multiplied by the second, viz. 640.

Wherefore if the Product of the second and third Terms, viz. 640, be divided
by the first, viz. 4, the Quotient, viz. 160, is the fourth Proportional.

The SINGLE RVLE of THREE Inverse.
THis Rule is when there are three Numbers given, and a fourth demanded, which
bears the same Proportion to the second, as the third to the first.

Example.
If a quantity of Hay will keep 8 Horses 12 Days, how many Days will the same
quantity keep 16 Horses.

The same Proportion 8 Horses bears to 12 Days, so do the 16 Horses to 6 Days.

The DOUBLE RVLE.
THis Rule is when there are five. Terms given, and a sixth in Proportion to
them is demanded; As if 4 Men spend 19 l. in 3 Months, how many Pounds will 8
Men spend in 8 Months.

Of the five Numbers given three, imply a Supposition, and two more a Question.

For ranking the Terms, observe amongst the Terms of Supposition, which of them
is of the same name with the Number sought, and place that Term in the Middle;
or second Place, write the two other Terms of Supposition one above the other
in the first Place, and the Terms of demand one above the other in the last
Place, in such manner that the uppermost may have the same Men 4 -- 19 -- 8
Men. Months 3 -- 00 -- 8 Months.

There it is resolved by two Single Rules of Three, observing still the
abovementioned Rules.

4 19 8 38 152 152

3 38 9 114 342 342

FARCTIONS.
IF in the Division of the Operations there remains any thing, then the
Remainder is the Numerator of the Fraction, whose Denominator is the Divisor,
and does express one of the Integers in the Quotient into so many parts, the
value of which in the known parts of one Integer is found by Multiplying the
Numerator of the Fraction by the Number of known Parts of the next inferior
Denomination, which are equal to the Integer, and divide that Product by the
Denominators in that inferior Denomination.

And if there happen to be any Fraction in the Quotient, you may find the value
thereof in the next inferior Denomination by the same Rule; Pound will be
found in Shillings and 3 diviz. Multiply the Numerator 9 by 20 (the Number of
Shillings in a Pound) the Product 180 which divide by the Denominator 16, the
Quotient is 2 Shillings 4/16, Parts of a Shilling, which by the former Rule is
found in value 3 d.

To reduce a Fraction to its least Terms is by finding the greatest common
Measure of both the Fractions (that is the greatest Number which will Divisor
by the Remainder (if there be any) and so continue dividing the last Divisors
by the Remainders until there be no Remainder (neglecting the Quotients) so is
the last Divisor the greatest common Measure to the given Numbers.

A single Fraction is reduced to its least Terms by dividing the Numerator and
Denominator by their greatest Common Measure, then the Quotients will be the
Numerator of the Fraction, equal to the former, and in the least Terms.

177 (132 91 26 13 last Divisor. 26 00
91/117 by 13 91 (7 13 thus 117 (9 -- 7 13 00 -- 9 00

When the Numerator and Denominator are Even Numberst, hey may be measured by
two.

Note, The Rule of Three is to be proved by Transposition, viz. the last Number
in the sum must be set first in the Proof, and the first last; the product
found in the Middle place. Then working as is before taught, the midlemost
Number will come forth (if it be right performed); you must also in the Proof
draw into the Multiplications the Remainder of the Divisions, as in the
Examples following.

Example to Exercise the GOLDEN RVLE.
First for the Direct Rule.
1. IF 1 lb. of Powder cost 4 d. 2 What will 595 Pound cost?

4 18 -- -- 18 4760 595 -- (2 (1 10710 2677 (22 3 4444 1222 (11 11

Answer 2 l. 3 s. 1 d. 2 l. Transposition, or Proof.

If 595 lb. 2 l. 3 s. 1 d. 1 lb.

2. If of one Circle the Diameter being 7, the Circumference 22 Inches, what is
the Circumference of a Circle whose Diameter is 75 Inches?

Proof. 7 -- 22 -- 75 75 -- 235 5/7 -- 7 22 7 -- -- -- 1650 150 525 7 150 -- --
(5 11550 (22 1650 (235 5/7 5255 777 52

Note, that in such Questions with Fractions, you must Multiply the first
Number by the Denominator of the Fraction of Second and Third Numbers; and the
Fraction of the first must be set down under the second Number, that all may be
reduced equally, as in the foregoing, and this Example.

If one Man work one Day 3 1/9 Rod, how much will 10 Men work in one Day?

-- 3 -- 10 10 -- 37 -- 1 -- 15 2 1 15 -- (2 -- (2 150 (37 20 75 (3 44 20

For the Inverse Rule.
If 3 Men work a Raveline in 72 Days, in how long time will 18 Men work the
same?

Proof. 3 -- 72 -- 18 18 -- 12 -- 3 3 12 -- -- 246 (12 Days. 36 188 18 11 --
261 (72 Days. 261 33

There is a Castle besieged, which is sufficiently Victualled for 12 months, 10
Ounces of Bread, 7 Ounces of Cheese, and 3 Ounces of Butter every day. The
Governor is advertised, that if the Castle can hold out 15 Months with the same
Provisions, that the Siege shall be raised; How much then shall be allowed to
every Soldier a Day, that they may be able to hold out the time?

12 -- 10 -- 15 12 -- 7 -- 15 12 -- 3 -- 15 12 12 12 -- -- (9 -- (6 20 84 (5
9/15 Ounces of Cheese. 36 (2 2/5 Ounces of Butter. 10 15 15 120 (8 Ounces of
Bread. 15

Examples in the Double Rule.
If four Soldiers can make up 12 Rood of a Trench in 24 Hours, how many Roods
can 32 Soldiers make up in 72 Hours?

Soldiers. Rood. Soldiers. Hours. Rood. Hours. 4 -- 12 -- 32 24 -- 96 -- 72
12 72 -- -- 64 192 384 (Rood. 32 672 Rood 44 96 -- -- 6912 (288 384 6912 24

If 3 Horses cost in keeping 6 Days 16 s. what Horses 48 Days?

3 -- 16 -- 24 6 -- 128 -- 48 16 48 -- -- 144 1024 384 (128 s. 24 512 333 -- --
shill. 384 6144 (102 4 (4 shill. 6666 51 l.

If 2 Soldiers have 4 for Months Entertainment 9 l. 12 s. what shall 756
Soldiers have in 12 Months?

2 -- 9 -- 12 -- 756 20 192 -- -- 192 1512 6804 756 -- (1 145152 (7257 (6 22222
-- 3628 -- 16

Of the SQUARE ROOT.
Every Number being multiplied by it self of what value soever, gives a Square
Number, and the Number whereof the Square is produced by the Multiplication of
it in it self, is called the Side, or Root of the Square.

Therefore to find the Quadrate, or Square Root, or side of any Number which
Multiplied in it self makes the Number proposed. You are to take Notice that
all Squares under 100 are found by the following Table, or by Multiplying any
of the nine Simple Numbers in themselves; but the sides of greater Squares are
to be found out only by Art.

The Table.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

This Artificial Device is taken from the 4 Propositions of Euclid, where by
Demonstration it is proved, that if a right Line be cut into any 2 Parts, or
Segments, the Square of the whole Line is equal to the Squares of the Segments,
and to the 2 right angled Figures made of the Segments; as in the Figure, the 2
Diagonals K, G, and b, f, are the Squares of the Segments a, b, and b, c, also
the Complements B, K, and f, G, are the right angled Figures, made by
Multiplying the Line a, b, by b, C.

The same parts are to be found in any Square Number; as for Example, let the
Number be 169, whose side is 13, the side divided into 2 parts, viz. 10 and 3,
multiplying each part by it self one, viz. 10 by 10, and 3 by 3, then multiply
one by the other, as 10 by 3, and 3 by 10, so you shall have 4 plain Numbers,
whereof 2 are Squares. Therefore as the Square 169 is made by adding these four
Numbers together, so by subducting of them severally it is resolved. To which
First Mark each odd, or third place with Points, because the particular Squares
are to be found in the odd places, and how many Points there be of so many
Figures the Root is to consist of. Then for so much as the Unity standing under
the first Point next the Left Hand is both a Square,.. and the side of a
Square, that Figure therefore being set in the Quotient alone, and Subducted
from the Unity, standing under the Point, nothing remains.

169 (1 1 -- 0

This Unity set alone by it self in the Quotient does signify 10, when another
Figure is set by it, representing the side of the other lesser Square, as this
does the side of the greater. Wherefore the greater Diagonal K, G, is now
Subducted from the whole Square, and the side thereof, if K, c, or a, b, they
being equal to one another, and also the side of one of the Complements is
found out: and this is the first Step. Moreover double the Figure in the
Quotient, because being doubled it is viz. K, 1, and G, 1; then setting 2,..
the double Number, under 6, divide 6 (each in this place is as much as 60, and
represents both the Complements) by 2, the Quotient is 3 representing the other
side Remaining of the Complements, viz. j, f, or b, C, which Number place in
the Quotient, and reckon it for the Segment remaining Line given. Wherefore
because 3 is the side of the Remaining Diagonal, that is to say, of the lesser
Square b, f, therefore being set by the Divisor on the Right Hand, and
Multiplied by it self, and also by the Divisor, it brings forth 3 plain
Numbers, viz. the Square b, f, and the 2 Complements a, j, and a, L, which
being subducted from the Numbers standing over them, nothing Remains; and so in
any other Example: As in this, 625 the Root is found to be Unites, the Integers
of the Square Root had been still 25, only there had been left 30 which had
been the Numerator of a Fraction, whose Denominator must ever be the double of
the Root augmented by an Unite, and the Operation had been 25 30/51.

To prove if you have extracted right, multiply the Root in it self, if there
remains any thing, add it to the Product, which if rightly performed will

169 (13 1 023 3 69 00

Some Examples.
1. A Colonel having 1849 Men, he would set them in a square Battalion, how may
Soldiers must there be in Rank and File?

1849 (43 in Rank and File. 16 -- Proof. 249 83 43 3 43 249 129 172 000 -- 1849

2. There is one equal sided Square piece of Ground the content of which is
6098 Square Rods; to know if the length of one of the sides answer 78 Rods.

3. A Colonel having by him 2048 Men, he would place them in a Battalion, which
shall be twice so long as broad, how many Soldiers must there be in length and
breadth?

To resolve any Question of this nature, divide the Number of Men by the Number
of the proportion of the Battalion, then extract the Root out of the Quotient,
which is the Soldiers in breadth, which Multiplied by 2 the Proportion gives
the Soldiers in depth, or length.

2048 (1029 (32 in Breadth 32 2222 2

And so of any other Proportion. 64 in length.

4. A General having an Army of 33756 Soldiers, would have them set in form of
Battle 3 times so long as broad; how many Men must there be in breadth and
length?

33756 (11252 (106 Soldiers in Breadth.

(16 106 3 318

To find how much of the Remainder of the Extraction is in Soldiers, multiply
the Remainder by the Proportion (3); the aforesaid Example being in a Triple
Proportion, and therefore it is divided by 3, and to bring it to the first
again multiply by 3.

16 Remainder in the Extraction.

3 Divisor.

48 Soldiers remains of the whole Body.

For Measuring of Land it is not material to come so precisely to the knowledge
of the Remainder of the Extraction, unless it be Acres, Perches, or any great
Measure, which you may reduce to Inches, and then draw forth the Extraction,
and quit the Remainder.

Of the CVBE ROOT.
A Cube in Geometry is a right Angled Parallellipipedon, having 6 equal
Surfaces, 8 solid Angles, and 12 sides, as in the Figure a, B, C, D, E, f, G,
h, whose sides are a, b, or a, d, also B, C, or C, d, either C, E, or E, f,
also E, h, or h, G, likewise G, f, or d, f, or d, a, and G, a.

A Cube in Arithmetic is a Number made by three equal sides, or of two
Multiplications by three Numbers, that is, of any Number Multiplied in it self;
and that Product again by the first Number, expressing Length, Breadth and
Thickness.

The Number whereof the Cube is produced by the Multiplication of it in it self
is called the side, or Root of the Cube, which being found out in whole
Numbers, the Cube in known.

As for the Cubes under a 1000, whose Roots are simple Numbers, they are found
by the following Table.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 1 8 27 64 125 216 343 512 729

But it searching out the sides of greater Cubes, proceed as the following
Theorem directs.

This Artificial Device is taken out of the Theorem.

If a right Line be cut into two Segments, the Cube of the whole Line shall be
equal to the Cubes of the Segments; and to the two Solid Figures comprehended
three times under the Square of his Segment, and the Segment remaining.

As the Line E, j, which is 13, is cut into two Segments 10 and 3; therefore
the Cube of the whole Line, viz. 2197, is equal to the Cubes of the Segments,
viz. 1000 and 27, and also to the Twofold solids, or Parallellipepidons thrice
taken; Segment 3, that is, of 9 Multiplied by the other Segment 10, these three
Parallellipipedons taken together make 270; but of the three greater
Parallellpipedons each contains 300, made of 100, the Square of the greater
Segment, 10 Multiplied by the lesser Segment

The Cube of the greater Segment.

The Cube of the lesser Segment.

The three greater Parallellipipedons.

The three lesser.

The Cube whereof has eight particular Solids in Number, which are made of the
Parts of the Number given, viz. of 10 and 3 in this manner.

First let there be four plain Numbers made, each part being Multiplied by it
self, and one by another.

10 3 10 3 100 9 30 30 100

If again you Multiply the plains by the same parts, there will arise eight
Solids, as you here see.

9 9 30 30 30 30 100 100 3 10 27 90 90 300 90 300 300 1000

All which being added together, are equal to the Cube of the whole.

Therefore the same way that is used in making the Cube, is to be followed in
resolving the Cube: As for Example.

Mark the Cube given with points, omitting each two Figures continually,
beginning at the right Hand, as 2197; then subduct the particular Cube of the
Number set underneath the last point, but that Number being no Cube, take the
nearest to it, viz. an Unite, which set in the Quotient, the Unite in the
Number given is 1000, but in the Quotient it is but 10, the Unite subducted
from 2, the remainder is 1; which must be writ over the Number given, so that
the greater Cube A, is supposed to be subducted from the Number given; this is
the first step.

1 2 197 (1 1

Triple the Quotient found out (that is, Multiply it by 3) this Triple
represents the 3 sides taken together of the 3 lesser Solids marked C. then
place the Triple Number under 9. again Multiply the Quotient Squarewise, and
Triple the Product which likewise makes 3. this Product represents the 3 square
sides of the 3 greater Solids, taken together marked D. then place the Product
1 Degree lower toward the left Hand underneath, with it divide 2 which is writ
above it, the Quotient is 3, the Segment or Quotient 3, being Multiplied by 3,
the Devisor makes 9, which in respect of the place where it stands is 900, and
represents the 3 greater Solids marked D, taken together.

Moreover the same Quotient being Multiplied Squarewise makes 9, and
Multiplied afterward by the Tripled Number, standing under 9, makes 27, which
in respect of the place it is in is 270, and represents the 3 lesser Solids
marked C. Last of all the same Quotient Multiplied Cubically, brings the lesser
Cube B, 27. These three Products therefore being added together* and the Total
Subducted from the Number standing over it, there remains nothing which imports
but the given Numbers is a Cube; As in the Example.

1 2197 (13 the greater Cube. 2197 (13 1000 1 3 3 3 -- Or, thus, -- Solids 9
900 the 3 greater. 27 270 the 3 lesser. 27 27 the lesser Cube. 2197 2197

The use of this will appear in casting up the Solidity of the Ground of a
Fort, which is here inserted only to show the Sections of a Solid Body.

To ye. Honble. Francis Robartes Es^^. third son to ye. Rt. Honble. John Earl
of Radnor etc. This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome



GEOMETRY.
GEometry is an Art of well Measuring any Magnitude or Bigness, that is to say,
any continued Quantity, by which a thing is called Great, or Small.

The continued Quantity is that in which the parts are continued to a common
Term.

A Term is the utmost part or point of Magnitude.

A Point is an indivisible Sign, or Mark in Magnitude; where first are to be
considered the Affections, and then the Division, or Difference.

The common Affections taken from Number are the Proportion and Ratio: those
taken from themselves are the Convenients, and Adscription, in which are to be
considered the Inscription, and the Circumscription.

Proportionable Magnitudes are those which are measured by the same Measure;
those that are not Proportionable are Measured a contrary

Rational Magnitudes are those by which the Ratio is easily explicated by the
Number of the Measure proposed; the Irrational on the contrary.

The Congruous are those from which parts applied to parts take equal place.
Adjunct Magnitudes amongst them are when the Terms of one are terminated by the
Terms of another. That within is called the Inscribed, that without the
Division or Difference of Magnitude is a Line or Lineament. A Line is only a
long Greatness, whose Termination is in a Point: In this must be considered the
Affections of one alone, or of two; The Line alone is straight or crooked.

A Straight Line is that which extends it self equally within its Terms: On the
contrary the crooked Line extends it self unequally within its Terms.

A Crooked, or an oblique Line is divided into a round or wreathed
Circumference. A round Circumference is that which is equally distant from the
middle of the space comprehended and enclosed; The wreathed on the contrary is
that which is equally distant from the middle of the space any way enclosed and
comprehended, of which there are several Species.

A double Line is perpendicular, or Angular, Parallel, or Equidistant.

Straight Lines between themselves are those, one of which falling under the
other extends it self equally; Oblique or crooked on the contrary.

Parallel or equal-distant Lines, are those that are equally distant throughout.

A Superficies is a Magnitude more than long in which there are to be
considered the Affections and the Species.

The Affections of a Superficies are Angle and Figure.

An Angle is the Concourse of two Lines meeting together in the common Section
of Terms, whose sides are the Terms comprehending the Angle; Of which are two
Species, straight and oblique.

A straight or right Angle is that whose Sides are right among themselves;
Oblique on the contrary which is Obtuse or Acute.

The Obtuse Angle is an Oblique Angle, more than a right Angle; The Acute Angle
is less.

Figure is a Superfices terminated and bounded on every side, in which we are
to consider its Parts and Affections.

The Parts are the Center, the Circumference, the Semidiameter, the Diameter,
and the Altitude.

The Center is a Point in the middle of a Figure; The Circumference is the
comprehension of the Figure.

The Semidiameter is a right Line drawn from the Center to the Circumference.

The Diameter is a right Line drawn through the Center of a Figure which is
flat: And straight Line Figures are properly called Diagonal; and in Solids the
Axis.

The Altitude, or height is a Perpendicular from the Sommet or top of the
Figure to the Basis.

In every Figure the Affections are of a simple or double Figure; of a simple
Figure, as Order, Primariness, and Ratio.

An Orderly Figure is a Figure of equal Terms and Angles: A primier Figure is
that which does not divide it self into other Figures more simple. A Rational
Figure is that which is comprehended in height and depth rational amongst
themselves.

The Affections of a double Figure are in the Ratio of Isoperimetre, or equally
Circumference Figures, and in proportion of the primary Figures, and in
likeness, complement of place, and roundness.

For the Isoperimetrical Figures are those of equal Circumference, like
Figures, as those that are of equal Angles, and proportioned to the Basis of
equal Angels: Figures filling a place are those which being set in whatsoever
manner about the same Point leave nothing void. A round Figure is that whose
Radious's are equal and alike. These are the Affections of a Superficies. Now
follow the Species and Differences, viz. the Superficies and the Body.

A Superficies is a Dimension only large, whose Term is a Line, and is either
flat like a Plate, or swelling.

A flat Superficies is that which extends it self equally in its Terms, and is
of straight or crooked Lines.

The Superficies of straight Lines is flat, which is comprehended in straight
Lines, and divides it self into a Triangle, or a Triangular.

A Triangle is that which is made of three straight Lines; A Triangle is of a
straight Angle, or a crooked Angle.

A Triangle of a straight Angle is called Orthogon, which has a right Angle
whose dimension is taken by the Reglet, which is the most excellent Instrument,
and most useful of all the Geometrical Instrument, and most Ancient; It is
vulgarly called the Jacobs Staff.

A Triangle of a crooked Angle is that which has not a straight Angle, and is
called Amblygon, or Oxygon.

The Amblygon is that which has an obtuse Angle: Oxygon is that which has all
the Angles sharp: A Triangulat is a flat Superficies of a straight Line which
is composed of Triangles, and is either Quadrangle, or Multangle.

A Quadrangle consists of four straight Lines, and is a Parallellogram, or
Trapezium.

A Parallellogram is a Quadrangle equally distant of the sides which are
opposite; whose Species must be considered, for there is a Parallellogram of a
straight, and of a Crooked Angle,

A Right Angle Parallellogram has all right Angles; and is either square, or
oblong.

A Square is a Right Angle Parallellogram of

A Parallellogram of an oblique or crooked Angle is called a Rhomb, or
Rhomboides.

A Rhomb is a Parallellogram of a crooked Angle, and of equal Sides.

A Rhomboides is of a crooked Angle, and of unequal Sides; These are the
Species of a Parallellogram.

A Trapezium is a Quadrangle of four Sides with is not a Parallellogram.

A Multangle is a Triangulat comprehended in more than four straight Lines.

The flat Superficies of a crooked Line is called a Circle, which is a
Superficies flat and round, whose Segment is the Sector and Section.

The Segment of a Circle is that which is comprehended Exteriorly in the
Circumference, Interiorly in a straight Line. A Sector is a piece of a Circle
contained within one straight double Line, making One Angle at the Center,
which is called Angle at the Center; as the Circumference is called the Base of
the Sector.

A Sector is likewise a piece of a Circle which is contained within a straight
Line, called the Base of the Section, and is a Demicircle or unequal to a
Demicircle.

A Demicircle is half of the Section of a Circle; An unequal to the Demicircle
is not the half of the said Section.

A Gibous, or swelling Superfice is that which Terms; and is Circular or
Various.

The Circular or Spherical Superficies is the Gibous Superficies, which is
equidistant from the Center of the contained Space.

The various Superficies is also Gibous, whose Basis is the Circumference; The
Side one straight Line from the Term of the top to the Term of the Basis; It is
called Conical, or Cylindrical.

A Conical, or pointed Superficies, is that which rises equally in a Point
from the Subject subsected Circumference toward the Top.

A Cylindrical, or long and round Superficies is drawn and rises equally in a
Point from the subject Circumference toward the height Circumference equal
and equidistant.

So much for the Superficies and all its Parts and Species.

A Geometrical Body that has thickness is a Dimension large and deep, whose
Term is the Superficies, the Axis is the Diameter about which it turns; it is
flat and Gibous.

A Flat Body is comprehended of flat Superficies, and it is a Pyramid, or
Pyramidate.

A Pyramid is a flat Body, raised equally high from the Basis of a Right Line,
and has but one Species ordained it, which is a Tretradon, viz. an orderly
Pyramid comprehended in four Triangles.

A Pyramidate is also a flat Body which consists in Pyramids, and is a Prisme,
or mixed Polyedron.

A Prisme is a Pyramidate Body, whose two opposite Flats are equal, alike, and
equidistant; the rest Parallellogram; and has two Species, Pentadron, or
composed of Pentadrons.

A Prisme compounded of Pentadrons is a Hexadron, or a Poludron.

The Hexadron is Parallellipipedon, or Trapezium.

A Parallellipepidon is a Hexadron, whose opposite Flats are Parallellogram;
and it is either right Angle, or oblique Angle.

The Right Angle Parallellipipedon is like a Die, which is a right Angle,
Isocedron, or oblong.

An Oblique Angle is like a Rhomb, or a Rhomboides.

The mixed Polyedron is a Pyramidate composed of Pyramids that assemble
themselves from the upper part to the Center, and raising themselves from the
Basis, alone, and is of a Triangular Basis, as the Octodron, which is
comprehended in eight Angles; the Isocedron consisting of twenty Angles, or of
a Quinquangular Basis, which is comprehended in twelve Quinquangles, and is
called Dodecadron.

The Unequal Geometrical Body is that which consists of a Unequal Surperficies,
and is called a Sphere, or Globe.

A diverse Body is comprehended in a diverse Superficies, and Basis, and it is a
Cone, or Cylinder.

A Cone or a round Pyramid is comprehended in a Conick Superficies, Basis.

A Cylinder is contained in a long and round Superficies, and opposite to its
Basis.

Hitherto has been treated of the Definitions and proprieties of Magnitude,
and all their parts and Species: There remains only Measure, and to Measure the
Magnitude is the part of Geometry. But there are two sorts of Measuring, one
which is natural and common, and known almost to all, by which we apply the
Measure to the thing Measured: So we know that each -- is of six Foot, or six
Else, whench we have experimented, that the Foot or ^ll is not found so often
in it.

According to this, Euclid makes demonstration from the fourth Proposition of
the first Book, when he puts one Triangle to another.

Moreover the common Propositions, and Questions relate to this natural Measure.

Common Sentences are clear, and manifest Propositions of themselves, and
therefore called by Cicero Natural Judgments; But for as much as Euclid sets
down but three Demands, all the Theorems and Propositions always which tend to
instruct to Measure, and teach what is most easy to do, relate to the Demands;
as may be understood by the Definition of the Question; it is this that falls
commonly under a natural Measure. But for as much as it would be a long and
most difficult thing to Measure the Places and Sides of great Figures by this
natural sight, there is another Magnitudes, and all their Parts and Spaces,
which is called Surveying, which shall be treated of more at large apart by it
self.

I shall conclude this Tract of Geometry with some necessary Problems: And
First as to the Practick Part thereof.

To cut a Line into two equal Parts.
FRom the Extreme Point c, d Figure 1, opening your Compasses at pleasure,
describe the Arches intersecting each other, as well above as beneath; and
through the Intersections of these Arches draw a Line a, b, c; this Line will
cut the given Line directly in the midst, and Angle equally into two Parts: For
Example, In the second Figure from a, by whatsoever opening of the Compasses
fix the Points c, and b, and from those Points describe the Arches intersecting
each other in e, from that Intersection drawn the Line e, a, and it will cut
the Angle in the midst.

Any middle part being given in a Line, to raise from thence a Perpendicular.
FRom the Point, suppose a, in the first Figure at any convenient opening of
the Compasses, you make Points on each side in the said Line, as c, and d; then
from those Points at what Compasses you please, draw the Arches intersecting
each other, as at a, and from their Intersection draw the Line a, b, to the
given Point; so a, b, is the Perpendicular.

At the end of any Line to raise a Perpendicular.
FRom a, which is the given extreme, describe the Arch e, at any opening of the
Compass; then from the Point e, at the same opening make a Point in the said
Arch; from the Point describe another Arch e, d, and on the Arch, opening the
Compass to thrice the interval; mark a third Point, from whence the desired
Perpendicular c, a, is to be drawn, and by this Method you may examine whether
any Line be truly Perpendicular.

If a given Point, or distance be given to draw a Parallel.
LEt the Line, a, b, be given and the distance be fixed at the Point, c; from
the said c, draw at pleasure the right Line c, b; then from the Point c,
describe the the Arch b, d; In like, and at the same opening of the Compass
from b, describe the Arch c, a; take the distance a, c, and transfer it on the
Arch b, d, which makes out the Point d, through which is drawn the Parallel
Line c, d.

To divide a given Line into given Parts.
TAke a Line at pleasure; for Example, g, e, which must be bigger than the
given Line. This Line divide by opening the Compass into as many equal Parts as
are designed; as suppose, from both Extremities of the Line so divided,
describe the Arches intersecting each other in v, whence the Aequilateral
Triangle u, g, e, is to be made; then from the Point u, draw Lines to the
designed Sections in the lower Line; this done, if the Line a, o, be given to
be divided into 5 Parts; mark out the length thereof in both sides of this
Triangle, by fixing the other Point of the Compass in the Point u; then make
the said Line a, o, between the Points thus marked, and thus the designed
Division will be finished; and in the the same manner may any other Division
whatsoever be made.

Two right Lines being given, to find a mean Line proportional.
LEt 2 Lines be given, and both placed in a direct Line, one by the other, viz.
l, u, and u, r, which are to make as it were one Line in all, out of the middle
whereof m, make a Semycircle l, t, r; then erect the Perpendicular u, t, in the
Point of the Conjunction of the Lines, l, u, and u, r. This Perpendicular Line
touching the Circle will be the middle Proportional Line sought; for as the
Line l, u, is to the Line u, t, so is the Line u, t, to the Line u, r, which in
Numbers has the same Proportion to the 2d, as the 2d has to the 1st, as is
demonstrated from Euclid.

Three points being given, so as not placed in a direct Line, to describe a
Circle, which shall strike through them all.
MAke the three Points a, b, c, described at pleasure, keeping the same opening
Arches from the Points o, and b, cutting each other double in one of the
opposite Parts; then altering Compasses, as occasion requires, describe in like
manner double in the other opposite Part Arches intersecting each other from
the Points b, and c; then through the Sections of these Arches draw right
Lines; the Point of Concourse will be the Center of Circle drawn.

A Circle being given, to find the Center thereof.
DRaw from one part of the Circle, to the opposite Part; as suppose the Line a,
b; this Line divide into 2 equal Parts, which will pass through the Center of
the Circle; but if this Line Line c, d, into 2 equal Parts, they will intersect
each other in the Center. And thus a Circle is divided into 4 equal Parts, if a
Line being drawn through the Center, this Line will be also divided into 2
equal Parts, and by this, means also a Square may be inscribed in a Circle, if
Lines be drawn through the extremities of those Lines; So likewise by dividing
it into 6 Parts a He^agon may be described, and proportionably an Octagon, and
Dodecagon, etc. according as more are drawn, and more Divisions made.

To make an Elipsis, or Oval Figure.
DEscribe two Circ^es, one through the Center of the other, fixing the Foot of
the Comp^^s Circumference; then from a, or any other part of the Circle draw a
Line through the Center to the Circumference in b, which Line is the extention
of the Compass, by which the Elipsis is made, by placing one Foot in the
intersections of the Circles, and joining them by Arches.

A right Line being given, to describe upon it an Equilateral Triangle.
THe Compass being opened to the length of the Line a, b, from a, and b, the 2
extremes of the said Line, describe the Arches intersecting each other in c;
then from the Point of that Section draw the Sides c, a, and c, b, and thereby
the said Triangle is completed:

A right Line being given, to describe a Square upon it.
THe Line a, b, being given, erect upon a, the extremity of the said Line the
perpendicuar a, c, according to the length of the Line a, b; then from the
Points b; and c, describe the Arches intersecting each other in d; then draw 2
other Lines to the Point of that Section, and the work is perfected.

To describe a Pentagon, or to find the Sides of it in a given Circle.
A Circle being drawn, and divided into 4 equal Parts, divide the Semidiameter
a, b, into 2 Parts in f; then from the Point f, extend the Compass to the Point
c, and in that extention f, c, describe the Arch c, h; then again extend the
Compass from c, to the Point h, and this last extention will give the Side of
the Pentagon g, or five-sided Figure. How to draw a sixth seventh or eighth to
a twelfth-sided Figure, or a Dodecagon, which is taught in Fortification.

An Oblong being given, to constitute a Square equal to it.
IF a mean proportion be found between the 2 Lines containing the same Angle of
the Oblong, that mean proportioanl will be the Side of the said Square.

A Square being given, to find an Oblong equal to it.
DIvide the Side a, c, and afterward the Side d, e, into 3 equal Parts; then
by a third Part to a, and likewise by a third Part to f; from the Point b,
extend at pleasure the Lines b, c, and b, f, and the Sides a, c, f, and d, c,
e; so by the Intersections made in the Points c, and f, the quantity of the
sought Rectangle is resolved.

A Circle being given, to make a Triangle equal to
LEt a Perpendicular be erected, or the extreme Point of the Semidiameter of a
Circle, and let the length of the Perpendicular be equal to the Perimeter, or
Circumference of the Circle; then from the Center draw a Line to the extremity
of the Perpendicular, and this will produce a Triangle equal to a Circle.

ALTIMETRY.
ALtimery or the Art of taking Altitudes, or the Height of the Sun Moon, or
Stars; also of Hills, Trees, Steeples, etc. is performed by several
Instruments, but chiefly by the Quadrant; Figure of which is here described.

The Quadrant may be made of any bigness, the larger the more exact.

The Arch of the Quadrant is divided into Degrees, viz. the fourth part of a
Circle; and these Degrees into Parts, or Minutes, if so possible, numbered from
10 to 90 Degrees. In this Quadrant is inscribed the Quadrant C, E, F, G, whose
Sides G, F, and F, E, are divided into 50 equal Parts; On the Side C, F, are
the Parts of the right Shadow; on the other Side E, F, are the Parts of the
contrary Shadow. In the Center at C, there is a Thread fixed with a Plummet
hanging at it; and on the Sides C, E, there are

The use of the Quadrant.
THe use of the Quadrant is for the finding the Altitude of the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, which is as follows; First in observing the Altitude of the Sun, hold up
the Quadrant, the String and Plummet hanging at the Center C; then turn the
Sights to the Sun till the Shade of the Sight next the Center C, strikes on the
other Sight at E, and until the Sun Shine through both the Sights. Mark what
Degree the Thread cuts on the Arch of the Quadrant, and that is the Suns
Altitude, reckoned from 10 to 20.

In observing the Altitude of the Moon, or Stars, hold up the Quadrant, and
look through both Sights, until you see the Moon, or Star you observe, and the
Degree the Thread cuts is the Altitude observed.

The best and surest way in taking the Height of any Land-Object, is by the
Rule of Proportion, because then any Station will do the work. But Heights may
be taken without it, provided the Ground admit. Mark the place whose Height
you would know, and look through the Sights to the place, going backwards and
forwards until the Thread and Plummet hanging at C, fall on 45 Degrees of the
Quadrant, or else upon one half of the Parts of the right and contrary Shadow;
then conclude the Height to be equal to the Distance. If it fall upon one half
of the Parts of the right Shadow, then is the Height but half the Distance; if
upon one Quarter, then the Height is but a Quarter of the Distance; and if it
fall on three Quarters, then is the Height three Quarters of the Distance.

Now of the Parts of Contrary Shadow; if the Thread fall upon half the parts,
then is the Height double to the Distance, if it fall half way, then this and
the Line whereon the Sights are placed, is the Height 4 times the Distance.

To perform this by Arithmetical operation; take any Station, and look through
or by the edge of the Sights, to the top of any Tree or Steeple; then mark
whether the Thread fall upon the Parts of right or contrary Shadow; if on right
Shadow, then the proportion is as the whole parts, viz. 50 are to the parts
cut, so is the distance to the Height; And on the contrary, if the Thread and
Plummet fall on the contrary Shadow, then say, as the parts cut are to the
whose Scale, or 50, so is the distance to the Height: observing this for a
general Rule, It is easy to find any Height that is accessable.

To find the Height of any Steeple that you cannot approach to Measure the
distance, because of Water, or other Obstructions.
THis is done by two Observations; First stand, and observe the Height, and
you will find the Thread fall on 35 Parts of right Shadow; and because you cannot
measure to the Steepl^, suppose the distance 90 Yards; then say, as 50 the
whole Parts of right Shadow is to 35 Parts cut by the Thread; so is 40 Yards
the supposed distance to 28 the supposed Height.

Then going a little farther in a Straight Line from the Steeple observed,
you will find the Thread to fall upon 33 Parts of right Shadow; then say as 33
Parts cut by the Thread is to the whole Scale 50, so is 28, the supposed
Height to 42 Yards 1 Foot, 3 Inches, the supposed distance of the Second
Station, viz. 2 Yards, 1 Foot, 3 Inches.

But in measuring the Sationary Distance, you will find it to be only 2 Yards, 3
Inches; then say as 2 Yards 1 Foot 3 Inches the supposed distance is to 2 Yards
3 Inches the true one, so is 28 Yards the supposed Height to 44 Yards, 4
Inches the true one. Then you may by this find the true Steeple, by saying, as
28 Yards, the supposed Height is to 24 Yards 4 Inches the true one, so is 42
Yards, 1 Foot, 3 Inches the supposed distance from the second Station, to 36
Yards, 1 Foot 7 Inches the true distance from the second Station to the Foot of
the Steeple; and for the distance of the first Station taken away, the
difference of the two Stations 2 Yards, 3 Inches, and the remainder will be the
distance of the first Station to the Steeple.

If the Thread fall upon the Parts of contrary Shadow, observe only the Rules
before laid down.

Note, when you are to find a distance, the Height given, or supposed, you are
to use the proportion of contrary Shadow in right, and right in contrary; as in
the last example in right Shadow, that is, as the parts cut is to the whole
Scale, which is the proportion of contrary Shadow, and in contrary Shadow as
the whole Scale is to the parts cut.

Note also, that in taking the Heights you are to add always the Height of
your Eye from the Ground.

PLANIMETRY, OR SURVEYING.
AMongst the many Instruments that have been invented for the Surveying of
Land, none is in more esteem than the plain Table, as it is at this Day
improved, it being the most absolute of all others for the said purpose, in
that it performs whatsoever may be done either by the Theodolite,
Circumferentor, or any other Instrument, and that with the same ease and
exactness.

For a particular Description of it I refer you to the fourth Chapter of the
Second Book of Leyborns complete Surveyor.

The Chain that is made use of in this Treatise is Bathburns of two Statute
Poles or Perches, each Pole being in length 16 Foot, or 198 Inches, which is
divided into 10 equal Parts, called Primes, containing 19 9/5 Inches; and these
Primes subdivided into 10 other equal Parts, called Seconds.

In the eighth Chap. of Leyborns Second Book you have the Description of the
Protractor, and Scales, very useful for the ready laying down of Lines and
Angles, according to any assigned quantity, all which Instruments may be had at
any Instrument-makers.

The Principles of Geometry necessary to the practice of Surveying being
handled in the Treatise of Parctical Geometry, are omitted here; so that I
shall proceed to the Art it self.

CHAP. I.
Of the ordinary Scale, with the Line of Cords thereon described.
FOr this purpose be provided with a Ruler containing in length 7 or 8 Inches,
and in breadth 1 Inch, upon which (on the one side) place 2 Scales, one of 11,
the other of 12 in an Inch. Also on the same Side Describe a Line of Cords, 2
Inches in length, or less, of 60, or 90 Degrees, whose Radius, or 60 Degrees
thereof will be equal to the Semidiameter of the same Circle.

On the other side after the order of these, place diverse other Scales, as of,
16, 20, 24, etc. in an Inch, so that you have an Instrument useful for diverse
occasions. To use with this Scale you must have a Pair of Brass Compasses with
steel Points, as also a near Pair of Callem Compasses, with Screws to alter the
Points, as to draw with Black Lead, or the like, which will be useful for the
beautifying your Plats after protracted.

CHAP. II.
How to reduce Statute Measure to that which is Customary.
BY the Statute of 33 Edw. 1. an Acre of Perches; but in many parts of this
Kingdom, through long Custom, other quantities have been received, called
Customary, viz. 18, 20, 24, and 28 Foot to the Perch; so that the Surveyor
should be well experienced to reduce one to the other. For Example of which.

To reduce 5 Acres, 2 Rods, 20 Perches measured by the 18 Foot Pole into
Statute Measure, seek out the least proportional Terms between 18 Foot Foot; to
effect which do thus: Because 16 bears a Fraction reduce it into Halves, and
to make them of one denomination also, reduce 18 into Halves, and they will
stand thus 11/36 which abbreviated by 3, by saying How many times 3 in 33; the
Answer is 11; The like do by 36, which will be 12; so will the two proportional
Terms between 16 and 18, be 11 and 12.

This done, reduce your given quantity 5 Acres, 2 Rods and 20 Perches, into
Perches, which Perches: and considering that what proportion the Square of 11,
which is 121, bears to the Square 12, which is 144, the same proportion does
the Acre of 16 Foot Pole, bear to an Acre of 18 Foot.

Now for that the greater Measure is to be reduced into the lesser, multiply
the given Quantity 900 Perches, by 144, the greater Square, and the product
will be 129600, which divided by 121, the Quotient will be 1071 9-/121 Perches,
which being Acres gives 6 Acres, 2 Rods, 31 Perches, and -9-/121 parts of a
Perch for the quantity of Acres according to Statute Measure.

But contrary-wise suppose it had been required to reduce Statute Measure into
Customary, then you should have multiplied 900 Perches (your given Quantity) by
121, your lesser Square, (because the lesser Measure is to be reduced into the
greater) the Product will be 108900, which being divided by the greater Square
144, the Quotient Acres, is 4 Acres, 2 Rods, 36 Perches.

The same Method is to be observed with any other Customary Quantity, as when
you measure with the Perch of 20, 24, or 28 Foot.

CHAP. III.
To reduce Perches into Acres, and
BY the Statute of 33 Edw: 1. as aforesaid, an Acre of Ground is to contain 169
square Perches, and is every Rod of Land 40 Square Perches: Therefore if any
Number of Perches be required to be put into Acres, the Number given is to be
divided by 160, and the Quotient shows the Acres; But if any thing remain (if
under 40) they are Perches; and if they exceed 40, divide it by 40, which are
the Number of Perches contained in a Rod, and the Quotient are Rods, and the
Remainder Perches.

For Example, 5267 Perches being given to be reduced into Acres: First divide
the 5267 by 160, and the Quotient will be 32, and 147 remains, which divide by
40, and the Quotient will be 3, and 27 remaining, so that the whole amounts to
32 Acres, 3 Rods and 27 Perches.

To reduce Acres into Perches.
THis is but the converse of the former, for whereas before to bring Perches
into Acres you divided by 160, you must now to turn Acres into Perches,
multiply by 160.

For Example; Let 32 Acres, 3 Rods and 27 Perches be given to be reduced into
Perches; First multiply the 32 Acres by 160; and the Product will be 5120; then
multiply the 3 Rods by 40, the Product will be 120; these 2 Products, and the
27 Perches being added together, the Sum will be 5267, and so many Perches are
contained in the foresaid Number of Acres, Rods and Perches.

CHAP. IV.
Shows how to multiply the several Fractions of your Chain together, as if
they were whole Numbers.
SUppose you were to multiply 16 Unites, 2 Primes, by 1 Unite, 3 Primes, 2
Seconds. Place your Numbers in all respects as if whole Numbers, but over every
Fraction of your Multiplicand place a Prick, or Point, as in this Example; The
Multiplicand contains only one Fraction, which is 2, over which place a Prick,
and at the end of your Multiplier place as many Pricks as there are Fractions
contained in that Number, which in this Example are 2, viz. 3, and 2; behind
which Figures place 2 Pricks, and the Number will stand thus; Under which draw
a Line, and Multiply these two Numbers together in all respects as if they were
whole Numbers, and then the Work will stand thus, your Product of your
Multiplication being 21384. Now because in your two Numbers, viz. your
Multiplicand, and your Multiplier there are 3 Fractions, viz. one in your
Multiplicand, and 2 in your Multiplier, you must therefore with a Dash of your
Pen cut off the 3 last Figures of your Product toward your Right Hand, and
then will your Product 162 132 -- 162 132 -- 324 486 162 -- 21384
stand thus: 21384. The 3 last Figures whereof are the Numerator of a Fraction,
whose Denominator is 1000, and the other 2 Figures toward your Lest Hand are
Integers of your Multiplication; so that the Sum of this Multiplication is 21
Perches 114/1000 parts of a Perch, which is something more than a third part of
a Perch.

CHAP. V.
Shows how to take the Plot of a Field (upon your plain Table) at one
Station, taken in any part of the same Field, from whence
FOr effecting this, go round the Field, placing at every Angle Marks, then
choose some convenient place, about the middle thereof, from whence you may see
all the said Marks, and there place your Instrument, with a Sheet of Paper;
stretch thereon the Needle, hanging directly over Meridian Line in your Card,
which is much to be observed, especially when you Survey many Severals; then
making a Mark about the middle of your Paper, which represents that part of the
Field where your first Instrument stands, and laying your Ruler upon this
Point, direct your Sights to the several Angles where you before placed your
Marks, and draw Lines by the Side of your Rules upon your Paper; then measure
the distance of every of these Marks from your Instrument, Scale set the same
distances upon the Lines drawn upon your Table, making small Marks with the
Points of your Compasses, or Black-lead at the end of every one of them; then
Lines being drawn by these Points from one to another, you shall have upon your
Table the exact Plot of the Field, with all its Sides and Angles.

Suppose you were to take the Plot of the Field A, B, C, D, E, F. having placed
Marks in Angles thereof, as at A, B, C, D, E, F, make choice of some convenient
Place about the middle of the Field, where you may see all your Marks before
placed in the several Angles, and there place your Instrument; which Place let
it be O; then turn your Instrument about until the Needle hang directly over
the Meridian Line of the Card noted at the Cross, and at the North end with a
Flower-delis, which Line is represented in the following Figure, with M, N.

Your Instrument thus placed, with a Sheet of Paper thereupon, make a Mark with
Black-lead, or otherwise upon the Paper, which Mark represents the place of
your standing; then applying your Index to this Point, direct your Sight to
your first Mark at A, and the Index resting there, draw a Line by the Side;
then measure the distance from O, the place of your Instrument, to A, the Mark,
which suppose to be 40 Perches; then take 40 Perches from one of your Scales,
and apply that distance in your Table from O, to A, and at A, make a Mark; then
direct your Sight to B, your second Mark, and draw a Line by the side of your
Index, as aforesaid; then measure the distance from your Instrument at O, to
your Mark B, which suppose 45 Perches. This distance must be taken from your
Scale, and set upon your Table from O to B, and at B, make another Mark.

Then direct your Sight to a third Mark at C, and draw a Line by the Side of
the Index, and measure the distance from O, to C, which suppose 42 Perches;
this distance being taken from your Scale, and applied to your Table from O, to
C, shall give you the Point C, representing your third Mark.

In this manner you must proceed with the test of the Marks at D, E, and F, or
more, if the Field had consisted of more Angles.

Lastly when (according to the former Directions) you have found all the Marks
A, B, C, D, E, and F, upon your Table, draw Lines from one Mark to another,
till you conclude where you began. For Example, suppose you began at A, and
then to B, and C, so proceeding round about the Field, till you come to A,
again; then draw a Line fram A, your first Mark, to B, your second Mark, and a
Line from B, your second Mark to C, your third Mark, and sron C, your third
Marck to D, your fourth Mark, and likewise from D, to E, from E, to F, and from
F to A, where you first began; then will the Lines AB, BC, CD, DE, OF, and FA,
be the exact Figure of the Field; the Sides and Angles of the said Figure
bearing an exact proportion to those in the Field, and the Pricked Lines, M, N
represent the Meridian Line.

Another Example to take the Plot of a Field by help of the Degrees on the
frame of your Plain-Table, when either Rain, or Wind so obstructs you that you
cannot keep a Sheet of Paper upon your Table, and by measuring as aforesaid.
HAving placed Marks at the several Angles of the Field, as before directed,
and made choice of some convenient place about the middle thereof, as
aforesaid, place there your Instrument as already directed; then direct your
Sights to your first Mark at A, noting the Degrees cut by the Index on the
frame of the Table, which suppose 40 Degrees, 15 Minutes, which must be noted
down in your Field-Book in the first and second Colums thereof; then measure
the distance from O, the place of the Instrument, to A, your first Mark, which
suppose 40 Perches, which must be placed in the third Colum of your Field-Book.
Then direct your Sight to B, your second Mark, noting the Degreees cut by the
Index, which suppose to be 88, and the distance O, B, 45 Perches; the 88
Degrees must be noted in the first Colum of your Field-Book, and the 45 Perches
in the third Colum.

Then direct your Sight to C, the third Mark, and note the Degrees cut by the
Index, which suppose 130 Degrees 45 Minutes, and let the distance O, C, be 42
Perches; the 130 Degrees, 45 Minutes must be noted in the first and second
Colums of your said Book, and the 42 Perches in the third Colum.

Then direct your Sights to D, your fourth Mark, noting the Degrees out by the
Index on the Frame of the Table, which let be 200 Degrees, 30 Minutes.

By the way note, that in the using the Degrees on the Frame of your Table,
that having passed Degrees, which is the Line M, N, representing the
Meridian-Line, you must then count the Degrees backward, according as they are
numbered on the Frame of the Table, from 190 to 360.

Then Measure the distance O, D, which let be 60 Perches 4 Primes; these 200
Degrees, 30 Minutes must be noted in the first and second Colums of your
Field-Book, and 60 Perches, 4 Primes in the third and fourth Colums thereof.

Then direct your Sight to E your Fifth Mark, the Index cutting 250 Degrees,
and the distance O, E, being 39 Perches; these must be noted in your said Book,
the 250 Degrees in the first Colum, and the 30 Perches in the third.

Lastly direct your Sights to F, your last Mark, the Index cutting 310 Degrees,
and the distance O, F, being 50 Perches; these must be noted down in your
Field-Book in all respect as before, viz. the 310 Degrees in the first Colum,
and the 50 Perches in the third, and then will your Notes collected in your
Field-Book stand, as in the following Table.

Degrees. Mi. Pe. Pri. A 40 15 40 0 B 88 45 0 C 130 45 42 0 D 200 30 60 4 E 250 39
0 F 310 50 0

Further Directions how to Protract, or lay down upon Paper any Observations
taken according to the Directions aforesaid.
DRaw upon a Sheet of white Paper a Line Line M, N, in the aforesaid Figure;
then make choice of some Point or other in that Line to represent your Station
in the Field, upon which place the Center of your Protractor, so that the Line
N, S, of your Protractor may lie directly upon the Line M, N; then laying your
Field-Book before you, and seeing that at your first Observation noted with A,
the Index cut 40 Degrees, 15 Minutes, you must therefore against the 40
Degrees, 15 Minutes of your Protractor, make a Mark upon your Paper, which must
be represented by A.

Secondly, Seeing the Degrees cut at your second Observation were 88, make a
Mark upon your Paper against 88 Degrees, which Mark with B.

Thirdly, The Degrees cut at your third Observation were 130, and 45 Minutes,
therefore against the same make a Mark upon your Paper, as C.

Fourthly, The Degrees cut by the Index at your fourth Observation, being 200
and 30 Minutes, you must against 120 Degrees, 30 Minutes of your Protractor
make a Mark upon your Paper, as signified by D.

Fifthly, Seeing the Degrees cut at the fifth Observation were 250, make a Mark
thereat, as E.

Lastly, The Degrees cut at your last Observation were 310, therefore make a
Mark thereat, as F.

Having thus Protracted all the Degrees of your several Observations, take away
your Protractor, and laying a Ruler to the Center O, draw Lines by those
Points, which will be OA, OB, OC, OD, OE, and OF. This done, you must observe
by your Field-Book the length of every Line.

As the Line A, O, your first Observation was 40 Perches, therefore 40 being
taken from your Scale and set upon your Paper from O to A, shall give you the
Point A, upon your Paper.

Secondly, The length of your second Line being 45 Perches, which take from
your Scale, and place it on your Paper from O, to B.

Thirdly, The Line O, C, being 42 Perches, which take from your Scale, and set
upon your Paper from O to C.

And in this manner must you proceed with the rest of the Lines, as OD, OE, and
OF.

Lastly, Draw the Lines AB, BC, CD, DE, OF, and FA, and so you shall have the
exact Figure of your Field upon the Paper.

CHAP. VI.
Shows how to take the Plot of a Field upon your Plain Table at one Station,
taken in any Angle of the same Field, from whence all the other Angles of the
Field may be discerned, by measuring from the Stationary Angle to all the other
Angles.
MAke choice of some Angle in the Field, from whence all the other Angles may
be seen, and there place your Instrument Horizontal, the Needle directly over
the Meridian-line, and a sheet of Paper stretched on your Table, then make
choice of a Point on your Paper to represent your Station, which let be G; then
direct your Sights to A, and draw a Line on your Paper as G, A, and measure the
distance G, A, as is directed in the foregoing Chapter; then direct your Sights
to B, your second Mark, and there likewise draw a Line G, B, measuring the
distance G, B, as is directed in the said Chapter. In like manner direct your
Sights to C, D, E, and F, drawing Lines by the side of your Index at every
Observation, and measuring with your Chain the distance from G, the place of
your standing, to the several Angles of the Field A, B, C, D, E, and F, which
distances being taken in your Compasses from Scale, and set upon your Paper
from G, upon the Lines GA, GB, GC, GD, GE, and GF, so shall you have on your
Paper the Marks, A, B, C, D, E, and F, by which Marks draw Lines, as GA, AB,
BC, CD, DE, OF, and FG, and so shall you have the true Figure of the Field
described on your Paper,

To draw the Plot of a Field at one Station
LEt the the Figure A, B, C, D, E, F, G, be the Figure of the Field to be
measured. Then having placed Marks at the several Angles, and made choice of an
Angle for your Instrument, suppose G, direct your Sights to A, and draw upon
Table the Lines G, B; then direct your Sights to B, draw the Line G, B; then
direct your Sights to C, draw the Line GC, and consequently the Lines GD, GE,
and G, F.

Having thus done, measure with your Chain the distance from G, to A, which
suppose 40 Perches, which take from your Scale, and 1 Foot of the Compasses
placed in G, with the other draw the Arch A, and draw the Line G, A.

Secondly, Measure with your Chain the side A, B, which suppose 53 Perches;
this being taken in your Compasses from your Scale, place 1 Foot in A, and with
the other Foot draw the Arch B.

Thirdly, Measure the side B, C, which let be 59 Perches; and that being taken
in your Compasses from your Scale, place one Foot in B, and with the other draw
the Arch, C.

Fourthly, Measure the side C, D, 28 Perches, and take that distance in the
Compasses, placing one Foot in C, and with the other drawing the Arch D.

Fifthly, Measure, the Side D, E, 54 Perches, and take that distance from your
Scale, placing one Foot of the Compasses in D, and with the other draw the Arch
E.

Sixthly, Measure the Side E, F, 49 Perches; and taking the distance from your
Scale, place one Foot of your Compasses in E, and with the other draw the Arch
F: And thus shall the several Arches cut the several Lines GA, GB, GC, GD, GE,
and GF, in the Points A, B, C, D, E, F.

Lastly, By these Points draw Lines from one to the other, as AB, BC, CD, DE,
OF, FG, and GA, and so shall you have upon your Paper on your Table the exact
Figure of the Field, the Sides and Angles thereof being in all respects
proportional to those taken according to the Doctrine of the last.

To take the Plot of a Field at one Station, taken in any Angle thereof, from
whence all the other Angles may be seen, by help of the Degrees described on
the Frame of the Plain-Table, and by measuring from your Station to every of
the other Angles.
PLanting your Instrument at G, as aforesaid, direct your Sights to B, as your
first Mark, (for the Line G, A, lying under the Meridian Line M, N, must be
measured in the last place) noting the Degrees cut by the Index on the Frame of
the Table, which suppose 47 Degrees, which must be noted in the first Colum of
your Field-Book; then with your Chain measure the distance from your Station at
G, to the Angle B, which let be 50 Perches, which place in the third Colum of
your Field-Book, according to the former Directions.

2. Direct your Sights to C, noting the Degrees there cut, which suppose 88
Degrees, 15 Minutes, which place in the first and second Colums in your
Field-Book; then measure the distance G, C, which let be 60 Perches, and note
them in the third Colum of your Field-Book.

3. Direct your Sights to D, the Degrees cut being 120, and the distance G, D,
65 Perches; note these in your Field-Book as aforesaid. And in this manner
proceed with the other Marks E, F, and A, and then having noted them all, your
collected Notes in your Field-Book will be as follow.

Degrees. Minutes. Perches. Primes. B 47 00 50 0 C 88 15 60 0 D 120 00 65 0 E
165 30 56 7 F 193 00 40 2 A 348 45 34 0

To protract any Observations taken according to the Doctrine aforesaid.
HAving collected into your Field-Book the quantity of the several Angles, and
the Length of the Lines, proceed to Protraction in this manner.

1. Draw the Meridian Line M, N; then make choice of a Point therein,
representing your Stationary Angle, as at G, to which Point apply the Center of
your Protractor the Semicircle upwards; then laying your Field-Book before you,
you may perceive that at your first Observation (which was at B) your Index cut
47 Degrees, and make a Mark against it, drawing a Line G, B.

2. The Degrees cut at your second Observation at C, being 88 Degrees, 15
Minutes, make a Mark likewise against 88 Degrees, 15 Minutes of your
Protractor, and draw the Line G, C.

3. The Degrees cut at your third Observation being 120 Degrees of your
Protractor, draw the Line G, D. And in this manner must you proceed with the
rest of your Observation, viz. with the Line GE, GF, and GA.

Having thus finished your Angular Observations, proceed to your lineal, to
wit, the length of your Lines noted in the third and fourth Colums of your
Field-Book.

And seeing that the Length of your first Line GB, was 50 Perches, take 50 from
your Scale, and apply that distance to your Paper from G, to B.

2. The distance of your second Line GC, being 60 Perches, take 60 from your
Scale, and apply the distance to your Paper from G, to C.

3. The distance of your third Mark GD, being 65 Perches, take that distance
from your Scale, and apply it to your Paper from the Point G, to D.

In all respects as before proceed with the measuring of all the other Lines
about the Field, were they never so many.

Lastly, If you draw the Lines AB, BC, CD, DE, OF, FG, and GA, you shall have
upon your Paper the exact Figure of your Field.

And if you find these Operations not to agree, you had best examine, and
reform the Error.

CHAP. VII.
How to take the Plot of a Field at two Stations, upon a Sheet of Paper
stretched on your Table,
SUppose A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, is the Figure Field to be drawn upon the
Plain-Table, now because you cannot from any one place thereof see all the
Angles at once, therefore make choice of two several Stations, which let be O,
and Q. Then upon the Paper on your Table make a Mark, as Q. representing your
first Station. This done, place your Instrument at Q, the Needle hanging
directly over the Meridian-Line of your Card, as represented by the Line M, Q,
N.

The Instrument being there fastened, direct your Sights to C, and draw upon
your Table the Line Q, C, measuring the distance from Q to C, and setting that
distance on the Table from Q to G.

2. Direct your Sights to D, and draw your Line Q, D, measuring the Distance Q,
D, as before.

3. Direct your Sights to E, and draw the Line Q, E.

4. Direct your Sights to F, and draw the Line Q, F.

5 Direct your Sights to G, and draw the Line Q, G.

6. Direct your Sights to H, and draw the Line Q, H.

7. Direct your Sights to O, your second Station, and draw the Line Q, O,
measuring the distance from Q, to O, and by your Scale and Compass set off your
Stationary distance upon your Table from Q to O.

Having thus made your Observation of all the Angles visible from the Station
Q, and drawn Lines from Q, upon your Table, and likewise measured the distance
from Q, to every one of them, you may then according to the Directions in the
first part of the aforegoing Chapter draw the Line CD, DE, OF, FG, and GH, and
so you have that part of the Field finished from your first Station at Q.

Then remove your Instrument to O, your second Station, and there place it in
all respects as before, the Needle hanging over the Meridian-Line of your Card
represented in the second Station by the Line M, O, N.

Having thus placed your Instrument at O, make observation of the Angles I, A,
and B, in all respects as you did before with the Angles, C, D, E, F, G, H, and
having drawn the Lines OI, OA, C, B, and measured their distances from O, draw
the Lines HI, IA, AB, and BC, and so you shall have upon your Table the Figure
of the Field.

To perform the work of this Chapter by the Degrees on the Frame of the Table.
THis differs nothing from the work of the middle part of the sixth Chapter.
Having therefore placed your Instrument at Q, according to the aforesaid
Directions, guide your Sights to C, observing the Degrees and Minutes cut by
the Index on the Frame of your Table, which Degrees and Minutes place in the
first and second Colums of your Field-Book. Then measure with your Chain the
distance from your Station Q to the Angle C, and set that distance down in the
third and fourth Colums of your Field-Book, as already treated of. After this
manner do with all the Angles visible at your first Station, viz. with the
Angles, C, D, E, F, G, H, measuring the distance of every Line, as aforesaid.

Then remove your Instrument to O, your second Station, and make observation of
the several Lines and Angles, I, A, and B, in all respects, as you did before
with the Lines and Angles C, D, E, F, G, and H, which being collected into your
Field-Book according to the directions aforesaid.

Degrees. Min. Perches. Prime. C 47 15 25 2 D 88 00 37 0 1 Station Q. E 135 30
35 1 F 200 00 28 0 G 270 15 48 4 H 341 00 33 0

The Stationary distance O, Q, 50 Perches, and the Angle O, Q, M, or N, O, Q,
10 Degrees, being the Declination of your Stationary Line from Meridian Line.

I 341 30 23 0 2 Station O. A 30 00 21 1 C 84 45 35 4

CHAP. VIII.
To take the Plot of a Field upon your Plain Table at two Stations taken within
the same Field, without tedious traveling about it, by measuring only the
Stationary distance.
IT may so happen that the plotting of a Field must be according to these
following Directions; yet make as little use thereof as may be, in regard of
the acutness of the Angles, which is more liable to Error than any of the
former ways, though grounded upon a firm Geometrical Principle.

Let A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, be the Figure of Field, and let the two Stations
within the same be O and Q.

Having placed your Instrument at O, for your first Station, the Needle hanging
directly over the Meridian-Line of the Card, you must 1st. Direct your Sights
to your first Angle at A, and draw the Line O, A. Secondly Direct your Sights
to B, and draw the Line O, B. Thirdly to C, and draw the Line O, C. Fourthly to
D, and draw the Line O, D. Fifthly, to E, and draw the Line O, E. Sixthly to F,
and draw the Line O, F. Seventhly to G, and draw the Line O G, and Eighthly
direct your Sights to H, and draw the Line O, A.

This done, direct your Sights to your second Station at Q, and draw the Line
O, Q, upon your Table; then with your Chain measure out your Stationary
distance O, Q, 40 Perches; and removing your Instrument to Q. (the Needle over
the Meridian Line of the Card) make observation as before at O. that is, direct
your Sights first to A, drawing the Line Q, A, and so proceed to the rest as
aforesaid.

By the Figure you may see where the correspondent Lines at each Station
intersect; as first the Lines O, A, and Q, A, intersect, or cross each other at
A. Secondly, The Lines O, B, and Q, B, cross at B. Thirdly, The Lines O, C, and
Q, C, cross at C. Fourthly, The Lines O, D, and Q, D, cross at D. Fifthly, The
Lines O, E, and Q, E, cross at E. Sixthly The Lines O, F, and Q, F, intersect
at F. Seventhly, The Lines O, G, and Q G, cross at G, and Eighthly, The Lines O,
H, and Q, H, cross each other at H.

Therefore if from these Points of intersection you draw Lines from one to the
other, you have upon your Paper the exact proportion of your Field, to wit the
Lines AB, BC, CD, etc.

And by this kind of plotting, you will find a quick dispatch, as not obliged
to observe Degrees cut, or to measure any Distances, except only between you
Stations; but by reason of the acuteness of the Angles, (without exact drawing
of your Lines, and observing the precise Points of intersection) you may run
into gross Absurdities, and Mistakes.

CHAP. IX.
To take, or draw the Plot of a great Champain Plain, by the help of the
Degrees on the Frame of the Table.
LEt A, B, C, D, be the Champain Plain; then first place your Instrument at A,
laying the Index on the Diameter of the Table, and turning the whole Instrument
about until through the Sights you see the Angle at B; where fix the
Instrument, and turn the Index about until through the Sights you see the Angle
on the other side of your Station at D, observing the Degrees cut by the Index,
which suppose 71, which is the quantity of the Angle B, A, D. Then measure with
your Chain the distance A D, which is 31 Perches, 2 Primes; the 71 Degrees must
be noted in the first Colum of your Field-Book, and the 31 Perches, 2 Primes,
in the third and fourth Colums, as has been showed before.

Secondly, Remove your Instrument to the next Angle at D, and laying the Index
on the Diameter thereof, direct your Sights to the last Station at A, and there
fix the Instrument; then turn the Index about until you see the next Angle at
C, Degrees there cut, which suppose 86, which is the quantity of Degrees of the
Angle A, D, C; then measure the distance. D C, 31 Perches in the third Colum of
your Field-Book.

Thirdly, Remove your Instrument to G, and laying the Index on the Diameter
thereof, direct your Sights to D, and then fasten the Instrument. Then turn the
Index about until through the Sights you see the next Angle at B, observing the
Degrees cut, which suppose 73, and 30 Minutes; and measure the Distance C B, 22
Perches, 3 Primes, the 73 Degrees, 30 Minutes must be placed in the first and
second Colums of your Field-Book, and the 22 Perches, 3 Primes in the third and
fourth Colums.

Lastly, Remove your Instrument to B, and laying the Index on the Diameter
thereof, direct your Sights to C, and then fix the Instrument; then move the
Index about until through the Angle at A, where you began, noteing the Degrees
there cut, which are 129, and 30 Minutes, which is the quantity of the Angle C,
B, A; then with your Chain the distance from B, to A, 25 Perches, 5 Primes,
these 129 Degrees, 30 Minutes, and the 25 Perches, 5 Primes must be noted in
your Field-Book, as aforesaid, and then will they stand thus.

Degrees. Minutes. Perches. Primes. A 71 00 32 2 D 86 00 31 0 C 73 30 22 3 B
129 30 25 5

The work of this Chapter may be performed upon your Plain-Table, the operation
differing nothing from what is here delivered, except only, that here you have
the Angles by the Degrees on the Frame of your Table, and you must by the Lines
upon the Table.

CHAP. X.
To take the Plot of a Wood, or overgrown Ground upon your Plain-Table, by
going round about it, making Observations at every Angle, when through the
thickness of the Wood you cannot see the Angles from any Station taken in the
midst thereof, nor from any Angle to all the rest.
IT has been already treated of plain and open Grounds; it will also be
necessary to speak of Wood-lands. Suppose A, B, C, D, E, F, G, were a Piece of
Wood-ground to be measured: By reason of the thickness of the Wood, you cannot
come to measure the inside thereof; therefore work without.

1. Place your Instrument at the Angle A, and directing your Sights to the next
Angle B, and by the Side thereof, draw a Line upon your Table, as the Line B,
A: then measure by the Hedge-side, from the Angle A, to the Angle B, which
suppose 66 Perches; then from the Scale take 66 Perches, which distance set
upon your Table from A to B.

2. Remove your Instrument from A, and set up a Mark in the place thereof, and
place your Instrument at your second Angle B; then lay the Index upon the Line
A B, and turn the whole Instrument about until through the Sights you see the
Mark which you set up at A; and then with your Screw fasten the Instrument
there; then laying the Index upon the Point B, direct your Sights to the third
Angle at C, and draw the Line B C, upon your Table; then measuring the distance
B C, 63 Perches, take that distance from your Scale, and set it on your Table,
from B, to C.

3. Remove your Instrument from B, and set a Mark in the room thereof, placing
your Instrument at C, laying the Index upon the Line C B, and turn the whole
Instrument about until through the Sights you see the Mark at B, and then
fasten your Instrument; then laying the Index on the Point C, direct your
Sights to D, and (...) upon your Table the Line C D; then measure from C, to D,
54 Perches, and set that distance upon your Table from C, to D.

4. Remove your Instrument to D, (...) a Mark at C, where it last stood, and
lay the Index upon the Line D C, turning the whole Instrument about till
through the Sights you see the Mark at C, and there fasten the Instrument: Then
lay the Index on the Point D, and direct your Sights to E, and draw the Line
DE; then with your Chain, measure the distance DE, 76 Perches, and set that
distance upon your Table from the Point D, to E.

5. Remove your Instrument to E, placing a Mark at D, where it last stood, and
lay the Index upon the Line DE, turning the whole Instrument about until
through the Sights you see D, and there fasten the Instrument; then lay the
Index upon the Point E, and direct your Sights to F, and draw the Line E, F;
then measure the distance E, F, 100 Pearches, and set that distance upon your
Table from E, to F.

6. Remove your Instrument to F, placing a Mark at E, where it last stood, and
lay the Index upon the Line E, F, turning the whole Instrument about, until
through the Sights you see E, where fasten the Instrument: and laying the Index
on the Point F, direct your Sights to G, and draw the Line F, G, then measure
the distance F, G, 69 Perches, and set off that distance upon your Table from
the Point F, to G.

7. Remove your Instrument to G, placing the Mark at F, where it last stood,
and lay the Index upon the Line F, G, turning the whole Instrument about, till
through the Sights you see Instrument; then laying the Index upon the Point G,
direct your Sights to A, your first Mark where you began, and draw the Line G,
A, which shall pass directly through the Point A, where you first began, if you
have truly wrought.

CHAP. XI.
To Protract, or lay down any Observations taken according to the Directions of
the tenth Chapter.
YOu must consider which way your Plot will Line AB; then upon the Point A,
protract an Angle equal to the Angle B, A, D, 71 Degrees, and draw the Line AD;
then from your Scale take 32 Perches, 2 Primes, and set it upon your Paper from
A, to D.

Then on the Point D, protract an Angle equal to the Angle C, D, A, 86 Degrees,
and draw the Line D, C, then from your Scale take 31 Perches, and set it upon
your Paper from D, to C.

Then on the Point C, protract an Angle of 73 Degrees, 30 Minutes, equal to the
Angle D, C, B* and draw the Line C, B, which will intersect the Line BA, in B,
and so the Angle C, B, A, will contain 129 Degrees 30 Minutes, as aforesaid;
and the Lines C, B, and B, A, being measured upon your Scale, will give you the
exact Lengths as found them measured in the Field.

CHAP. XII.
To take the distances of several places one from another; as also the distance
of any of them from your place of standing, it being of excellent use to draw a
Plot of the most considerable Marks, or Bounds of a Town, Manor, etc.
MAke choice of such a Place from whence you may see all those Places whose
distances are required, and there place your Instrument exactly level; then
move your Index about till through the Sights you see your first Mark,
observing what Degrees your Index cuts on the Frame of the Table, which Degrees
note down in a Book; then your Index to your second Mark, and there set down
the Degrees cut as before, and set them down; then direct your Sights to your
third Mark, which set down as aforesaid, and so if there be more, or less till
you have gone over them all.

Then for your second Observation, choose some other convenient Place, from
whence you may see all the Marks, which Stationary distance let be as large as
your Ground with convenience will permit, and so situate that the Index lying
on the Diameter of your Table at your first Station, through the Sights thereof
you may see your second Station, and likewise at the second you may see your
first, so that in both Stations the Diameter of the Table, may be in a right
Line, at which second Station make Observation, as aforesaid, by noting your
Degrees cut, and setting them down in a Book by themselves with a distinction
between your first and second Station, as also Figures to your several Marks,
as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. at both Stations, so that you may not mistake when you
come to Protraction.

Let A, B, C, be three several Marks in the Fields, or other observable Marks,
as Churches, Houses, etc. and let it be required to find the distance of either
of them from one another, as as also the distance of any of them from A, or B.

Then make choice of your first Station at A, where placing your Instrument,
direct your Sights to your first Mark at C, and suppose the Index cuts 70
Degrees, 30 Minutes, which must be noted in a Book, as you see here following,
with the Figure 1, before it signifying your first Mark, then direct your
Sights to D, your second Mark, and let the Degrees cut be 100 Degrees, 15
Minutes, which must be likewise noted in your Book as aforesaid, with the
Figure 2, before it; signifying your second Mark; then turn your Index about,
till through the Sights you see the third Mark at E, the Index cutting Degrees
which note down in your Book, with the Figure 3, before it, signifying your
third Mark. This Figure shows the whole.

This done bring your Index to the Diameter of your Table, that through your
Sights you may see your second Station at B, and measure the distance of your
Station A, B, which let be 40 Yards.

Then bring your Instrument to B, and the Index lying on the Diameter thereof,
move the Instrument about, till through the Sights you see your first Station
at A, and there six your Instrument.

Then move the Index about till through the C, the Index cutting 36 Degrees, 30
Minutes, which note in your Book as aforesaid, with the Figure 1, before, it
signifying your first Station; Then direct your Sights to D, your second Mark,
and Index cutting 58 Degrees; and lastly direct your Sights to E, the Index
cutting 90 Degrees, 15 Minutes, which note in your Book with the Figure 3,
before it, for your third Mark, and then will they stand as thus.

Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. 1 -- 70 -- 30 1 -- 36 -- 30 1, Station 2 -- 100 -- 15 2,
Station 2 -- 58 -- 0 3 -- 150 -- 00 3 -- 90 -- 15

Your Stationary distance 40 Yards.

By the help of this Table of your Observations you may at any time protract
the same on Paper, Scale of equal Parts, answerable to the Parts of your
Stationary distance, you may with your Compasses measure the Distance of any of
these Marks one from another, or from either of your Stations.

CHAP. XIII.
To know whether you have truly wrought, and whether your Plotwill close, or
not, when you make Observation at every Angle of a Field, as in Chapter X.
COllect the quantity of all the Angles found at your several Observations into
on Sum; the Multiply 180 Degrees by a Number less by two, than the Number of
Angles in the Field, and if the Product of this Multiplication be equal to the
Total Sum of all your Angles, then have you wrought right, otherwise not: For
Example.

Take the work of the tenth Chapter, where the Angles found were as follows,
the Sum of them being 360 Degrees.

Now because the Field consisted but of four Sides, you must Multiply 180
Degrees by 2, (which is a Number less by 2 than the Number of Angles in the
Field) and the Product will be 360, which exactly agrees with the Sum of all
the Angles in the Field, as found by Observation. Degrees. Min. 71 00 86 00 73 30
129 30 360 00

CHAP. XIV.
How to find the Area, or Superficial content of any plain Figure, and to
reduce irregular Figures into regular Forms, and to find the content thereof.
HAving showed how to draw the Plot of a Field upon Paper, it will be
convenient to show how the content thereof may be attained, that is, how many
Acres, Rods and Perches any Field so plotted, does contain. For effecting of
which, consider that the Original of the mensuration of all superficial
Figures, such as Land, Board, Glass, or the like, do depend upon the exact
measuring of certain regular Figures, as the Geometrical Square, the Long
Square, the Triangle; the Circle, and the Trapezium: so that any Plot of Land
to be measured, if it be not in the Form of one of these Figures it must
(before it be measured) be reduced into some of these Forms. I shall first show
how to measure any of the said Figures severally by themselves, and then how to
reduce any other Figure (how irregular soever it be) into some of these Forms,
and then how to measure it by the same Rules; And first.

Of the Geometrical Square.
A Geometrical Square is a Figure, consisting of 4 equal Sides, and Angles, as
is the Square P, R, R, V, whose Sides PK, KV, VR, and RP, are all equal, viz.
6, be they either Inches, Feet, Perches, or any other measure whatsoever.

Now to find the Superficial content thereof, Multiply any of the Sides in it
self, and the Product of that Multiplication shall be the content of the
Square. For Example, Suppose the Square P, K, R, V, to be a Piece of Land, and
the Side thereof to contain 6 Perches, therefore Multiply 6 in it self (that,
is 6 by 6) and the Product is 36, and so many Perches does the Square Piece
Land P, K, R, V, contain, as you may perceive by counting of the little Squares
within the great one.

Of the large Square.
A Long Square is a Figure consisting of 4 Sides, as in the Figure A, B, C, D,
the two opposite Sides whereof are equal, as the Sides A, B, and C, D; and
likewise the two other opposites AC, and BD, the two shorter Sides containing 3
Perches, and the longer Sides 15.

To find the Superficial content of this long Product is the Superficial
content thereof. For Example, The longer Side of the Square contains 15
Perches, and the shorter 3; now if you multiply 15 by 3, the Product will be
45, which is the content of the Square in Perches.

Of the Triangle.
ALthough there be several sorts of Triangles, yet in respect they are all
measured by one and the same Rule, one Example therefore shall serve, which
take for a general Rule.

In all right-lin'd Triangles whatsoever, half the length of the Base being
multiplied by the length of the Perpendicular, shall be equal to the Area, or
content of the Triangle: Or half the length of the Perpendicular being
multiplied in the length of the whole Base, shall be the content of the
Triangle. Also if you multiply the whole Perpendicular by the whole Base, half
the Product shall be the content of the Triangle. For Example, Suppose you were
to find the Area of the Triangle S, R, Q, First from the Angle R, let fall the
Perpendicular R, E, and let the length thereof be 24 Perches; Now if you
multiply 12, the half of the Perpendicular by 44, the length of the whole Base,
the Product will be 528, and that is the Area, or content of the Triangle. Or
if you multiply 24 which is the length of the Perpendicular, by 22 the length
of half the Base, the Product will be 528. Also if you multiply 44 the length
of the Base by 24, the whole length of the Perpendicular, the Product will be
1056, the half of which is 528 the Area, or content of the Triangle.

Of the Trapezium.
A Trapezium is a Figure consisting of 4 unequal Sides, and as many unequal
Angles, as is in the Figure A, C, B, D.

To measure this Trapezium, first reduce it into 2 Triangles, by drawing the
Diagonal Line A, R, by which means your Figure is reduced to 2 Triangles, viz.
the Triangles A, C, B, and A, D, B; then if you let fall the Perpendiculars
from the Points D, and C, you may measure them by the last Example, as if they
were 2 Triangles, the Sum whereof being added together will be the Area, or
Content of the whole Trapezium.

For Example, having drawn the Line A, B, and so reduced the Figure into 2
Triangles, and let fall the Perpendiculars from C, and D, (the Base A, B, being
common to both Triangles) suppose the Perpendicular at C, were 20 Perches, the
Perpendicular at D, 10, and the Base, AB, (serving for both Triangles) 42
Perches. If therefore according to your former Directions you multiply 42 the
Base, by 10, half the Perpendicular, the Product will be 420 for the content of
the Triangle A, C, B. In like manner if you Multiply 42 the Base by 5, half the
other Perpendicular, the Product will be 210, for the content of the Triangle
A, D, B. Then if you add the Contents of these two Triangles together, viz. 420
and 210, the Sum of them is 630, which is the content of the whole Trapezium A,
C, B, D. But this Work may be performed with more brevity thus.

In respect the Base A, B, is common to both the Triangles, you need therefore
do no more but add the two Perpendiculars together, the half whereof being
Multiplied by the whole Base, the Product shall be the content of the
Trapezium. For Example, The two Perpendiculars 10, and 20, being added together
make 30, the half of which is 15, which being Multiplied by 42 (the whole
length of the common Base) makes 630, which is the Content of the whole
Trapezium.

How to reduce Irregular Figures into Trapeziums, and Triangles, and to cast up
the Content thereof.
LEt A, B, C, D, E, F, G, be the Figure of the Field drawn upon your
Plain-Table, or protracted on Paper, according to any of the former directions;
In regard the Field is irregular, that is to say, it is neither a Circle,
Triangle, Square, or Trapezium, it must therefore before it is measured, be
reduced into some of these Forms; which to perform, do thus; Draw Lines to
every other Angle, as the Lines, GB, BD, DE, and FB, Triangles, as.

1. The Triangle G, A, B.

2. The Triangle B, C, D.

3. The Triangle D, E, F.

4. The Triangle F, B, G.

5. The Triangle F, B, D.

These five Triangles must be all measured severally, according to your former
Directions showed to find the Content of a Triangle, and then the Contents of
the five Triangles being added together into one Sum, shall be the Area or
Content of the whole Field. As suppose the Triangle G, A, B, should contain 53
Perches, the Triangle B, C, D, 47 Perches, the Triangle D, E, F, Perches, the
Triangle G, B, F, 74, and the Triangle B, F, D, 68 Perches.

These five Numbers added together make 281 Perches, which is the Area or
Content of the whole Field in Perches.

Here note that at any time when you reduce any Irregular Plot into Triangles,
your Number of Trangles will be less by 2, than the Number of the Sides of your
Plot; as in this the Plot consisted of 7 Sides, and you see it is reduced
Triangles.

Of the Circle.
THe Proportion of the Circumference of any Circle is to his Diameter, as 7 to
22. Now to find the Area, or Content of any Circle, Multiply the Diameter
thereof in it self, and Multiply that Sum by 11, which Product being divided
Area of the Circle.

For Example, In the Circle. D, F, G, E, let the Diameter thereof D, E, be 28,
which Multiplied in it self, gives 784, which being Multiplied by 11, gives
8624, and being divided by 14, the Quotient will be 616 which is the Area of
the Circle.

The Circumference of a Circle being given to find the Diameter.
MUltiply the Circumference by 7, and divide the Product by 22, the Quotient
shall be the length of the Diameter. For Example, Let the Circumference of the
Circle D, E, F, G, be 88, which Multiplied by 7, gives 616, which being
divided by 22, gives 28, for the length of the Diameter D, E.

CHAP. XV.
Treats of certain ARITHMETICAL, and GEOMETRICAL PROPOSITIONS, for the
Separation, and Division of Land.
Proposition I.
A right Line being given, to divide the same according to any Proportion
assigned.
SUppose A, be a Line given, and let it be required to divide the same into two
parts, bearing Proportion the one to the other, as the Line B, does to the Line
C.

First draw the Line F, D, equal to the given Line A, then draw the Line E, D,
to contain any Angle at pleasure, and from D, to H, place the Line C, and from
H, to E, place the Line B; then draw the Line E, F, and lastly draw the Line H,
G, Parallel to the Line E, F, which shall cut the Line F, D, in the Point G: so
is the Line F, D, (which is equal to the given Line A,) divided in the Point G,
in Proportion as the Line B, is to the Line C.

Proposition II.
To perform the same Arithmetically.
LEt the Line A, be 72, the Line B, 50; and the Line C, 40, according to which
Proportion let it be required to divide the Line A: First say by the Rule of
Proportion, if 90 (which is the Sum of the 2 Proportional Terms) give 72, the
whole given Line, what shall 50, the greater part give? Multiply and Divide and
you shall have in the Quotient 40 for the greater part of the Line A, which
being subtracted from 72, the whole Line, there remains 32 for the lesser part.

Proposition III.
To divide a Triangle into 2 parts, according to any Proportion assigned, by a
Line drawn from any Angle thereof.
LEt A, B, C, be a Triangle given, and let it be required to divide the same,
by a Line drawn from the Angle A, into two parts the one bearing Proportion to
the other, as the Line F, does to the Line G.

By either of the two last Propositions, divide the Base of the Triangle B, C,
in the Point D, in Proportion as the Line F, is to the Line G; then draw the
Line A, D, which shall divide the Triangle Proposition.

Proposition IV.
The Base of the Triangle being known, to perform the former Proposition by
Arithmetic.
SUppose the Base B, C, to be 40, and let the Proportion into which the
Triangle is to be divided be, as 2 to 3.

First, Add the Rule of Proportion, If 5 give 40, which is the whole Base, what
shall 3 the greater Term give? Multiply, and Divide, and the Quotient will give
24, for the greater Segment of the Base D, C, which being deducted from the
whole Base 40, there remains 16 for the lesser Segment B, D.

Proposition V.
To divide a Triangle given into two parts, according to any Proposition
assigned, by a Line drawn from a Point limited in any of the Sides thereof.
LEt the Triangle given be A, B, C, and let E, to draw a Line that shall divide
the Triangle into two Parts, bearing Proportion the one to the other, as the
Line I does to the Line K. First, from the limited Point E, draw a Line to the
opposite Angle A, then divide the Base B, C, in Proportion as I, to C, D; then
draw D, F, parallel to A, E. Lastly, from F, draw the Line F, E, which will
divide the Triangle as I, to K.

Proposition VI.
To Divide a Triangle, whose AREA is known, into two Parts, from a Point
limited in any Side thereof, according to any number of Acres, Rods, or Perches.
LEt the Triangle be A, B, C, whose quantity is 5 Acres, 1 Rod; let the limited
Point be E, in the Base; and let it be required from E, to divide the Triangle
into two Parts between M, and N, to wit to M, 3 Acres, 3 Rods thereof, and to
N, 1 Acre, and 2 Rods.

First, reduce the quantity of N, being the lesser, into Perches, which makes
240; then considering on which Side of the limited Point this Part is to be
laid, as toward B, measure that Part of the Base from E, to B, 30 Perches,
whereof take half, which is 15, and thereby divide 240, the part of N, and the
Quotient will be 16, the length of the Perpendicular F, H, at which parallel
distance from the Base B, C, cut the Side A, B, in F, from whence draw the Line
F, E, which shall include the Triangle F, B, E, containing 1 Acre, 2 Rods, and
the Trapezium A, F, E, C, contains the residue, viz. 3 Acres and 3 Rods.

CHAP. XVI.
How to lay out several quantities in Common Fields unto several Tenants.
ACcording to the aforesaid Directions, Plot out the whole Field, Common, or
Several, with its particular Bounds, as you observe them in the Survey of the
whole Manor; or if you only Survey that Particular, take notice of all the
Bounds thereof; then provide a particular Book, or Paper Ruled into 10 Colums,
in the 1 toward the left Hand write the Tenants Name, and the Tenor by which
he holds the same Land; the next three Colums are to contain the Breadth of
every man's Parcels of Land, noted over the Head of every Colum with these 3
Characters 0, 1, 2, answering to the several Divisions of your Chain, o,
signifying Unites, 1 Prime, and 2 Seconds. In the next 3 Colums is expressed the
length of every Tenants Parcel, having the like Characters of 0, 1, 2, over the
Head of each Colum as that of the Breadth; and in the three last Colums is to
be expressed the quantity of each Tenants Parcel.

In laying out of several Parcels in this kind, you will use only your Chain;
then when you begin your Work, first write the Name of the Field, and in the
first Colum write the Tenants Name, and the Tenor by which he holds the same,
from what place you begin to Measure, and upon what Point of the Compass you
pass from thence, and observing this Direction in all the rest you may, if need
require, Bound every Parcel.

This being noted in your Book, observe the Species or Shape of the Furlong,
whether it be all of one Length, or not; if all of one Length then take the
Length thereof but once for all; but if different Lengths, then take the Length
thereof at every second, or third Breadth, and express the same in your Book
under the Title of Book or Paper under the Title of Breath.

In this manner you may proceed from one Furlong to another, until you have
gone through the whole Field; which when you have done, and noted down the
several Lengths and Breadths in your Book, Multiply the Length and Breadth of
every Parcel together, and so shall you have the quantity of every Parcel by it
self, which quantity must be noted down in the three last Colums of your Book,
as in the following Example appears.

GRAVEL-PIT FIELD.
Tenants Breadth Length Quantity Names 0 1 2 0 1 2 a r p John Price from the
Lane Eastward, free 6 8 2 16 2 0 0 2 30 Thomas Jones for two Lives 1 3 2 16 2 0
0 0 21 William Smith by Copy 5 6 3 15 4 2 0 2 7 Robert West, at Will 8 4 1 14 2
3 0 3 0

CHAP. XVII.
To take the Plot of a Manor,
ALthough Practice in the performance hereof is better than many Words; and
that the Rules already delivered are sufficient to perform the Work, yet I
shall render it as plain as possible. Cainsham, you must first write the Title
thereof in your Field-Book, thus.

Manor of Cainsham in Com: sur: pro Reg. incip 2 Mar. 1685.
THen having your Field-Book in a readiness, Ruled and fitted as aforeshewed,
write over every Close as you Survey, the Tenants Name, and the Tenure by which
he holds the same, as in the following Example; for the first Close, Richard
Price, Birds Close Pasture Free; then beginning to Survey this Parcel, first
place your Instrument at A, and direct your Sights to B, observing the Degrees
there cut, which let be 195, which must be noted in the first Colum of your
Field-Book; then with your Chain measure the di^ance from A, to B, and you
shall find it to contain 30 Perches, 4 Primes, which place in the third and
fourth Colums.

2. Remove your Instrument to B, and direct your Sights to C, the Index cuting
205 Degrees, 30 Minutes, which note in the first and second Colums of your
Field-Book; then measure the distance B, C, 26 Perches, 7 Primes, which observe
in the third and fourth Colums; Then in regard you are to leave the Hedge, or
Border A, B, C, adjoining to Smiths Close, (which belongs to another Manor,
and therefore naming is sufficient for your remembrance) draw a Line quite
cross your Field-Book, and in the last Colum thereof, which is very broad,
write the name of the Bounder which you went against, as in the Example. These
two Observations being made by the Hedge, or Bounder of Smiths Close, therefore
against these Observations write Smiths Close; and being you are now to leave
that Bounder, therefore draw a Line quite through your Field-Book, which
denotes that you leave the Bounder of Smiths Close.

3. Place your Instrument at C, and direct your Sights to D, the Degrees cut
being 120, and 45 Minutes, and the distance C, D, being 27 Perches, 8 Primes;
these 120 Degrees, 45 Minutes, must be noted in the first and second Colums of
your Field-Book, and the 27 Perches, 8 Primes in the third and fourth Colums.
Now because at these three Observations you went against the Hedge, or Bounder
of Grays-Field, you must against them in the broad Colum of your Field-Book set
down Grays Field; and because at your next Observation you are to leave that
Bounder, therefore draw a Line Cross your Book, showing that you have done with
that Bounder.

4. Place your Instrument at D, and direct your Sights to E, the Index cutting
86 Degrees, 15 Minutes, and the distance D, E, being 10 Perches, 4 Primes, the
Degrees and Minutes must be noted in the first and second Colums of your Field
Book, and the 10 Perches, 4 Primes, in the third and fourth.

5. Remove your Instrument to E, and direct your Sight to F, the Index cutting
300 Degrees, and the distance E, F, being 12 Perches, 3 Primes, the Degrees and
Minutes set down in the second and fifth Colums of your Field-Book, and the 12
Perches, 3 Primes in the third and fourth Colums.

6. Place your Instrument at F, and direct your G, the Index cuting 55 Degrees,
30 Minutes, and the distance F, G, being 16 Perches, 4 Primes; the 55 Degrees,
30 Minutes must be noted in the first and second Colums of your Field-Bood, and
the 16 Perches, 4 Primes in the third and fourth.

Now because in these three last Observations you went against the Hedge or
Bounder of Barns-wood, and that you are now to leave it, you must against these
three Observations, in the broad Barnes-wood, and being now to leave that
Bounder, draw a single Line cross your Book.

7. Place your Instrument at G, and direct your Sight to H, the Index cutting
324 Degrees, 15 Minutes, and the distance G, H, being 36 Perches, 2 Primes, the
Degrees and Minutes must be noted, in the first and second Colums, and the
Perches, and Primes in third and fourth.

8. Remove your Instrument to H, and direct A, where you began the Index,
cutting 107 Degrees, 15 Minutes, and the distance H, A, being 34 Perches, 6
Primes. The Degrees and Minutes must also be noted in the first, and second
Colums, and the Perches, and Primes in the third and fourth. Now because in
these two last Observations you went by the Riverside, therefore against them
write the River; and because you have now finished your first Close, draw a
double Line for a remembrance.

Then consider which Close is next fitting to be Surveyed, which let be Grays
Field, and withal at what Angle it is best to begin, which let be at C, and
here (for your help when you come to protraction) express in the Title of this
second Close at what Angle you begin, (unless you had begun where you ended the
last): Wherefore seeing you begin at C, look in your Book on the Work of your
last Close, at what place the Line B, C, ended, as at the end of 205 Degrees,
30 Minutes, and 26 Perches, 7 Primes, and against that Number make this * or
any other Mark, on the right Side of your downright Lines, and then write your
Title for your second Close thus:

Thomas Rich, Grays Field, Free, begin at *
BY this means you shall readily know when Margin place (2) for the Number of
your second Close, and then proceed in your Work, as before taught for your
last Close, until you come to K; where observing that you want but one Line, as
K, D, to enclose this second Close, and also that this Angle R, is the ^ittest
place to begin your third Close at, placing there your Instrument, and
directing your Sights to D, where you are to enclose, and then write in the
Margin of your Book (against the Degree here taken) draw a short Line, as thus
-- 21, 30, 40, 2, which serves to put you in mind when you come to Protraction,
that you are to begin your third Field, where now you are at the Angle K, where
you took your last Sight; and then having enclosed this second Close, proceed
to the third from K, in the Title whereof you need not make mention at what
place you begin, for the former reason, but working in that and all the rest,
as before showed, and if there were never so many Enclosures you may without
confusion easily distinguish the Work of the one from the other, and be able to
draw a Plot thereof at any time, remembering always that these Numbers in the
Margin of your Book, are to be placed severally in your Plot in these Closes
they represent; And by this means you are eased of much trouble that you must
by the other ways be put to in protracting upon the Table it self: for then in
every Plot you must write the Name of the Tenant, or the Close, or the Tenure
or quality thereof, which breeds confusion, and occasioneth much trouble in
casting up the Contents.

These Instructions being sufficient for the application and use of the
Field-Book, it were convenient to practice the same, and compare his Book with
the Plot, and protracting the same according to the Directions hereafter given.

An Example of a Leaf of the Field-Book, as it ought to be Ruled, and taken
according to the preceding Example.
Ric: Price, Birdsclose, Pasture, Free* Degrees. Min. Perch. Prin. (1) 191 00 30 4
Smiths Close. 205 30 26 7 * 120 45 27 8 Grays Field. 86 15 10 4 300 00 12 3
Barns Wood. 55 30 16 4 324 15 36 2 The River. 106 15 34 6 Tho: Rich, Grays
Field, free from* (2) 160 00 12 3 180 45 16 2 The Common 95 15 14 7 (3) 21 30
40 2 Barns Wood.

CHAP. XVIII.
To protract, or lay down Mountanous, and uneven Grounds, with the best way to
find the Area, or Content of such Irregulars.
LEt A, B, C, D, E, F, G, be a Mountanous Piece of Ground to be measured;
First, place your Instrument at A, and direct your Sights to B; then measure
the Line A, B, draw the same by the Side of the Ruler upon the Table; then in
regard that from B, to C, there is an Ascent, find the Horizontal Line thereof,
and draw it upon your Table, reckoning thereon the length of the Hypothenusal
Line; then measure Table, reduce it into Trapeziums, as A, B, E, G, and B, C,
D, E, and the Triangle G, E, F; then from the Angles A, C, E, F, fall the
Perpendiculars.

Now by reason there are many Hills and Valleys all over the Field, you must
measure with your Chain in the Field over Hill and Dale from B, to D, and to
the Line B, D, set the number of Perches as you find them by measuring, which
Line B, D. measured on the Scale; then by the help of your Instrument find the
Point H, in the Line B, D, and measure with your Chain from C, to H, over Hill
Dale, as aforesaid, and to the Perpendicular C, H, set the number, as you find
it by the Chain; then likewise find the Perpendicular I, E, and likewise
measure that with your Chain; all which Lines in respect of the Hills and
Valleys will be found much longer than if measured by your Scale: Then by the
Measured Lines BD, CH, and IE, cast up the contents of the Trapezium B, C, D,
E, and in this manner cast up the content of the Trapezium A, B, E, G, and the
Triangle G, E, F; and this is the exactest way to be prescribed from the
mensuration of uneven Grounds, which being carefully peformed, will not much
vary of the true Content. And to distinguish these from other Grounds, Shadow
them off in your Plot with Hills and Valleys, lest any should measure your Plot
by your Scale, and find your work to differ.

CHAP. XIX.
Directions to beautify your Plot when Protracted.
YOUR Plot being protracted as intended, and written the content of each Close
about the midst of the same, about the Bounds of every Field, with a fine
Pensil and Colors, neatly wash over the same which several proper Colors, and
use those Colors that are transparent, as Copper-Green, and Sap-Green, for
Greens; Yellow Berys, Combogeum, and Saffron for Yellows; Littmus for Blue;
Couchanea, Lake, Virmillion and Red-Lead for Reds; and for mixture of other
Colors as your fancy pleases for the adornment thereof. Also in your
Wood-land Grounds draw small Trees, and shadow your Hills, and uneven Grounds,
and for Rivers and High ways distinguish them by proper Colors. It were also
necessary in some convenient corner to draw the Mariners Compass according to
the Situation of the Ground, with the Flowerdelis pointing North, and from each
Point you may draw Lines thwart the Plot, the better to know the Point. Also
draw your Scale, and if there is a convenient place it were convenient to affix
the Coat of Arms of the owner thereof.

CHAP. XX.
Of the use of Gunters four Pole-Chain.
IN this Chapter for variety's sake, and to render the Treatise of Surveying
the more complete, it will be necessary to let you know how Ground is to be
measured with Gunters Chain.

This Chain containing 4 Poles, is divided into 100 Links, each Link consisting
of 7 Inches 91/100 Parts of an Inch in Length, which make 66 Feet to the whole
Chain, and 16 Feet for each Pole.

The Form of the Field-Book when you measure with this Chain, is as you see,
consisting of three Colums, the first for the Degrees of the Angles of the
Field, and the other 2 for Chains and Links.

Degrees. Chains. Links. 60 10 00 60 10 00 60 10 00

After having protracted the Field, according to the Field-Book, and reduced
the Figure into Triangles, let fall Perpendiculars, or the Base of each
Triangle, and measuring them with the same Scale into which you protracted the
Plat, Multiply the half of the Perpendiculars in their whole Bafes, or the half
of the Base into the whole Perpendicular, adding all the Sums of the Triangles
together; then if from the total Product you cut off by a Dash, or Comma the 5
last Figures toward the right Hand* (if there be so many) the Figures on the
left Hand of the Comma are Acres, and those to the right Hand of the Comma
500000 Parts of an Acre. If you Multiply the 5 Figures cut off by 4, the Number
of Rods in an Acre, and cut off 5 Figures to the right Hand, before the Comma,
are Rods, and the 5 cut off are 10000 Parts of a Rod. If you Multiply Poles in
a Rod working as before you have Perches or Poles before the Comma, and the
remainder Links, as according to the Field-Book, the Field being Triangular,
the Base of the Triangle is 10 Chains, 00 Links, the Perpendicular let fall
from one of the Angles on the Base; Chains, 7 Links, then by Multiplying the
whole Base 10 Chains 00 Links by the half Perpendicular 3 Chains 35 Links, the
Product is 335000, the Content of the Triangle; by cutting off 5 Figures to the
right Hand you have 3 Acres before the Comma. By Multiplying the remainder by
4, and Cutting off the Product 5 Figurs, there is 1 Rod, and by Multiplying the
Product by 4, and cutting off 5 Figures, there is 16 Pole.

Chain. Links. 10 00 3 35 3 (350 00 4 1 (400 00 40 16 (00000

If the Figure or Plot of the Field did consist of more Triangles, it is but
adding all their Sums together and working as before.

STERIOMETRY.
CHAP. XXI.
Giving directions how the Content of most Regular Figures may be attained;
also how to find the Crassitude, or solid Content of any
PROP I.
To Measure the Solidity of a Cube.
A Cube is a Figure comprehended under 6 equal Geometrical Square. Now for the
finding the Solidity thereof do thus; Measure one of the Sides, which Multiply
in it self, which being again Multiplied by by the Side, will give Solid
Content thereof. For Example, Let the Figures A, B, C, D, be a Cube, whose Side
A, B, suppose 6 Foot, this 6 being Multiplied in it self produces 36, which
Multiply by 6, and the Product will be 226, and so many Solid Feet of Timber,
or Stone are contained within the Cube A, B, C, D.

PROP II.
To measure the Solidity of a long Cube.
LEt M, N, O, P, Q, be the Figure of a long Cube, or oblong, the Side whereof
O, P, is 4 Foot, which being Multiplied in it self, gives 16 Foot for the
Square M, N, O, P; this 16 being Multiplied by 8, the length of the Side O, Q,
gives 128, and so many solid Feet of Stone or Timber are contained in the whole
Figure M, N, O, P, Q.

PROP III.
To Measure the Solidity of a Cilinder, or Pillar.
LEt the Cilinder given be A, B, C, the Crassitude, or solid Content whereof is
required. Let the Diameter of the Circle at the end A, B, be 7 Foot; then as
the superficial Content thereof (by Chapter 15) 38 Foot.

This Number being Multipled by 12, the Length of the Cilinder, gives 462 for
the Crassitude of the whole Cilinder.

PROP IV.
To Measure the Content of a Cone.
LEt the Cone given be A, B, C, the Height whereof A, C, is 12 Foot, and the
Diameter of the Base is 10, by which the superficial Content of the Circle will
be found to be 78 4/^, which Multiplied by 4, the third Part of the
Perpendicular gives 314 2/7 for the Content required.

But by reason it is not easy to measure the Altitude of a Cone, without the
true knowledge of the Perpendicular, it will be necessary to show how that may
be found; First take half the Diameter C, B, which is 5, and Multiply it in it
self makes 25, which Number keep; then measure the Side C, A, 13, which
Multiply in it self, makes 169, from which take the Square of half the Base,
which is 25, (your Number being found) and there remains 144, the Square Root
whereof is 12, and that is the Length of the Perpendicular.

PROP V.
To find the Content of a Sphere.
CVbe the Diameter, which Multiply by 11, and Divide by 21, gives the Solidity.

In this Figure, let D, E, the Diameter contain 14 Inches; First Multiply 14 in
it self, which makes 196, which being again Multiplied Sphere.

PROP VI.
How to measure a Piece of Taper-grown Timber.
A Piece of Taper-grown Timber, is thus measured according to the usual way.
Decimally, Let A, B, C, D, be a Piece of Timber, and let the end A, B, contain
2 Foot, and the part C, D, 1 which added together makes 3 Foot 5 Primes, the
half whereof is 1 75 Seconds, which Multiplied in it self gives 3 0625 Fourths,
which again Multiplied by the Length 27, gives 82 Foot, and 6875/10000 Parts of
a Foot, for the Content of the whole Piece.

PROP VII.
Another way to measure a Taper-grown Piece of Timber more exactly,
EVery Piece of Taper-grown Timber, the Sides Piramid, as this Piece A, B, C,
D; if the Sides A, C, and B, D, were extended till they meet at E, they would
include the Piramis A, E, B. Now to measure the Segment A, B, C, D, First find
the Length of the whole Piramis, E, F, which is thus done. Subtract 1 5 Primes,
the Length C, D, from the Base, gives 5 Primes for the difference; then say by
the Rule of Proportion.

As the Difference 5 Primes, is to the Base 2 Foot, so is the Length 27 to the
whole Length F, E, 108 Foot, out of which Subtract the Length of the Piece 27
Foot, and there remains 81, for the height of the lesser Piramis C, D. Secondly
the Base A, B, Squared, makes 4 Foot, which Multiplied by 2 third Parts of 108,
the Length of the whole Piramis, which is 36, gives 144 Foot, the Content of
the whole Piramis. Lastly, find the Content of the lesser Piramis C, E, D, by
Multiplying 1 5 Primes; the Base C, D, in it self, and it makes 2 25 Seconds,
which Multiplied by one third part of 81, the Height of the lesser Piramis 27,
which makes 60 75 Seconds, that is 60 Foot of the Content of the lesser
Piramis, which being deducted out of the whole Piramis, the remainder will be
83 25 Seconds, the true Content of the Piece A, B, C, D,

PROP VIII.
To measure any Timber-Tree as it is standing.
WIth a Cord or Ring girt the Tree about the middle thereof; then measure the
Length, which is equal to the Circumference of a Circle, described upon the
mean Diameter of the Tree, by help of which Circumference you must by the 2
last Rules of the Fifteenth Chapter find the Diameter, and Area thereof; Then
measure the Length of the Tree, which being Multiplied by the Content of the
Circle, gives the Content of the whole Tree. For Example; Let A, B, be a
standing Tree to be measured; then first girt the same about the middle thereof
at C, then measure the Length of the String, which let be 7 Foot, 4 Inches,
that is 88 Inches, which being Multiplied by 7, gives 616, which divided by 22
gives 28 for the Length of the Diameter. Having attained the Diameter. of the
Circle, find the Area thereof thus; Multiply the Diameter 28 in it self, which
makes 784, this again, Multiplied by 11, produces 8624, which divide by 14,
and the Quotient will be 616, the Content of the supposed Circle, which being
Multiplied by 10 Foot (which is 120 Inches) the Height of the Tree A, B, the
Product will be 73920, and so many Square Inches are in the Tree; which being
divided by 1728, the Number of Inches in a Foot of Square Timber, the Quotient
gives 42 21/27, and so many Foot is in the whole Tree.

CHAP. XXII.
GAGING.
ALL the difference between Gaging, and Measuring other Solids, is only in
this, that the Solids are Measured by Feet and Inches, the Vessels by Gallons,
Quarts, etc.

In this Art are two things to be observed; First, that those Vessels, being
for the most part of Irregular Forms how to reduce them to Regular Propotion;
Secondly, to find the true quantity of the Gallons in Cubick Inches, or parts
of a Foot: For the first of these, the best way is to measure the Diameter of
the Cask, both at the Bung and Head; and by their Diameters find Area of their
Circles; then take 2 Thirds of the Area at the Bung, and 1 Third at the Head,
which added together, will be the mean Area of the Vessel. And if you Multiply
this mean Area by the Length of the Vessel, it will show how many Solid Inches
the Vessel contains; which if you divide by the Number of Solid Inches in one
Gallon, the Quotient will show how many Gallons the Caskholds.

For Example, Suppose Wine Cask A, having the Diameter at the Head 18 Inches,
and the Diameter at the Bung 32 Inches, and the Length 40 Inches, what is the
Content?

Of the Area at the Head is -- 84, 823 of the Area at the Bung are -- 536, 166
The Sum of these two -- 620, 909 Inches in one Gallon of Wine, which are 231
Inches, yields for the Content 107 Gallons, 530 Parts, that is, somewhat above
a Gallon.

But there is a difficulty to resolve, that is, How many solid Inches there are
in a Gallon.

As for the Wine Gallon it is generally concluded to contain 231 Cubick Inches;
but some say it is some thing less; but this difference is not so much as
others make it in the Ale-Gallon, for although most Gagers, and the Coopers
make the Ale-Gallon (...) the Wine-Gallon 4 to 5, so that the Wine-Gallon being
231 Inches, the Ale-Gallon is 288 Inches; yet since the Excise, it is accounted
by them but 282 Cubick-Inches.

According to these Rules and Observations, Area at the Head, and of the Area
at the Bung, of any Cask ready cast up in Gallons, and 1000 Parts for Wine
measure; so that measuring the Diameter of any Cask at the Head, and Bung, and
adding the Numbers together, and Multiplying their Sum by the length of the
Cask, you shall find the Content thereof in Wine-Gallons. For Example, Suppose
the Diameter at the Head to be 18 Inches, -- 0, 367 Bung to be 32 Inches, -- 2,
321 the Sum of these two, -- 2, 688 Multiplied by the length 40 Inches, -- 40
make very near as before, -- 107, 502 that is, 107 Gallons, and 502 Parts of a
Gallon, which is a little above one half of a Gallon.

A Table for Gaging of Wine Cask.
Head. Bung. Head. Bung. G Parts G Parts G Parts G Parts 1 0 001 0 002 31 1 089
2 178 2 0 004 0 009 32 1 160 2 321 3 0 010 0 020 33 1 234 2 468 4 0 018 0 036
34 1 310 2 620 5 0 028 0 056 35 1 388 2 776 6 0 045 0 081 36 1 469 2 938 7 0
056 0 111 37 1 551 3 102 8 0 072 0 114 38 1 636 3 272 9 0 092 0 183 39 1 724 3
448 10 0 113 0 226 40 1 813 3 625 11 0 137 0 274 41 1 904 3 809 12 0 163 0 326
42 2 000 4 000 13 0 192 0 383 43 2 096 4 191 14 0 221 0 444 44 2 194 4 388 15 0
255 0 510 45 2 295 4 588 16 0 290 0 580 46 2 398 4 796 17 0 318 0 657 47 2 504
5 007 18 0 367 0 734 48 2 611 5 222 19 0 409 0 818 49 2 721 5 442 20 0 453 0
906 50 2 833 5 665 21 0 500 1 000 51 2 948 5 895 22 0 548 1 097 52 3 065 6 129
23 0 600 1 199 53 3 184 6 609 24 0 653 1 305 54 3 305 6 865 25 0 708 1 416 55 3
428 7 108 26 0 766 1 532 56 3 554 7 364 27 0 826 1 692 57 3 682 7 625 28 0 888
1 777 58 3 813 7 890 29 0 953 1 906 59 3 945 8 100 30 0 020 2 040 60 4 080

To Gage a Cask that is not full
A Table for Gaging Wine-Cask that are not full
G Parts G Parts G Parts G Parts G Parts 0 000 13 2630 26 4338 39 5913 52 7672
295 2707 4400 5976 7758 1 470 14 2775 27 4462 40 6040 53 7829 620 2847 4542
6094 7909 2 720 15 2918 28 4585 41 6158 54 7990 830 2986 4646 6223 8072 3 935
16 3056 29 4706 42 6288 55 8154 1038 3123 4766 6353 8236 4 1138 17 3189 30 4826
43 6418 56 8319 1235 3255 4885 6483 8404 5 1339 18 3321 31 4943 44 6548 57 8491
1420 3387 5000 6613 8580 6 1502 19 3452 32 5057 45 6679 58 8661 1596 3517 5115
6745 8765 7 1681 20 3582 33 5174 46 6811 59 8862 1764 3647 5234 6877 8962 8
1846 21 3712 34 5294 47 6944 60 9065 1918 3777 5354 7012 9170 9 2010 22 3842 35
5415 48 7082 61 9280 2091 3906 5476 7153 9398 10 2171 23 3960 36 5535 49 7225
62 9530 2242 4024 5600 7297 9705 11 2328 24 4087 37 5662 50 7370 63 10000 2405
4150 5724 7444 12 2481 25 4213 38 5787 51 7519 2556 4276 5850 7595

The use of this Table is as follows.
FIrst measure the Diameter of the Cask at the Head and Bung, and thereby you
will find the Content of the whole Cask; Then measure how many Inches deep the
Liquor in the Cask is, and then work by the Rule of Proportion; As for Example.

Let the Cask be as before, 32 Inches at the

As the Diameter at the Bung in Inches 32 To the depth of the Liquor in Inches
24 So the Radius of the Table 10000 To the part Proportional 7500
Find this Number 7500 in the Table, and it answers very near to 50 Gallons.

Then work again thus, omitting the smaller Fractions, which are of little
concernment.

Gal. Part. As the Gallons of the Radius 63 00 to the Proportional Gallons
found 50 75 So the content of the whole Cask 107 50 to the Content of the
Liquor being 24 Inches deep 86 61 That is somewhat above 86 Gallons.

Note that one Foot Square is near a Gallon; for there is 144 Inches in a Foot,
which doubled makes 288, which should be the Content of the Ale Gallon,
although here it is alittle lessened unto 282 Inches.

To Gage a Ship, and cast up how many Tuns her Burden is.
MEasure the Length of her Keel, the Breadth at the Mid-ship-Beam, and the
Depth of the Hold; Multiply these three one by the other, and divide the
Product thereof by 100, and so you shall find how many Tuns her Burden

Suppose a Ship having the Length of her Keel 50 Foot, and the Breadth at the
Mid-ship Beam 20, and the Depth in the Hold 10 Foot; how many Tuns will the
Ship carry?

Multiply 50 by 20, which makes 1000; and that Multiplied by 10, makes 10000,
which divided by 100, cutting off the two last Figures, shows the Ships Burden
to be 100 Tuns.

But this reckoning is only for the Kings Ships; As for Merchants Ships, who
give no allowance for Ordinance, M^sts, Sails, Cables, and Anchors, which are
all a Burden* but no Tunnage, you must divide your Product by 95; so the
foresaid Ship will be found to be 105 Tuns, 25/95 Parts.

But this way of reckoning the Tunnage of Ships, though it may come near in
some Ships, yet it may miss much in others; for all Ships are not built of the
same Fashion; therefore it is the best and surest way to cast up the Content of
the Ship more exactly according to the Rules of Art, with respect had to the
Mold, and shape of the Ship, and so to find out how many Cubick Feet the Ship
does contain; and every Cubick Foot of Water according to some, weighs 55 li.
Averdupoiz; but a Cubick Foot of Water according to some Artists, weighs 62
li. 588 parts. Now every Tun being 20 hundred Weight, and every Hundred 112 li.
which makes 2240 li. divide this by 62 li. 588 parts, it makes 35 Foot, 79
parts; so that about 36 Cubick Feet makes a Tun weight.

But observe that if you measure thus a Ship within, you shall find the Content
or Burden the Ship will hold, or take in. If you measure the Ship on the
outside to her Light-mark, as she swims being unladen, you shall have the
Weight or Content of the empty Ship; and if you measure from the Light-mark to
her full Draught of Water, being laden, that will be the true Burden or Tunnage
of the Ship.

Knowing the Measures of a Ship of one Burden, to make another Ship of the same
Mold, which shall be double, or treble, or in any Proportion, more or less, to
the said Ship.

Multiply the Measurs of the Length, Breadth, and Depth of the Ship Cubically,
and then double, or treble the Cube, and extract the Cube-Root thereof.

COSMOGRAPHY, OR ASTRONOMY.
COSMOGRAPHY is an Art that describes the whole Universe. It has two parts,
General, or Special.

General teaches the universal History of the World, which is a great
Spherical Body composed of Heaven, and the Elements; that is to say, the
Theater of the Universe, which is divided into two Parts or Regions, to wit,
Superior and Constant, as the Heavens; or Inferior, Inconstant and
Elementary, as the Earth.

Heaven is the highest Region of the transparent World, exquisite, and not
subject to change, which for its perfection and perpetual Motion, as well as
for those Luminary Ornaments which God has placed in it, may be said to consist
of Divine Matter, which moves about all the Elementary Region.

The Heavens, which contain several Globes one within another, are divided into
two, viz. Empyreal and Ethereal.

The Empyreal Heaven (which is called the Heaven of Heavens, or the Third
Heaven) surrounds all the other, and is so called from its great brightness and
splendour; and because it is purer than all the rest, it is thought to be the
Throne of God, and the habitation of the blessed Spirits.

The Ethereal Heaven is that where the Stars, and other the Celestial
Luminaries are placed, which is extended like a Pavillion, and is double;
Primum Mobile; the other the Chrystalline, as the Region of the fixed Stars,
the Firmament, or of the Planets, of which there are seven Globes or Spheres.

The Primum Mobile is the last Celestial Globe of the Concentrick Universe,
which has only one daily Motion of Twenty four hours from the East to the West,
between the two Poles of the World, carrying with it self all the other
Inferior Heavens, Spheres, and Celestial Bodies.

The Chrystalline Heaven is another Celestial Globe, which is carried on the
Ecliptic Line, and Poles of the Zodiac by its own proper Motion from West to
East, contrary to the Motion of the Primum Mobile.

The Firmament is another Celestial Globe, adorned and studded with an
infinite number of fixed Stars, which sometimes appears slow, sometimes faster;
sometimes advanced, and sometimes depressed; sometimes tending to the North,
and sometimes to the South; retaining to it self one proper Motion called Motus
trepidationis, which is so slow, that it makes but three Minutes, and five
Seconds, in the space of a Year, and its whole Revolution in seven hundred
Years.

Under this Firmament or Heaven of fixed Stars are other Globes or Spheres,
every one of which carries its proper Planet; as Saturn, which is nearest the
Firmament goes round once in thirty Years, Jupiter in twelve, Mars in three,
the Sun (or rather the Earth) Venus and Mercury in one, and the Moon in a Month.

The Inferior or inconstant Region of the World is called Elementary, because
the four Elements are contained in it, of which there are also three sorts,
viz. the highest or Fiery Region, the middlemost being the Region of Air, and
the two lowest, that of the Water and the Earth.

The Figure of the whole Universe is represented in a Material Sphere, which is
a Mathematical Instrument, round and solid, consisting of Circles accommodated
and distinguished in such manner, that it represents to the Eye the rest; also
the Motions of the Circles and Orbs supposed to be in the first Mobile, and the
Natural Sphere; the Figures represent the same.

There are two sorts of Spheres, viz. strait and oblique; the Strait shows the
two Poles beneath the Horizon, and Equator over head; but the Oblique elevates
one Pole above the Horizon, and depresses the other.

The Artificial, or Material Sphere, which represents the form and likeness of
the Imaginary World; and the Celestial Motions are fitted to these parts, as
well to the Center, as to the Diameter, Poles and Circles.

The Center is a Point in the midst of the Sphere, supplying the place of the
Earth, whose dimensions contain the number of Degrees and Affections of the
Zones, no less than the Circumference it self.

The Diameter is a strait Line that passes through the Center, and touching
both sides of the Circumference divides the Sphere into two equal Parts, about
which the Sphere turns.

The General Opinion is, that the Imperial Heaven does not move, but all the
rest do.

The Primum Mobile has but one Motion, which is from East to West, but so
swift and violent, that it makes it Revolution (although so To his Excellency
Roger Pa^mer. Earl of Castlemain and Baron of Limberick in Ireland,
Ambassador Extraordinary from his Ma^^* King James y^. ^d. to his Holiness
Pope Innocent y^* uth. Anno Do^ ^^86.

This Plat^ is (...).

vastly great) in 24 Hours; turning also in the same time and manner, the other
Heavens under it; although contrary to their own proper Motion, which is from
West to East, which is the reason they cannot make their own proper Revolution,
but in a much longer time; and so much the longer, the nearer they are unto it.
This Motion of the Primum Mobile is called Diurnal, as finishing its Revolution
in 24 Hours.

The Primum Mobile is without Stars, being a Heaven of a pure and clear
substance, like unto the Imperial.

The Heaven next the Primum Mobile is also without Stars, and of the same
Substance; but it differs from it in that this has two Motions, and the other
but one; that is, one upon the Poles of the World, according to the Diurnal
Motion, and the other from West to East upon its own Poles, but turns so slowly
about, that according to Copernicus, and some other Astronomers,

The general Opinion of the Astronomers, concerning the thickness and distance
of the Heavens, how the Stars appear through them, and the Magnitude of the
Planets and fixed Stars, is as follows. The Heaven of the Moon contains in
thickness 105222 Miles; that of Mercury 253372 Miles; that of Venus 3274494;
that of Mars 2630800; that of Jupiter 1899654; Saturn 19604454 Miles: Yet
although these Heavens are so vastly thick, they are so transparent and clear,
that the Stars by reason of their great Light appear with ease through them,
indeed being no Impediment thereunto, but appear so small unto us through their
great distance; for were not the Heavens so thick, they could not have
contained each one his Planet or Star; for according to the Opinion of some
Philosophers and Astronomers, every Star is greater than the Earth; the like
are the Planets, except the Moon, Mercury, and Venus. And according to the
Judgment of the Ancients, Saturn is 79 times bigger than the Earth; Jupiter 81,
Mars 2, and the Sun 167 times greater than the Earth. As for Venus, she is said
to be 28 times less than the Earth; Mercury 3143 times, and the Moon 39 times
less than the Earth, which is 21600 Miles in Compass.

The Opinion of Ticho Brahe, concerning the Firmament, Sun, Moon, etc. from the
Earth, is thus; from the Center of the Earth to the Sun there is 3923912 Miles,
or 1142 Semidiameters* from the Center of the Earth to the Moon there is 56
Semidiameters; and from the Center of the Earth to the Firmament 48104000
Miles, or 14000 Semidiameters, Now the Diameter of the Earth contains 6872
Miles, and the Semidiameter the Moity, which is 3436 Miles.

A Planet from the Greek is termed a wandering Star, which moves in a Heaven by
it self; but their various Motions do occasion them to be at a nearer distance
sometimes, than at others.

The SPHAERE.
THe Sphaere is a Solid Body, contained under one Super^^cies, having in the
midst thereof a Prick, or Point, which is the Center of the Sphaere, from
whence all right Lines drawn to the Circumference are equal the one to the
other, as this following Figure demonstrates.

By the Center is to be understood the Terrestrial Globe, and the outward
Circumferences the Celestial.

The Sphaere is distinguished by 10 Circles, whereof 6 are great, and 4 less;
and there are only 8 described upon the Body of the Globe. limiting the Zones
and Motion of the Planets; as the Equinoctial, the Ecliptic, the Equinoctial
Colure, the Solstitial Colure, the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, the Artick
Polar Circle, the Antartick Polar Circle; the Horizon and Meridian are not
described upon the Body of the Globe, but Artificially annexed thereunto, for
the better and more ample use.

The AEQVATOR.


THe Equator, or Aequinoctial, is a great Circle, being that strait Line drawn
through the middle of each Hemisphere which is parallel to the top and bottom
of a Map of the World; It is that great Circle which is equally distant from
both Poles, dividing the Earth into two Parts. It is called the Equator, or
Aequinoctial Line, because when the Sun comes to this Line, which is twice a
Year, viz* on the 10th of March* and on the 12th of September, the Days and
Nights are of an equal length. It likewise shows the Aequinoctial Points by
cutting the Z^diack in the beginning of Aries and Libra. It is also the Measure
of the Hours; for by its Elevation 15 Degrees above the Horizon a complete Hour
is finished. It is also the Measure of the rising and setting of the Stars, the
Term from which the Declinations are numbered, and the beginning of
Geographical-Latitudes.

The Explanation of the Figure of the Sphaere; A, B, is the Aequinoctial Line;
C, D, the Zodiac; E, D, the Tropic of Capricorn; F, G, the Tropic of Cancer;
H, the Pole-Artick, or North Pole; L, the Pole Antartick, or ^outh-Pole; M, N,
the Artick Circle; O, P, the Antartick Circle; Q, R, S, T, the Color of the
Aequinox; and I, K, V, W, the Meridian and Colure of the Solstice.

The Equator, or Aequinoctial Line, is of great use in Geography, marking out
the distances of Latitude and Longtitude; for from this Line the Degrees of
Latitude are begun to be reckoned, going toward either of the Poles; and the
Degrees of Longitude are also reckoned on this Circle.

Of the Poles.
THe Poles are the Pricks or Specks at both ends of the Axis, or two Points
which Axis, for every Line is terminated by two Points. Or the Poles are two
Points that are directly at the top and bottom of either of the two great
Meridians, and are distant from the Equator 90 Degrees. In these two Points
all the Merdians meet.

In the Sphaere there are two Poles, the Artick, and Antartick, which are
called the Immovable Points of the Universe about which the Heavens are
turned.

The Artick, or North Pole, is frequently visible to us in Europe, and to the
greatest part of Asia: The Antartick, or Southern Pole, is not to be seen to
us, as being opposite to the Artick, so that it is visible to our Antipodes.

There are 10 Circles of the Sphaere, viz. fix great, and four lesser* of which
the Pole are reckoned; and the lesser Circles have their Centers contrary to
that of the Sphaere, which is the reason that they do not divide it into two
equal Polar Circles, Artick and Antortick, and likewise the Tropicks of
Capricorn and Cancer.

The Artick is one of the less Circles of the Sphaere, which describes the Pole
of the Zodiac when it moves about the Artick Pole; The Antartick is that which
describes the other Southern Pole of the Zodiac about the Antartick Pole of
the Universe.

The Horizon.
THe Horizon is one of the great Circles, which divides the Sphaere into two
Hemisphaeres, viz. into that which is above and visible to us, and that which
is beneath and invisible unto us, whose Poles are the Zenith, and the Nadir. In
this Circle the Azimuths, or Vertical Circles are numbered; and by this Circle
our Days and Nights are measured out, for whilst the Sun is above our Horizon
it is Day, and when under it is Night.

The Horizon is either Natural, or Mathematical. The Natural Horizon is that
apparent Circle which divides the visible part of Heaven from the invisible: It
extends it self in a strait Line from the Superficies of the Earth, every way
round about the place on which you stand, even into the very Circumference of
the Heavens; It is only discerned at Sea, or on plain Ground free from Hills,
Trees, or the like Impediments. The Mathematical Horizon is that Circle that
cannot be described on the Map, as beings alterable, according to the motion of
any Man from the place he stands on.

The Horizon is of great use for diverse occasions: It shows what Stars appear
to us, and what not, with their Rising and Setting. It directs us to find the
height of the Pole, Sun, and Stars, by which the Latitude is found out; and by
this Circle the Artificial Days are distinguished from the Artificial Nights,
as being the Measure thereof.

Although there is properly but one Horizon, yet those that Travel by Sea or
Land, do from time to time change their Horizon, discovering some part of the
Heavens, which before could not be seen, because of the roundness of the Sea
and Land; for although one change his Horizon, he does not change it in its
kind; for in what place soever he is in, he will see no other Horizon, by
reason he sees half of the Heavens.

This Figure further explains it: The Globe A, B, represents the Earth; the
Circle C, R, D, S, the Heavens; R, the Zenith; S, the Nadir; C, E, D, F, the
Rational Horizon; O, the place of the Spectators Eye; T, the Antipodes, and O,
A, B, the sensible Horizon, whose Semidiameter O, A, or O, B, is not above
three Miles, when the Eye is not above six Foot from the Surface of the Earth,
but increases proportionably to the height of the Eye, or thing seen.

Of the Zodiac, Ecliptic, Line, Signs, etc.
THe Zodiac is another great Circle, which alone does comprehend 16 Degrees,
and divides the Sphaere into two equal Parts by cutting the Equator at Oblique
Angles, or slopingly, into two Points, the one in the beginning of Aries, and
the other in the beginning of Libra; so that one half of the Circle declineth
toward the North as far as the Tropic of Cancer; and the other half toward
the South, as far as the Tropic of Capricorn, as appears by the Figure of the
Sphaere. In the middle thereof is the Ecliptic Line, in which the Sun moves;
for when the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction, Eclipses happen beneath this
Line. The other Plane^s pass under the aforesaid Latitude; but the Sun never
goes beyond the Ecliptic. This Ecliptic Line is divided into 360 Degrees, and
the Division begins at the first Point of Aries, which is the Equinox on the
10th of March; from which Point the Longitude of the Stars are also reckoned,
according to the Succession of the Signs, viz. from Aries to Taurus, and so
forth. The Declination or Distance of the Ecliptic from the Equator is 23
Degrees, 31 Minutes: And by the Obliquity of the Ecliptic Line with the
Horizon, the inequality of the Days and Nights are known; also it
distinguishes the time and season of the Months and Year, as likewise the
Degrees at which the Stars rise and set.

The Zodiac is divided into 12 equal Parts, which are called the 12 Signs,
which are noted by certain Names and Characters, as follows, Aries, or the
Ram; Taurus, or the Bull Gemini, or the Twins Cancer, or the Crab; Leo, or the
Lion; Virgo, or the Virgin; Libra, or the Balance; Scorpio, or the Scorpion;
Sagittarius, or the Archer; Capricorn, or the Goat; Aquarius, or the Pourer of
Water; and Pisces, or the Fish.. Of these Signs the first six are called
Northern, by reason of their being on the North-side of the Equator; and the
other six last named are called Southern Signs, as being on the South Side of
the Equator. And Sign is divided into 30 Parts, called Degrees, each Degree
containing on Earth 60 English Miles, so that the Sun is 30 Days (or
thereabouts) in each Sign; entering on the 10th of March into Aries, on the 10th
of April into Taurus, on the 11th of May into Gemini, on the 11th of June into
Cancer, on the 13th of July into Leo, on the 13th of August into Virgo, on the
13th of September into Libra, on the 13th of October into Scorpio, on the 12th
of November into Sagittarius, on the 11th of December into Capricorn, on the
10th of January into Aquarius, and on the 8th of February into Pisces.

The Zodiac contains in Breadth 16 Degrees, that is, 8 on each side of the
Ecliptic, in which the Planets, as also the aforesaid Signs do move.

Now all these Circles of the Sphaere are divided into two equal Parts, each
containing 360 Degrees, so called from the Motion of the Sun Zodiac, making
almost all the Spaces by its Diurnal Motion. Again, each Degree is divided into
60 other Proportions, which are called the first Scruples or Minutes: Each of
these are again divided into 60 Seconds, every Second into 60 Thirds, every
Third into as many Fourths, and so consequently into Decimats, or Tenths, so
that one Minute is the 60th part of a Degree, one Second the 60th part of a
Minute, one Third the 60th part of a Second; and so consequently Unite.

500 Furlongs on Earth is equavalent to each Degree in one of the Great Circles
in the Sphaere, so that the Zodiac is divided (according to Longitude) into
four equal parts, which are called Quadrants, as all the other Great Circles of
the Sphaere.

The QVADRANT is likewise divided into three Signs, each Sign into 30 Degrees,
each Degree Minutes, and each Minute as aforesaid, and so to Decimats; from
whence may be observed, that all before Minutes are entire Spaces, or
Distances; but those that follow are but parts of the Entire.

All the Circles of the Sphaere were invented to separate the Heavens into
certain Spaces and Regions, called Zones and Climates; and as we imagine them
in the Regions of the Heavens, in like manner are they described on the Surface
of the Earth: And hence it may be concluded, that the four little Circles
(which hereafter shall be discoursed of) distinguish five Spaces in the Surface
of the Heavens and Earth, which are called Zones from their likeness to a
Girdle.

The MERIDIAN.
THe MERIDIAN is likewise another great Circle passing through the Poles of the
World, and the Zenith, or Vertical Point to any place. It is called Meridian,
as dividing the Day into two equal parts, being as far from the Horizon, or
Sunrising to Midday, as from Midday to Sunsetting; and there are as many
Meridians as you may suppose Points in the Equator; nevertheless Hydrographers
and Geographers do generally draw them but at 10 Degrees distance from one
another on their Plats.

There are not so many Meridians as Zeniths, for all Places situated North and
South one from another have the same Meridian, so that should you Travel never
so far North from South, or South from North, you would not change your
Meridian, as being always under the same Circle: But it is not so going from
East to West, or from West to East, for then you change your Meridian. And the
Meridian that passes through the Zenith, passes also through the Nadir.

Amongst the Meridians there is one most remarkable, which has the Name of the
first Meridian, because that from it Eastward the Longitude is reckoned upon
the Equator; and this Meridian on the Globe, or Maps, is commonly placed with
us at the Island Gratiosa, which is one of the Isles of the Azores; but
formerly at the Canary Islands, which was the furthest part of the World then
discovered.

The use of the Meridian shows the greatest Altitude of the Sun and Stars,
and their nearest distance from our Zenith, their Declinations and
Right-Ascensions. It also makes the Longitude; and by it the Latitude is
reckoned, and come to the knowledge of the East-part of the World from the
West-part thereof; and likewise the Midst of the Artificial Days and Nights,
from which the Hours are begun to be reckoned.

The COLVRES.
THe Colures are two other Great Circles in the Sphaere, which passing by the
Poles divide the Sphaere, and themselves into two equal parts, one of which
when it comes by through the Points of the Equator, is called the Aequinoctial
Colure, as cutting the Ecliptic in the beginning of Aries and Libra, which
makes the Days and Nights equal; the other, when through the Point of the
Solstice is called the Colure of the Solstices, which is called the Circle of
the Declination, showing how far the Sun is retired behind the Equator, which
is on the 11th of June, and the 11th of December, at which time the Sun seems
to stand, for that he can go no further by reason of the Tropicks, which are
his Bounds.

The Solstices are distinguished by the Summer Solstice, which is when the Sun
enters the Tropic of Cancer, which makes our longest Days; the other the
Winter Solstice, which is when the Sun enters the Tropic of Capricorn, the
time of our shortest Days.

These Colures (by intersecting one another) divide themselves into four
Semi-Circles, and these Semi-Circles divide the Ecliptic into four equal

The Points of the Ecliptic, that those Intersections pass through, are called
the four Cardinal Points, and are of great use in Astronomy; for according to
the Suns approach to any of them the Season of the Year is altered into Spring,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter; for the Spring begins at the Vernal Equinox, or
beginning of Aries, which is the 10th of March; the Summer at the Summer
Solstice, which is the beginning of Cancer, 11th of June; the Autumn at the
Autumnal Equinox, which is the beginning of Libra, being the 12th of September;
And the Winter, at the Winter Solstice, which is the beginning of Capricorn,
being the 11th of December.

Of the four Lesser Circles, viz. the two Tropicks, and the two Polar Circles.
THe TROPICKS are so called, because Sun comes at either of these two Circles
he turns back again; and because one of the Tropicks passes through the
first Point of Cancer, it bears the name of the Tropic of Cancer, and makes
the Summer Solstice, the Sun never going beyond it. The other Tropic is of
Capricorn, so called by reason of the Suns passing through the first Point, or
Degree of Capricorn, and makes the Winter Solstice.

Now forasmuch as we are to imagine the Circles upon the Earth, as in the
Heavens. This Figure shows the same, with more than upon the Sphaere.

Suppose then you are in a right Sphaere (where the Poles are at the Horizon)
A, B, Aequinoctial.

C, D, the Tropic of Cancer, and E, F, the Tropic of Capricorn; and both
distant from the Aequinoctial 23 Degrees, 31 Minutes.

G, H, the Artick Circle, and I, K, the Antartick Circle; C, F, the Ecliptic.

The Points, or occult Circle L, M, is the Horizon.

The Distance between the Tropicks C, D, and E, F, is the Torrid Zone.

The Distance or Interval between the Tropicks, and the Polar Circles, viz.
between CG, HD, and EI, KF, are the two Temperate Zones.

And the Intervals between the Polar Circles, and the Poles, are the Frigid
Zones.

The use of the Tropicks is to mark the longest and shortest Days, as also to
limit the Torrid Zone, as well as the Suns Course.

The Polar Circles are each distant from the Poles of the World 23 Degrees, 30
Minutes.

They are called Polar, as being supposed to be in the Heaven, exactly where
the Poles of the Ecliptic turn about the Poles of the World.

Of these Polar Circles one is called Artick, and the other Antartick; the
Artick, because it passes through the Constellation of Vrsa Major; and the
Antartick, as being opposite to the Artick.

These Circles bound the Temperate Zones on the North, and South sides of them.

Of the ZONES.
A Zone is a Circular part of the Heaven and Earth, contained between two
Parallels, or Circles, of a considerable breadth. Of these Zones there are
five, viz. two Frigid, two Temperate, and one Torrid.

The Frozen Zones are two parts of the Earth, the one comprehended betwixt the
North Pole, and the Artick Circle; and the other between the South Pole, and
the Antartick Circle; They were supposed by the Ancients Uninhabited, by reason
of the extreme Cold there always predominating, occasioned by the remoteness of
the Sun, which strikes his Beams so obliquely and weakly upon them.

The Temperate Zones are also two parts of the Earth, the one between the
Tropic of Cancer, and the Artick Circle; and the other between the Tropic of
Capricorn, and the Antartick Circle. These Zones the Ancients allowed
Habitable, by reason of their Temperateness.

The Torrid Zone is that Space of Earth* contained between the two Tropicks,
Supposed by the Ancients Uninhabited, through the rageing heat, the Sun never
moving out of this Zone, but dartings its Beams perpendicularly upon it.

But by Experience it is found otherwise, for both the Torrid, and Frigid Zones
are inhabited, especially the Torrid by sundry Nations, or sorts of People; and
it is found that those Europeans that have transplanted themselves into those
parts, especially the American Plantation, have enjoyed a liberal measure of
Health, and that they are Countries of great fertility and plenty.

The PARALLELS.
THe PARALEELS that distinguish the Climates, are Circles drawn round the Globe
between the two Poles, as the Equator and the Tropicks, which are separate
from those of the Equator by a certain equal Space, which is called a Climate,
by which they serve to distinguish the Climates, which show the length of the
Day in every Region or Country; and are also of use for the knowing the
Degrees of Latitude.

The AZIMVTHS.
THe AZIMVTHS, or Vertical Circles, are great Circles passing through the
Zenith and Nadir, whose Poles are the Zenith and Nadir; And as the Meridians
cut the Equator, and all the Parallels to the Equator at right Angles, so the
Azimuths cut the Horizon, and all Almicanthars, at right Angles also.

The Azimuths (as the Meridians) are infinite, and are numbered by Degrees from
the East, and West Points, toward the North and South, in the Horizon.

The Azimuths take their beginning from the Point, at which the Sun rises, when
it is at the Equator, which is the true East and West, from Southwards, and
you may suppose as many Azimuths as Points, or Degrees in the Horizon which are
360. And the Azimuth of the Sun and Stars, is the number of Degrees
comprehended on the Horizon, between the Azimuth that passes through the
Center, of the Sun and Stars, to the Horizon; and the true East and West Point,
as aforesaid: Now by the Latitude of your place, the Declination of the Sun and
Stars, and their Altitude above your Horizon, you may know the Azimuth of the
Sun and Stars. Likewise the Azimuth shows at what part of the Heaven, or
point of the Compass the Sun and Stars are at any time, being above the
Horizon; also it shows the variation of the Compass, and how two places bear
from one another; for the Compass being divided, into 32 parts, are the same as
so many half of Azimuths, or Vertical Circles falling down flat as they appear
on the Compass.

The ZENITH, and NADIR.
THe Zenith, and Nadir, are two Points opposite to one another. The Zenith is
that Point in the Heaven, which is directly over our Heads; and the Nadir is
that Point in the Heaven, directly under your Feet.

The ALMICANTHARS.
THese are little Circles, Parallels, to the Horizon, whose Poles are the
Zenith, and the Nadir as appears by the Figure, where AB, being the Horizon,
CD, OF, GH, IK, and the other Circles, Horizon, are called Almicanthars.

The Almicanthars are also Circles of Altitude, because when the Sun, Moon, or
any Star, is in any number of Degrees, above the Horizon, it is said to have so
many Degrees of Altitude, which said Degrees are numbered upon the Verticle
Circle, from the Horizon, upwards toward the Zenith. The Almicanthars are also
infinite as the Parallels, Meridians, and Azimuths are; nevertheless there
Degrees from the Horizon, to the Zenith, which is 90. These Circles are of no
great use; for those of the Azimuth, perform the same, only serving to mark the
Altitude of the Sun and Stars.

Of LATITVDE.
THe Latitude is an Arch of the Meridian, comprehended between the Equator,
and the Zenith, or place enquired after. It is numbered on the first Meridian,
from the Equator, both ways, viz. Norths and South, until it comes to the
Poles, or 90 Degrees.

Of LONGITVDE.
THe Longitude of a place is the distance from the first Meridian, to the
Meridian it passes through the Zenith, or Vertical Point of the place whose
Longitude is desired to be known; It Signifies the Length of the Earth, from
East to West. But of this more anon.

Of the difference in Latitude, and Longitude.
THe difference in Latitude, is the Degrees and Minutes, comprehended between
two Latitudes; and this is known by adding the lesser Latitude to the greater,
when they are on different sides of the Equator, the one being North, and the
other South Latitude: And by Subtracting the lesser from the greater, when they
are both on the same side the Equator.

The Difference in Longitude, is also the Degrees and Minutes comprehended
betwixt the two Meridians; And this is known by Subtracting the lesser
Longitude from the greater, and the remainder will be the difference in
Longitude. But observe, that if one Longitude be on the West side of it, and
the other on the East; or that one be on the East, and the other on the West
side of it; that you always add 360 Degrees to the least of the Longitudes to
have their differences

Of the Meridian Altitude of the SUN and STARS, and of their Declination.
THe Meridian Altitude, is the greatest Height of the Sun or Stars above the
Horizon, which is when they come to our Meridian.

The Declination is the distance of the Sun or Stars from the Equator; that is
to say, it is an Arch of the Meridian comprehended between the Equator and the
Sun, or Stars.

The Suns greatest Declination at present is 23 Degrees, 30 Minutes; for so
soon as it comes to the Tropicks, it returns toward the Equator, and so by
little and little his Declination lesseneth. But when the Sun is at the
Equinoctal, or first Point of Aries, and Libra, which is the 10th of March, and
11th of September, he has no Declination.

The Declination of the Stars differ according to their Latitude and Longitude.

The Complement of the Altitude of the Sun, Stars, and Pole above our Horizon,
is the Degrees that the Sun, or Star, is distant from our Zenith, which being
added to the Degrees of Altitude, makes up the 90 Degrees that our Zenith is
distant from the Horizon.

The Complement of the Declination is an Arch, or number of Degrees,
comprehended between the Sun or Star, and the nearest Pole of the World.

The Complement of the Latitude is the Height of the Equator above the Horizon.

The distance of the Sun, or Stars from our Zenith, is the Degrees and Minutes,
comprehended between the Zenith and Center of the Sun or Star; so that the
Altitude is always the Complement Zenith.

Of the Amplitude Ortive, and Occasive.
THis is the Degrees and Minutes, that the Sun, or any Star rises distant from
the true East Point. Or to explain it more, It is an Arch of the Horizon,
comprehended between the true East, and the Point that the Sun, or Star rises
at, either Southwards or Northwards. For when the Sun has North Declination,
his Amplitude is also North; and when his Declination is South, his Amplitude
is also South, which makes it, that from the 10th of March, to the 11th of
September, the Sun rises and sets on the North side of the Equinoctial; and
from the 11th of September, to the 10th of March, his rising and setting is on
the South side.

Of CLIMES, or CLIMATES.
A Climate is a Space comprehended between to Parallels, in which there is half
an Hours alteration of Day, presently after the beginning of it to the end of
the same. Where it is to be noted, by how much the further the Climate is from
the Equator, so much by half an Hour shall the longest Day of that place,
exceed the Day that is equal to the Night.

On each side of the Equator, there are 24 Climates; the furthest of which
ends at that part of the Earth, where the longest Day in the Year is 24 Hours,
which is in the Latitude of 66 Degrees and 30 Minutes, being right under the
Polar Circles, viz. the Artick, and Antartick, and no further, by reason the
longest Day is no more to be accounted by Hours, but rather by Weeks, and
Months; in so much that those inhabiting right under the North Pole, have six
Months Day, whilst the Sun is in the Northern Signs, and six Months Night, when
the Sun is in the South Signs, or has Declination South; Also those that dwell
right under the South Pole, have the like quantity of Months Day, the Sun being
in the six Southern Signs, or having South Declination, and the like space of
time Night, whilst the Sun is in the six Northern Signs. But although it is
said to be so long Night, yet it is not so dark as our Nights. for as the Sun
never goes lower under the Horizon of those People there inhabiting than 23
Degrees, the Twilight, or Dawning of the Day, does almost always appear; and
there is one part of that time in which it is considerable light, and that is
when the Sun appears to them by Refraction, which is when the Sun is near the
Horizon.

If you would know in what Climate a place is situate; subtract the length of
the Aequinoctial Day, which is 12 Hours from the longest Day of the proposed
place, and doubling the remainder to reduce it into half Hours, will show in
what Climate the place is situated; for Example, Suppose that at Oxford the
longest Day in Summer, is 16 Hours and an Half, if you subtract 12 Hours from
it, the Remainder is 4 Hours, which being reduced into half Hours, makes 9; so
that Oxford is in the 9th Clime, from the Equinoctial Northwards.

A Table showing the longest Day, in every Degree of Latitude.
Latitud. Longest Day. Degrees H. M. S. 1 12 3 28 2 12 6 56 3 12 10 24 4 12 14
0 5 12 17 28 6 12 20 56 7 12 24 48 8 12 28 0 9 12 32 36 10 12 35 12 11 12 38 48
12 12 42 41 13 12 46 8 14 12 49 44 15 12 53 28 16 12 57 20 17 13 1 4 18 13 4 46
19 13 8 56 20 13 12 48 21 13 16 48 22 13 21 4 23 13 25 4 24 13 29 20 25 13 33
35 26 13 38 0 27 13 42 24 28 13 46 16 29 13 51 36 30 13 56 16 31 14 1 12 32 14
6 8 33 14 11 12 34 14 16 24 35 14 21 52 36 14 27 20 37 14 33 4 38 14 37 36 39
14 44 56 40 14 51 12 41 14 57 44 42 15 4 24 43 15 11 20 44 15 18 40 45 15 26 8
46 15 34 8 47 15 42 24 48 15 51 4 49 16 0 8 50 16 9 24 51 16 19 52 52 16 30 52
53 16 41 52 54 16 54 8 55 17 7 4 56 17 21 4 57 17 36 16 58 17 52 48 59 18 10 48
60 18 30 56 61 18 53 20 62 19 18 24 63 19 48 40 64 20 24 24 65 21 10 32 66 22
20 40 Degrees Days H. M. 67 42 1 40 68 42 1 16 69 54 16 25 70 64 13 46 71 74 0
0 72 82 6 36 73 89 4 58 74 96 17 0 75 104 1 4 76 110 7 27 77 116 14 22 78 122
17 6 79 127 9 55 80 134 4 58 81 139 31 36 82 145 6 43 83 151 2 6 84 156 3 3 85
161 5 23 86 166 11 23 87 171 21 47 88 176 5 29 89 181 21 58 90 187 6 39

The Position of the Sphaere,
IN respect to the Horizon, it is found that the Sphaere is constituted into a
threefold Position; As First, into a direct Sphaere; Secondly, into a Parallel
Sphaere; and Thirdly, into an Oblique Sphaere.

A Direct Sphaere has both the Poles in the Horizon, and the Aequinoctial
transiting the Zenith. Direct Sphaere all the Circles Parallel. to the Equator
make right Angles with the Horizon, and are also divided into two equal parts,
by the Horizon; and in a Direct Sphaere the Sun, Moon, and Stars are always 12
Hours above the Horizon, and 12 Hours under it, and so by consequenee make 12
Hours Days, and 12 Hours Night.

It is called a Direct Sphaere, because all the Celestial Bodies, as the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, viz. by the Diurnal Motion of the Primum Mobile ascend
directly above, and descend directly below the Horizon.

Those that Inhabit under the Equator have the Sphaere thus posited, as in the
Isle of St. Thomas, Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes, a great part of Africa, and
America. A, is the South Pole. B, is the North Pole. A B, is the Horizon. C D,
the Aequinoctial. E F, the Tropic of Cancer.

G H, the Tropic of Capricorn.

The Space betwixt G C, C E, and H D, D F, are the Parallels that the Sun
describes in making his Revolution. The Arches under the Horizon A B, are the
Night Arches, and those above it Arches.

A Parallel Sphaere has one Pole of the World in the Zenith, the other in the
Nadir, and the Equinoctial Line in the Horizon.

In a Parallel Sphaere all the Circles that are Parallel to the Equinoctial,
are also Parallel to the Horizon; and in a Parallel Sphaere from the 10th of
March to the 11th of September (the Sun being then in the Northern Signs, and
consequently on the North side of the Hemisphaere) there are six Months Day in
the North, and six Months Night in the South; and on the contrary, from the
11th of September to the 10th of March (the Sun being then in the Southernly
Signs, and by consequence on the South Side of the Horizon) there are six Month
Day in the South, and six Months Night in the North.

It is called a Parallel Sphaere, because the Sun, Moon, or Stars, in the
Diurnal Revolution of the Heavens neither ascend, or descend, but always move
Parallel to the Horizon.

That is, When one of the Poles is in the Zenith, and the other in the Nadir,
and that the Equator is Parallel to the Horizon; as in this Figure, which
shows how the Earth is posited to those supposed to dwell under the Pole.

An Oblique Sphaere has the Axis of the World, neither Direct, nor Parallel to
the Horizon. but lies slopwise from it.

In an Oblique Sphaere all the Celestial Bodies, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc.
have (in respect of the Horizon) oblique and unequal Ascensions and
Descensions, and all the Lines Parallel to the Equator make unequal Angles
with the Horizon, and are cut by the Horizon into unequal parts; for those
Lines toward the Elevated Pole have a greater proportion of a Circle under the
Horizon, than above it; only the Equator, because it has the same Center with
the Horizon, does divide the Horizon into two equal parts, and is also divided
into two equal parts by the Horizon.

According to which it follows, that when the Sun is in any part of the
Ecliptic that declines toward the elevated Pole, the Days in the elevated
Hemisphaere shall be longer than the Nights, and when the Sun is in any part of
the Eclipstick that declines toward the depressed Pole, the Nights shall be
longer than the Days; but when the Sun is in the Aequinoctial (because whether
the Pole be raised, or depressed) equal proportions remain both above, and
under the Horizon; therefore the Days are of the same length with the Nights,
and the Nights with the Days.

Also in an Oblique Sphaere all those Stars that have as great, or greater
number of Degrees of Declination, than is the elevated Poles Complement of
Latitude to 90, never set, nor come under the Horizon; and those Stars that
have the same Declination above the depressed Pole, never rise.

It is called an Oblique Sphaere, because all the Circles of the Sphaere move
Obliquely above the Horizon. The Earth is thus obliquely posited to all those
Nations that Inhabit under any Degree of Latitude, either North or Southwards,
between the Equator and either Pole, as may be seen by this Figure.

Of ECLIPSES.
THere are two sorts of Eclipses, the one of the Sun, and the other of the
Moon; and of these there are four every Year, viz. two of each, although not
always visible unto us.

Eclipses are occasioned when the Sun and Moon are at the same time under the
Ecliptic, or when they meet at the Head or Tail of the Dragon: that is, those
two Points on the Ecliptic, under which the Moon passes in making her own
proper Revolution.

An Eclipse of the Moon, is when the Sun and Moon are Diametrically opposed one
to another, and that the Earth is betwixt them, which is the cause thereof,
keeping from her the Light that Sun. And these Eclipses of the Moon do always
happen when she is in her Full: And the Eclipses of the Sun, only when the Moon
is in Conjunction with him, that is, being interposed betwixt him and the
Earth; but the Sun being so much bigger there cannot be a total Eclipse, as
there may be of the Moon, which is less than the Earth.

To find the Distances and Magnitudes of the
WE will instance in the Moon, whose distance may be thus found: First, Find
the Moons Elevation above the Horizon by the help of an Astronomical Quadrant;
as suppose 30 Degrees; then according to this Figure conclude the Arch e, d,
will be 60 Degrees: Then to go on to Triangle from the quantity of the Arch d,
e, judge the Angle c, to be 60 Degrees; also the quantity of the Arch h, f, and
consequently of its opposite Angle being known, conclude the quantity of the
internal Angle e, a, c; which for Example, if it be found to be 100 Degrees,
there will remain 20 Degrees for the Angle e. Upon this foundation suppose c,
a, the Diameter of the Earth to be 1718 Leagues, Precepts of Trigonometria
proceed thus: If the Sign of the Angle e, being 20 Degrees, gives 1718 Leagues
for the Side a, c, opposite to it; how many will the Sign of the Angle c. give
for the Side a, e, which is the distance of the Moon from the Superficies of
the Earth, to which the Semidiameter of the Earth is to be added to gain the
distance from the Center of the World?

But this is the more common Method of Planet, which by the help of the
Parallaxis is performed as follows, according to this Figure. Let the lesser
Circle h, g, be for the Globe of the Earth, whose Semidiameter is b, a; then
supposing l, to be the Planet, let m, the true place of the said Planet in the
Firmament l, m, e, be Elevated Horizon 40 Degrees; but let l, the Suns apparent
place, be Elevated only 30 Degrees. Then the Parallaxis will be only 10
Degrees, and consequently the Angle opposite to the Arch l, m, will be 10
Degrees. Therefore so much likewise must the Angle be, which is opposite to it
at the Vertex within the Triangle b, j, a, whereof b, a, is known to be 1718
Leagues.

Moreover the Angle a, becomes known from the Arch in e, which must of
necessity be 50 Degrees, from this Hypothesis, that the Elevation of the place
m, was 40 Degrees. These things thus laid down, it may be thence inferred; If
the Paralletick Angle i, or rather the Sign of the Angle i, being 10 Degrees,
gives the Side b, a, 1718 Leagues: How many will the Sign of the Angle a, give
for the Side b, j, which is the distance of the Superficies of the Earth?

Much after the same Method, by the Doctrine of Trigonometria some find the
Suns Altitude as in this Figure; Suppose the Sun to be in the Horizon, and the
Moon in i, c, o, n, to be distant from it 87 Degrees; then suppose the Line n,
o, to be perpendicularly drawn from the Sun to the Moon, constituting right
Angles in the Lunar Body it self.

Hence if the Angle at the Center of the World under the Arch, d a, be granted
to be 87 Degrees, it will follow that the Angle a, in the Sun will be only 3
Degrees; whence it may be thus concluded; As the Angle of the 3 Degrees, at the
side of the Lunar distance from the Center of the World, which by the former
Problem is taken for known; so is the Angle a, o, b, to the side b a, which is
the Suns distance, from the Center of the World. Whence if we Subtract, the
Semidiameter of the Earth, the Suns distance from the Earths Superficies will
be thence known.

Secondly, From the common Observation, and Computation of Astronomers; The
Moons Apogaean, (that is in its farthest distance,) is distant from the Center
of the Earth, or which is the same thing, 104798 Leagues, which number arises
from the Multiplication of 1718, the number of Leagues in the Earths
Semidiameter by 61.

The Moons Perigaean, (that is its least distance from the Earth,) is 89336
Leagues.

The Suns Perigaean, (that is its least distance from the Earth,) is 1101
Semidiameters, or 1891518 Leagues.

But according to the opinion of Clavius, the Sun is distant from the Earth,
2089088 Leagues.

The Stars of the Firmament are distant from the said Centers of the Earth,
14000 Semidiameters, or 20452000 Leagues.

Here we follow the common Observations of Bourdinus, and Clavius, although
some there be that differ, as Lanspergius, etc.

Thirdly, As to the Magnitude of these Heavenly Bodies, and the Heavens in
which they are; it may be determined diverse ways. In the first place several
Arguments may be drawn to prove the Magnitude of the Sun and Moon from the
Shadow of the Earth, For suppose the Suns Shadow cast from the Earth to be
finite, and the Beams at lenghth to meet, as in this Figure, otherwise if the
said Shadow should be cast in Infinitum, it would not only involve the Moon
when it suffers an Eclipse, but also Mars, Jupiter, and the other Planets, and
even the very Stars of the Firmament; the contrary whereof is found by
experience. Also certain it is that this Shadow of the Earth, becomes Conical,
as appears by the Moon, when she is in the Wain, for then the Confine of the
Shadow, is always Circular. which proceeds from no other cause, than from the
round form of the said Shadow. Moreover this is certain, that the Moon suffers
not an Eclipse, except so far as it falls out upon the Shadow of the Earth:
whereupon that Eclipse of the Moon, is longest where she is less distant from
the Earth, because that part of the Cone is always biggest which comes nearest
to the Basis. These things thus supposed; It is first to be inferred that the
Sun is bigger than the Globe of the Earth, because as often as the Shadow of the
Opac Body is Conical, and the extreme Rays at length meet, then always the
Lucid part is bigger than the Opac Body, as appears by the Figures at the
Letter c.

Likewise it is to be inferred, that the Moon is lesser not only than the Sun,
but also than the Globe of the Earth, forasmuch as it is sometimes all hid
within the Shadow of the Earth, which Shadow nevertheless, when as it proceeds
from the Earth in fashion of a Top, or Cone, it always so much the more
Decreases, by how much the farther it is cast from the Earth it self, as is
manifest by the Figures.

Moreover the determined Magnitude of those Bodies might be assigned from the
Principles of Geometry, after this manner, according to this Figure. If from a
known distance by a proper Instrument, the Diameter of the Star b, c, be taken
from the Eye a, from thence will be produced Isosceles Triangle a, b, c, whose
Angle a, being known, consequently the quantity of those Angles will be known,
which are at the Base b, c. Whence the Astronomers make this Conclusion; As the
Sign of the Angle b, is to the Side, or known distance a, c, so is the Angle a,
to the opposite Side b, c.

There is another very common and safe way of inquiring into the Magnitude of
Stars, for that of the Sun is particular, since Astronomers Diameter of the
Suns Body possesses the dimidiated, or half Degree of that Circle which it
runs through in its Diurnal motion: And when by the Suns distance from the
Center of the World, the circumference of the Circle is found, it will be easy
by Arithmetical Division to find the quantity of the dimidiated Degree. And
from thence they affirm, that the Suns Diameter contains five Diameters and an
half of Earth; whence also according to the Precepts of Cyclometry, they easily
judge of its other Magnitudes.

Thus, whereas the Suns Diameter is to the Diameter of the Earth, as 5 to 1;
and whereas the Sphaeres are in a Triplicate proportion of their Diameters; it
follows, that the Suns Body contains the Magnitude of the Terrestrial Globe
above 166 times, when at the same time the Moon is 40 times less than the Globe
of the Earth.

In like manner by Geometrical Proportion, it is found by Astronomers that the
Magnitudes of other Stars; affirming, that those Stars of the Firmament, which
are said to be of the first Magnitude, are 107 times bigger than the Globe of
the Earth; and that those which are said to be of the sixth Magnitude exceed
the said Globe of of the Earth 18 times, or thereabouts.

Note, that the Duplicate distance of any Star from the Center of the Earth,
makes the whole Diameter of the Heaven, or of that Circle which the Star runs
through in its Diurnal motion. Thus the Diameter thereof being known, the
Circumference is easily found by the Rule of Three. So that.

Fourthly, The Circle of the Moons Perigaean is 561540 Leagues, of the Moons
Apogaean 658730 Leagues.

The Compass of the Suns Perigaean is 11889541 Leagues, of the Suns Apogaean
13131410 Leagues.

The Compass of the Firmament, as to its greater Circles; for Example, the
Equator is 151184000 Leagues, from which Number (according to the Precepts of
Geometry) may be collected the Concave Superficies of the Firmament, or
Capacity of the whole World; and this Capacity however thus slupendiously
great, if ^^ed up with little Sands, the number thereof will yet not consist of
above 50 Figures, as according to Archimedes may be easily made out by the
triple Rule of Proportion, which is the proper Subject of Geometry.

The Substance and Motion of the Stars.
PHilosophers are of Opinion, that the Stars are of the same Substance with the
Heavens, in which they are, yet differ as to their thickness of Body, being
thereby capable to receive and retain their borrowed Light of the Sun, and by
that means become visible unto us in the Nights, when the Light of the Sun is
departed from our Horizon.

These fixed Stars have no other Motion than the Heaven in which they are
placed; yet sometimes seem nearer the Meridian than at other times, and the
reason is, because of the several Motions of the Firmament, in which they are
placed. But the Planets change their place; yet not by their own Motions, but
only through the Motion of the Heaven, in which they are fixed.

Of the Celestial Motions, and their various Affections.
WE come to treat of the various Aspects of the Stars, and of their swiftness
in Motion, and of their ^ising and setting.

These Aspects are certain Habitudes, or Dispositions of the Planets under the
Zodiac, from whence certain particular Effects in nature are produced; the
principal of these Aspects are five, which this Figure represents.

The first is the Synodos, or Conjunction; that is, when two Planets are both
under some Degree of the Zodiac.

The second is the Hexagon, Sextile, or Sexangular Aspect; that is to say, when
two Planets are distant from each other a sixth part of the Zodiac, or two
Dodecatemories.

The third is a Tetragon, Quadrat, or Quadrangular Aspect, that is, when they
are distant from each other three Dodecatemories.

The fourth is a Trigon, or Triangular Aspect, when they are distant four
Dodecatemories.

The fifth and last is Opposition, or a Diametrical Aspect; that is, when they
are distant from one another six Dodecatemories, being the Interval of six
Signs.

Note, that a Planet is said to be Exalted when Sign with which it exercises
its greatest virtue; to which Exaltation of a Planet, is opposed its debility,
that is, when it is in that Sign with which it exercises its least virtue.

Now as to the swiftness of the Celestial Motions; The slower Motion is that
by which the Stars are moved from West to East, contrary to the rapid Motion of
the Primum Mobile, as the Ancients term it. And thus the Stars of Firmament are
moved according to the order of the Signs under the Zodiac of the Primum
Mobile, that they do not finish their Period till after the expiration of about
28800 Years, which course of time is by some called the Platonic Year.

Now as to the Planets, or Wandering Stars: The Sun runs through the Zodiac in
365 Days, 5 Hours, and 48 Minutes. Whence we may note.

First, That the Sun daily advances under the Ecliptic about one Degree; and
that hereupon he marks out new Points, in the Horizon, both rising and setting;
and that he thus moves gradually from one Tropic to the other by Spiral Lines,
and by Circles which they call Parallels, such as are Figures. And of these
Parallels, some are Northern, and some Southern, which taking their beginning
from the Equator, begin also to be numbered from thence.

Secondly, That the Sun spends 87 Days in passing through the Northern Signs,
and then becomes Apogaean; whereas in the Southern he is Perigaean, in which he
stays not above 178 Days.

Thirdly, That the Sun thus ascending and descending from one Solstice to
another, describes about 182 Parallels, according to the number of Days in
which he runs that Course. And although these Parallels are not altogether
Circles, but Sphaeres, yet because there is no sensible error in them, they are
wont nevertheless to be called Circles, and amongst them the Tropicks and
Equator are numbered.

Fourthly, That the Suns Apogaeum is found to be about the 7th Degree of
Cancer, whence it advances by little and little toward the following Signs,
and that after this manner it runs through the whole Zodiac in the space of
about 21000 Years. And this is collected from thence, that in the time of
Hipparchus it was about the 5th Degree of Gemini. Observing therefore the
proportion of time in which it has advanced so many Degrees, it is easy to
conclude how much it proceeds further almost every Year.

Fifthly, That the Moon finishes her Course through the Zodiac in 27 Days, 7
Hours, and 43 Minutes; so that vulgarly the Course of the Moon each Day is
computed to be 13 Degrees, and some odd Minutes; in which Course there are to
be observed in the Moon (both Increasing and Decreasing) several Phases. On the
first Day, which is her Congress, or Conjunction with the Sun, she is void of
Light, and is therefore called Luna silens, and is then in her Apogaeum. On the
fourth Day, having a Sextile Aspect in a middle Longitude, she becomes
Corniculate, or Horned. On the 7th Day, being in her Perigaeum, or Quadrat
Aspect, she is called Dividua, or Half Moon. On the 11th Day she is in her
Trine Aspect, and repeats her middle Longitude, being on either side Gibbous.
On the 15th Day she becomes again Apogaean, and is in her Diametrical Aspect,
which is commonly termed Opposition; and this makes the Plenilunium, or Full
Moon: From which Full Moon, going back she repeats the same Aspects in a
Retrograde order, turning her Horns toward the West, and appearing in the
Morning; whereas on the contrary Increasing, she was visible in the Evening,
and turned her Horns Eastwards; for the Illuminated part of the Moon is always
toward the Sun, as is to be seen by this Figure.

The Swiftness of the Diurnal Motion is more or less, according to the
Magnitude of the Circle made by this or that Stars Motion; and the computation
of this Velocity is made by dividing the number of Leagues contained in the
said Circuit by ^4; for the Quotient will show how many Leagues are hourly
finished: As for Example, According to the abovementioned computation of the
entire Circuits, the Moon in her Per^gaeum hourly finishes about 23230 Leagues,
in her Apogaean about 27447.

So the Sun in his least distance from the Earth dispatches about 494564; in
his Apogaeum, or greatest distance, about 547142 in an Hour.

So likewise the Stars of the Firmament, toward the Equator, compass in one
Hour about 6299333 Leagues, and in one Minute above Fractions allowed to belong
to all, or most of them.

It is to be understood, that all Astronomers do not consent in these Measures,
partly because the Measure of a League is different in several parts of the
World, and some Measure by Miles, which also differ; to which may be added the
Errors possible to be made through Ignorance, however the Principles upon which
Skilful Astronomers

Seventhly, The beginning and end of Celestial Motion above the Horizon, is
called Rising and Setting; for the Sun (when it ascends above the Horizon) is
said to rise to all that live in the Hemisphaere above; on the contrary, when
it sinks beneath the Horizon it is said to be set.

Now Ortive, and Occasive Latitude, is the distance of that Horizontal Point in
which on Sun Rises or Sets from the Aequinoctial Point, in which the Horizon is
cut by the Equator.

The Rising or Setting of any of the Signs of the Zodiac, is properly called
by Astronomers, Ascent, or Descent. The Ascent, or Ascension of any Sign, is
some part of the Aequinectial Circle, or Equator, reckoned from the beginning
of Aries, which ascends above the Horizon, together with a certain Arch of the
Zodiac, or Ecliptic, Zodiac) is either Right Ascension, that is, when more
Degrees arise from the Equator than from the Ecliptic; or Oblique, that is,
when fewer Degrees arise from the Equator than from the Ecliptic; and so
proportionably of the Right, and Oblique Descension.

Besides this Astronomical Rising and Setting of the Sun, and other Stars here
treated of, there is another sort, which being much used by the Poets is
therefore called the Poetical Rising and Setting, and this is threefold; viz.
First, Cosmical; that is, when any Sign of the Zodiac rises with the Sun.
Secondly, Chronical; that is, when a Star rises at the time of the Suns
setting, when as Cosmical and Chronical Setting are quite contrary. Thirdly,
Heliacal, Rising or Setting; for a Star rises Heliacally when it becomes
conspicuous at the Suns setting, which could not before, by reason of the
brightness of the Suns Beams; Heliacally, when being visible before, it becomes
obscure by the Beams of the Rising Sun.

Of the Principal Stars, and into how many Constellations they are divided.
AStronomers do take notice of 1377 Stars, of which said number (according to
Tycho and other Ancient Astronomers) 1241 appear in our Horizon, and 136 about
the South Pole. The knowledge of which said Stars were found out by certain
proper Instruments made for the taking their Latitude and Longitude.

These Stars were afterward reduced into Constellations by the Egyptians,
alloting such a number of Stars together as best represented the Thing, or
Image they appropriated to it. Of these Constellations there are 62, of which
12 are the Signs of the Zodiac, 27 more in the South Hemisphaere, and 23 in
the North.

The Names of the Constellations are as follows, as they are taken notice of
by Sir Jonas Moore, deceased; and first with those in the Zodiac, which are
12, viz.

ARIES, which contains 19 Stars, of which the most noted is that in his Ear,
being of the third Magnitude.

TAVRVS, which contains 48 Stars, one of which is in the Eye, being of the
first Magnitude, and called Aldebaran; another in the tip of his Horn, being of
the second Magnitude; and this great Constellation has two smaller belonging
to it, the first the Plejades, or Seven Stars, being in his Neck; and the
second called Hyades, being Five Stars near his Eye.

GEMINI, which contains 34 Stars, of which three are of the second Magnitude,
one in the Head, called Castor, another in the Neck, called Pollux, and the
third in the Foot.

CANCER contains 32 Stars, two being of the third Magnitude, the rest of the
fourth, fifth, and sixth.

LEO, containing 43 Stars, two of which are of the first Magnitude, viz.
Ragulus, or the Lions Heart, and Cauda-Leonis in the Tail; also two of the
second Magnitude, viz. one on the top of his Loins, and another in the middle
of the three in his Neck.

VIRGO, which contains 45 Stars, one of which is of the first Magnitude in her
Left hand, called Spica Virginis.

LIBRA, which contains 14 Stars, of which two are of the second Magnitude, the
one in the end of the Handle, called Lanx Septentrionalis, and the other in the
Southern Scale, called Lanx Meridionalis.

SCORPIO contains 35 Stars, one of which is of the first Magnitude, being in
the Body, and called Cor Scorpionis.

SAGITTARIVS contains 30 Stars, two of which are of the second Magnitude, the
one in the Knee, and the other in the Heel of the right Leg.

CAPRICORNVS contains 28 Stars, but none of the first or second Magnitude.

AQVARIVS contains 42 Stars, but none likewise of any considerable Magnitude.
And,

PISCES, contains 36 Stars, but none of the first or second Magnitude.

The Constellations on the South side of the Zodiac, are
ORION, A signal Constellation of 56 Stars, one of which is of the first
Magnitude in his left Shoulder, and another in his right Foot also of the said
Magnitude, called Rigel; also four of the second Magnitude, of which one in
Shoulder, and three in his Girdle, called the Yard-wand; there are also two
others in his Shoulders, two in his Feet, three in his Yard-wand, and three in
the Sword.

CETVS, or the Whale, contain 29 Stars, two of which are of the second
Magnitude, the one near his Mouth, and the other near his Tail.

ERIDANVS, or the River, contains 44 Stars, one of which is of the first
Magnitude, called Enar; the rest are all small.

CANIS MAJOR, or the Great Dog, contains 19 Stars, one of which is of the first
Magnitude, being in his Mouth, and called Sirius; also one of the second
Magnitude near his left Knee; the rest are small ones.

CANIS MINOR, or the Little Dog, has 10 Stars, one of which is in his Belly,
called Procyon, and of the first Magnitude; the rest are small.

LEPVS, or the Hare, contains 13 small Stars.

ARGO NAVIS, or the Ship, has 51 Stars, one of which being in the Rudder,
called Canopus, is of the first Magnitude; also seven Stars of the second
Magnitude up and down in it.

CRATER, the Goblet, a small Constellation of 11 Stars.

CENTAVRVS contains 41 Stars, two of which are of the first Magnitude, the one
in his left Thigh, and the other in the extremity of his Foot.

HYDRA, or the Serpent, contains 29 Stars, one of which of the first Magnitude,
called Alphard, being in the third Wreath, and sometimes called Cor Hydrae.

CORVVS, a small Constellation of 8 little Stars.

LVPVS, a Constellation of 20 small Stars.

The ALTAR, or a Constellation of 6 small Stars.

The SOVTHERN FISH, a Constellation of 12 Stars, of which one is of the first
Magnitude; the rest all small.

The SOVTHERN CROWN, a Constellation of 13 small Stars.

There are also 12 Constellations more toward the South Pole, as Piscis
volans, the Peacock, Indus, Hydras, Triangulum, Chamelion, Toucan, Apis, Apis
Indica, Gros, Doradu, and Phoenix.

The Constellations on the North side of the Zodiac; are
THE GREAT BEAR, or Vrsa Major, contains 35 Stars, of which 7 are of the second
Magnitude, 3 of the third, 12 of the fourth, 8 of the fifth, and 5 of the
sixth. Of the 4 that make up the Wain, that in his Shoulder is called Dubbe,
and the Thill-Horse, Alioth, between which and the Pole Star lies the Pole.

The LESSER BEAR, or Vrsa Minor, contains 10 Stars, of which two are of the
second Magnitude, three of the fourth one of the fifth, and three of the sixth.
This Constellation is next the Pole, and therefore called the Pole Star; as
also the Sea-Star, as being of great use to Mariners. In this Constellation, as
also in that of the Great Bear there is a Wain, called Charles's Wain, each
composed of 7 Stars, 4 of which are for the Wain, and 3 for the Horses, the
brightest in the Wain being called by Seamen, the brightest of the Guards.

DRACO, or the Dragon, contains 35 Stars, lying betwixt the two Bears, and
noted for that it has Stars in every one of the 12 Signs, as also by reason
the Pole of the Ecliptic lies in the midst of this Constellation:

ANDROMEDA, or the Chained Woman, freed and married to Perseus, contains 27
Stars, of which three are of the second Magnitude, one in her Head, another in
her Leg, and the third in her Girdle.

CASSIOPEA, the Mother of Andromeda sitting in her Chair, contains 28 Stars,
the principal of which is in her Breast, being a bright Star of the third
Magnitude, and called Scheder.

PERSEVS, the Son of Dance, who cleared Andromeda, and brought away Medusa's
Head. It contains 42 Stars, of which two are of the second Magnitude, the one
in his left Side, called Algenib; and the other in Medusa's Head, called Algol.

CEPHVS, an Ethiopian King, contains 21 Stars, but none of any considerable
Magnitude.

HERCULES with his Club, watching the Dragon, contains 62 Stars, of which 9 are
of the third Magnitude, amongst which that in his Head, called Ras Algethi is
of chiefest note.

AVRIGA, the Carter, contains 40 Stars, of which one is in his Back of the
first Magnitude, called the Goat Star, Hircus, and Capella.

BOOTS, the Keeper of the Bear, contains 32 Stars, of which one is of the
first Magnitude betwixt his Legs, called Arcturus, being a noted Star.

SERPENTARIVS, that holds the Serpent, contains 30 Stars, of which one is in
his Head, of the second Magnitude.

PEGASVS, or the Winged Horse, contains 23 Stars, of which four are of the
second Magnitude, and that in the Tip of the Wing is called Markab; these four
Stars make a Square.

The NORTHERN CROWN, or Ariadne's Crown, contains 21 Stars, of which one is of
the second Magnitude, called the bright Star in the Crown.

The SERPENT contains 35 Stars, of which one is in his Neck, being of the
second Magnitude.

The HARP, or Vultur Cadens, contains 15 Stars, of which one is of the first
Magnitude, called Lucida-Lyra, or the bright Star in the Harp.

SAGITTA, or the Dart, contains 8 Stars, none of any considerable bigness.

The SWAN contains 40 Stars, of which one is of the second Magnitude near the
Tail.

The LESSER HORSE contains 4 Stars of the second Magnitude.

The EAGLE, or Flying Vulture, contains 27 Stars, of which one is of the second
Magnitude in its Neck, called Aquila, or Vultur volans.

The TRIANGLE contains 6 small Stars.

The DOLPHIN contains 10 small Stars.

BERENIC ES HAIR contains 13 small Stars.

COR CAROLI, a small Constellation of three Stars, newly discovered by Sir
Charles Scarborough, and so called in memory of King Charles the First.

Besides these Constellations aforesaid, there is the Milky-way fit to be taken
notice of, described on the Globe, appearing to the Eye like a small Cloud, or
White-way; but if viewed with a good long Telescope, are found to be an
infinite number of small Stars close set together.

The Magnitude of the STARS, with their Proportions to the Earth.
THe Magnitude of the Stars appears by comparing the one with the other; for
those of the first Maguitude are most considerable,

The Magnitude of the Stars compared to that of the Earth bears this
proportion; Those of the first Magnitude are 107 times greater than the Earth,
those of the second 90, those of the third 72, those of the fourth 54, those of
the fifth 36, and those of the sixth 18 times bigger than the Earth.

To find the Latitude of the fixed Stars.
THe Latitude of the Stars, is the distance of any Star from the Ecliptic, so
that those Stars that are distant from it Northernly have North Latitude; and
those that are Southernly, or betwixt the South Pole and the Ecliptic, have
South Latitude, according to this Figure.

AB, is the Ecliptic.

CD, the Poles of the Ecliptic.

OF, the Poles of the World.

CAD, CGD, CHD, CID, CKD, and CLD, are the six Circles of Position, that divide
the Firmament into 12 equal parts; by which it is known under what Sign any
Star is situated; for the Circles of Position pass through the beginning of
every Sign, according to the Figure.

The Latitude of a Star is reckoned from the Ecliptic toward either of the
Poles, so as the Arch MN, is the Latitude of the Star at M. The Longitude of a
Star is to be reckoned in the Ecliptic, from the first point of Aries to the
Star, according to the Succession of the Signs, viz. from Aries to Taurus, and
so forwards.

The Longitude of the Stars.
THe Longitude of the Stars, is the distance of any Star from the Vernal
Equinox, or first Point or beginning of Aries, and so forwards: Or to define it
otherwise, It is an Arch of the Ecliptic, comprehended between the first Point
of Aries and the Circle that passes through the Body of the Stars and Poles of
the Zodiac, as appears by the aforegoing Figure.

The Declination of the Stars.
THis is the same as the Declination of the Sun, viz. the distance of any Star
from the Aequinoctial, as well Southwards or Northwards.

The Stars change in Declination as well as in Longitude, so that the newest
Tables should be made use of.

The Right Ascension of the Sun and Stars, also the Oblique Ascension, and
Ascentional difference.
THe Right Ascension, is the Point, or Degree and Minute of the Aequinoctial,
which comes with the Sun or Star to the Horizon, and that rises or goes down
with it in a right Sphaere.

The Oblique Ascension, is the Point or Degree of the Aequinoctial, that rises
or goes down with the Center of the Sun, or Star in an Oblique Sphaere.

The Ascential Difference, is the difference betwixt the Right and Oblique
Ascension; that is to say, the number of Degrees contained betwixt the Point of
the Aequinoctial, that rises with the Center of the Sun or Star; and that
Point of the Aequinoctial that comes to the Meridian, with the Center of the
Sun, or same Star.

To find the Suns place in the Zodiac.
THe true place of the Sun, or any other Planet, is that Sign, or Degree of the
Sign, to which it answers in a direct Line, which is drawn directly from the
Center of the World through the Center of the said Planet to the Zodiac, or
Ecliptic.

Now to find out the true place of any Planet; As for Example, of the Sun;
first, the Motion of the Longitude is to be considered, whose beginning is
drawn from the Vernal Aequinoctial of the Primum Mobile. Next, regard is to be
had of that motion of Longitude, by which the Sun makes his Progress from his
Apogaeum to the following Signs; for then from the forementioned motion of
Longitude is subtracted the Arch of that Interval, which is the distance of the
Apogaeum from the Aequinoctial, and the Remainder is called the Suns Anomaly;
which being digested Astronomical Tables, declares the Prostaphaeresis to be
subtracted from the middle motion of Longitude, so long as the Sun converses in
that Hemisphaere, which is extended from the Apogaeum to the Perigaeum: But
when he is conversant in the opposite Hemisphaere by repeating the Apogaeum,
then it is to be added to the middle Motion, to find the true place of the Sun.

Besides this, there is another more common Suns place. First, remember what
are the Signs proper to every Month, although the Sun enters not into the said
Signs till toward the latter end of the said Months; for except Pisces (which
he enters on the 19th of February) he enters into none of the rest until after
the 20th Day.

These things thus premised, the Problem is thus resolved: Number the Degrees
of the Ecliptic according to the Day given from the time of Sun's Ingress into
such a Sign, and you will come so near the matter that there will be hardly one
Days difference.

To find the Sun's Declination for any Day given.
SEek the Sun's place in the Zodiac according to the preceding Problem; then
apply that Part, or Degree of the Ecliptic to the Meridian, and reckon the
Degrees of that Arch, which extends Equator to the part of the Sun assigned,
and the Problem is resolved.

There is also another more common way of finding the Sun's Declination, which
is as follows: The Altitude of the Equator being known when the Meridian Hour
arrives, make use of the Astronomical Quadrant, directing its Dioptra toward
the Sun; If it points at an equal Degree with the Aequators Declination, it is
to be concluded that it declines not from the Equator. If Degrees, as in the
Summer, or fewer, as in the Winter, that difference is the very Degree of the
Sun's Declination. For Example, On the 22th of June (in any City where the
Equator is Elevated 42 Degrees) I find in the Instrument the Sun's Meridian
Elevation to be 65 Degrees; hence it is to be concluded, that the Sun then
declines 23 Degrees, which is the difference between 65 Degrees, and 42, and so
proportionally of the rest. But for the more Sun's Declination in any Degree of
any Sign whatsoever, these following Tables are inserted. In the first Column
whereof the Degrees of the Signs are only set down; in the rest over against it
are marked the Degrees and Minutes of the Sun's Declination for each Degree of
the Signs.

The Knowledge of the Sun's Declination is highly necessary in many respects,
particularly in the making of Dials, and describing the Arches of the Signs,
and determining of the Altitude of the Pole; where every Day at Noon it uses
to be sought from that place which the Sun obtains in the Zodiac, and is of
great use also in Navigation.

A Table of the Sun's Declination.
Signs of the Degrees In Aries, and Libra In Taurus, and Scorpio. In Gemini,
and Sagittarius Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. 1 0 0 11 30 20 12 0 0 24 11 51 20
25 2 0 48 12 12 20 37 3 1 12 12 33 20 49 4 1 36 12 53 21 0 5 2 0 13 13 21 11 6
2 23 13 33 21 22 7 2 47 13 53 21 32 8 3 11 14 13 21 42 9 3 35 14 32 21 51 10 3
58 14 5 22 0 11 4 22 15 10 22 9 12 4 45 15 28 22 17 13 5 9 15 47 22 25 14 5 32
16 5 22 32 15 5 55 16 33 22 39 16 6 19 16 40 22 46 17 6 42 16 50 22 52 18 7 5
17 14 22 57 19 7 28 17 31 23 3 20 7 50 17 47 23 8 21 8 13 18 3 23 12 22 8 35 18
19 23 15 23 8 58 18 34 23 19 24 9 20 18 49 23 22 25 9 41 19 4 23 24 26 10 4 19
18 23 26 27 10 26 19 32 23 28 28 10 47 19 46 23 29 29 11 9 19 59 23 30 30 11 10
20 12 23 30

Another Table of the Sun's Declination.
Signs of the Degrees. In Cancer, and Capricorn. In Leo, and Aquarius. In
Virgo, and Pisces. Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. 0 23 30 20 12 11 30 1 23 30 19
59 11 19 2 23 29 19 46 10 47 3 23 28 19 32 10 26 4 23 26 19 18 10 14 5 23 24 19
4 9 42 6 23 22 18 49 9 20 7 23 19 18 34 8 58 8 23 15 18 19 8 35 9 23 12 18 3 8
13 10 23 8 17 47 7 50 11 23 3 17 31 7 28 12 22 57 17 14 7 5 13 22 52 16 57 6 42
14 22 46 16 40 6 19 15 22 39 16 33 5 55 16 22 32 16 ^ 5 32 17 22 25 15 47 5 9
18 22 17 15 28 4 45 19 22 9 15 10 4 22 20 22 0 14 51 3 58 21 21 51 14 32 8 35
22 21 42 14 13 8 11 23 21 32 13 53 2 47 24 21 22 13 33 2 23 25 21 11 13 13 2 0
26 21 0 12 53 1 36 27 20 49 12 33 1 12 28 20 37 12 12 0 48 29 20 25 11 51 0 24
30 20 12 11 30 0 0

To find out the Altitude or Elevation of the Sun, or any other Star every Hour.
USe either the Astronomical Quadrant, or the Astrolabe rightly disposed.
Direct the Dioptra toward the Object, or receive through its Radius; then you
will see how many Degrees the Dioptra cuts, by reckoning them from the
Horizontal side.

Note, first, That the greatest Elevation or Altitude of the Sun, or any Star
is Meridian, that is, when it comes to the Meridian, or Mid- Circles of Heaven.
Secondly, That the Altitude of the said Star is either greater or lesser,
according as it is in that part of the Meridian, which is more or less distant
from the Horizon. Meridian Altitude of the Sun, or Stars, let the Meridian Line
be rightly drawn in any Horizontal Plain, by the help whereof the Meridian
Constellation may exactly be found. Then near that Meridian Line, the Back of
the Astrolabe, or any other fit Instrument of that kind being applied, the
Alhidad will point out the Degree of Elevation above the Horizon; and this will
be the Magnitude of that Arch which extends from the place of the Star to the
Horizon.

To set forth the Face of Heaven, and what Stars are above the Horizon, and
what part of Heaven each of those Stars possesses.
MAke use of the Astrolabe, and apply the Degree of the Ecliptic in which the
Sun is upon the Almucantarath, or Circle of Elevation agreeing to the Altitude,
which answers to the given Hour; then it will appear what Constellation is
East, and what West.

Note, That the Degree, or Sign, and part of the Zodiac which is then found at
the Horizon, is called by Caloulators of Nativiti^s, The Ascendant Degree, the
Angle of the Orient, and the Horoscope: The part opposite to it is called the
Angle Occident: That part of the Meridian Line is called the Angle at the Mid-
Heaven. Lastly, The part opposite to it is the Angle of the Earth, or the
Degree of Midnight. These four parts of the World Astrologers call the four
Angles of Heaven.

To find the Altitude, or Elevation of the Equator above the Horizon.
AS it is to be supposed, that they only have the Equator Direct, or Right,
who live under it, and have the Poles of the World at the Horizon. But it
inclines, and becomes Oblique to us in such a proportion, as we recede from it,
so that if we were distant from it; for Example, 40 Degrees, so much of
Obliquity, or Inclination it has toward the Horizon; but so many Degrees as
it is distant in Obliquity, or Inclination from the Horizon, so much it is said
to be Elevated above it.

Now what, and how great this Elevation is at any set time, is the Question at
present and it may be commodiously determined upon Aequinoctial Days, if at the
very Hour of Noon the Instrument being disposed to the Meridian Line, you
receive through the little Sights the Rays of the Sun then in the Equator; for
the Dioptra, according to the Line of Direction, will mark out the Degree of
that Elevation, by numbering from the side of the Instrument. In brief, It is in
effect but the same thing, as the finding the Sun's Meridian Altitude in the
time of the Equinox.

Moreover in the time of Summer, or Winter Solstice the way of this Invention
is very facil, and obvious; for the Suns Declination being known to be 23
Degrees and an half, it is but subtracting them from the Degrees of the Summer
Solstice and the Question is resolved; for Example, On the 22 of June, at the
hour of Noon, the Sun being in the Tropic of Cancer, or in the first Degree,
of that Sign, gives in the Instrument 64 Degrees and 30 Minutes of Elevation;
from which 23 Degrees and 30 Minutes being subtracted, there will remain 41
Degrees, the Altitude of the Equator in the said City.

To find the Distance of the Vertical Point from the Equator.
THe Aequators Elevation being found, the Complement thereof to 90 Degrees
gives the sought distance: For Example; If in the said City, the Alitude of the
Equator be 40 Degrees, it will follow that the Vertical is distant from the
Equator 49 Degrees.

To find the Poles Altitude.
THis is very Easy to be done, from what has been said, for the Suns Meridian
Altitude in either of the Aequinoxes being granted, you have consequently the
distance of the Vertical Point from the Equator, and the Meridian Latitude.
And this distance, and Latitude is equal (as has been said) to the Elevation
of the Pole; Arch of the Meridian placed between the Elevated Pole of the
World, and the Horizon; so that to have the Altitude of the Pole, the Suns
Meridian Altitude is to be sought either by adding or subtracting the Degrees
of Declination, if it be at the time of either of the Aequinoxes.

But this is to be noted, that this way the Altitude of the Pole is only
indirectly found, neither Star is visible to us at those Points of Heaven,
which are called the Poles: so that Geographers use to apply themselves to
those Stars that are nearest the Pole, especially to that which is called the
Pole Star to judge thereof; And thus they proceed, In the first place, the
Meridian Altitude of that Star is sought when it arives at the Meridian Circle;
Secondly, 12 hours after when it comes to the opposite part of the Meridian,
then its Altitude Meridian Altitudes is to be considered, which done, the half
of the difference found is to be added to the lesser Meridian Altitude to find
the Poles Altitude; For Example, If one of the Stars nearest the Pole be found
in its highest Meridian Altitude to be 60 Degrees, and in its lowest only 40,
the Difference of these Altitudes is 20, and the half of that number 10, which
added to 40 makes 50, whence we infer that the Pole is then Elevated 50 Degrees.

To find the Longitude.
THis is a troublesome thing and cannot be very exactly performed, the best way
is by Lunar Eclipses, for we must suppose the distance of Longitude; for
Example, Between one Town and another to be the distance of their proper
Meridians. The better therefore to understand what distance of Longitude Rome
and Paris have one from another, there ought to be observed both at Rome, and
Paris, by able Astronomers, some certain part of any Lunar Eclipse; as perhaps
the beginning, but rather the middle. Then the business is to know at what Hour
this happened at Rome, and at what Hour at Paris; for since the Ingress of the
Moon within the shadow of the Earth appears at the same time throughout all the
whole Hemisphaere, and yet the Hours differ with the Meridians, then it being
found the beginning of the Eclipse was at 9 of the Clock, and at Paris at 10.
It must thence be concluded that Paris is distant from Rome the Longitude of 15
Meridians, as passing through 15 several Degrees of the Equator, there going
(as before taken notice of) 15 Degrees of the Equator to one Hour.

But to Conclude, It must be understood, that the Longitude, and Latitude which
is now treated of, is that which is properly called Mundane, or Geographical;
for in Astronomy, as has been already observed, the Latitude properly spoken
of, is the Latitude of a Star, which is its distance from the Ecliptic, or the
Arch between the Ecliptic, and the true place of the said Star: So likewise
Longitude is the distance thereof from the beginning of Aries, or the Vernal
Aequinoctial Point toward the Signs of Taurus, Cancer, and those that follow;
or as some express it, an Arch of the Zodiac, drawn from the beginning of
Aries through those Signs.

ASTROLOGY.
ASTROLOGY is the Art of foretelling things to come, and of giving Judgment of
Human Affairs and Revolutions, by the mutual Aspects of the Planets, and their
disposition toward any of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

The Twelve Signs are thus Named and Characterized.

Taurus.
Gemini.
Cancer.
Leo.
Virgo.


Libra.
Scorpio.
Sagitary.
Capricorn.
Aquarius.
Pisces.


The Division, Nature, and quality of the Twelve Signs.
are fiery, hot, and dry, and are therefore fiery Triplicity.

are cold, dry, and earthly, and are called the Earthly Triplicity.

are airy, hot, and moist, which make the Airy Triplicity.

are cold, moist, and watery, and are named the Watery Triplcity.

The Signs are again divided into Moveable, Fixed, and Common; the Moveable
are,,,, the Fixed,,,; the Common,,,. They are called Moveable, because that
when the Sun Signs, the season and temperature of the Weather soon changes;
Fixed, because when the Sun enters them, the temper of the Air is more fixed
and stable; And lastly, they are called Common, because they partake both of
the preceding and consequent Sign.

But herein note, that the Moveable Signs, behold each other with, the Fixed
behold each other with, and the Common behold each other with. The Fiery Signs
behold each other Earthy Signs behold each other with; so likewise the Air and
Watery, etc. Which this Table following will inform you more at large.

The Table
* * Dexter Dexter Dexter Sinister Sinister; Sinister Dexter Dexter Dexter
Sinister Sinister Sinister Dexter Dexter Dexter Sinister Sinister Sinister
Dexter Dexter Dexter Sinister Sinister Sinister

The use of this Table is very easy, as thus; you may observe Aries is in
Sextile Dexter to Aquarius, and Sextile Sinister to Gemini; and in Quartile
Dexter to Capricorn, and Quartile Sinister to Cancer; in Trine Dexter to
Sagittary, and Trine Sinister to Leo, and his Opposition to Libra. Observe the
like in the rest; where note a Planet in Aries beholds another Planet, if he be
in the same Signs, with the like Aspects, so that they be within the half of
each others Orb; as thus, a Planet in Aries beholds another in Aquarius with
Sextile Dexter, and so of the rest.

The Names and Characters of the Planets.

Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol, or the Sun. Venus. Mercury. Luna, or the Moon.
Dragons Head. Dragons Tail.
Of the Aspects.
BEsides the Five common Aspects mentioned in Astronomy, and of the general use
therein, there are several others added by the most Famous Astrologers, as very
much conducing to their Art, so that it is thought expedient to join this
complete Table of them all in general.

A Table of the Aspects.
Conjunction, in the same Sign and Degree. S. D. SS Semisextile, when Planets
are distant 30 Degrees, or -- 1 00 Sextile, when they are distant 60 Degrees. or 2
00 Q Quintile, when distant 72 Degrees, or 2 12 Quartile, when they are distant
90 Degrees. or 3 00 Td Tredicile, when they be distant 108 Degrees, or -- 3 18
Trine, when distant 120 Degrees, or 4 00 Bq Biquintile, when distant 144
Degrees, or 4 14 Vc Quincunx, when they are asunder 150 Degrees, or -- 5 00
Opposition, when distant 180 Degrees, or 6 00
Of the Division of the 12 Houses.
IN the next place, I think it most convenient (before I teach the young
Student how to erect a Figure of Heaven) to show him the division of the 12
Houses of Heaven.

The whole Sphaere of Heaven is divided into four equal Parts by the Meridian
and Horizon, and every one of these Parts or Quadrants are divided into three
other Parts, according to other Circles, drawn by Points of Sections of the
aforesaid Meridian and Horizon; so the whole is divided into Twelve equal
Parts, which the Astrologers call Houses, or Mansions, taking their beginning
from the East.

The first Part or Quadrant is described from the Angle of the East to the Mid-
Heaven, viz. from the Line of the first House to the Line of the tenth House,
and contains the twelfth, eleventh, and tenth Houses. It is called the
Oriental, Vernal, Ascending, Masculine, Sanguine Infant Quarter, verging to the
South.

The second Quadrant is from the Cusp of the Mid- Heaven, to the Cusp of the
seventh House, and contains the ninth, eighth, and seventh Houses; and is
called the Meridian, Estival, Feminine, Touthful, Choleric Quarter, verging to
the West.

The third Quadrant, is from the Cusp of the seventh House, to the Cusp of the
fourth House, and contains the sixth, fifth, and fourth Houses; Occidental,
Autumnal, Masculine, Melancholic, Manhood, Cold and Dry, verging to the North.

The fourth Quadrant, is from the Cusp of the fourth House, or Imum Caeli, to
the Cusp of the first House, and contains the third, second, and first Houses.
Its called, Northern, Feminine, Old Age, of the Nature of Winter, Phlegmatic,
verging East.

The first, tenth, seventh and fourth Houses are Angles; the eleventh, second,
eighth and fifth, Succedents; and third, twelfth, sixth and ninth, Cadents. The
Angles most powerful, the Succedents next in force, the Cadents weak: The
Succedents are next to the Angles; the Cadents next to the Succedents.

1. 10. 7. 4 11. 5. 2. 8 9. 3. 12. 6 Angles. Succedents. Cadents.

Note, That the first House is preferred before the tenth, and the tenth before
the seventh, etc.

How to Erect a Figure of Heaven.
SInce I have showed you the division of the Twelve Houses, it is also
requisite to show the use of them, and how to erect a Figure. First, draw the
Figure following; and note that the Twelve empty places are the Twelve Houses,
as Figures standing on the Cusp or beginning of each House does inform you, and
the vacant place in the middle may note to you the Earth, which is surrounded
with the Heavens; in which it is usual to write the Year, Month, Day, and Hour
when the Figure was made. Thus have you a Figure of the Heavens and Earth in
plano.

Note, Where you see the Figure 1 placed, that is called the Cusp of the first
House, or Ascendent, Cusp of the second House, and the Figure 3 the Cusp of the
third House, etc. and so of the rest.

Having drawn your Blank Figure, then seek the place of the Sun in the
Ephemeris; and having found the Suns place, then enter the Table of Houses, and
in the Column of the Tenth House, find the Sign and Degree the Sun is in; and
if you find not the just place of the Sun, then take the nearest to it, for
many times there be odd Minutes adhering to his place; which if the odd Minute
be above 30, then take the next whole Degree; but if under 30, you may reject
them, and take the even Degree; and right against it in the Column toward the
Left hand, entitled [Time from Noon] you have the time in Hours and Minutes of
the Suns right Ascensions to be added to the time of the Hour and Minute you
make your Figure for; and the Hours and Minutes thus added (if they be under 24
Hours) seek out in the Column of Time from Noon; but if they exceed 24 Hours,
then cast away 24 Hours, and the Remainder seek out under the Column of Time
from Noon, and right against it in the same Line you have the Signs, Degrees,
and Minutes; to be placed upon the 10, 11, 12. 1, 2 and 3 Houses, so have you
six of the Houses, the other six are easily found only by placing the same
Degree and Minute of the opposite Sign on the opposite House; if you cannot
tell what Signs are opposite to each other, look at the beginning of the Tract,
and you may see that Aries is opposite to Libra, and Taurus is opposite to
Scorpio, etc. Take example by that Figure at the beginning of the Ephemeris,
when Sol enters Aries. Next you must learn to place the Planets in the Figure
aright, as you may see in the same Figure; as thus, you may observe, Saturn
being more Degrees than the Cusp of the fourth, is placed in the fourth;
Jupiter being in fewer Degrees than the Cusp of the Ascendent, is placed above
the Ascendent: the like Rule observe in all the rest, etc.

Here note, That the Figure of Sols entering Aries, is erected for London by the
Table of Houses of 51 Degr. 32 Min. which is the Elevation of that place; but
if you chance to be in another Elevation when you make your Figure, then take
that Table of Houses which is nearest the Elevation you are in.

How to reduce the Ephemeris, and Suns declination to any other Meridian.
FOrasmuch as the Suns Declination is of great use, I shall first show an
Example of that: Observe this, that a Table of Declination, or an Ephemeris
made for any particular place, will not serve generally for all places, but
only for such places as have the like, or near the same Longitude. The reason
is, because the Declination (or the Ephemeris) is calculated according to the
true place of the Sun at Noon, at which time the Sun is upon the Meridian at
that place for which the said Tables are made: But you must note, that the Sun
does not come to the Meridian in all places at a like time; although that in
all places the Sun being upon the Meridian makes the Middle of the Day; but for
every 15 Degrees difference of Longitude between any two Sun comes sooner or
later to the Meridian by so many Hours: So that if a place be 15 Degrees to the
Eastward of the place prefixed, then the Sun comes sooner to the Meridian by an
Hour, and if it be 15 Degrees to the Westward, later by an Hour, and so
consequently more or less, according to the difference of Longitude; by which
reason, in what Part of the World soever you be, you may work for the
Declination of the Sun in that place by the proportional Declination to the
Hour of difference in Longitude.

Note, That what is said of the Declination, by the same Rule you may reduce
the Planets also to another Meridian.

Example.
SUppose you were in Brasilia, or in any other place Westward, the 10th of
April, 1686. Meridian is distant from the Meridian of London to the Westward
about 45 Degrees, which is three Hours of Time that the Sun comes to their
Meridian later than here at London, where the Table and Ephemeris is made: For
when it is Twelve of the Clock here, it is but Nine there, and being Noon
there, it is Three of the Clock here; therefore to apply this Table to that
place, I find the Declination for the Day Meridian to be a 11 Degr. 38 Min. at
Noon, and by reason that when it is Twelve of the Clock at Brasilia, it is then
at London three Hours past; therefore by the Rule of Proportion, I seek what
Declination the Sun has at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, as follows:
I take the difference of Declination between the Day aforesaid and the next
following, which is 20 Min. then I say by the Rule of Three, If 24 Hours give
20 Min. what gives 3 Hours, the time of the difference in Longitude? Facit 2
Min. and 30 Seconds, which because the Declination increases I add to the
number of the Day proposed: So I conclude the Declination of the Sun to be the
10th of April at Noon in the Kingdom of Brasilia 11 Degr. 40 Min. 30 Seconds.
Do the like in the Planets that are direct; but to the Retrograde Planets and,
subtract their three Hours Motion from their places at Noon.

Again, the Day and time aforesaid in the Bay of St. Sebastian, whose Longitude
is 58 Degr. to the Eastward of London; answering near to four Hours Time,
showing that the Sun comes sooner to the Meridian in the Bay of St. Sebastian
by four Hours, than at London, by which reason the Declination is less there
than at London, because the Declination does increase: For if the Declination
did decrease, it would be more there than at London. And to know the
Declination of the Sun in the Bay aforesaid, I take the difference betwixt the
Declination of the 10th of April, and the Declination of the Day next before,
being 20 Min. then I say, If 24 Hours give 20 Min. what do 4 Hours? Facit 3
Min. which deducted from 11 Degrees. 38 Min. the Declination of the Sun the 10th of
April aforesaid, at London, leaves 11 Degr. 35 Min. the Declination of the Sun
at Noon in the Bay of St. Sebastian, being that when it is Twelve of the Clock
there, it is but Eight of the Clock at London, or in any place having the same
Longitude. Do the like in the Planets that are Direct; but in the Ret^ograde
Planets, and, add their four Hours Motion to their places at Noon.

An Example in reducing of Aspects to other Meridians.
OBserve this as a general Rule, That if you add in Motion, you must subtract
in Aspect; and if you subtract in Motion, you must add in Aspect.

In the first of the foregoing Examples, your difference of Meridians was three
Hours to the Westward of London, and the Motion of three Hours was added to
give you the true Degree and Minute of what was sought. The Day following,
which is the 10th of April, 1686. here at London we have a New Moon at 30 Min.
past, at Noon subtract three Hours from that, and there Remains 9 Hours, 30
Min. which is the time of the, or new Moon at Brasilia.

Again, In the second Example, your difference of Meridian was four Hours
Eastward, and the four Hours Motion was subtracted to give the true Degree and
Minute of what was sought for. Now for this, or New Moon aforesaid, here I add
4 Hours to the time of the at London, which is 0 H. 30 Min. P. M. and that is 4
H. 30 Min. P. M. or Afternoon at St. Sebastian.

Herein note, That Astronomers begin their Day at Noon, so that One of the
Clock Afternoon is their first Hour, Two of the Clock the second, and so
forward; Six of the Clock the next Morning the 18th Hour, and Eleven of the
Clock the 23th. Hour. This Rule you must observe in all Astronomical
Calculations, and in your time when you erect Figures, for every Ephemeris is
calculated to the Meridian of some particular place.

Of several Terms, Words of Art, and Accidents of the Planets.
APplication is, when two Planets draw toward each other by Body or Aspect; by
Body, that is by Conjunction; by Aspect, that is by beholding each other from
several Signs. And this happens three several ways.

First, When a Planet that is swift applies to Mars in 10 degrees. of Aries, and
Mercury, five here, Mercury applies to the Conjunction of Mars.

The second Application is, when both Planets are Retrograde, as Mercury in 10
degrees. of Aries, and Mars in 9 degrees. of Aries, Mercury not being Direct until he
has made Conjunction with Mars. This is an ill application, and an Argument of
either suddenly perfecting, or breaking Planets have signification.

The third Application is, when a Planet is Direct, and in fewer Degrees, and a
Retrograde Planet in more Degrees of the Sign; as Mars being Direct in 15 degrees.
of Aries, and Mercury Retrograde in 17 degrees. of Aries: This is an ill
Application, and in the Air shows great change, in question sudden alteration.
But more particular Application follows, It is when two Planets are
Conjunction or Aspect, viz.; where note, that ever the lighter Planets apply to
the more ponderous, unless they be Retrograde.

Separation is first, when two Planets are departed but 6 min. distance; but
they are not fully separated till they are distant half of each others Orb.

Prohibition is, when two Planets that signify the effecting of any thing
demanded; are applying Conjunction or Aspect; and before they can come to a
true Aspect, another Planet interposeth his Body or Aspect, so that thereby the
Matter propounded is hindered or retarded; as Mars in 7 degrees. of Aries, and
Saturn in 12 degrees. of Aries; here Mars signifies the effecting of any business
when he comes to the Body of Saturn, who promises the conclusion; but Sol at
the same time in 6 degrees. of Aries, and he is swifter in Motion than Mars; he
overtakes Mars and Conjunction with Saturn before Mars, whereby whatever Mars
or Saturn did formerly signify, is now prohibited by the Sun's first
impediting Mars, and then Saturn before they can come to a true Conjunction;
this is called Conjunctional or Bodily Prohibition. You must note, there is a
Prohibition by Aspect also: It is necessary to observe this in change of the
Air, as well as in Horary Questions.

Refrenation is, when a Planet is applying to Conjunction or Aspect, but before
he comes to the other be becomes Retrograde; as Saturn in 12 degrees. of Aries, and
Mars in 7 degrees. here Mars hastens to a Conjunction of Saturn; but before he
comes to the 10 or 11 degrees. he becomes Retrograde, and so refrains to come to a
former Conjunction of Saturn, who still moves sorward in the Sign: Nothing
signified by the former Conjunction will be effected.

Translation of Light and Nature is, when a Planet separates from one more
weighty, and applies to another more heavy; as Saturn in 20 degrees. of Aries, and
Mars in 15 degrees. of Aries, and Mercury in 16 degrees. of Aries; here Mercury being a
swift Planet separates from Mars, and translates the virtue of Mars unto
Saturn. It is done also as well by any Aspect, as by Conjunction.

Reception, is when two Planets are in each others Dignities, as Sol in Aries,
and Mars in Leo; here is reception by House, it may be by Triplicity, Term, or
Face, or any essential Dignities: The use of it is much, for when the effecting
of a Matter is denied by the Aspects, or when the Significators have no Aspect
to each other, or when it seems doubtful what is promised by Quartile or
Opposition of the Significators; yet if mutual Reception happen between the
Significators; the thing is brought to pass, and without any great trouble, and
suddenly to the content of both Parties.

Frustration, is when a lighter Planet would come to Conjunction with another;
but more weighty before they come to Conjunction, the more weighty Planet is
joined to another, and so the Conjunction of the first is frustrate: As Mercury
in 10 degrees. of Aries, and Mars in 12 degrees. and Jupiter in 13 degrees. of Aries; here
Mercury strives to come to Conjunction with Mars, but Mars first goes to
Conjunction with Jupiter, whereby Mercury is frustrated of the Conjunction of
Mars. In Questions it signifies, as our common Proverb is, Two Dogs quarrel,
the third gets the Bone: but in the Air (if three Planets happen so near
together) it breeds sudden alteration.

Peregrination; a Planet is Peregrine when he has no essential Dignity in the
Sign where he is, neither by House, Exaltation, Triplicity, Term, nor Face. It
is very material in all Questions to know the Peregrine Planet, especially in
Questions of Theft, for ever almost the significator of the Thief, is known by
the Peregrine Planet posited in an Angle, or the second House.

Combustion; a Planet is Combust when he is not 8 degrees. 30 min. distant from the
Sun, either before or after him, the Significator of the Querent Combust shows
he is in great fear, and overpowered by some Great Person. Many times in
change of the Air, it shows the higher Winds, and great Storms.

Under the Sun Beams; a Planet is said to be so until he be distant from him 17
Degrees.

Cazami; a Planet is in the Heart of the Sun, or in Cazami, till distant from
him 17 min. While a Planet is in Cazami he is accounted very strong.

Void of Course; a Planet is so when he is separated from another, and does
not, during the time of his being in that Sign, apply to any other: This is
most usually in the Moon, in Judgments carefully observe if she be void of
Course, or no, for you seldom see a Business go handsomely forward when She is
so. Some say, that if a Planet be above 12 degr. distant from the Conjunction
or Aspect of another Planet, that he shall be counted void of Course till he be
within 12 degrees. of some Aspect.

Besieging; A Planet is besieged, when he is between the Bodies of the two
Infortunes or Malevolents, Saturn and Mars, Pulsation or Mission; some call it
rendering of Virtue; it is thus, Saturn in Virgo, and the Sun in Capricorn; here
the Sun gives virtue unto Saturn, because the Sun casts an Aspect to Saturn
from his House.

Almuten; It is that Planet that bears chief Rule of any Sign in any Figure.

Almuten of a Figure, is that Planet that has most Dignities, or is most
powerful in the whole Scheme of Heaven.

Haiz, is when a Masculine and Diurnal Planet in the Day time is above the
Earth, and in a Masculine Sign; or a Feminine Nocturnal Planet in the Night
time under the Earth, and in a Feminine Sign. In Questions it usually shows the
Querent at the time of the Question when his Significator is so found.

Oriental; that is, when a Planet rises before the Sun.

Occidental; that is, when a Planet sets after the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars are called Superiors and primary Planets; they are Oriental of the Sun
from their Conjunction with him till their Opposition, from whence, till again
they come to his Conjunction, they are Occidental.

Venus and Mercury are called Inferiors, and they cannot make any Sextile,
Quartile, Trine, or Opposition to the Sun, because they are never elongated the
quantity of a Sextile from the Sun; for Mercury is seldom above 30 degrees. distant
from the Sun, and Venus seldom above 48 degrees. in their greatest Elongations from
the Sun. Their Orientality is when they are fewer Degrees of the Sign the Sun
is in, or in the Sign proceeding their Occidentality, when they are in more
Degrees Sun is in; or in the next following, Luna is Oriental of the Sun from
her Opposition to Conjunction, and Occidental from her Conjunction to her
Opposition of the Sun.

Direction, is when a Planet moves forward in the Sign, as going out of 13
degrees. into 14 degrees. and so along.

Retrogradation, is when a Planet goes backward, as out of 10 degrees. into 9, 8,
7, etc.

Stationary, is when a Planet moves not, as the Retrograde.

Longitude of a Planet or Star, is their distance from the beginning of Aries,
numbered according to the succession of the Signs.

Latitude of a Planet, or Star, is their distance from the Ecliptic, either
toward the North or South.

Declination of a Planet, or Star, is their distance from the Equator, as they
decline from thence

The Orbs of the Planets.
is 9 Degrees. 9 Degrees. 8 Degrees. 15 Degrees. 7 Degrees. 7 Degrees. 12 Degrees. before and after. Some
do allow the Planets Orbs to be (in some of them) greater by a Degree or two,
than what I have inserted here.




Right against every Planet are the Degrees of this Orb; for when any two
Planets are not in the Degrees of the Signs which make their party Aspect, yet
if they be within half the Degrees of each others Orb, they are in Platick
Aspect.

Example.
Suppose Saturn in third Degree of Aries; and Jupiter in the ninth Degree of
Gemini; here they are in Platick Aspect, because they are within the half of
each others Orb: But the Partile Aspect is of greatest force; had Jupiter been
in the third Degree of Gemini, then the Aspect had been Partile.

A Table of the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets, both Essential and
Accidental.
Essential Dignities.
A Planet in his own House, or in mutual Reception with another by House, shall
have Dignities, 5 In his Exaltation, or in Reception by Exaltation 4 In his own
Triplicity, 3 In his own Term, 2 In his Face 1
Accidental Fortitudes.
IN the 10th House, or Ascendant 5 In the 7, 4, or 11 Houses, 4 In the 2, or 5
Houses, 3 In the 9th 2 In the 3d 1 Direct to Sol and Luna, this is void 4 Swift
in Motion 2 Saturn, Jupiter and Mars Oriental 2 Venus and Mercury Occidental 2
The Moon Increasing, or Occidental 2 Free from Combustion, and Sols Beams, 5 In
the Heart of the Sun, or Cazami 5 In Partil Conjunction with Jupiter and Venus,
5 In Partil Conjunction with the Dragons Head, 4 In Partil Trine to Jupiter and
Venus 4 In Partil Sextile to Jupiter and Venus, 3 In Conjunction with Cor
Leonis in 25 of Leo, 6 In Conjunction with Spica Virginis, in 19 degrees. of Libra
5
Debilities.
IN his Detriment, 5 In his Fall 4 Peregrine 5
Debilities.
IN the 12th House, 5 In the 8th and 6th Houses 2 Retrograde 5 Slow in Motion 2
Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars Occidental 2 Venus and Mercury Oriental 2 Luna
Decreasing in Light 2 Combust of the Sun, 5 Under the Sun Beams, 4 Partil
Conjunction with Jupiter or Mars, 5 Partil Conjunction with the Dragons Head, 4
Besieged of Saturn and Mars 4 Partil Opposition of Saturn or Mars 4 Partil
Quartile of Saturn or Mars 3 In Conjunction with Caput Algol, in 24 degrees. of
Taurus, or within 5 Degrees 5
Fortitudes of Pars Fortunae. Debilities of Pars Fortunae. IN Taurus or Pisces
5 IN Virgo, Capricorn, or Aquarius 5 In Libra, Sagittarius, Leo, or Cancer, 4
In Aries neither gets nor loses 0 In Gemini 3 In the Terms of Saturn or Mars 2
In Virgo, so it be in the Terms of Jupiter or Venus 2 In Conjunction with
Saturn or Mars 5 If in Conjunction with Jupiter or Venus, 5 In Opposition with
Saturn or Mars 4 In Trine with Jupiter or Venus 4 In Quartile of Saturn or Mars
3 In Sextile with Jupiter or Venus 3 In Conjunction with the Dragons Tail, 3 In
Conjunction with the Dragons Head, 3 In the 12th House, 5 In the 8th House, 4
In the 1st or 10th Houses 5 In the 6th House, 4 In the 7th, 4th, or 11th Houses
4 Combust 5 In the 2d or 5th, 3 With Caput Algol, in 21 degrees. 16 min. of Taurus.
In the 9th House, 2 In the third House, 1 In Conjunction with Regulus, in 25
degrees. of Leo 6 In Conjunction with Spica Virg. in 19 degrees. of Libra 5 Not
Combust, or under the Suns Beams, 5

These foregoing Tables are so plain and easy, that they need no Explanation;
only when you have collected the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets in
any Figure; then observe which is the greatest in number, and subtract the
least from the greatest, and the Remainder shows you what Dignities or
Debilities the Planet has, and according to the number thereof give your
Judgment.

And note, That the first of these three Tables, which is the Table of the
Essential Dignities, and Debilities of the Planets, is of greatest use in
change of the Air.

Of the Faces of the Signs.
THe first Face of Aries is the Face of Mars, and signifies Boldness,
Fortitude, Preferment, and Immodesty; it is complete and strong in its
properties and virtues.

The second Face is the Face of the Sun, and signifies Nobility and Preferment,
Rule and Dominion.

The third Face is the Face of Venus, and signifies Women, and their skill in
Manual operation and Trades belonging to that Sex, Courtesies, Play, Joy, and
Mirth.

The first Face of Taurus is Mercuries, and is complete in his Nature; is good
to Plow, Sow, and build; to frequent the company of Lawyers, learned and wise
Men; to measure and divide Land; to practice Geometry.

The second Face is belonging to the Moon, and signifies Power, Nobility, and
Honor; to spoil Towns, and dispeople them, and bring great necessity upon
People.

The third Face is the Face of Saturn, and signifies Misery and Bondage,
Slavery, Necessity, Want, and Vileness.

The first Face of Gemini is Jupiters, and is complete in its Nature, and
signifies Writing, Casting of Account, receiving and paying Moneys, delivering
Petitions, and exercising such Feats of Wit by which little Money is gotten.

The second is the Face of Mars, and signifies Oppression and Labor, obtaining
things by much study and difficulty, and if it signify any at all it is
Knavish Wit.

The third is the Face of the Sun, and signifies Forgetfulness, Disdain,
Jesting, and Playing.

The first Face of Cancer is the Face of Venus, complete in its own Nature, and
signifies Strength and Sensibility, Community, Subtilty, and favor of the Men
they desire.

The second is the Face of Mercury, and signifies Mirth, Jesting, and playing
with Women. Riches and Fruitfulness: So proportionably of the rest.

The Radiations of the Signs and Planets.


BY this Table you may know when any Aspect is; as suppose a Planet in Aries
calls his Sextile Aspect to the same Degrees in Aquarius Gemini, and a Square
to Capricorn and Cancer, and a Trine to Sagittarius and Leo, and an Opposition
to Libra, as you see in the upper Line; and so of the rest in the Left Hand
Column.

Likewise a Planet in Libra, casts a Sextile Aspect to the same Degrees in
Sagittarius and Leo, and a Square to Capricorn and Cancer, and a Trine to
Aquarius and Gemini, and Opposition to Aries; as you may see by the Right Hand
Column, and the Aspects in the lower Line. The Example being easy, I will say
no more.

By the foregoing Table you may also know when exact Crysis, or Critical Days
fall; As for Example, If the M^^n should be in 10 Degrees, of Aries at the
Decumbiter, she takes her first Crysis when she comes to be in 10 Degrees of
Cancer, that being in a Square to the same Degree (...) Aries at the
Decumbiter; and when she is in 10 Degrees of Libra, her second Crysis being
(...) Opposition to Aries; and the third Crysis, when she is in 10 Degrees in
Capricorn; and the fourth Crysis, when she comes to the same Degree in Aries*
as she was in when the Patient first (...) sick.

The Second Part of COSMOGRAPHY, VIZ. GEOGRAPHY.
GEOGRAPHY, is an Art that teaches to make a true description of the
Superficies of the whole Earth. It is divided into General and Particular.

The General comprehends not only the whole Earth, as far as is discovered that
is habitable, but also that part that lies under the Water. Now the description
of the Waters belongs to Hydrography, of which more anon.

The Particular description of the Earth, extends Chorography, and Topography;
so that as Cosmography is a description of the whole World, and Geography of
the Earth; so is Chorography a description of every Particular Country, or
part of the Earth, such as is described by particular Maps, as of England,
France, Spain, and the like. And whereas Topography is a description of every
particular place, as Cities, Towns, Forests, Deserts, Woods, Mountains,
Valleys, Lakes, Marshes, Gulphs, Bays, Rivers, Streights, Havens, etc. the
knowledge thereof cannot but be of great use, and delight to all men, especially
to Travelers.

Of the Motion of the Earth.
IN the Copernican Hypothesis, neither the Sun, nor Firmament have any Motion,
but the Sun is said to be so disposed in the middle, that the Globe of the
Earth, together with the Sphaere of the Moon is continually carried about it,
with a most rapid Motion; according to this Figure.

The Arguments, and Answers pro, and con, are many on both sides; but the most
unanswerable proofs of the truth of the Ptolomaean, or Hypothesis are these.

First, If our Terrestrial Globe were not placed in the midst or Center of the
World, it would not be plainly made out, how the mid part of Heaven should be
conspicuous to us, or how in the New Moon, the Sun and the Moon could be seen
both at the same time in parts Diametrically opposite. And whereas they answer,
That the Earth is but a small Punctum or Point in respect to the Heavens, and
that therefore all this night well enough be without any contradiction to their
Hypothesis, a greater Absurdity would still follow, that is, that all the part
of Heaven beneath the Horizon, would be equally seen by us with those parts
above. Moreover, if the Earth were not placed in the middle of the World, there
could not be a perpetual Aequinoctial in the Sphaera recta, in regard all the
Circulations of the Sun, would be unequally cut by the Horizon. Also if the
Earth were not in the middle of the World, there would not always be an Eclipse
of the Moon, when she is Diametrically opposite to the Sun, since it would
often happen that the Globe of the Earth, would not be exactly in the middle,
and equally opposite to both those Planets, within the Line drawn from the Sun,
through the middle part of the World to the Moon; whereas in Lunar Eclipses are
never known, but when the Moon keeps her opposition with the Sun, through the
middle of the World; the Moon then being exactly in the middle, as Astronomers
have always observed.

Next, there is this Pyhsical reason to be given, why the Earth is in the
Center, namely, because all heavy things have their tendency thither, and
consequently the Earth, as being of that Gravity which renders it unfit for
Motion, and inclines it to a settlement in the lowest place, or Center.

Lastly, in the Copernican Hypothesis, the Globe of the Earth, is affirmed to
be moved, not only about the Center of the World, but also about its own Axis;
so as successively to receive the diurnal Light according to its different
parts; but to refute this Assertion, hereafter it shall be made appear, that
the Earth is a Magnetick-Body, and consequently uncapeable of being moved about
its own Axis, and this is the opinion of Galtruchij. But a larger Dicourse of
this subject, which recites the Opinions of the Pythagoreans, Ptolomains, and
Copernicans, you will find in the fifth Chapter of Varenius his Geography.

To the Rt. Honble. George Berkeley (...) Berkeley. Ma^bray. Segrave, and
Bruce, Baron of Berkeley Castle, and Earl of Berkeley, and one of the Lords of
his Majestyes most Honble. Privi Council etc. (...) Anno Dom 1678.

This Plate is humbly. Dedicated By Ricd. Blome.



The Figure of the Earth.
THat the Earth is a round Figure, is proved by several Arguments. First, by
the rising of the Stars; for in their rising they appear first to those that
live most Easternly; next by the Elevation of the Pole; for the nearer any one
comes to the Pole, the higher he is elevated above the Horizon; another
Egregious proof is this, Perpendicular falls in any part whatsoever at right
Angles upon the Earth, which could not be if the Earth were plain, and not
round according to this Figure. Moreover, If the Superficies of the Earth were
plain, and not round, as the Chinese are of opinion, it would not Earth, whose
Longitude of Body is in the Line of Direction; for thence it is that they stand
Perpendicularly upon the Center of the World, excepting in this case, those
that possessed the middle of the plain of the Earth; which the better to
demonstrate Figure, where there is described a right Line for that right
Pavement, which tends directly to that Point of Heaven, which answers to the
Horizon. Next there are imagined to proceed from the Center of the Earth, Lines
passing at rights Angles through the Superficies of the said Earth.

The Earth excavated in several parts takes in the Waters, so that the Water
together with the Earth makes one perfect Globe, which is thereupon called the
Terraqueous Globe; However some are of opinion, that the Globe of the Earth is
distinct from that of the Water, but the absurdity of this opinion is easily
evinc't by the Eclipse of the Moon, whereas it is plainly evident, that there
is but one Shadow of Earth and Water, and that Conical, and consequently that
the Globe of the Earth and Water is one and the same, which the better to
confirm, it must be considered, Center, to which both the weight of the Earth
and Water tend; for let Water be thrown down any where, it will certainly fall
the same, as Earth directed from the same place. Nor can it be imagined, if
there were two Globes, how there could be any passing from the Globe of Water
to that of the Earth. And those that frequent the Seas easily from the sight of
either Pole, show that they are carried about the same Center with that of the
Earth. Sea in its outward Superficies is of a Form so Spherical, that it makes
but one rotundity, and consequently but one Globe with the Superficies of the
Earth; and this is very manifest by a Ship homeward bound, and returning into
the Haven, when those aboard her see first the Turrets and Battlements of
public Edifices, and afterward the lower parts, which can proceed from no
other cause, but from the swelling, and rotundity of the Water. as appears by
this Figure, And for the same reason the Pole appears by Degrees more and more
elevated above the Horizon to him that Sayls toward it, under the same
Meridian.

Note, that the Superficies of the Sea toward the extreme Shoars falls more
sensibly from its main bulk, than from any part of the Superficies of the
Earth; in regard there is a descent to the Sea from all parts of the Earth, as
the fall of Rivers demonstrates; for the Waters by their own natural gravity
descend not but from a higher place to a lower, and consequently it may be laid
down for a Maxim, That the whole Mass of Water, or Sea in its utmost
Superficies is lower than the whole Superficies of the Earth; for were that
part of the Sea which is near the Shore, higher than the Shore, it cannot be
otherwise imagined, but that it must needs pour it self upon it; and by the
Rule of Proportion, the same may be affirmed of any other part of the Sea; for
were one part more imminent than another, the higher part according to its
fluxible nature would still fall upon the lower, as tending to a Level, and to
keep an equal distance from the Center of the World. And whereas to those that
look upon the Sea from the Shore it seems to rise, and swell up more and more.
This arises from the fallacy of the Sight, as by the Rules of Optics may be
more plainly demonstrated.

Of the Magnitude of the Earth.
THough the Globe of the Earth, only considered in it self may be said to be a
vast Bulk; yet in respect of the Heavens it is but a little Point.

The Compass of the Earth, is to be found out several ways; the first is that
of Maurolycus, according to this Figure, where the Altitude c, a, of the
Mountain; for Example, Aetna is said to be 2 French Leagues, which is four
English Miles, from whence the prospect upon the Sea by the Line a, d, will
consequently be the Longitude of the sensible Horizon, and the Line touching
the Circle d, h, i, which is taken for the Compass of the Earth; then suppose
that distance, or Line a, d, to be 200 Furlongs, the square whereof is 40000.
Likewise let a right Angle be imagined from the Line, a, h, cutting the whole
Circle through the Center thereof, under the Latitude a, g, which is the same
with c, a, These things thus laid down, whereas the said right Angle a, g, h,
i, according to the 36th Proposition of the said Book of Euclide, is to be
eequal to the Square of the Tangent Line a, d; It will be thence easy to
determine of the said Right Angle, and the Longitude thereof.

But the more clear way of finding out this Compass, is by the Elevation of the
Pole in two places: For Example, Two Cities so far distant from each other
under the same Meridian, that the Pole Elevated in one more than in the other
one Degree, or some known part of a Degree; For Example, a fourth part, from
whence the Degree may easily be computed: Now one Degree in Heaven answering to
30 French Leagues, and there being 360 Degrees in all, Multiply 360 by 30, and
the Product is 10800 which is the compass of the Earth. But according to the
English Account, the Circumference is 21600 Miles. From whence the Diameter
accoring to the Triple proportion allowed by Geometricians, between that and
the Circumference, will be found to be 3436 Leagues omitting all Fractions,
Surface to the Center, 1718 Leagues. Hence also may be made the Computation of
the whole Superficies of the Earth, which will be 37114200 Square Leagues; and
in like manner the whole solidity 21254065200.

Note, that this universal Bulk of the Earth, considered as to its solidity,
Regions, according to this Figure, whereof the first is that which is called
the outwardmost of the Surface; the second is the next beneath, where for the
most part Stones, Metals, and the like are generated, in which also are certain
Passages, Channels, through which Waters from the Sea, are devolved toward the
Generation of Rivers and Fountains. Also hitherto belongs Subterranean Fires.
The third reaches from thence to the Center, and this according to the
whimsical fancy of some, is said to be the place or Prison of the damned.

However, Geographers affirm the Surface of the Waters, to be double to that of
the Earth; yet Mass, the Earth is much the biggest, of which there is this
material proof, viz. that neither all the Earth is covered with Water, neither
are there any Waters in any part under which there is not Earth of far greater
profundity than the Water above; for the greater profundity of the Earth, is
accounted to be above 1700 Leagues, whereas the Sea where it is deepest, scarce
exceeds one League in depth, as the skillfullest Mariners have experimented

That the Earth is a Magnetic Body, and first of the nature of the Magnet, or
Loadstone.
IT is to be understood, that the Loadstone is a Stone that has the virtue of
attracting cognate Bodies, and directing it self to certain parts of the World;
those are said to be cognate Bodies which have a Magnetic virtue, either
proper to themselves, as other Magnets, or borrowed from the Magnet, as Iron.
But these kind of Notions are best made good by Experiments.

First, we observe that Iron, that is Iron Rings moved to the Magnet, presently
cleave to it, and draw each other successively in manner of a Chain; especially
if the Iron be substantial, well purged and clear of Dross. Secondly, That a
Magnetic virtue is contracted by the Iron, but not retained by it when the
Magnet is removed, excep it be drawn out very long, and in form of a Rod, or
Staff. Thirdly, That the Magnet exercises its attractive force only in certain
determined Points; and that these Points are as it were two Poles, and placed
as it were at the extremities of a certain Axis, as a, b, in this Figure. These
Poles are best discovered by the tendency of a Needle that way. Fourthly, That
these Poles are directed to the contrary parts of the World, one to the North,
and therefore called the North Pole, and the other to the South, and called the
South Pole. These Magneticks besides their attractive, have also a directive
virtue, whence the Needle in the Mariners Compass is of such great use for the
Navigating of Ships from Port to Port; nor is it of small use in Dyalling for
the drawing the Meridian Line. Fifthly, That the Poles as they are of a
contrary direction, viz. North and South, so also they are of a contrary
virtue; for that which one draws to it self, is repelled by the other; the
virtue which one contributes to the Iron is destroyed by the other. Moreover
the same Pole is sometimes contrary to it self; for what virtue by one kind of
Motion it gives to the Iron, by another Motion it takes away. Sixthly,
Magneticks keep exact concord amongst themselves when they meet near Poles of a
contrary direction, such as this Figure represents; but on condition that no
more than two be present at a time; for if a third comes in the way all is
disturbed. Also those disagree, and exercise Hostility one with another, which
tend both to the same term, and draw virtue from the same Fountain, as is to be
seen in the first Figure of this Problem; where three Needles fixed all to the
same Pole, depart one from another. Seventhly, As to propagation and extension
of the Magnetic virtue in its subject, observe that this virtue from the
Magnet, within the Sphaere of its proper Activity is diffused in an instant;
for of many Versories those which are distant are agitated at the same time
with the nearest, for as much as interposed Bodies hinder that propagation.
Moreover, as is represented in this Figure, it so affects its subject, that it
is divided as it were by an Equator into two contrary parts, each Rays to a
Point, being that which is termed the Pole; and it is therefore called the
Center of Magnetic virtue, in which sense they say that the Magnet has the
Center of its virtue in the Circumference. And more than this, that in the same
Circumference it has two Centers, of an opposite virtue. Eighthly, It is to be
observed, that in Magneticks there is a manifold kind of Verticity, Motion, or
Agitation; the first and Verticity by which it is directed to the Poles of the
World, and conforms as much as may be to its own Axis, with the Axis of the
World; nor is there any other reason to be given, why Poles of a different
direction are most friendly, and mutually conserve themselves, but that they
may be united together to constitute the Axis, and more firmly affixt to those
opposite parts of the World; whereas on the contrary, Poles of the same
direction have an antipathy, Axis; for the Poles that are alike, regard both
the same part of the World, whereas of those parts which meet into a Closure,
one ought to regard the North, the other the South.

The second Verticity is the Declination, or Variation, by which it declines
from its Pole either Eastwards, or Westwards. But this is different in
different parts of the World. Now Versory directly in the Meridian Line
Astronomically drawn; for the Angle which it will make with that Meridian Line
gives the Degrees.

The third sort of Verticity is Inclination; for if a Needle not yet touched be
placed in a Rhomb, and six'd upon a Cork in swiming Water, or so hung upon a
Thread, as to keep its Aequilibrium, as soon as it shall draw the Magnetic
Virtue by the application of the Magnetic, it Horizon, and to the Pole of the
Earth, as in this Figure; though if you stand under the Equator of the World,
it will become Parallel to the Horizon; but it will always incline to the Pole
of the Earth in Equator, till at length it erects perpendicularly when you
come to the Pole. From the Inspection of this Magnetic Decliration, a Circle
divided into its Degrees being made use of, true Judgment may be made of the
Elevation of the Celestial Pole, as that famous Author Grandamicus has
sufficiently demonstrated; who also shows, how from Declination and Inclination
joined together, conjecture may be made of Geographical Longitudes, if from
certain Observations there be any Information of the proper Inclination and
Declination of the Country whose Longitude is sought, although the variation
of the Magnet seems somewhat too uncertain for any true Judgment to be made
thereof.

Note, That the Magnet has not that power of staying it self at the East and
West, in some Oriental or Occidental Points, as it has in its Poles, but is
rather situate in a certain Meridian Circle, which of its own nature composeth
it self to the Worlds Meridian. Whence consequently it comes to pass, that in
certain parts it fixes to the East and West, but that in reality it has not
that virtue placed in it, except in some kind of Meridian, as is hereby proved;
viz. because the same Meridian being kept, though that part which was turned to
the East becomes Occidental, nevertheless it perfectly rests. This is to be
observed in a Vertical Needle swiming, such as this Figure shows.

From what has been said, may very well be inferred; First, That the Magnet
has not only its Equator, by which it is divided into the Septentrional, and
Meridional Pole, but that there is also found in it a Meridian by which it is
divided in the Oriental and Occidental Parts. Secondly, That the Circular
Motion is no less natural to the Magnet, than it is to a Stone to move
downwards, or to Fire to move upwards, and that from an inward Principle of
Nature; insomuch, that being by any Accident diverted from its proper Site, it
betakes it self to it again, by cleaving either to the Poles of the World, or
to the Oriental and Occidental Parts. Thirdly, That such is the nature of
Magnetic virtue, that it renders whatsoever Subject it effects every way quiet
and immovable about its Center, forasmuch as from one part through the Poles
its Axis is rendered immovable; then through the Meridian the Motion about the
Axis is hindered.

From what has been said of Magnetic virtue in general, we pass on to affirm,
that there is actually in the Earth a Magnetic virtue, being confirmed in this
Opinion by the Authority of the most Learned in Magnetic Philosophy, that
later Ages have produced. For this part of Science has not been long revealed
to the World, and the many substantial Reasons they give for this their
Assertion: First, That there is a Magnetic virtue derived from the Earth to
Iron, is apparent from the Observation of long Iron Bars set upright on the
Earth, their lowermost part being always imbued with the virtue of that Pole
which is next, and which is proper to that Country in which they are, as with
us the North; and hereof any one may be himself an Eyewitness, by applying the
Versory to any of these Bars or Rods of Iron. Secondly, No other Reason can be
given of the Magnetic Inclination than now treated of, but because the Pole of
the Earth draws the Needle to it; neither is Declination, but the various
temper of the Earths, whence either more or less the Virtue is infused, and the
Versory disturbed from its Natural course; for in this matter we may
Philosophize in the same manner as concerning the Magnet Stone, which the
inequality of parts performs the same thing, as is often found by Experience.

Thus it may also be asserted, that the Terrestrial Pole is the cause of that
Verticity, by Needle touched declares to us the Poles of the World; for as the
Magnet or Lodestone conforms to it self the friendly Poles of the Versorian
Needle; so the Earth, which is in the nature of a certain great Magnet, will
conform to it self all these lesser Magnetic Bodies, and so will change their
proper Site; that is to say, that Pole which inclined toward the South will be
attracted toward the North, by the force of the Terrestrial Pole.

Neither can that Verticity, and Magnetic Direction be ascribed (as some
Write) to Heaven on the Celestial Pole; for if it had that force of
attracting, the Needle would not incline to the Pole of the Earth, but rather
would be erected upwards to Heaven. Moreover, if the Celestial Pole had the
efficacious force of attracting to it the Magnetic Needle, the said Needle
would decline from it. Nor have these Parts that lie near the Pole this
attractive force; for were it so, Magnetic Needle: But this common Experience
contradicts.

Note, That this force of the Terrestrial Pole is only exercised upon the Poles
of the Magnet, which nevertheless being by greater force, may possibly decline
elsewhere. But so long as the Magnet vertically constituted can act freely, as
when it swims upon Quicksilver, or the like, it Meridian within the Meridian of
the World, without any Declination, by reason the Magnetic Meridian is not
moved by any other, nor has it any Antipathy, or Sympathy with the Polar
virtue. The same thing may be as conveniently done by a Vertical Needle
floating on the Water, as in the last Figure; and by this means may be had the
Universal Meridian, without Declination, in any Country whatsoever.

But when we treat of the Magnetical virtue that is in the Globe of the Earth,
it is not to be understood of any piece of Earth, but only of that which is
pure and unmixt.

Of the Immobility of the Earth, both at the Center, and about the Center of
the World.
THe Terraqueous Globe, by reason of its innate gravity, has this property,
that being placed in the midst of the World it resists all Motion, as well
upwards as side-ways: (For that is the proper effect of Gravity.) But however
it is thus moveable in the Center, or at the Center of the World; yet it is
moveable about its Center. For this is certain, That a Globe of equal Gravity
hung in an Aequilibrium, may without any great force be inclined and moved
Orbicularly. Nor can the Terraqueous Globe from any part resist that Motion,
resting only upon its Center. Neither does it press hard upon it self,
forasmuch as heavy things placed in their proper place discover no heaviness or
weight. Therefore it is from the weight of the Earth that it is immovable
about its Center; nor does that hinder but that it might be every way moved
Orbicularly, either by the ebbing and flowing of the Seas, or by the violence
of the Winds. Yet that it is not thus moved, since in one and the same place of
the Earth there always appears the same Elevation of the Pole; to which may be
added the Testimony of Holy Writ, affirming, that the Earth stands firm for
ever upon its own Foundation. Besides, that there is a necessity of this
Immobility of the Earth, about, in, and at its Center, for the better
succeeding of all Natural Productions and Conveniences of Mankind.

Now to apply what has been said herein, I shall not doubt to affirm,
(following the Authority of that eminent Author Grandamicus,) That this
Immobility of the Earth about its Center proceeds from the Magnetic virtue;
for it imports no less that the Earth be immovable about its Center, than in
the Center. GOD in his Providence enduing all Natural things with those
Qualities that are requisite for their preservation and consistence: But there
is no Quality fitter for this purpose than the Magnetic virtue; nor was it
indeed given by GOD to any other end, being it comprehends all things that
conduce to this sort of Immobility, and since it renders the Poles and the
Meridian of themselves Immovable; nor is there any other thing required to the
Immobility.

Of the EARTH, its Circumference, Superficies, etc.
THe Circumference of the Earth (which if considered with the Firmament, is but
a Spot) is divided into 360 Parts or Degrees (as the Heavens are) and each
Degree contains 60 English Miles, by which Account the whole Circumference is
21600 Miles, the Diameter (as all round Bodies being one third) is 7200 Miles;
so that by consequence, the Semidiameter which reaches to the Center, is 3600
Miles. But as it properly belongs to Geography, to give an Account of the
Latitude and Longitude of Places, so to find out the Thickness of the Earth
seems to belong to Geometry.

The whole Superficies consists of Earth and Water, as already treated of;
which is divided into two parts, the one Visible, and the other Invisible: And
divided into five Zones, which are treated of in Cosmography, or Astronomy.

The Visible part of the Earth, which was appointed by Gods Providence for the
Seat of Man, and other living Creatures, lay at first all under Water; but at
the Command of God at the Creation, the Waters were separate from the Earth,
Sea serve likewise for the Continent, some of which Borders are of easy
Access, and proper for Navigation; others Inaccessible, and hard to be
approached, as those places where there are Precipices, Rocks, and high Hills.
Such as are convenient, are either more or less commodious: Of the first sort
are the Seaports, Harbors, and Bays, which said places are (or ought to be)
Seas, Winds, and the like: But there is this difference between a Harbor, and
a Bay, that Ships may safely Ride in an Harbor, but not in a Bay.

The Habitable Land is divided into Continents, and Islands. A Continent is a
great part of the Surface of the Earth, as Russia, Tartary, Germany, etc.

An Island is a part of Earth surrounded with Water, as Great Britain, Ireland,
Madagascar,

A Peninsula, or Chersonesus, is a part of Land almost encompassed with Water,
being only joined to the Main Continent by a narrow Isthmus, or Neck of Land;
as Morea in Greece, Panama in South America, etc.

A Cape, or Promontory, is a Hill that shoots it self forth into the Sea; as
the Cape of Good-Hope, in the South part of Africa.

A Point, or Foreland, is a narrow piece of Sea.

The other Invisible Superficies of the Earth, is either Uninhabitable, or
covered with Running, or standing Waters.

The Runing-Waters are either lesser, as Springs, Brooks, and Rivulets; or
greater, as large Rivers, and Terrents.

The Standing-Waters are sweet, salt, or the like. These gather naturally in
long places, as Lakes, and Marshes; or Artificially, as Wells, Cisterns, Ponds.

The Waters are generally divided into Seas, Lakes, and Marshes; or Artifically
into Wells, Cisterns, Ponds, Gulphs, Rivers, etc. as by the Hydrographical
Table following the division of the Waters will better appear.

The Latitude and Longitude of Places.
THe Latitude and Longitude of Places should Cosmography, or Astronomy, it is
thought convenient to omit them here, rather than to have two Discourses of one
and the same Subject.

The Art of GEOGRAPHY, as also that of COSMOGRAPHY, are of so large a Latitude,
that it cannot be comprehended in so narrow a Compass; however the most
essential things are taken notice of. But having lately published a Volume in
large Folio of that Subject, entitled Cosmography and Geography, in two Parts
(the first containing the General and Absolute Part thereof, Translated from
the Works of that eminent and much esteemed Geographer VARENIVS. The Second
Part being a Geographical Description of the World, taken from the Notes and
Works of the Famous Monsieur Sansen, late Geographer to the French King;
Illustrated with Maps; And for the further compleatment thereof are added about
100 Geographical and Hydrographical Tables of the Kingdoms and Isles in the
World, with their chief Cities, Ports, etc.) I have thought fit to give the
Reader an Account of the Heads therein treated of, with some Cosmographical,
Geographical, and Hydrographical Tables, taken notice of in the Second Part,
viz. Sansons Geography. Which said Work having been so well received and
approved of by experienced Cosmographers and Geographers, I may be bold to
recommend it for the best of that kind yet extant in our Native Tongue.

The Heads of the respective Things in the several Chapters of VARENIUS, with
the Folio's where Treated of.
In the First Part, being the ABSOLVTE, or COMPLETE PART.
Chapter 1. -- Folio 1.
COncerning the Precognita's, or things known before the handling the Art it
self; as the Definition, Division, Object, Properties, Principles, Order,
Method, Original, Excellency, and other Affections of Geography.

Chap. 2. -- Fol. 6.
TReats of certain things taken out of Geometry, and Trigonometry, necessary to
be known in Geography.

Chap. 3. -- Folio 11.
COncerning the Figure of the Earth.

Chap. 4. -- Folio 15.
COncerning the Dimension and Magnitude of the Earth.

A Table of the Quantity of one Degree in every Parallel; or the Degrees in
which the Parallels are distant from the Equator, or the Elevation of the
Poles of the Parallels.

Chap. 5. -- Folio 23.
THe Motions of the Earth, according to the Opinion of the Pythagoreans,
Ptolomaians, and Copernicans, with some others.

Chap. 6. -- Folio 27.
COncerning the Situation, or place of the Earth, in respect of the Planets and
Stars.

Chap. 7. -- Folio 30.
COncerning the Substance and Constitution of the EARTH; declaring of what
Simple and Simular Bodies it may consist, or be compounded of. That it is
divided into Dry and Moist parts, viz. Earth and Water, and how they hold, or
cleave together, making the Land, Superficies, or Surface, is continual, but
that of the Water is not so. That the sticking or cleaving fast together of the
Earth is occasioned from Salt. That the kinds of Earths are diverse ways mixed
together in the Earth; And that the Cavities of the Earth, and the outward
Disposition thereof, are not always the same.

Chap. 8. -- Folio 35.
TReats concerning the Natural division of Parts of the EARTH, made from the
Ocean flowing round about it; as Islands, both great and small, Peninsula's,
and Isthmusses.

Chap. 9. -- Folio 40.
OF MOVNTAINS and HILLS, in General, and how how to find the height thereof;
also the Height being known, to find the Shadow that a Mountain casts, with the
height of the Sun to that time being given, to find the Altitude of the said
Mountain. Why Showers of Rain, Mists, and Snows, are frequent on the Tops of
Mountains, when as in the Valleys the Air is serene and calm without any such
Meteors.

Chap. 10. -- Folio 46.
TReats of the Differences, and tract of MOVNTAINS, and in Particular
concerning the most famous Chains or Cliffs of Mountains; also those famous for
their great Altitude; and for their burning and casting forth Flames. That
Mountains that run forth in a narrow Neck into the Sea, are called
Promontories. Of Caves, and deep Abysses, that are in some parts of the Earth.

Chap. 11. -- Folio 54.
OF Mines, Woods, and Deserts.

Chap. 12. -- Folio 57.
TReats of the Division of the OCEAN throughout the Earth. That the Ocean is a
continued Tract, encompassing the Earth, and the Terrestrial Parts; that the
Ocean may be divided into three kinds, viz. Ocean, or Seas, Bays, or Gulphs and
Streights, the chiefest of which are taken notice of.

Chap. 13. -- Folio 65.
TReats of some properties of the Ocean, and its part. That the Superficies of
the Ocean, and all Liquid Bodies are round, Sphaerical, or else in part of a
Sphaerical Superficies, whose Center is the same with that of the Land. That
the Ocean is not of a greater height than the Shoars of the Earth, so that the
Earth and Water are almost of the same Altitude, high Mountains excepted. The
reason why the Sea, being beheld from the Shore, seems to arise in a greater
Altitude and Tumor, by how much it is more remote. The cause and original of
Gulphs, Bays, and Streights. Whether the Ocean be every where of the same
Altitude. That the depth of the Ocean in most parts may be sounded That the
Ocean has no Fountains, but is contained within the Cavities of the Earth.
That the Saltness of the Waters proceed from the particles of Salt mixed with
it. Whether that Water be the fresher in the Ocean, by how much it is nigher
the bottom, and why in some parts fresh Water is found in the bottom. That the
Water is less Salt nearer the Poles, and more Salt the nearer to the Equator.
The reason why Rainwater in the middle of the Sea is found sweet, but the
Water separated from the Salt Water is yet found Salt; when as the Rain Water
proceeds from the Vapors exhaled from the Sea. That Seawater is more
ponderous than Fresh; and the Water of one Sea, is more heavy than of another.
That Salt Water does not so soon freez as Fresh. Why the Ocean is not bigger,
seeing that it receives so many Rivers. That certain parts of the Ocean differ
in Color. That certain peculiar things are found in certain parts of the
Ocean. That the Ocean, or rather all Water casts out Terrestrial Bodies on the
Shore, especially in the Full Moon.

Chap. 14. -- Folio 83.
TReats of the MOTION of the SEA in general, and in particular of the Flux and
Reflux; showing what Water has no natural Motion, except one, by which it
moves from a more higher place unto those more low; but if the vicine place or
Body be equal, or of a greater Altitude than the Superficices of the Water,
then the Water naturally rests, that is, being without Motion, except
compelled by a violent Cause. That when part of the Ocean is moved, the whole
is likewise so; but by so much the more, that every one is nearer the part
moved. That the Quarter into which the Sea that is moved tends, is to be
observed. The Motion of the Sea, is either Direct, or a Vortex, or a
Concussion. That Wind is the cause of the contingent cause of the Sea, forceing
the Sea to a quarter, opposite to the Wind, nor is the Sea ever free from such
Motions; this Motion of the Sea is twofold, the one continually from East to
West; the other composed of two contrary Motions, termed the Flux, and Reflux,
in which the Sea flows at certain Hours, to the Shore, and at others back
again: Winds oft-times change the general Motion of the Sea, especially those
Fixed Winds. That the cause of the general Motion, from East to West, is
uncertain; and that the Flux and Reflux, in which the Sea in the space of about
12 Hours Flows unto most Coasts, and so Flows back again, is when the Moon
approaches, to the lowest Meridian, and refloweth when the Moon recedeth from
the Meridian, toward the West, and toward the East; and the reason thereof.
Moons, the general Motion of the Sea, from East to West, is more violent; also
the intumescency of the Sea, is found great in most parts; Also in the Vernal
and Autumnal Equinox, the intumescency of the Sea, is greater than in other
Seasons, but least in the Solstices. That in some parts of the Ocean, as Gulphs
and Shoars, the increase and decrease of the Water in the Influx, and Deflux is
great; in other parts it is very small, and in some not discernable. Sea, to
which the Moon is Vertical, the Flux and Reflux is greatest, except
impediments. That the quantity of the Flux, and Reflux is inconstant in every
place, and diverse on several Days, and by so much the greater or lesser, by how
much the Moon is more remote, or nearer to the place. The variety of peculiar,
or proper Motions of the Sea, in which a certain part of the Ocean is either
moved perpetually, or in some certain Motions of the parts of the Ocean also
these do pertain, caused by great Rivers discharging themselves therein. That
the Motion of the Sea termed a Concussion, or Trembling, is caused from a
Spiration of Wind, which moves the Earth, or Water it self, causing it to
rise. The reason why the Pacifick Ocean is more Calm, and without great Floods
or Waters, and the reason it is easily moved, and rough with Wind.

Chap. 15. -- Folio 102.
TReats of LAKES, POOLS, MARSHES, and the like, standing Waters; giving an
Account thereof, and the reasons why some neither send forth, nor receive
Rivers; of others that receive Rivers, but let out none; and others that both
receive and let out Rivers. Lakes contain Fresh Water, and but few Salt. That
Marshes have a Sulphurous, Bitumenous Earth in them.

Chap. 16. -- Folio 108.
TReats of RIVERS in General. That Torrents and Rivulets sometimes proceed from
a quantity of Rain, and dissolved Snow. That most Rivers proceed from
Fountains; but great Rivers have their original, either from the Congress of
many Rivulets, and small Rivers; or flow from Lakes and Marshes. That Rivers
are very much augmented by frequent Rains, and dissolved Snow, and that in
diverse Seasons and Months of the Year. From whence Rivers are generated; and
what may be the Original of that Water which flows from Springs. That certain
Rivers hide themselves in the midst of their passage under the Earth, and in
another place rise up again, as it were new Rivers; and all Rivers do discharge
themselves into the Sea, or else the one into the other, which at last emptieth
it self into the Sea. The reason why no Salt Water Rivers are found, seeing
that Salt Springs are found in many places. The reason why Rivers have, or
acquire a greater Latitude in one part of them, than in another; and why some
run with a more swift Current, and others with a more slow. Also why one River
is carried with a swift Current in once place, and a slow in another. That most
Rivers have their Course in diverse windings. The Water of Rivers carries with
it many particles of various Metals, Minerals, Sands, and Oily, fat Bodies; and
that the Waters of most Rivers differ in color, gravity and other qualities.
That some Rivers at a certain time every Year, are so augmented, that they over
flow the adjacent Lands. The Reason how Springs and Fountains break forth.
Rules to know if a Spring or Well may be made there, and to know if the Water
is good. That Whirlpools are found in the Channels of some Rivers. That
River-Water is more light than that of the Sea.

Chap. 17. -- Folio 130.
TReats of MINERAL WATERS, BATHS, and SPAWS. That no Water is pure, and
elementary, but contains, or has mixed Particles, such as are found in
Terrestrial Bodies, as Oils, Spirits, and the like, The reason how Mineral
Waters are generated; for there are innumerable kinds of these Waters,
according to the variety and diversity of the Particles which they contain of
diverse Minerals; some being acid or sour, others hot, as Baths, others fat and
Oily, others bitter, others cold, others Poisonous, and others Salt.

Chap. 18. -- Folio 142.
TReats of the mutations, of the Places of the Water, and Land, or of the
mutations of Watery Superficies into the Earthy, or the contrary. To know the
Superficies of the Earth, which the Water possesses, how great it is, and that
which the Earth occupies. That the Superficies of the Water, as also of the
Land is not at all times of the same Magnitude, but sometimes greater, and
sometimes lesser; and that when one augmenteth, the other diminishes. The
Water may leave the Shore for diverse causes, and become dry Ground; likewise
Rivers leave their Channel, or Shore, and afford new Land; Lakes are also dried
up, and become Land; Streights are exsiceated, and changed into Isthmusses or
Continents; and Bays, or Gulphs, in course of time become dry places. The
generation Sandy-Banks in the Sea, and elsewhere. Islands are produced in the
Sea, and Rivers, after the same Mode that Sand-Banks are: yet Islands may
proceed from Sand-Banks, although made after another Mode. That the Ocean now
possesses part of the Land which formerly it did not. The reason why in the
middle of the Ocean no Islands are found.

Chap. 19. -- Folio 154.
TReats of the ATMOSPHAERE and AIR. That from the Parts of the Earth, as well
Dry as Moist, or from the Earth and Water, Vapors and Fumes do continually
exhale into that Space which is about the Earth. The Atmosphaere is a Space
about the whole Earth, in which the Exhalations raised from the Earth are
always present; and it is uncertain whether any Thing or Body else be contained
Exhalations; and sometimes more, sometimes less Exhalations are drawn from the
Earth, especially in diverse places. The Exhalations which constitute the
Atmosphaere are of diverse kinds (especially in sundry Regions) viz. Waters,
Saltish, Earthy, Sulphurous, and Spirituous. The least Particles of the Air,
and those all insensible repel and reflect the Rays, as a Looking-Glass; but
some of the Particles of the Air being sensible and compounded, do Rays, but
reflect fewer; others (on the contrary) transmit fewer Rays, and reflect more.
Exhalations do not ascend of themselves, and of their own nature upwards, but
are forced by a violent Motion; or the Air is not light but heavy, in a proper
Mode of Expression. The upper parts of the Atmosphaere are more subtle than
the lower, yet it may so come to pass, that the middle parts may be more gross
and condensed, than the lower parts Earth. The Atmosphaere, or Air, being
heated, possesses more Space than before. Instructions to make a Thermometer,
Thermoscope, or Weather-Glass, to discover the Mutations of the Air in Heat and
Cold. The serene Air may be so carried by a most vehement Fire, that it may
occupy a Space 70 times greater than it did before: on the contrary, it may be
so condensed in a Wind-Gun, that it may only possess a 60th part of the former
Space; but the heat Sun brings not so great a Rarification, or the cold so
great a Condensation to the Air. The reason why the places in the Frigid Zone,
at the time in which the Sun arises not altogether unto them, on some days the
Air is serene. but for the most part foggy. Whether the Altitude of the
Atmosphaere above the Earth, be the same in all places at one and the same
time, and whether its Figure be Sphaerical. That Condensations, or Rarefaction
of Air changes not its Altitude. By how much the Air is the more cold, by so
much the more it is condensed; and therefore the more condensed in the Winter.
By how much that place of the Earth unto which the Sun is vertical recedeth to
the Pole, by so much the less distant the place of the Air is from the Earth,
in which the Rain, Snow, and Hail begin to be generated. The Atmosphaere, or
Air, causes the Sun, or the rest of the Stars and Planets to be seen before
they arise in the Horizon, also to appear higher than they are. By how much the
Air is thicker, by so much the more the Star is depressed beneath the Horizon,
when it first begins to appear; and by how much the Air is lower, by so much
the Star is the more depressed beneath the Horizon. The reflection of the Rays
of the Sun from the Particles of the Air is the chief cause of the Twilight,
that is, of the Light before the rising, and after the setting of the Sun; from
which Twilight the Altitude of the Air may be found. To find the Altitude of
the Clouds by a Geodetical dimension. That the Air in some places has some
things peculiar.

Chap. 20. -- Folio 179.
TReats of the WINDS in general, and the QVARTERS of the WORLD. The Wind is a
commotion of the Air, sensible by touch, or with some force. Most Winds tend
from one Quarter to the opposite Quarter, and force Bodies with them. A Quarter
is an imaginary Point, extended from any place of the Earth perpendicularly,
toward one Point of those which circularly stand about that place. These
Quarters are infinite in number, seeing that Plains may be drawn through every
Point of the Horizon, but 32 only have Names ascribed to them; which said 32
Points or Quarters are equally distant one from another. The causes of the
Winds are various; for seeing that the Wind is nothing but a continued
protraction of the Air, all those things that are able to effect such a
protrusion will be the cause of Winds. Why the Winds blow by an interrupted
force, so that sometimes they cease, and at other times (as it were) with
redoubled strength, they return with the greater importunity; and the reason
that they seem more continually to blow on the Sea, so that it is discovered
less calm. The reason that Westerly-Winds are less frequent than Easterly; and
the Northern and Eastern Winds are more impetuous and stormy, and on the
contrary the Southern and Western more calm: Also why the Southern and Western
Winds are more hot than those of the North, or East. Why from the sight of a
Cloud of a pale and duskish color, a Wind proceeds from that Quarter. Why in
the Spring and Autumn the Winds are more frequent, and stronger than in the hot
Summer, or cold Winter. Unto what Space one and the same Wind may extend it
self.

Chap. 21. -- Folio 187.
TReats of the WINDS in particular, and of TEMPESTS. That one Wind is constant,
and another inconstant; one Wind is general, and another particular. Some Winds
are Periodical and fixed, others wandering and Erratick. Of the most noted
Winds: The Etesian Winds, that are Anniversary in Greece, proceed Rain and Snow
dissolved on the Mountains. Some Winds are proper, and almost perpetual to some
place, others are ceasing. Unto the Periodical, or State-Winds, appertain those
also termed Day-Winds, which in some Regions, and at a certain time of the Year
blow for some hours every day. By how much you draw near the Equator from the
Artick-Pole, by so much the North-Winds are found to be less vigorous; and
having past the Equator in part of Southern Winds are vigorous, which in these
places are cold and dry. There are differences of Winds, some are sudden,
impetuous, and violent, not continuing long; An Exhydrias, is a Wind breaking
from a Cloud with great abundance of Water; A Typhon, is a violent Wind passing
swiftly through all the Quarters about a place, and for the most part rushing
from the top. Whether that a certain Wind may arise from the flowing of the
Sea, and of the Rivers. Why Ignes-fatui, Castor. and Pollux, and Helena, are
amongst Tempests. Why there is so frequent a Calm in the Sea near Guiny, and
under the Equator, in the Atlantic Ocean, between America and Africa. That in
some Regions the Tempests are Anniversary.

In the Second Part, being GENERAL
Treats of the Affections of the Places of the Earth, depending on the apparent
Motion of the Stars.
Chap. 22. -- Folio 203.
TReats of Things necessary to be foreknown in Geography.

Chap. 23. -- Folio 207.
OF the LATITVDE of Places, and the Elevation of the Pole. Showing, that the
Latitude of a place in the Superficies of the Earth is the distance of the same
from the Equator. That Elevation of the Pole of any place, or above the
Horizon of any place, is called the Arch of the Celestial Meridian of that
place intercepted between one and the other Celestial Pole, and the Horizon of
that place. The place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, so to
constitute the Globe, that the Wooden Horizon may be the Horizon of that place.
A place being given in the Superficies of the Globe, or the Latitude of any
place being given, to show all the places of the Earth, which may have the same
Latitude, or Distance from the Equator, or Elevation of the Pole; or to find
all the places of the Earth, which may have the distance given from the
Equator. How to find the Meridian, and Point of the North and South in the
given place of the Earth. To place a Globe, so that the Cardines of the same,
may respect the Cardines of the Earth, that is, that the Brazen Meridian may be
seated in the true Meridian of the Place. To find the Latitude of the place
from the Heaven, or the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon of any place by
the benefit of the Stars. The places of the Earth (under the Equator) have no
Latitude, but both Poles lie in their Horizon. The places under the Poles have
the Latitude of 90 Degrees; viz. the Pole in the Vertex, and the Equator in
the Horizon. The places between the Poles and the Equator, have a less
Latitude than 90 Degrees.

Chap. 24. -- Folio 213.
TReats of the Division of the Earth into ZONES; and the Caelestial Appearances
in the diverse Zones; Showing, that from the proper or Annual Motion of the Sun,
there arises a certain Division of the Superficies of the Earth into five
Zones, as already treated of; and that the Equator of the Earth passes
through these places there taken notice of. In the places that lie in the
Tropicks, the Sun once a Year is only vertical on the Meridies, or Noonstead;
but in places under the Torrid Zone he is vertical twice a Year, viz. two Days,
which are equally distant from the longest Day. But in places without the
Torrid Zone, and seated without the Tropicks, the Sun never in any Day of the
Year is vertical. To Places seated in either of the Frigid Zones, the Sun every
Year (some Day or other) sets not, and so many Days rises not; and that so
many Days the more, by how much those Days are nigh the Poles; so that in a
whole place of the Pole for six Months it sets not, and rises not to
another. But in places in the Artick and Antartick Circle the Sun sets not
one Day in the Year, and one Day rises not; but other Days it sets and rises.
That in Places seated without the Frigid Zone, that is, in the Temperate, or
Torrid Zones, the Sun every Day rises and sets.

Chap. 25. -- Folio 220.
TReats of the LONGITVDE of the Days in diverse places of the Earth; and of the
Division of the Earth into Climates, which proceed from them. That in two Days
of the Year are the Aequinoxes, or the Night is equal to the Day in all places
of the Earth. In places seated in the Equator, the Days and Nights are always
equal: In the places of the Poles there is only one Day and one Night in the
whole Year: Now the Day is longer than the Night in the North Pole, and in the
South Pole, the Day is shorther than the Night. In places lying beneath the
Equator, and the Pole, no Days are equal to the Nights, except the two Days of
the Aequinoctial, all the rest being either greater, or lesser than the Nights.
In all places seated between the Equator, and the Pole Artick, the longest Day
and shortest Night, is when the Sun enters the first Degree of Cancer; and the
shortest Day and longest Night, is when the Sun enters the first Degree of
Capricorn; but in the places seated between the Equator and the Antartick
Pole, it is just contrary; And whilst the Sun in the Northern Places, moves
from the first Degree of Capricorn, to the first of Cancer, the Days increase;
and whilst he moves from the first of Cancer, to the first of Capricorn,
decreaseth; but in Northern Places quite contrary, increasing from the first of
Cancer to the first of Capricorn, and decreasing from the first of Capricorn to
the first of Cancer. All places of the Earth, seated in one and the same
Parallel have all the Days of the Year equal, and therefore the same quantity
of the longest Day. If more places of the Earth, be taken from the Equator
toward the Pole, whose distance from the Equator equally augmenteth from one
Degree to, 10, 20, 30, or 40, the longest Days in these places shall not be
equally greater, or not equally augment; but they shall more augment in places
more remote, and Pole. How to compose a Table of the Climates, with a Table
thereof, and its use.

Chap. 26. -- Folio 231.
TReats of the LIGHT, HEAT, COLD, and RAINS, in diverse parts of the Earth, or
Zones, with other Properties of the Zones, as the Seasons of the Year, and the
Temperate and frigid Zones, the Seasons of the Year, are almost equal,
consisting of an equal number of Days; But in the places of the Torrid Zone,
they are unequal. In places of the Torrid Zone, as the Sun by Day is very near
the Vertex, so on the contrary by Night he is beneath the Horizon, and very
much removed from the Vertex of those places; so that those places by Night,
lie almost in the middle Shadow of the Earth; neither can the Air possibly any
ways be warmed by the Suns Rays by frequent reflection. In places of the Frigid
Zone as the Sun by Day is not very nigh the Vertex, so by Night he does not
profoundly remain beneath the Horizon; but for the greatest part of the Night
does so turn round beneath the Horizon, that many Rays from him by reflection
do penetrate into the Air. And in places in the Temperate Zone, as the Sun by
Day comes to the Vertex, of those Horizon; so that some Rays at least are in
the Air. In Places of the Torrid Zone the Twilights are small, very long in
those of the Frigid, and moderate in those of the Temperate Zone. Reasons given
to show how the four Seasons of the Year are made, and behave themselves, and
in what Months of the Year they commence in the diverse places of the Zones.

Chap. 27. -- Folio 259.
TReats of the SHADOWS, which the Bodies erected in the Earth, and illuminated
by the Sun do cast, and of the Division of the Earth, arising from thence. That
Shadows of Bodies, erected above the Horizontal Plain, fall upon the Quarter
opposite to it, in which the Sun existeth. In places seated in the Equator the
Meridian Shadow falls half the Year toward the North, the other half toward
the South. In the places seated in the Equator, the Shadow of the Style
perpendicularly erected in the whole Days of the Aequinoxes, remains in one
right Line, whether before Noon, it be continually cast into one Quarter of the
West, or after Noon into a Quarter of the East; Now in the other Days of the
Year the Shadow is carried round into the Semicircle. The Longitude of the
Shadows decreaseth, the Altitude of the Sun increasing; and on the contrary the
Altitude of the Sun decreasing, the Shadow increases. By how much the places
of the Earth, every Day are more remote from the Equator, or from the Parallel
of the Sun, by so much the more, both the Meridian Shadow as well as the
Shadows of the rest of the Hours, are longer. Directions from the Aequinoctial
NightDyal, as also the Horizontal Scioterick, or Horizontal Plain.

Chap. 28. -- Folio 269.
TReats of the comparison of the CELSTIAL AFFECTIONS, in diverse places of the
Earth; showing that those who live in the same Semicircle of the same Meridian,
have also the same Merides, or 12 Hours; and also reckon together all the other
Hours. Those that dwell in diverse Hemisphaeres of the Earth, which the Equator
makes, or those that live in the diverse Quarters of the Equator, have contrary
Seasons of the Year, at the same time, and the same Seasons in a different time
of the Year; so that in one Hemisphaere it is Winter, when in the other it is
Summer. Those who live in the North Hemisphaere of the Earth, when they turn
their Faces toward the Equator, the East is on their left Hand, and the West
on the right, the South before them, and the North behind them: And those that
live in the South Hemisphaere the Stars rise on their right Hand, and set on
their left. Those who live in the same Parallel of the same Earth, have every
Day and Night equal; every one of the Stars also remains an equal time above
their Horizons, the same Stars never set, the same Stars never rise; the Sun
every Day, and also all the Stars rise and set to them in the same Quarter; and
in the same Hour also the Stars are equally elevated above the Horizon, or
depressed beneath it; They have the same Pole equally elevated; their Faces
being turned to the Equator, or the same Pole, the Stars rise to them from the
same side: they have the same Seasons of the Year, and at the same time, except
the singular properties of some places.

Chap. 29. -- Folio 272.
TRreats of the Computation of time in the diverse places of the Earth, wherein
are diverse Questions stated, and resolved, concerning time, or the Hour of the
Day of several Nations, and places.

Chap. 30. -- Folio 280.
TReats of the various rising, setting, Altitude of the Sun, and other
appearances in the diverse parts of the Earth; showing how to place or hang a
Terrestrial Globe so, that when the Sun shines, those parts of the Globe, may
be illumnated which the Sun enlightneth in the Earth, at any time; and that it
also may appear, unto People the Sun rises, and to whom it sets; to whom it
makes the Meridies, and to whom it is quite absconded; to what place it is
vertical. Also to find the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and the Day of
the Year; Also the Hour of the place. That the Globe being so placed when the
Moon shines, to whom it arises, to whom sets, and to whom vertical. By how
much the places of the Earth, are remote from the Parrallel of the Sun on any
Day, by so Sun is elevated to a lesser Altitude in the same Hours above their
Horizons: Also by how much the places of the Earth are remote from the
Equator, or more near the Pole, by so much the more the Parts of the Horizon
are distant, in which the Sun rises on the Day of the Solstice, and the Day of
the Winter; as also those in which he sets: The same is true concerning the
Moon, and all the Planets. Stars placed between the Parallel of any place
(being Equator) and the Pole, are less elevated above the Horizon, of the
places between this Parallel, and the other Pole of those situated there, then
above the Horizon of the places seated between the Parallel, and the nearer
Pole. In places seated in and near the Equator, the Sun and Stars directly
ascend above the Horizon, even to the Meridian, and so descend again: But in
places above the Equator they ascend and descend obliquely; and so much the
more, by Equator. By how much the place is more remote from the Equator, by
so much the more the Signs of the Zodiac, and other Constellations, require
the greater time to rise and set; and they pass through the Meridians of all
places at an equal time, with several Questions laid down, and resolved,
relating to the Rising, Setting, and Altitude of the Sun.

In the Third Part of GENERAL GEOGRAPHY, to wit, the Comparative Part, Treats
of the Affections from comparing of Places.
Chap. 31. -- Fol. 291.
TReats of the LONGITVDE of Places. Showing, that Nature has put no beginning
or end to the Dimension of the Earth, or of the extension from West to East, or
according to the Equator; but all and every one of the Places may be taken for
a beginning, and the first Meridian may be placed in them. The Latitude and
Longitude of any place, or the distance of any place from the Equator, or a
certain Meridian being given, which is found in Maps, or Globes, to exhibit the
Situation and Point of that place on the Maps, or Globes. The Sun, Stars, and
all the Points conceived in the Heavens, are every Hour removed, or recede 15
Degrees from the Meridian of any place, in one Scruple of an Hour, which is the
1/60 part, they are removed 15 Minutes, and so in four Scruples they recede one
Degree. With other Questions proposed, relating to the Longitude of Places.

Chap. 32. -- Folio 309.
TReats of the mutual Situation of Places, and composition of the TERRESTRIAL
GLOBE, and MAPS; Showing, that a place being given in the Earth, how to find
the Situation of other places at that place. That a Place being given on the
Earth, or Globe, to exhibit all those places, at which the given Place has
some one given Situation, or Quarter. Directions to make a Terrestrial Globe;
and how to compose Geographical Maps.

Chap. 33. -- Folio 335.
TReats of the Distance of Places; Showing, That two Points or Places being
given on the Globe, to draw a Line or Arch from one to the other, which may be
part of the greatest Periphery of the Globe; or to describe on the Superficies
or Periphery of the greatest Circle, which may pass through the two given
Points. That the distance of two places on the Superficies of the Earth is very
short, or the shortest way from one place to the other, is only one (except the
places of the Antipodes) viz. the Arch of the greatest Periphery, which is
intercepted between those two places. The Distances of Places are not changed.
No Maps of the Earth are distant a greater Interval than 2700 German Miles,
whereof 15 are said to be a Degree; for the Distance of the Antipodes is 2700
German Miles, or 180 Degrees. The reason why the Itinerary Distance is greater
than the true, or short and Geographical. The Latitude and Longitude of two
places being given, to find their Distance.

Chap. 34. -- Folio 342.
TReats of the Visible and Sensible HORIZON. That the Stature of a Man being
given from the Foot to the Eye, and the Semidiameter of the Earth being given,
to find out the Semidiameter of the Sensible Horizon. The Altitude of the Eye
being given on a Tower, or Mountain, to find the Distance of the last point
unto which the Eye extends it self, or which the Eye can see. The Altitude of
the Eye being given, and of some erected seen Magnitude, as a Tower, Mountain,
or the Mast of a Ship, to find the Distance thereof from that of the Eye. The
Refraction of Rays in the Air, augmenteth the apparent Semidiameter of the
Sensible Horizon.

Chap. 35. -- Folio 342.
TReats of the three Parts of the Art of Navigation, to wit, the Building of
Ships, Lading them, and guiding or Navigating them from Port to Port. And this
concludes the first Part, viz. of Varenius's Cosmography, and Geography.

The Second Part, to wit, SANSONS GEOGRAPHY, viz. Special Geography, Treats of
these following Heads.
THe Subject of Special Geography, is to describe the Limits and
Circumscription of Countries, with their Latitudes, Longitudes, and Situation
of Places; their Mountains, Valleys, Woods, Deserts, Forests; describing their
Appellation, Situation, etc. their Properties, with the things contained in
them, as Mines, Minerals, etc. Their Waters, as the Sea, Lakes, Rivers, and
Marshes; showing their Springs, Inlets, Tracts, Cateracts, with the quality and
nature thereof; their Capes, Bays, Seaports, Cities, Towns, etc. Their
Fertility, Sterility, and Soil. Their Fruits, Cattle, Fowl, Fish, and Insects;
Their Inhabitants, as to their Original, their Stature, Life, Meat, Drink, and
Habits; Their Customs, relating to Marriages, Children, Funerals, Laws,
Religions, Government; Their Language or Speech; Their Arts, Manufactures,
Commodities, and Traffic; Their Military Discipline, Force, and Arms; Their
Virtues and Vices, Genius and Erudition; Their Memorable Histories, with their
Famous Men and Women, Artificers, Inventions, etc.

These and the like Heads, being the Subject of Special Geography, being too
capacious to be handled in this small Tract, are thought fit rather to be
omitted than to be only glanced upon; so that I refer the Reader to the
abovesaid Book, as also to other famous Geographers; and so conclude with some
necessary and useful Tables.

The Earth is divided into Land, and Waters. The Superficies of the Earth
extant out of the Water by the Interflux of the Sea, is distinguished into
these four parts, 1. Into great Continents or great Islands, of which four are
reckoned by us. 1. The Old World; whose parts are Europe, Asia, and Africa. The
Bounds of this Continent are On the North, the Frozen and Tartarian Ocean. On
the East, the Pacifick and Indian Ocean. On the South, the Southern Ocean. On
the West the Atlantic Ocean.


2. The New World, or America, whose parts are Meridionalis, Septentrionalis,
The bounds of it are On the North, Davis Streights. On the East, the Atlantic
Ocean. On the South, the Pacifick Ocean. On the West, the Streights of Magellan.


3. The Polary North-land, or Greenland, is every were encompassed by the Sea
and Streights. 4. The South-land, and Land of Magellen, yet undiscovered.
2. Into Peninsuals, or Chersonesus, which are parts of those Continents,
Round, whose Latitude and Longitude are equal about, Africa it self.
Peloponesus, the Chersonesus of Grecia. Chersonesus Taurica, or Tartaria
Precopensis. Cambaja.
Long, among which are The Chersonesus of Malacca, adjoining to India. Cimbrica
or Jutland, adhering to Holsatia. Borea adjoining to Tartaria. The North and
South parts of America. California. Jucatan. The Chersonesus of Thracia. Nova
Francia. Ionia, Cindensis, Mindensis.
Of Affinity to Peninsulas, Italy, Greece, Acaia, Spain, Norway, Sweden,
Lapland, Asia minor, Arabia, Beach a Region of Magellan, and New Guiney,
Indostan, Cochinchina, New England, Monomotapa, Camboia.

3. Islands, which may be considered in four sorts, viz. Great, as England
Japan Island Canada Sumatra. Madagascar, Borneo. Nova Zembia. California.

Indifferent, as Sicilia Ireland Hispaniola Cuba Java Major Celebes Creet.
Luconia, Sardinia, Friesland, Terra Nova, Mindanoa, Ceilan.

Small, as Gilolo, Amboina, Timor. Corsica, Majorca, Cyprus, Negropont.
Sealand, Jamaica.
The very small ones, in which we consider 1. The more famous, Solitaria,
Rhodes, Malta, Lemnos, Helena, St. Thomas. 2. A knot, or heap of Isles
together, as The Canary Isles. The Flandrian or Caribbe Isles. The Hesperides.
Those of the Gulf of Mexico. Of Maldives. Of Japan. About Madagascar. The
Mollucoes and Isles of Bauda The Philippine Isles, The Isles of Thieves. The
Isles in the Aegean Sea. The Isles about England. The Isles of Solomon.


4. The Isthmusses, Between Egypt and Arabia, or Africa and Asia. That of
Corinth between Peloponesus and Achaia. The Isthmus of Panama or America the
longest of all. Between Jutland and Holsatia. Between Malacca and India.


On, or above the Surface of the Terrestrial Globe, and Maps of the World,
ought to be understood and noted, Ten Points; of which Four are called Cardinal
Points, as the North, or the Pole Artick, the South, or the Pole Antartick, the
East. the West.
Four are called Collateral Points, as the East of the Summer, the East of the
Winter, the West of the Summer, the West of the Winter.
And two, as above and Under us; as the Zenith, the Nadir.

Ten Circles, or Lines, of which Five are Parallels, the one to the other, as
the Aequinoctial, or the Equator. the two Tropicks, as the Tropic of Cancer,
the Tropic of Capricorn,
The two Polar Circles, as the circle of the Pole Artick, the circle of the
Pole Antartick.

Five others are different the one from the other, as in the middle of the
Zodiac, as the Ecliptic. the Horizon, as the Horizon rational, the Horizon
feasible, or visible.
the Parallels, or the Degrees of Latitude. the Meridians, or the Degrees of
Longitude.

Two Colures, in which are 4 Points, which note our four Seasons of the year,
to wit, above the colures of the Aequinoxes, as the Spring, the Autumn.
the colures of the Solstices, as the Summer, the Winter.
one Torrid, or the Parching.

Three sorts of Zones, in which are five, to wit two Temperate, as the
temperate Artick, or Northernly, the temperate Antartick, or Southernly.
two Frozen, or Cold, as the frozen Artick, or Northernly, the frozen Antartick
or Southernly*

Three sorts of Shadows, which diversely rereceive the Inhabitants of the five
Zones, for they are in the Torrid Zone Amphisciens. in the Temperate Zones
Northernly, Northen Heterosciens, Southernly, Southern Heterosciens.
in the Frozen Zones Northenly, Northen Perisciens, Southernly, Southern
Perisciens.


3 sorts of Positions, as the Inhabitants about the same Parallel, opposite in
Meridian, are Perioeciens. the Inhabitants about one Meridian, opposed in their
Parallels, are A^toeciens. the Inhabitants opposed both in Meridians, and in
Parallels, are Antipodes.
The Climates; of which the Ancients first made seven which they call by the
most famous Places, Seas, and Rivers, by which they passed; as dia (that is*
through) Mer^es, dia Sienes, dia Alexandrias, dia Rhodo^, dia Pontou, dia
Boristeno^.

then nine, in adding dia Ripheon, dia Danias.
the Moderns made 30, to wit between the Equator and the Polar Circle 24, by
half Hours. between the Polar Circle, and the Pole 6, by Months.

The Parallels; which are following the Ancients 14, between the Equator and
Polar Circle 4^, by Quarters of Hours.
following the M^derns ^0, between the Polar Circle and the Pole 12, by
Fourteen Days.

The Winds; whereof the 4 Firsts, and whereof the names are Monosyllables,
shall be called Cardinal Winds, as North, South, East, West.

4 Seconds, whereof the names are of two syllables, and composed of two of the
four Firsts, shall be called Collateral Winds, as North-East, North-West,
South-East, South-West.

8 Thirds; and have their names of three syllables, composed of one of the four
First, and of one of the four Seconds, as North North-East, North North-West,
South South-East, South South-West, East North-East* East South-West, West
North-west, West South-west.
North and a quarter by North east, North, and a quarter by North-west,
North-east, and a quarter by North, North-west, and a quarter by North.
16 Fourths; taking their names from four Firsts, or four Seconds, in saying of
one fourth part by the other, and that without having regard to the eight.
Third Winds, etc. as it were South and a quarter by South-east, South, and a
quarter by South-west, South-east, and a quarter by South. South-west, and a
quarter by South.
East, and a quarter by North-east, East, and a quarter by South-east,
North-east, and a quarter by east* South-east, and a quarter by east*
West, and a quarter by North-west, West, and a quarter by South-west,
North-west, and a quarter by west, South-west, and a quarter by west.

The Measures; in which are to be considered, that the least part that can be
described upon the Terrestrial Globe, is a Point. many Points, described and
continued right the one to the other, make a Line. twelve Lines, continued
together, are esteemed to make an Inch, or Thumbs breadth. twelve Inches, make
a Foot. two (...) and half make a common Pace, and two common Paces a
Geometrical Pace. one hundred twenty five Geometrical Paces, make a Stade, or
certain measure of ^round. eight Stade^, or one thousand Geometrical Paces, is
one thousand Roman Paces, or the Italian Mile one thousand fifty six
Geometrical Paces make an ^nglish Mile. one thousand-two hundred sixty seven
Paces make a Scottish Mile. two thousand-four hundred, or 2500 Geometrical
Paces, make a common League of France. three thousand four hundred Geometrical
Paces, or little more, make a Spanish League. four thousand Geometrical Paces,
make a Dutch League, or Mile. five thousand Geometrical Paces, make a Swedish
League, or Mile. six thousand Geometrical Paces make an Hungarian Leagues, or
Mile. 24 or 25 French Leagues, or 60000 Geometrical Paces make, a degree of
Latitude on the Equator. three hundred and sixty Degrees of Longitude on the
Equator, make the great Circle of the Terrestrial Globe. the great Circle of
the Terr, Globe, multiplied by his Diameter, make the Superficies of the
Terrestrial Globe.


The Terrestrial Globe has all its Surface in LAND, which discovers it self
in Two Continents; whereof Ours, or the most Ancient and Superior, contains
three great parts, to wit, Europe; where the Kingdoms or Countries of Turkey in
Europe, France, Germany, Low Countries, Poland, Scandinavi^, Russia, or
Moscovi^.
Asia; where are the Kingdoms or parts of Turkey in Asia, Arabia, Persia,
India, China, Tartaria.
Africa; where are the Kingdoms or Countries of Barbary, Biledulgerid, Egypt,
Sara, or Desert of Saara, the Land of the Negroes, Guinee, Nubia, the Emperor
of the Abyssines, Zanguebar, Congno, Monomotapa. Caffreria,

The other, or New and Inferior, is called AMERICA. America Septentrionalis;
where are the Kingdoms of Canada, or New France, New Mexico, New Spain.
America Meridionalis; where are the Kings of Peru, Brazil, Paragua.


Many Isles; of which the most famous are About our Continent and part of
Europe; as those in the Mediterranean Sea. the VVestern Ocean, called the
British Isles.
part of Asia; as those of Japon, the Philippins, the Moluccoes, Sonde, Ceyla^,
and the Maldives, etc.
part of Africa; as those of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, St. Thomas. Cape
Verd, the Canaries, etc.

Between one and the the other Continent; as the Azores, About the other
Continient, and toward America Septentrionalis; as those of Terra Neuves,
California, the Antilles.
toward America Meridionalis; the Magell^nick Isles.
And in some Lands and Isles, the most part unknown, toward the one and the
other Pole; among the which are Groenland, Izland, etc. Terra Australis, Nova
Guiney, etc.


WATER; which is found in SEA; and which may be called Ocean, about our
Continent, Oriental, or Indian; where are the Seas of China, India, Arabia.
Southern, or Ethiopian; where are the Seas of Barbaria, or of Zanguebar,
Cafreria, Congo.
Western, or Atlantic; where are the Seas of Guinee, Cape Verd, the Canaries,
Spain, France, Great Britany.
Northern, or Frozen; where are the Seas of Denmark, Moscovy, Tartaria.

Sea, about the other Continents, North-Sea, or Seas of Canada, or New France,
Mexico, or New Spain, Brazil.
Magellanick-Sea, or Seas of Paraguay, Magellanick.
Pacifick-Sea, or Seas of Peru, New Mexico.

Gulphs, or Seas, between the Lands of our Continent the Baltic Sea, the
Mediterranean Sea.
between the Lands of the other Continent the Gulf of Mexico, the Gulf of
Hudson.

Lake, or Seas, in the midst of our Continent, the Caspian Sea, in the midst of
the other Continent, the Lake, or Sea of Pa^ime.
Streights; to wit, between the one and the other Contin. of Anian, between the
other Contin and the J. M. of Magellan. between Europe and Africa of Gibraltar.

RIVERS; of which the most famous, are In our Continent; as In Europe, the
Tage, the Loire, the Rhine, the Elbe, the Danube, the Boristene, the Don, or
Tauais, the Volga.
In Asia, the Tigre, and the Euphrates, the Indus, the Ganges, the Quiam, or
Jamsuquiam, the Oby.
In Africa, the Nile, the Niger.

In America, Septentrional; as the River Canada, or St. Lawrence, the River
Paria, or Orinoque, the River Amazones,
Meridional; as the River of Plates.




The Water in the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, is for the most part in
Seas; and which may be called Ocean, and about our Continent, to wit, the
Indian, or Eastern, where are the Sea of China, Indian Sea, Arabian Sea.
Ethiopian, or Southern, wherein are the Sea of Barbary, or of Zang^ebar, Sea
of Caffreria. Sea of Congo.
Western, or Atlantic; where are the Sea of Guinee, Sea of Cape Verd. Sea of
the Canaries, or Gulf of Yeg^as, Sea of Spain, Sea of France, Sea of Great
Britain
Northern Frozen, or Scythick; where are the Sea of Denmark, or
Mourmanskoi-More, Sea of Moscovy, or Petzorke-More, Sea of Tartaria, or
Niaren-More.

Sea, and about the other Continent, to wit, the North, or Sea of Canada, or
New France. Sea of Mexico, or New Spain. Sea of Brazil, or North-Sea.
Megalanick, or Sea of Paraguay, Magellanick Sea, Sea of Chili.
South, or Pacifick; or Sea of Peru, or South Sea, Sea of California, or New
Mexico,


Between the one and the other Continent, and toward the Artick Pole, are the
Archipelague of St. Lazare, the Sea of Groenland.

Bays, or Gulphs; among which there, where the Ocean washes them, and about
our Continent are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulf of Nanquin, Gulf of
Cochinchina. Gulf of Sian, or Cambogue, Gulf of Bengala, Gulf of Ormus, and
Balsora, Gulf of the Red Sea, or Sea of Mecca, Gulf of Aethiopia, or St.
Thomas, Gulf of Corea. Sea of Guascagne, White-Sea, or Bella-more.

there, where the Mediterranean Sea enters, and there, where the Baltic Sea
enters, and within our Continent are these Gulphs and Seas, as the Gulf of
Lion, Gulf of Venice, Archipelague, or White-Sea, Sea of Marmora, Black-Sea,
or the Sea of Majeure, Levant Sea.
Gulf of Bolnia, Gulf of Findland, Gulf of Rhiga, Gulf of Dantzick, Gulf
of Lubeck.

there, where the Sea washes them, and about the other Continent are the Gulf
of Hudson, Gulf of St. Lawrence, Gulf of Mexico, Gulf of Hondutas, Gulf of
Panama.


Streights; among which there, where the Ocean and the Sea washes, and about
the other Continent are these Streights, Seas, etc. as the Straight of Anian,
Sea of Vermejo, Straight of Magellan, Nova Zembla, Straight of Le Maire,
Channel of Bahama, Straight of Hudson, Straight of Davis.
about our Continent, are the Straight of Nassau, or Vaygatz, Pas, or Straight
of Calais, Straight of Bebelmandel, Straight of Mocandan, Straight of Manar,
Straight of Malace^, Straight of Sonde.

there, where the Baltic Sea is, and there, where the Mediterranean Sea is,
and in our Continent are the Straight of Sound. Straight of Belt.
Straight of Gibraltar, Fars, or Haven of Messi^s, Euripe, or Tourn passage of
Negroponte, Straight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, Straight of
Constantinople, or Channel of the Black-Sea, Straight of Caff^, or Vospero.


Lakes; and which may be called Seas; as in our Continent, the Sea of Bachu, or
Sala, Sea of Zabaque, or Tana.
in the other Continent, the Lake, or Sea of Parime.
Lakes; as in Europe, the Lake of Earne, Lake of Werner, Lake of Ladoga, Lake
of Geneve, Lake of Constance, Lake of Balaton, Lake of Majeur.
in Asia, the Lake of Sodom, or the Dead-Sea, Lake of Astamar, or Vasta^, Lake
of Burgian, Lake of Kithay, Lake of Chiamay, Lake of Cincui-Hay.
in Africa, the Lake of Zaire, and Zambe^e, Lake of Zafflan, Lake of Niger,
Lake of Bouchaira.
in America Septnonal, the great Lake of Canada, Lake of Mecho^can, Lake of
Chapal^, Lake of Mexico, Lake of Nicaragua.
Meridional, the Lake of Maracaybo, Lake of Titicaca, Lake of ^upana, or (...)
los ^arajes.





The most famous RIVERS In our Continent, and its Isles, are, towit in EUROPE,
and in the Kingdoms, Countries or Regions of Spain; as the Douro, the Tagus,
the Guadian^, the Guadalquivir, the Ebro; or Iberus,
Italy; as the Tiber, the Arno, the Po.
Turkey in Europe; as the Danube, or Donaw, the D^in, the Orfee, or Alfee, the
Vardar, the Marize.
France; as the Loire, the Garone, the Rhosne,
Low Countries; as the Seyne. the Eseault, the Meuse.
Germany; as the Rhine, the Weser, the Elbe, the Oder.
Poland; as the Weisser, or Vistule, the Niemen, the Duns, or Dawina, the
Niester, the Nieper, or Boristene.
Sweden; as the Torn. Moscovia; as the Wolga, the Dwine, the Don, or Tana.
England; as the Thames, the Severn, the Trent.
Scotland; as the ^ay. Ireland; as the Shennon.
ASIA, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, or Regions of Turkey, in Asia, as the
Euphrates, the Pactolus. the Tyg^is, the Acheion, the Jordaine, the Orontes,
the Lali, the Chrysorhous,
Georgia, as the Araxes, and the Farza. Arabia, as the Caybar, and the Astau^
Persia; as the Tirit^ri, the Gehun, the Bendimir, and the Tostar.
India; as the Indus, the Tapta, the Ganges, the Gemeni, the Mecon, and the
Pegu.
China; as the Quiam, or Jamsuquiam. Tartaria; as the Oby, the Gehan, the
Tartar, the Palisanga, the Jeniscey, the Albiamu, the Chesel, and the Jaick.

AFRICA, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, or Regions of Morocco; as the Tensift,
and the Susus. Fez; as the Ommiraby, Suba, the Mullulus, and the Cherser.
Barbary; as the Mulvia, the Maber, the Magrada, the Capes, the Rio Major, the
Chol, the Suffegmarus, the Masurius, the Teffsisus, and the Min^.
Egypt; as the Nile. Bilidulgerid; as the Suz, the Buzedora, the Darha, and
the Albus.
Zaara; as the Ghir, and the Equestris. the Negroes; as the Niger, which is
divided in the Senega, the Gambia, the Rio Grande, and the Cano.

Higher Aethiopia, as the Quilmanci, Nubia, the Zaire, and the Marabus.
Lower Aethiopia; as the Zambere, divided in the Curama, the Barame, the
Spiritu Sancto, the Rio dos Infante^.



In the other Continent, or in AMERICA Septentrionale and in the Kingdoms,
Countries, etc. of Canada, or New France; as those of Canada, or St. Lawrence,
Toppahanock, Penobscot, Pautunxat; Nansamud, Chesapeac, or Pouhatan, May, la
Trinite, Apamatuck, Pamanuc, and Patavomeck,
Florida; as those of Rio de Flores: Rio de Spirito Sancto, Rio de Neives, and
Rio grande.
Mexico, or New Spain; as those of Spiritu Sancto toward the East, Spiritu
Sancto toward the West. Panuco, Guaxacoalco. Baranja, Zacatula, Desaguadero of
Nicaragua.

AMERICA Meridionale, and in the Kingdoms, Countries, etc. of Terra Firma,
Guiana, and Peru; as those of Darien, Viapoco, St. Martha, Cayanna, Corritine,
Brebice, Ori^eque, Apuruvaca, Essequebe, Madelai^e, Desaguadero of Peru.
Brazil; as those of Orethane, or the Amazon^, Maragnon, or Miari, Taboucorou,
Rio Janiero, Rio grande, or Potengi, Rio Real, Parayba.
Paraguay; as those of Paraguay, or de la Plat^.



All the Kingdoms, Regions, Countries, Isles, etc. in the World, may be
comprehended under these two Heads, viz. Known Anciently, and in our Continent;
as EUROPE, with its Kingdoms, Estates, Isles, etc. may be considered in three
times three parts, and then The three most Southern parts, are the Kingdoms,
Estates, and Isles of Spain and Portugal, with its Isles of Majorca, Minorca,
etc. Italy, with its Estates and Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Isles of
Naples, etc. Turkey in Europe, with its Estates and Isles.
The three Innermost parts, and within the Continent, are the Kingdoms and
Estates of France. Germany, and Belgium, with its several Estates; as the
Swisses, the Grisons, etc. Poland, with its several Estates, toward the
Danube; as Transylvania, Moldavia, etc.
The three most Northern parts, or Kingdoms and Isles of Great Britain, and
Ireland. Scandinavia, or Denmark, Sweden, Norway.
Moscovy, with its Dutchies and Kingdoms.

ASIA, with its Kingdoms, Countries, Isles, etc. as they are found In firm
Land; as Turkey in Asia, with its Countries, Isles, etc. Georgia. Arabia.
Persia. India, as it is divided into the Empire of the Great Mogul. Peninsula
of India, within the Ganges. Peninsula of India, without the Ganges.
China. Tartaria. the Land of Jesso. the Land of Papous.
In Isles; as In the Ocean; as the Isles of Japon. Isles of Larrons. Isles of
Sonde. Philippine Isles. Isles of Ceylan, and the Maldives.
In the Mediterranean Sea; as in the Levant Sea. in the Archipelago.
About China, Persia, Arabia, etc.

AFRICA, with its Kingdoms, Isles, etc. as it is divided and found in Africa,
or Lybia Exterior, or outward; as Barbary, Bilidulgerid, Egypt.
Interior, or inwards; as Zaara, or Desert, the Countries of the Negroes,
Guinee.

Aethiopia, Higher; as Nubia, Aethiopia, or the Empire of the Abyssines.
Lower; as Congo, Monomotapa, Caffres.

And diverse Isles, which are found In the Mediterranean Sea; as the Isle of
Malta, etc. In the Western Ocean; as the Canary Isles, the Isles of Cape Verd,
the Isles of St. Thomas.
In the Eastern Ocean; as the Isle of Madagascar, the Isle of Zocotora, etc.



Lately, and in the other Continent; as AMERICA, with its Kingdoms, Regions,
Countries, Isles, etc. as they are divided and found in America Septentrionale;
as Canadian, or the Artick Lands; as Groenland, Estotiland, Izland, etc.
Canada, or New France, with its Estates, Isles, etc. Florida.
Mexican, or Mexico, or New Spain, with its Audiences of Mexico, Guadalajara,
Guatemala, and St. Domingo.
the Caribbe Isles.

America Meridionale; as Peruvian, or Terra Firma, with its Estates, Provinces,
and Isles. Guiana. Peru, with its Audiences of Quito, Lima, De la Plata.
Chili, with its Jurisdictions.
Brasilian, or Brazil, with its Capitanes, Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, with
its Parts or Provinces the Megallanick Land, etc.




Unknown, or not fully discovered, and li^th either under the Artick, or
Antartick Circles; as Nova Guinea, Terra del Fuego, Maletur. Psittacorum Regio,
and the like feigned Names and Places.




EUROPE, with its Kingdoms, Isles, etc. may be considered in three times three
parts; and then The three most Southern parts, are SPAIN, with its Kingdoms or
Principalities, etc. Castile, Madrid, Leon, Leon, Navar, Pampelona, Biscay,
Bilboa, Ast^rie, Ovideo, Gallicia, St. Jago de Compostell^, Portugal, Lisbon,
Algarve, Pharo, (...), Sevil, Granada, Granada, (...), Murcia, Arragon,
Caragosa, Valencia, Valencia, Ca^alonia* Barcelona, the Isles of Baleares,
Majorca.
ITALY, with its several Estates and Principalities; the Chief of which are
Pledmont, Turin, Millain* Millain, Genoua, Genoua, Monteferat Alba, Parma,
Parma, Mantua, and Modena, Mantua, Venice* Venice, Placenza, Placenza, Toscany,
Florence, Estates of the Church, Rome, Trent, Trent, Naples, Naples, Isle of
Sicily, Messina, Isle of Sardiny, Calari, Isle of Corsica, Bastia.
TURKEY, (in EUROPE,) with its several Estates; the Chief of which are those of
Bosnia, Jay^za* Transylvania, Waradin, Servie, Belgrad, Bulgaria, Sophia,
Moldavia, Zaccania, Walachia, Targovisco, Romania. Constantinople, Macedonia,
Salon^chi, Albania, Durazzo, Thes^alie, Ar^icho, Epi^e, Ferveza, Achaia,
Selines, Peloponnesus, Fetras, Dalmatia, Rhag^sa. Sclavonia, (...), Illyris,
Zatha, Croatia, Wi^itz.

Together with several Isles, as they lie in the Aegean, or Grecian Seas, as
Negropont, Crete, the Isles of Cyclades, and Sporades. Ion^an Seas, as Zant,
Zeffalonia, Cor^u, and C^rigo. Adriatic Seas, as Zara, Lesina, Curzoia, Lissa,
Vegea, and Cherso*
The three Innermost parts, and within the Continent, are FRANCE, with its
Twelve Governments, or General Estates; viz. Picardy, Amien^, Normandy, Roan,
or Rov^^, Isle of France, Paris, Champagne, Troy^, Bretagne, Nantes, Orlenois,
Orleance, Bourgogne, Dijon, Lyonnois, Lion, Guye^ne and Gascogne, Bourdeaur,
Languedoc, Toulouse, Provence, Marseille, Daup^^n, Grenoble.
The several Estates, which lie between France, the Cathol. Low Country Anvers,
Lorrain, Metz, the French County, Besans^ns, Savoy, Cambery.
Germany, the Low Countries, or Amsterdam, the United Provinces, Rotte^dam, the
Swisses, (...) the Grisons, Coire.

GERMANY, with its several Estates and Principalities; the Chief of which are
On this side the Rhine, Antwerp, Upon the Rhine, Strasbourg, Westphalia,
Munster, Franconia, Noremberg, Sovabe, Ausbourg, Bavaria, Munchen, Austria,
Vienna, Bohemia, Prague, Higher Saxony, Dris^en, Brandenbourg, Berlio,
Pomerania, Stet^^, Lower Saxony, Hamburgh.
POLAND, with its several Estates; the Chief of which are Polonia, Cracow,
Prussia, Dant^ick, Mazovia, War^aw, Lithuania, Wilna, Volhynia, Kyo^ia,
Cujavia, Brez^ti, Polaquie, Biel^k, Podolia, Kam^eniec, Russia Nigra,
Loewenberg.
And some Estates or Principalities, toward the Danube and Black Sea; as
Hungaria, Buda, Transylvania, Hermenstat, Valaquie, Targovisco, Moldavia,
Soczowa, Little Tartaria, Nigropoli,

The three most Northern parts, Kingdoms and Isles, are SCANDINAVIA; where are
the Kingdoms and Estates of Danemark, Danemark, Copenhaguen, Norway, Trondhem*
Gothland, Calmar,
Sweden, Sweden, Stockholm, Lapland, Loisby, Gothland, Abo, Livo^ie, Riga.
Ingria, Nottebourg,

MOSCOVIA; with its several Kingdoms, Duchess; and Provinces; the Chief of
which are Moscovy, Mosco, Wolomodire, Wolodomer, Dwine, St. Michal Archangel,
Caz^n (Kingdom) Caza^, Astracan (Kingdom) Astracan.
The ISLES of GREAT BRITAIN; where are the Kingdoms of England, London,
Scotland, Edinburgh, Ireland, Dublin.



ASIA, as it is divided into Firm Land whereof the principal Parts are, TURKEY
in ASIA, which comprehends the parts and chief places of Anatolia, Smyrna,
Ephesus, Pergama, Burs^a, Scutari, Tocat.
So^rie, Jerusalem Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus, Said.
Diarbeck, Caraemit, Bagded, Balsora.
Turcoma^^ie, ^rzerum, Car^. Derbent.

GEORGIE; which comprehends the parts and chief places of Mingtelle, Phazza.
Savatoplly.
Gurgistan Cori. Quirls, Chipeche. Stranu.
Avogasis, St. Sophia, Little Turcomanie, Derbent. Comanis, Asof,
ARABIA; with its parts and chief places of Arabia the Stony, Busseret. Mo^b.
Arabia the Desert, Anna. Arabia the Happy, Medina. Mecca, Zibit. Aden.

PERSIA; with its chief Provinces and place of Servan, Tauris. Gilan, Raft.
Gorgian, Gorgian, Churdistan, Choy. Ayrack, Hispahan, C^sbin.
Ch^r^zan, Kayen Dilemon, Allamoed. Chu^^stan, Souster. Tabarestan, Asterabad.
^ar^, Chiraef. Kherman, Giroft. Rhoemus, Bestan. Sablestan, Zarans.
Tocharestan, Thaalan,
INDIA, as it is divided into the Empire of the GREAT MOGOL; wherein are
comprehended diverse Kingdoms, the chief of which are Attock, Attock. Cabul,
C^bul. Lahor, Lahor. Delly, Delly. Agra, Agra. Malway, Rantipore. Guzurate, or
Cambaya Surat, Cambaya.
Bengala, Bengala. Decan, Goa.
Penisula of INDIA without the Ganges, with its several Kingdoms, etc. the
chief of which are, Golconda, Golconda. Bisnagar, Bisnagar, Harsingue
Malabar, Calicut.
Peninsula of INDIA within the Ganges; with its Kingdoms and chief places of
Pegu, Pegu, Boldia.
Siam, Banckock. Malacca, Malacca. Cochin^hin^, Pulocacein. Tunqui^, ^eccio.

CHINA; with its chief Provinces and Cities of Pequin, Pequin. Nanquin,
Nanquin. Scianton, Xanton. Quicheu, Quicheo. Canton, Canton. Chequian,
Cheiquian.
TARTARIA; with its five Parts, and chief places of Tartaria Deserta,
Cumbalich. Usbeck, Jarcham. Tutchestean, Chialis. Cathay, Cambalu. True
Tartaria, Tartar.

ISLES, towit, In the Ocean; as the Isles of JAPON; as Niphon, Meaco. Xicoco,
Sanuqui. Ximo, Bungo.
PHILLIPPINE Isles; as Luson, Luson. Mindanao, Mindana^.
Isles of MOLUCCO'S; as Molucques, Gamma, Celebes, Celebes. Gilolo, Gilolo.
Isles of SONDE; as Sumatra, Achem. Arun.
Borneo, Bortneo. Java, Bantam, Jac^tra.

Isles of LARRONS, or THEVES, Deserte. Isles of CEYLAN, Colombo. Isles of the
MALDIVES, Tills don Matis.
In the Mediterranean Sea; as In the LEVANT Sea; as Cyprus, Famagouste. Rhodes,
Rhodes. Scarpanto, Scarpanto,
In the ARCHIPELAGO; as Scio, Scio. Tenedos, Me^elin. Samo, Samo. Nicari^,
Nicaria. Lango, Lango. Stampalia, Stampalia.
Pathmos, Pathmos. Negropont, Col^his. Coos, Coos. Lero. Lero.




AFRICA, as it is divided into AFRICA, or LYBIA, Exterior, or Outward, and
comprehends BARBARY, which contains the Kingdoms of Morcco, Morocco,
Elmadina.
Fez, Fez, Almansor, Saly.
Telensin, Telensin. Algier, Algier, Telensin, Bug^a.
Tunis, Tunis, Urba.
Tripoli, Tripolis. Barca, Barca. Desert of Barca, Ammon.
BILIDULGERID, which contains several Kingdoms and Provinces, the chief of
which are Sus, or Tesset, Tesset, Nun.
Darha, Darha. Segellomessa, Segellomessa. Tasilet, Tasilet. Tegorarin,
Tegorarin. Zeb, Peschara, Nesta.
Bilidulgerid, Fezzen, Gademes.

EGYPT, which is divided in Said, or Bechria, Cairo. Er^if, Alexandria, Rosetta.
Coast of the Red Sea, Sues. Grodol.


Interior, or Inwards, and comprehends ZAARA, or SAARA, where are the
Kingdoms and Cities of Zanhaga, Tegassa. Zuenziga, Zuenziga. Targa, Targa.
Lempta, Lempta. Berdoa, Berdoa. Gaoga, Goaga. Borno, Borno.
The Land of NEGROES, where are the Kingdoms, People, or Countries On this side
the Niger, as of Gualate, Gandia. Genehoa, Ge^choa. Tombut, Tombotu. Agades,
Agades. Canun, Cano. Cassena, Cassena. Gangara, Gangara.
Between the Branches of the Niger, as of The Jaloses People, Solul. The
Biatares People, Biatares. The Sousos People, Beria.
Beyond the Niger, as of Melli, Melli. Manding^, Manding^. Gago, Gago. Guber,
Guber. Zegzeg, Zegzeg. Zansara, Zan^ara.

GUINEE, with its Kingdoms, Parts, and Chief Places of Melegutte, Bugos, Bagga.
Particular Guinee, or the Ivory Coast, St. George de la Min^. Cape of Palms.
Benin, Benin.


AETHIOPIA, Higher, or under Egypt, and comprehends NUBIA, where are the
Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities of Bugia, Bugia. Jalac, Jalac. Nuabia, Nuabia.
Dancala, Dancala. Cusa, Cusa. Gorham, Gorham. Damocla, Damocla. Somn^, Somna.
The Empire of the ABISSINES, where are several Kingdoms, Countries, and
Cities; the chief of which are Tigremahon, Charumo. Barnagasso, Barv^. Angota,
Angotina. Dancala, Deg^beldara. Amara, Amara. Bagamedri, Baza. Ambian, Amasen.
Damute, Damute. Agag, Agag. Cafates, Cafates. Narea, Zeb. Ambiam, Ambiam.
ZANGUEBAR, which is divided into Zauguebar, with its Kingdoms and Cities of
Mozambique, Quilo^, Quilmanca.
The Coast of AJAN, with its Kingdoms and Cities of Adea, Adel, Magadoxe.
The Coast of ABEX, with its chief Places and Isles of Arquico. Saquen.


Lower, or Interior, and comprehends CONGO, with its several Kingdoms or
Provinces; the chief of which are Loango, Loango. Pemba, Pemba. Angola, Engaze.
Bamba, Bamba. Songo, Son^o.
The Coast and Country of CAFRES, with its several Estates, Kingdoms, Capes,
Ports, and Isles; the chief of which are the Cape of Good Hope, Cape of St.
Nicholas, Port of Carascalis. Isle^ or St. Christophers, Isles of St. Lucia.
MONOMOTAPA, with its Kingdoms and chief Places of Monomotapa, Monomotapa.
Butua, Butua. Monoemugi, Agag. Zefala, Zesala. Chie^nga, Zimb^os.


In diverse ISLES In the Mediterranean Sea, Malta, Valetta. Goza, Goza.
In the Western Ocean, as the Canary Isles, Canaria. The Isles of Cape Verd,
St. Jago. The Isle of St. Thomas, Pavoasan.
In the Eastern Ocean, as Madagascar, Vingagor^, Tombaja.
Zocotora, Zocotora.



AMERICA, as it is divided into SEPTENTRIONAL, which may be divided into
CANADIANE, where there shall be The ARTICK LANDS, as Iseland -- Belle sted
Groenland, Beareford. North Wales, Sea-horse-point. South Wales, Hudsons Bay.
CANADA, or NEW FRANCE, whose chief Parts and People are those of Estotiland,
Hope-advanced. ^aguanay, Quebeck Canada, Mont-Real. Acadie, Martengo. New
England, Boston, Plymouth, Cambridge.
Mary Land, Marles Town. New York, New York. Virginia, James Town, Elizabeth
Town.
Carolina, Charles Town. The Hurons, St. Peter. Isle of Bermudas, Southampton.
Florida, St. Helens, Port Royal.


MEXICANE, with its Audiences, Provinces, etc. of MEXICO, with its Provinces
and chief Places of Mexico, Mexico. Panuco, Panuco. Mechoacan, Mechoacan.
Thascal^, Thascal^. Guaxaca, Antequera. Tabasco, No sen. de la Victoria.
Jucatan, Merida, Campeche.

GUADALAJARA, with its Provinces of Guadalajara, Guadalajara. Xalisco,
Compoflella. Chlametian, St. Sebastian. Culiacan, St. Michael. Cinaloa, St.
John. Los Zacatecas, Zacatecas. New Biscay, St. John. Qulvira, St. Fee. Anlan,
anlan. Cibola, Cibola. California, Port de Moniere. Guatemala, St. Jago de
guate mal^.
GUATEMALA, with its Provinces of Vera Pax, Vera Pax. Soconusco, Guevet lan.
Chiapa, Cul dad Real. Honduras, Valladolid. Nicaragua, Leon. Costarica,
Cartago. Veragua, la Conception.
St. DOMINGO, with its Isles, the chief of which are Cuba, St. Jago. Jamaica,
Port Royal, Sevilla.
Hispaniola, St. Domingo, Porto del la Plata.
Soana, St. German. Barbados, St. Michaels. St. Christopher, Sandy-Point.


MERIDIONAL, which may be divided into PERUVIANE, where there shall be TERRA
FIRMA, with its Provinces, etc. of Panama, Panama. Carthagena, Carthagena. St.
Martha, St. Martha. Rio de la Hacha, Rio de la Hacha. Venezula, Venezula. New
Andalousis, Comana. Paria, Macureguara. Caribes, Taupuramenen. Gulans,
Macureraway. Popayan, St. Fee de Antiochia^ Granads, St. Fee de Bogata. Peru,
Quito.

PERU, with its Audiences of De los Quixos, Baesa. Pasamores, Loyola. Lima,
Lima, Cusco.
De la Plata, De la Plata.

BRAZILIENE, where there shall be BRAZILE, with its Capitaines, or Governments
of Chill, Coplapo. Magellanick Land, St. Philip. St. Vincent, Sanctos Rio
Janiero, Sebastian. Spiritu Sancto, Spiritu Sancto. Porto Seguro, Porto Seguro.
Los Isleos, Los Isleos. Baya de los Sanctos, St. Salvador. Seregippe, Seregippe
del Rey. Fernambuco, Ollnda. Tamaraca, Tamaraca. Parayba, Parayba. Rio Grands,
De los tres Reys. Slara, Sara. M^r^^kan, Junipara. Para, Para:
PARAGUAY, or RIO de la PLATA, with its Provinces, etc. of Paraguay, Paraguay.
Chaco, Chaco. De la Plata, Assumption: Tucoman, St. Jago del Estera. Urvalg, Ia
Conception. Parana, St. Ignatious. Guayr, Orided Real.



NAVIGATION
To ye Hon.ble Arthur Herbert Esquire Admiral and comander in chief of his
Majestyes fleet in ye Mediterra: nean and one of ye Comissioners of the
Admirally etc. Thi^ Plate is Humbly dedicated by Ric: Blome



NAVIGATION.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
NAVIGATION, is an Art containing certain Rules, necessary to be known by every
Seaman that undertakes to Guide or Conduct a Ship, from one Port to another.

There are two sorts of Navigation, the one short and common, that is, Stearing
a Ship from Port to Port, along the Coast, seldom Losing sight of Land; and
this is termed Coasting. The other part of Navigation, is Great and Artificial,
for that it undertakes large Voyages, and requires more knowledge, and
experience.

Every Skilful Navigator ought to be expert in most of the Mathematics, and in
particular in the use of the Globes, Sphaere, the Compass, Card for the
Soundings, the Astrolabe or Astronomical Ring, Quadrant, Cross-Staff, the use
of the Calender, to know the use of the Golden-Number, and Epact, whereby to
find the New Moons, and her Ages; the time of Full-Sea, and Low Water, the
Spring and Ebb or Neap-Tide, the force of the Currents, with the time to enter
into any Port, which must be know as to their situation, the depths of their
Water, their Rocks, Sands, Clifts, Shoals, etc. likewise the use of the Tables
of Amplitude, with the Senical Quadrant, Gunters Scale, or the Courses, and to
correct them. Also to be expert for the finding out the Variation of the
Compass, for the rectifying the Courses. To conclude, Every Captain, or Master
ought, besides the knowledge of the aforesaid things, to be expert in the
Calculating the Declination of the Sun, and Stars, with their right Ascensions,
and Amplitudes, their Azimuth, and other Astronomical, and Geometrical
Practices, relating to this Art, which you will find in other Tracts apart,
wherefore omitted here.

This Art of Navigation is copious, requiring a larger Discourse than this Work
will admit of; wherefore I shall treat of such things as are most essential,
referring you to the many Volums, that are published of the teaching the said
Art; and in particular to a Volum lately printed, entitled, The whole Art of
Navigation, in five Book^, written by Captain Daniel New-House, being a Work of
much esteem, and worth the Book, I have made use of some things in this
following Treatise, referring you to the Book it self.

Also there are other things that relate to this Art, which are here omitted,
as being Treated of in other Parts, and in particular in Geometry, and
Cosmography or Astronomy, and Geography, to which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. II.
Of the several sorts of Instruments useful in Navigation.
BEfore I proceed to this Art, it will be convenient to give an Account of the
Instruments most useful, with some directions for the attaining to the
knowledge thereof, for that without them a Pilot cannot perform his Voyage. I
shall not here insert the Figures of the said Instruments, thinking it better
to be supplied with them from the Shops, as being more effectual.

The COMPASS, is an Instrument of great use in this Art, distinguishing the
Horizon into all the parts that are required for the perfect use of Navigation,
which are divided into 32 Parts or Points, in the Compass, bearing the Names of
so many Winds, as appears by the Figure thereof.

The use of these Points are to direct the Pilot by Horizontal Travers, how to
conclude the Course of his Ship, to recover and arrive at the place desired,
knowing in what part of the Horizon the place desired for lies in, and by that
(and the use of the said Compass) they attain the same; for the Wind receives
its name from that part of the Horizon from whence it blows: And observe,
that the Point of the COMPASS does stand full North, by which Horizon are found
out, which said North-Point (for your better distinction) is always marked with
a Flower-de-Lis.

There are two things chiefly to be observed in the Compass: First, That it be
good, and true made; and in particular, that the Flower-de-Lis, or Needle, be
exactly under the North and South Line; that the other Rhumbs be true placed,
that the Socket be placed in the right Center Card; that the Point of the Pin
of the Compass be not Blunt, or Rusty; that the Card may have a free Motion
upon it, and be placed perpendicular in the midst of the Box, which said Pin
should be made of Brass, Tin, or Copper; but not of Steel, or Iron, and indeed
neither Steel nor Iron must be used in any part of the Compass, neither should
it be placed near Guns, or other things of Iron; that the Needle be well
touched with a good Lodestone.

The use of the Compass, is to show at any time on what part of the Horizon,
the North, South, East, West, and all other Rhumbs are, by looking on the Lines
drawn on the said Compass, which represent the several Courses; therefore the
Names of the said Points must be well learned by Heart, and to know them so
soon as you cast your Eye on your Compass. You must know what Point of the
Compass the Wind blows over; For Example, If the Wind be North, it blows
Flower-de-Lis toward the South, and so of the rest. You must likewise know how
to set the Sun, and any Point of Land, by the Compass: And lastly, you must
understand how the Ship Capes, that is, what Point of the Compass looks strait
toward the Head of the Ship; for if you Steer your Course full East, that
Point on your Compass must be exactly toward the Head of your Ship, which you
must always observe.

The CROSS-STAFF is chiefly to take the Altitude of the Sun or Stars, as also
the distance betwixt two Stars, which may be performed either by a forward or
backward Observation.

The Cross-Staff consists of a strait square graduated Staff, and four Crosses
of different Lengths, viz. First, The Ten-Cross, which belongs to that side of
the Staff called the Ten-Side, where the Graduations begin at about 3 Degrees,
and proceeding toward the Center, or Eye-end, increase Minutes) to 10 Degrees.
Secondly, The Thirty-Cross, which belongs to the Thirty-Side of the Staff where
the Divisions or Graduations begin at 10 Degrees, and end at 30. Thirdly, The
Sixty-Cross, which belongs to the Sixty-Side, where the Graduations begin at 20
Degrees, and end at 60. And Fourthly, The Ninety-Cross, which belongs to the
Ninety-Side, and where the Graduations begin at 30 Degrees, and end at 90
Degrees. And sometimes the several Sides of the Staff are numbered with their
Complements to 90; as against 10 stands 80.

For the knowing how to hold your Staff to make your Observations, find the
Center of your Eye, thus; Put on the 60 and 90 Crosses on their proper Sides,
placing them exactly upon 45 Degrees of each proper Graduation; then bring the
end of your Staff to rest upon the out-Corner of your right Eye; and if you can
see each end of the two Crosses in a right Line one with another, then the
Staff stands Parallel with the Center of your Eye, and so hold it every time
you take your observation.

Although there are four Crosses, they are not to be used altogether, but
severally, according as the Altitude or Distance you are to observe is greater
or smaller: For Example, If above 60 Degrees, the Ninety-Cross; if above 30
Degrees, but less than 60, the Sixty-Cross; if above 10 Degrees, but less than
30, then the Thirty-Cross; and if less than 10 Degrees, then the Ten-Cross must
be used.

For the taking the height of the Sun with the Cross-Staff, put the Traversary
upon the Long Staff; then set the end of the Long Staff close to the Corner of
your Eye, as aforesaid, winking with the other, and removing the Transversary
forwards and backwards until you perceive the lower end thereof to be just with
the middle of the Horizon, and the upper end just with the middle of the Sun,
both agreeing with the Sun and the Horizon at one time; and thus have you the
exact height of the Sun. This done, yet observe the same until you see the Sun
at the highest, and so begin to descend.

And observe, that it is best to take the height of the Sun when it is under 50
Degrees in height above the Horizon; for until you come to 50 Degrees, the
Degrees are larger marked upon the Cross-Staff, than after 50 Degrees. Also the
Sun being under 50 Degrees in height, you may sooner take the height thereof,
by reason of your easier seeing and viewing the upper and lower ends of the
said Staff both at one time; but when it surpasses 50 Degrees it is not so
certain, because the Degrees are smaller marked; and then the Astrolabe is most
true and certain, which shall be next treated of.

The ASTROLABE: For this you ought to be very careful to have one that is good
and true, for the knowledge of which observe these Directions. Hold it as in
time of Observation; then let fall a Thread with some Lead at the end, from the
Point which represents the Zenith, and if the Thread pass over the Center of
the Astrolabe and the Point, or cover the Line, it is a sign it is good, for it
must always hang so when you observe the Suns Altitude.

Then observe, that the Horizontal Line be parallel to the Horizon, wherefore
placing your Label exactly upon the Horizontal Line, look through the two
Sights on any sensible Point of the Horizon; then turning your Instrument so
that the Sight that was next your Eye be now farthest from you without moving,
or altering the Label from the Horizontal Line; then look again, and if you can
see the same Point as before through the two sights, it is a sign the Horizontal
Line of your Astrolabe is parallel to the Horizon.

The Lines drawn from the Center of the Astrolabe, divide the Circumference of
the Heavens in the same manner as it divides the Circumference of the
Astrolabe; for all Circles that Center, are divided in the same manner, by the
Lines drawn from the common Center.

This Instrument is divided into as many equal parts as the Heavens, viz. 360
Degrees, however a quarter part is sufficient.

The use of this Instrument is easy, there being no more than to hold it so
with your left Thumb through the Ring, that it may have a free Motion, so that
the Horizontal Line may be Horizon; then turn your right Side, and the
Graduated part of the Astrolabe so to the Sun, that the Sun shine neither on
the one, nor the other side: Then lift up the Label with your right Hand, until
the Sun Beams entering through the Hole in the lower Sight, and the Label will
show the Suns Altitude above the Horizon. And if you count from the Horizontal
Line to the Label, from the Zenith to the Label, it will be the distance of the
Sun from Zenith. But be sure that the Astrolabe does hang upright, otherwise
you will be at a great loss.

It is also covenient to know the true Meridian at Sea, for Sailing far East,
or West, the Compass varieth; therefore to know the same, do thus: Set the Sun
with your Compass at its rising above the Horizon, and then (knowing what Part
and Point the Sun rises at) set the Sun with the Compass at the departing
under the Horizon, which being found out, you shall understand Compass be
varied, and how much, by the dividing the Piece of the Circle, contained
between the rising and setting of the Sun, into two equal parts; for the right
Line drawn from the Center of the Fly through the Point of the partition,
expresses the true Meridian, and the proportion of the Circle contained between
the said Line, and the South Point of the Compass shows the quantity of the
Variation.

The QVADRANT is an Instrument that 4th part of a Circle, which is 90 Degrees,
and represents the distance between the Horizon and the Zenith. This Instrument
is of much use upon Land, whereby many Observations are performed, but is now
not much used at Sea; The Figure of the Quadrant is made use of in the Treatise
of Geometry, and therefore omitted here.

The SEA-CHART, or MERCATORS CHART, is an Instrument by which the Mariner guids
the Ship, from place to place, by such Courses as by the Chart are laid down;
and for the understanding thereof observe these or the like Directions; First,
That the Latitudes of such places as are within the Chart, be well known
according as they are expressed in the said Chart. Secondly, That the Countries,
or Georgraphy of the Chart, be known, with the Capes, Bays, Promontories,
Havens, Ports, Rocks, Sands and the like. Thirdly, That you understand to
measure the distances of places upon the Chart. Fourthly, That the Line drawn
upon the Chart with their several properties, be likewise known; And Fifthly,
That by this Chart you may understand the true Courses between any Capes,
Isles, Continents, or the like.

This Chart is better to be bought, as other Instruments, which is a very
large, white, and smooth skin of Velom or Parchment; Upon this first describe a
Square; then divide the Aequinoctial Line into as may equal Parts or Degrees,
as you have occasion for; Then draw on your Degrees of Latitude, then your
Parallels through every 5th or 10th Degree of the Meridian, and the Meridians
through every 5th or 10th Degree of the Aequinoctial. As for the Rhumbs, Capes,
Harbors, Rocks, Isles, etc. to be described thereon, must be placed according
to their true Latitude, and Longitude.

The Latitude of places by the Chart, is thus found out; upon the place whose
Latitude you desire to know, set one Foot of your Compasses; then stretch the
other Foot to the next East, or West Line, for that Line is your direction,
keeping that Foot still upon the same Line, moving your Hand and Compasses to
the Graduated Meridian, and there that Foot of the Compass which stood upon the
place, whose Latitude you would know, shows the Latitude of the same place.

It Is not material to give a Draught of the Sea-Chart, these Instructions being
sufficient; but if not, any Instrument-Maker of whom you buy on, will soon show
the use, with directions to use it, as indeed of any other.

I shall omit the Plain Chart as being much of the same nature, but not so true.

The SENICAL QVADRANT is composed of Concentrick Arches, or rather Quarters of
Circles, and of three sorts of right Lines. First, Those Parallel to the Line
shows the Sines, and Meridians, and are Parallel to the North and South, upon
which the Leagues of Latitude are counted. Secondly, Those drawn Parallel to
the Line, give the Sines, Complements, and Parallels; and are Parallels to the
East and West, upon which the Leagues of Longitude, or departure from the
Meridian are reckoned; and Thirdly, Those drawn from the Center of the
Quadrant, to the Limb, show the Rhumbs of the Compass, or the several Courses;
and upon them the Distance, or Leagues Sailed are reckoned, which said Leagues
are marked by the several Arches, or Quarters of Circles.

Observe, that when the Distances are great, every Arch or Line cannot be
reckoned for a League, as when the Distances are small; so that in such Case
you may reckon them for what you please, as your occasions require, that is,
either, 2, 3, 4 or more Leagues; and the Arches must also be reckoned for as
much as you have reckoned the Lines of Latitude, and Longitude; for Example, If
you reckon an Arch for 5 Leagues, each Line of Latitude and Longitude must also
be reckoned for five Leagues, and so of any other.

Also observe, that when you will find how many Leagues, one or many Degrees of
Longitude contain by a proposed Latitude; or on the contrary how many Degrees
of Longitude a certain number of Leagues (of East or West) contain also by a
proposed Latitude; you must reckon the Degrees of Latitude given upon the
nearest graduation Center of your Instrument, that is to say, upon that which
begins at the side of East and West, and not upon the Limb, or utmost graduated
Arch.

This Instrument is the most exact, and the easiest that has been as yet
invented for the working a Travers at Sea by.

Thus having given a short Account of the chief Instruments necessary in this
Art, I next proceed to the Art it self, and first.

CHAP. III.
Of the LOG-BOARD.
THe Log-Board is a Board divided into several Colums, according to the
following Example, upon which is set down their dead reckoning, that is, the
Course and Distance Sailed upon every shift of Wind; in which observe this
Method; First, set down in the first Colum the time, or Hour; In the 2d, the
Ships Course; in the 3d, 4th and 5th the Knots, half Knots and Fathoms that the
Ship runs: In the 6th the Point of the Compass, the Wind is at; In the 7th the
force of the Wind; And in the 8th Colum the Variation.

The LOG-BOARD.
Hours Course Knots Half Knots Fathoms Wind at Force of the Wind Variation D.
M. 2 4 S. W. W. 5 1 0 S. S. E. F. G. 2. 30. W. 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12

Observe that when you begin a Long Voyage, you must keep a Log-Book, in which
must be writ down every Day what is on the Log-Board, and in the same Method;
as also what you have seen, how it before from you, and the Work of your
Observation.

You must know, that so many Knots of the Log-Line, as the Ship runs in half a
Minute Glass, so many Miles she sayls in an Hour. Know that you must leave the
Log, every two Hours, and that the best way is to set down the Course made good
upon each Point of the Compass. As for Example; Suppose the Course is SW, the
Wind being at SSE, and that after two Hours Sailing (with the same Gale) the
Log is left out, and you find the Ship to run 5 Knots in half a Minute; and in
the same time you observe also, (by the Wake of the Ship,) that there is half a
Point of Leeward way, by which you may conclude that the Ship makes good but
SW, half a point of Westernly, which accordingly must be set down upon the
Log-Board, and so continuing as in the aforesaid Table, setting down every two
Hours the Knots, half Knots, and the Fathoms that the Ship runs in half a
Minute, with the several Courses she has made good, and what Wind blows, with
the force of the Wind, and Variation.

To keep a Reckoning of 24 Hours without the Log.
THe Method observed by those that judge, of their distance, without a Log, is
to have a Board of six Colums; In the first, the Hour is set down; In the
second, the Course; In the third, the Miles; In the fourth, the Wind that
blows; In the fifth, the force of the Wind; And in the sixth the Variation, and
sometimes how the Current sets.

To take the Reckoning from the Log Board, thereby to compute the true Course,
and Distance of the Ship, by the several Runs expressed upon the Log, observe
this Method; First, double the Knots, half Knots and Fathoms, (if there be any)
of each respective Course, by which you may know how many Miles you have
sailed; for if they express on the Log-Board, but the Miles sailed in one or
two Hours, they must be doubled, to know how many Miles sailed in double the
time.

If your Knots be at 42 Foot Distance, from each other, it shows the seventh
part of a Mile in an Hour, so that 2 Fathom is something more than of a Mile;
but if the Knots are distant 50 Foot, then 2 Fathoms are a little less, for a
Fathom is but 6 Foot.

The Reckoning is taken from the Log-Board, every Day at Noon, and usually
after your Observation.

How to Correct a Dead Reckoning, when the Dead Latitude, differs from the
observed Latitude.
FOr doing this there are several ways, for you must correct the Dead Latitude,
as your Course has been; for if North and South, and by your Reckoning you
find your Latitude, less than by observation, the Ships place in the same
Meridian, must be corrected, and in the observed Parallel; For Example, Suppose
you depart from A, (taken notice of in the following Figure,) in the 50th
Parallel, or Latitude of 50 Degrees; and that you Sail directly South 50
Leagues, it will appear by your Reckoning that the Ship is at B, in the
Latitude of 47 Degrees, 30 Minutes; but by your observation the Ship is in the
Latitude of 47 Degrees, therefore to correct your Dead Reckoning prick your
Point in C, under the same Meridian, and in the 47 Parallel, according to your
Observation.

IF in sailing North, or South, the observed Latitude is lesser than the
Latitude by Reckoning, Distance in the same Meridian, according to your
observed Latitude.

For Example.
Suppose you depart from A, (in the Latitude of 50 Degrees,) and sail South 43
Leagues,) which is 2 Degrees 10 Minutes difference) by D, in the Latitude of 47
Degrees, 50 Minutes; but if by your observed Latitude, you find you are arrived
but in the Parallel of 48 Degrees, prick your Point in F, and not in D, by
reason your observation shows there is an Error in your Reckoning.

The cause of this Error is occasioned through want of Knowledge, or care to
judge well of the Ships way or Run, by making it greater or lesser than it is;
or else by Stemming a Current, or Sailing with it.

For the Correcting your Dead Latitude, by your observed Latitude, when you
Sail East, or West.
OBserve, that in that case, you cannot correct the Error of your Reckoning (if
any), nor by your Observation discover if any Current, has obstructed your
way, or set you forward, Stem a Current, alter your Course, that by the
difference of Latitude the Error may be discovered.

And for correcting your Reckoning; when having Sailed so many Miles, or
Leagues, East or West, you find by your Observation that your Course has not
been under that Parallel, where your Reckoning places you; it must be done by
your difference in Latitude, and Distance.

For Example.
Admit that departing from B, in the Parallel of 47 Degrees, 30 Minutes, after
having Sailed 43 Leagues West, by Observation you find, you are in the Parallel
of 47 Degrees; to correct your Course, (wherein there is Error,) take with your
Compass upon the Meridian, the 43 Leagues, Sailed, and setting one Foot in B,
with the other describe and Arch, which will cut the 47 Parallel, and the Point
of Intersection at H, will mark the place of your Ship.

For correcting your Reckoning in Sailing obliquely or between a Parallel and a
Meridian; when you Sail within 5 or 6 Points of the Meridian, and the Dead and
observed Latitudes differ, be sure there is an Error; In this case if you are
more sure of the Course or Rumb, than of the Distance, then stand to your
Course, and the Ships place must be corrected upon the Course, by altering your
Distance.

For Example.
Admit your Ship Sayls from A, SW, 60 Leagues, and so by your Reckoning you
find you are arrived at I, in the Parallel of 47 Degrees, 50 Minutes; but by
Observation you are arrived but in the Parallel of 48 Degrees, in such case
shorten the Ships Distance upon the Course, and prick your Point in M, for the
correct place of your Ship.

When your difference in Latitude, is greater by Observation than Reckoning,
Enlarge the Ships Distance upon the Course. Now supposing you were more sure of
your Distance Sailed, than of your Course, by reason of the Currents and
Variation that could not be observed; In such case, you must rely on your
Distance Sailed, and correct your Course.

For Example.
Suppose that departing from A, you sail away SW, 50 Leagues, and so by
Computation are arrived at M, in the Latitude of 48 Degrees; but by observed
Latitude you find you are in the Parallel of 47 Degrees, 50 Minutes, in such
case stand upon your Leagues Sailed, and correct your Course thus. Take with
your Compass the Distance sailed, viz. 56 Leagues upon the Meridian, and
placing one Foot of it in A, with the other describe a secret Arch, which cuts
the Parallel of 47 Degrees, 50 Minutes, and the Point N, of Intersection will
show the place of your Ship.

But if you fear an Error, as much in the Distance as in the Course, in such
case part the Difference.

For Example.
If you think to have Sailed by the Rumb AL, which is SW, and to be arived at
M, in the Latitude of 48 Degrees, and your Observation shows you are in the
Parallel D, N, In such case stand to the Longitude of the Point at M, and
drawing the secret Line MO, parallel to a Meridian, mark your Point in O, for
the place of your Ship.

For the Correcting by the Card a composed Course, or several Courses together,
occasioned through contrary Winds, Points of Land, Rocks, Shoals, etc.
NOte, that if the observed Latitude differs from the Latitude by estimation,
you must stand to the same Longitude, and prick your Point in the observed
Parallel.

For Example.
Suppose, that being departed from the Point at P, and you think you are
arrived at S, in the Latitude of 47 Degrees; but by observation you find you
are in 46 Degrees, the correction of it is to stand to the same Meridian of S,
and to prick your Point in T, the observed Parallel.

But if it happen that your several Courses have Southwards, or Northwards, in
such case divide to each single Course the difference you find between the dead
Latitude, and the observed Latitude.

For Example.
Suppose, that departing from K. in the 50th Parallel, you Sail to the South by
the Rhumb KV, VX, XZ, if by estimation your Ship Z, in the 47th Parallel, and
by observation in the 46th, the difference is of one Degree, which must be
divided according as each Course did alter the Latitude by estimation. Admit
that the difference in Latitude of the first Course was of one Degree, which is
the third part; in such case lengthen your first Course the third part of your
difference, which is 20 Minutes; then placing one Foot of your Compass in K,
and the other in Y, upon the Parallel of 48 Degrees Minutes, prick your first
Point 20 Minutes more to the Southward as at first, and doing as much from Y,
and from 2; for the second and third Course prick your Point in 3, the place
your Ship is arrived at according to your Observation.

But if in case you were surer of your Course than of your Distance, then stand
to your Course; but lengthen your Distance.

For Example.
Suppose, that after these three Courses P 9, 9 R, and RS, you think you are in
the Latitude of 47 Degrees, but by observation but in the Latitude of 46, in
such case lengthen the Distance upon each Course, proportionally to the
difference between the observed Latitude, and that by estimation; and so
instead of P 9, prick P 4, and for 9 R. prick 4, 5, and for RS, T.

Necessary Rules to be observed by those that keep an Account of the Ships Way.
YOu must be very careful to look often upon the Compass, that you may be the
more assured of your Course, and that the Seaman at the Helm has Steered as
commanded; and to that end, one very careful ought to have the management of
that Concern: Also, how the Wind has blown either Fresher or Calmer,
especially having a Lee-Shoar, if you Sail near thereunto in the Night, which
is a thing so dangerous, that many Ships have been lost by the negligence of
the Pilot; to prevent which, it is good (when the Night approaches) to Steer
your Course a Point of the Compass more from the Land. Also when you Sail close
by a Wind, or as near it as possible, with the Topsails out a Point of the
Compass is commonly allowed for the Lee-Way: For Example, If the Wind was E. S.
E. and you should Cape S. the Course will be S. by W. If with your Courses only
you commonly allow 2 Points for the Lee-way; and if with your Main-Sail only
(which is called a Try) you allow for Lee-way 4 Points of the Compass; for
Hulling in a Storm, 6 or 7 Points is allowed for Lee-way, and then the Ship may
drive 10, 12, or 14 Leagues in 24 Hours. But these Rules are not always
certain; for according as the Sea and Currents are, your Judgment must be of
your Course; besides, sometimes a Sea will take your Ship on the Lee-Bow, and
then the Leeward-way or Drive is lesser: Also, sometimes a Sea takes her on the
Weather-Bow, so that then she drives more; and when the Sea is smooth, less is
usually allowed for the Leeward-way. But to be certain, how much your Ship has
fallen to the Lee-ward, have regard to the Wake, or smooth Water that your Ship
leaves at Stern, setting it by your Compass; for its opposite Point will show
the true Course of your Ship. However, for your assurance, forget not to make
your Observations on all Occasions, as aforesaid, which every 24 Hours must be
writ down in your Journal. And also have a care when it Blows hard, of the
Lee-latch, if you Sail large.

For the knowing the distance, or number of Leagues Sailed, the way most
practiced by the Pilots, is by the Log, and half Minute-Glass; the knowledge of
which is common to all Seamen.

It is also known by the Pendulum. And those expert in Navigation will judge
how far a Ship has Sailed in an Hour, only by looking how swiftly the Water
passes about the middle of the Ship, with regard to the force of the Wind, and
how it blows, whether from the Stern-quarter, or Bow; as also by the Currents,
and Waves.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Three Parts of the Art of Navigation, and in special of the First Part,
viz. the Making or Building of Ships.
Proposition I.
That is termed the Nautical Art, which teaches how a Ship may with safety,
and the assistance of the Winds, be Sailed from one place to another.
BEcause in this Discipline the places of the Earth are compared amongst
themselves, Geography.

This Art may be divided into three Parts: First, The Art of Building of Ships,
which also considers the Motion of the Ship in the Water, or else
presupposes it as known. Secondly, Concerning the Lading of a Ships: And
Thirdly, The Direction, or Sailing of a Ship, which is the Art of the Master,
or Pilot, and in general the Navigation, unto which also the Definition of the
Art is most of all agreeable. And this part with greater right does appertain
unto Geography than the two former, which are more truly referred to the
Staticks and Mechanics.

Proposition II.
In the Fabrics of Ships these things following must be observed.
1. THat the Matter or Wood be taken which may endure very long in the Water,
of which Vitruvius, and other Authors are to be consulted. Hither also
belongs how the Woods are to be prepared, and their Density to be augmented,
the unuseful Moisture to be consumed with Fire, Pitched and defended from
Corruption. This Doctrine must be taken from Philosophy.

2. That such a Figure or Shape be given to a Ship that is most apt for a quick
Motion, and may be moved with a small power.

3. In this Fabric, and in reference to the Figure this must be observed, that
a Ship may with ease be defended against Storms and Tempests; but of this more
when I treat about Lading of Ships.

4. The Magnitude of Ships must be considered, where there is a great
Comparison between the Ancient, and Moderns. Some suppose, Ship of Alexandria
(made by Archimedes, by the Command of Hiero King of Sicily, and presented to
Ptolomy King of Egypt) was of 12000 Tun. The Ship of Philopater is delivered
by Calizenus, to have been in length 280 Cubits, in breadth 38, and in height
48 Cubits. The greatest Ships at this day are those of the Spaniards, which are
called Caracasts; but of all Nations in the World, the English have most reason
to brag of their gallant Ships, especially for the Service of the War.

5. There belongs to the Building of Ships the knowledge of every part, as the
Keil, Rudder, Ribs, Head, Stern, Masts, Yards, Cables, Anchors, etc. of which
not only the Matter, Figure, and Coherency; but also the Weight and Magnitude
are to be explained.

6. To the Fabric of Ships belongs the skill how to prevent a Breach, Leaks,
or other defects in Ships.

This much in brief of the First Part of Navigation, concerning the Building of
Ships.

CHAP. V.
The Second Part, which treats about Lading of Ships.
Proposition I.
The Bruthen to Lade Ships withal is expressed by Lasts, and Tuns.
THe Tun of a Ship is supposed to be 2000 Pounds weight, the Last 12 Tuns.

Proposition II.
The Body, or Matter which is higher than Water, is not mergent altogether in
the Water, but some part of it is above; but if it be of a greater weight than
Water, it will sink to the bottom: If of the same weight, it keeps the given
place in the Water.
HItherto belongs the various knowledge of the Weights of Bodies, as of Lead,
Gold, Iron, Wheat, Sand, Oil, Wine; the gravity of all which must be compared
with Water.

And from hence it is manifest, that the weight of the matter to Lade the Ship,
which, taken with the Burden of the Ship, ought to be lesser than the Burden
or Gravity of the Water, whose Moles are equal to the Solidity or Capacity of
the whole Ship.

Proposition III.
By how much the Figure of the Ship comes to an Ordinate, that is, to a Cubick
equality of Longitude, Latitude, and thickness; by so much the more it can
sustain the greater burden in the Water.
THe Demonstration must be sought from the Staticks.

Proposition IV.
In the Lading of Ships respect must be had to two things; First, That there is
not imposed so great a Burden that its weight taken may be equal with the
weight of the Ship, or greater than the Moles of the Water which is equal to
the Solidity of the Ship, but that it be lesser, though not much. But if the
Matter to Lade
FOr although the Gravity of the Water admits of this or that weight of the
Ship, or Lading, when this is lesser than the equal Gravity of the Ship is to
the Moles of the Water; yet if the Water has less profundity than the Ship
beneath the Superficies of the Water, the bottom will not grant a motion to the
Ship, but detain it. This is the reason that Spanish Ships carry a greater
Burden than Dutch, because they have the Sea deeper on the Shore, and in the
Harbors, as also greater Ships come to Zeland than to Holland.

Proposition V.
If a Ship be so butrdened, that its Weight, or
THe Reason is, because the Water of Rivers is lighter than the Water of the
Sea; Therefore if the weight of the Laden Ship be Marine Water, therefore it
shall be greater than the Gravity of River Water, and so the Ship shall be sunk
in the River, or carried to the bottom. Many Ships for this reason have
perished for being over-laden by unskilful Mariners, or not unburdened in the
Mouths of the Rivers. Now how this Gravity should be, is known from the
proportion of the Seawater to River-water.

Proposition VI.
Any Body swiming on the Water has that weight, that the watery Moles have,
equal to the demergent part of this Body.
THe part of the Ship being given, which is under the Water, the weight of the
whole burdened Ship may be found; for the Gravity of the Water is known, or is
easy to be found. Cubick Foot of Water is 70 Pound; and therefore if the part
of the Ship under Water be 2000 Cubick Feet, the Gravity of the water Moles,
which is equal to the part of the Ship under Water, shall be 140000 Pound; so
much also shall be the weight of the Ship laden.

Proposition VII.
A Ship is most commonly accounted commodiously to carry that quantity of
Burden, whose Gravity is equal to the Gravity of half the Moles of Water which
the Ship can contain.
FOr Example; If the Ship can carry 500000 Tuns of Water (whereof every one is
accounted at 2000 Pounds weight) that is, if it contains the Water of
1000000000 Pounds, you may conveniently lade it with the Burden of 250000
Tuns. In this sense you must understand it when they say that Ships are so many
Tuns, or carry so many Lasts.

Proposition VIII.
By how much the weight of the Ship laded is greater, by so much the less it is
tossed with Storms and Tempests.
SHips of 2000 Tuns are not in danger of those Tempests which are vexatious to
Ships of 2, or 300 Tuns. Much more might be said, but this may suffice for
Blements.

CHAP. VI.
The Third and Chief Part of the NAUTICK ART, viz. The Art of Guiding, or
Navigating of a Ship, and its subdivision of the Four Parts.
Proposition I.
That is termed the Art of Navigating a Ship, which teaches unto what Quarter
a Ship is to be guided in any situation of it in the sea, that it may come to
the proposed place without danger.
I Shall make Four Parts of it:

1. Special Geography; that is, the knowledge of a place intercepted between
two places, and the properties of the same.

2. The knowledge of the Quarters in every place.

3. The cognition of the Line, by which the Ship is to be brought from one
place to another; for there are between every two places infinite intercepted
Lines. This Part is termed Histriodromice.

4. The knowledge of the Situation of every place unto which by Sailing we
arrive, or how these places are situated unto that place unto which the Ship is
to be directed. This is the Chief Part of the Art of Sailing.

To ye. Rt. Hon.ble George Leg, Generarall of the Ordnance Master James the
Second* Leiutenant Hantshire. Admiral of his Mat^^. Captain General of his
l^te Ma^^ Tangier* and one of the Lds. of his Ma^^^. This Plate is humbly

Baron of Dartmouth Master of the Horse to his Majesty King of Alceholt and
Wolmer fforest in ^ fleet of Ships in ye Mediteranian, forces in Africa and
Governor of most Honble. Privy Council Anno 168^. dedicated by R* Blome



Proposition II.
The Cognition of the Intermedial Space does comprehend these things.
1. THe Situations of Places, the Procurrences of Angles, the bending of the
Shoars the Aspect of Promontories, Mountains, and Bay^, the Depths of Waters,
the Sight of Islands, the Coasts of Lands; all which are known from Special
Geography, and Sea-Plots; but most easily, and with greatest certainty from
Observation, and frequent Navigation through any Tract of Land, which is the
only cause that some Mariners are more fit to guide a Ship to such a place, and
others to another.

2. The knowledge of the General and Special Winds, and those that are peculiar
to any place, which is exceeding useful in Navigations in the Torrid Zone, and
adjacent places. For General Wind, and in many places Anniversary Winds, which
are called Mossons, do rule, which either promote, or hinder Navigation; for
the Indian Seas are Sailed by these Winds.

3. The Condition of the Motion of the Seas in every Tract, also the Quarter of
it, into which Quarter the Seas and Waves are born; for they carry the Ship
with them.

First of all, there is required a knowledge of the Ship, and Reflux of the
Sea, and the time Tides; for except a Master or Pilot know this, the Ship is in
danger when it is near Shoars, or Sands, whereof most in the greatest Increase
of the Water do not hinder the passage of the Ship; but most do in the
Decrease. So with a Flux, the Navigation is more facile to the Shore, and to
the Inlets of Rivers; and the contrary is discovered in the Reflux.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Knowledge of Places, viz. the North, South, East, and West, and the
Intermedial Quarters.
Proposition I.
In every place to know the Plagas, viz. the North, South, East, and West, and
the Intermedial
THe knowledge of this is the most necessary Problems of the whole Art of
Navigation, seeing that a Ship must be guided to some Quarter, which, if
unknown, there can be no direction, and the very defect of this Knowledge alone
hindered the Navigations of the Ancients; and in this is the chief difference
between the Ancient and Modern Navigation. For the Ancients had not a Method,
by which at any time in the large Ocean they might know where was the North,
South, or other Quarters; therefore they could not, nor durst they commit
themselves to the vast Ocean, but only Coasted the Shoars.

The Ancients had a double Method (which serves also to the Modern Navigation)
of finding out the Quarters; (Now this Problem is the same with that, to find
out the Meridian Line, and the North and South Quarters, for these being known
it is easy to know the rest) First, by the Stars, viz. in the Night the Bear,
or the Helice and Polary Star, so called, in the extremity of the Tail of Vrsa
Minor (of great fame amongst the Ancients) which showed the North Quarter,
whence all the rest are found; for the face being turned to the North, the East
is at the Right Hand, and the West on the Left, the Line of which Quarters at
right Angles cuts the Line of the North and South. And these Cardinal Quarters
being found, it is easy to find the Intermedial Quarters, unto which purpose,
that there may be no need of a description, they had a Circle made with the
Quarters, whose Northern Line being placed above the Northern Line of any
place, the other Quarters at one sight are discovered. But in the Day they
sought out the Quarter by the Rising or Setting of the Sun.

2. The other Method of the Ancients for knowing the Quarters, was the
knowledge of the situation, or extension of the Shoars, and one Promontory to
the other. For seeing the Quarter of this Extension was known to them either
from Maps, or from Observation and Experience, they might in Navigation (by
seeing them) know the other Quarters; (for one Quarter being known, all the
rest are known,) therefore the Ancients did not far depart from the Coasts,
viz. that they might know the Quarter by the benefit of the known Quarter of
the Extension of Shoars; for they could not always use the Method of the Stars,
and the Rising and Setting of the Sun.

3. The Third Method of the Ancients, of the knowledge of the Quarters, was the
observed Course of the Ship; for going from any place, and guiding the Ship to
the known Quarter, they were able from the mutation of the Course of the Ship
to know the Quarters.

But at this Day, the Method of knowing the Quarters in all places, and of
finding out the Line of the North and South, is facile by the benefit of the
Lodestone, There are two opposite Points in the Lodestone, whereof one
always, and in all places, turns it self to the North, or the adjacent
Quarter; the other, to the South, and so the other Points of the Magnet respect
the other Quarters; but all of them are not considered, but only those two
Points, viz. the North and South, which are termed the Poles of the Magnet, the
one Northern, the other Southern.

And the same Virtue is communicated to the Needle, but by an inverted and
contrary operation of Nature; for the end of the Needle which is touched at the
North Pole of the Magnet, does not convert it self to the North, but to the
South; and that end which is rubbed at the South Pole of the Lodestone turns
to the North.

Seeing that the Magnet has this property, therefore by its help it is easy
to find in any part of the Earth, or Sea, the North and South, whence all other
Quarters are soon known.

Proposition. II.
There are so many Quarters as there are Points in
THe Portugals call these Quarters Rhumbs; the Dutch, de Course, although they
attribute these Terms also to the Loxodromical part. Intermedial Quarters, they
do that by the division of a space lying between two Quarters.

Proposition. III.
The Magnetical Needle (as the Poles of the Magnes it self) in very few places,
does respect the very Quarter of the North and South; but in most places
declineth a little from that toward
YEt at one of the Isles of the Azores, called El Corvo, there is no
Declination, but the Needle shows the exact Northern Point.

The same is observed in some places of the same Meridian, but not in all parts
of it. In Isle toward the East, (even to the Promontory of the Procurrent of
Africa, called Cabo das Angulhas, not far from the Promontory of Good-hope) the
Needle declineth from the North toward the East, in an equal Declination, even
to the Islands of Tristan de Cunha; and the Declination augmenteth a part more
remote by 70 Degrees; so that it is there about 13 Degrees; then again it
decreaseth to the places adjacent to the Promontory de Angulhas, Declination.
From that place toward the Indies the Declination of the Needle begins from
the North toward the West at Hamburgh; the Chalyboclisis of 90 Degrees. At
Amsterdam at this time about five; for the time past it was greater.

Now Observations testify, that this Declination does not remain the same, but
changes in Course of time; for at London in Anno 1580, it was observed 11
Degrees 15 Minutes; but in Anno Degrees, 13 Minutes; and in Anno 1634, it was 4
Degrees 6 Minutes. And the Observations were performed not only by the new, but
old Needles also. At Paris in Anno 1640, the Declination was observed 3 Degrees
which in Anno 1610, was found 8 Degrees, the same was also observed in other
places.

Proposition IV.
To find the Declination of the Magnetic Needle, from the true Quarter of the
North, in any place.
LEt the Meridian Line be sound from the Heaven, as has been showed in the xx
Chapter of Varenius his Art of Cosmography; and the Declination of the
Magnetical Needle will soon be discovered. But the following Proposition will
show the more easy Method for the use of Seamen.

Proposition V.
To explain the Terms of Navigation, which are used in designing of this
Declination, and the correction of the Mariners Compass, and the Modes which
Saylors use to find out this Declination in the Sea.
IN the Composition of the Compass, the defect of the Declination is amended,
or corrected, viz. the Declination of the Needle, being known in the place, for
which the Instrument is prepared, that Needle must not be affixed to the Line
of the Chart, which has the Flower de Lis, and should be the Index of the
North, but under that Line, which is removed so many Degrees from the Line of
the North, as the Declination of the Loadstone has been found to have toward
the Line of the East or West; for so the Lily. And the Line of the North, will
show the true North, although the Needle may Decline.

But for the use of Navigation, because in diverse places there is a different
Declination, the Needle ought to be fitted to the Chart, that it may be carried
round, the Needle remaining immovable, and the Line of that Quarter may be
brought above the Needle, which the observed Declination shall show; for so the
same Instrument shall serve for all places.

Now for the finding out of the Declination of the Magnetic Needle from the
true Line of the North and South, thus many Mariners do act. They observe the
Quarter of the Compass in which the Sun does rise; and the Quarter of the West,
in which the Sun sets; for although that then they are in another place, yet
they are absent a small Interval from the former in which the Declination is
not varied.

If these Quarters of the Compass are equally distant from the Quarter of the
Compass in the North, then it is a sign that the Needle in that place has no
Declination, and so there is no need of Correction, but the Needle ought to
remain under the Line of the North: But if the Quarter of the Eastern Sun, be
further distant than the Quarter of the Western Sun from the Quarter of the
North, then it is a sign that the Needle declineth in that place from the true
Line of the North, toward the West: But lastly, if the Quarter of the Eastern
Sun be farther distant than the Western Sun from the Northern Quarter of the
Chart, it is a sign that the Nedle declineth toward the East. The Quantity of
the Declination is thus known: Let the Arches intercepted between the Northern
Quarter of the Compass, and the East and West Quarters of the Sun, be noted;
let the lesser Arch be deducted from the greater; then half of the residue is
the Declination Sought, and so many Degrees the North Line of the Chart, must
be removed from the Magnetical Needle.

Mariners use sometimes another Method, viz. They observe the Quarter of the
Compass, in which the Sun is discovered any time after his rising, and at that
time they observe the Altitude of the Sun. Then after Noon they expect, or wait
until they find the Sun to come unto the same Altitude; which being found, they
observe the Quarter of the Compass, in which the Sun was then beheld; for these
Quarters, or Arches intercepted between them and the Quarter of the North, the
Declination of the Needle is found after the same Method, as before spoken of.

Sometimes Mariners skilful in Trigonometry, or by the help of an Universal
Planisphere, use a third, or fourth Method, viz. when that immediately by one
Observation the Declination of the Needle must be enquired to know the
Quarters, for either they observe the Quarter, of the Compass, in which the Sun
rises or sets; or they observe the Quarter in which Sun, at any observed
Altitude.

Then by a Trigonometrical Calculation, or a Catholic Planisphere; they find
in what Quarter the Sun truly sticks at this time of the rising, or Altitude.
The Difference of this, or that Quarter observed on the Compass, is the very
Declination of the Needle.

Proposition VI.
To show those things which withdraw the Magnetic
THe chief are these, 1. The blunt extremity, or less sharpness of the Pin on
which the Needle is fixed, 2. Some matter in the Hole that receives the
Needle, 3. If the Paper or Rose lies beyond its Horizontal Situation, 4. Some
Air. And, 5. The vicinity of Iron. These hindrances of the true showing must be
avoided.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the HISTIODROME, or LINE of the COURSE of a SHIP.
Proposition I.
If that any two places be situate in one Meridian, or if that another place be
situated from some place toward the Quarter of the North, or South, that same
place shall be situated toward the same Quarter of the North or South, from
all those places or Points which are interposed between those two places first
assumed, one of the two places lying in the same Meridian, from another, and
from all intermedial Points is situated toward the same Quarter of the North,
or South.
THe truth of the Proposition is manifest, if that it be rightly conceived. By
places intercepted between two Points or places are understood all Points,
which are the intercepted Arch of the great Circle, drawn through the two
Points, first assumed; or of the Points of that Arch, which shows the
shortest distance. Let that place at which the situation of the other place is
expended, be termed the first; and that other whose situation is expended, be
termed the second. And for the more easy understanding, the first place is so
to be conceived, that it may be the same in the middle of the whole Earth, or
in the middle of the circumjacent Regions; and by reason that it is situated in
the Brazen Meridian of the Globe, infinite Verticals are drawn through it by
the circumjacent places to the Horizon, and so the situation of all the rest of
the places is expended at it, or the distance from the Meridian of it, or of
its Angles which they make Vertical with the Meridian.

The cause of the Proposition is, because that the Angle which the Meridian of
the first place makes with the Vertical of the first place drawn through that
second place, denotes the situation of the second to the first, or to the
Quarter. Now if we conceive all the Points interposed between the two places
assumed of one Meridian, (for these are they of which the one toward the
other, lies toward the Quarter of the North or South,) it is manifest that
the Meridian of every one of them is the same with the Vertical, which is drawn
through every one from, or through either place assumed, that is, that there is
no Angle between the Meridians, and Verticals; wherefore the place assumed is
situated at every interposed Point toward the Quarter of the North and South.

Proposition II.
If that any two places be assumed in the Equator, unto one of which, or the
first, the situation of the other or second be to be examined, the second
situated from the first in the chief Quarter, shall be the East, or West, and
the second shall be situated in the same Cardinal Quarter, to all the places
interposed; or one place of two lying
FOr the more easy understanding of this, let any place in the Equator be
taken, and so placed, that the wooden Horion may become the Horizon of it, that
is, that the Poles of the Earth, may be in the Horizon it self; then let the
second place in the Equator be taken, East or West. For the Equator is
Vertical to it, which is drawn from the first place through the second
Perpendicular to the Horizon, and cuts the Meridian Line, at right Angles; the
same is also true concerning all the interjected Points, which if that they be
brought to the Brass Meridian, the Wooden Horizon shall be their Horizon, and
the Equator Vertical of them which cuts the Meridian Line at right Angles, and
passes through the second place; therefore this second place shall be situated
to all those interjected Points in one and the same Cardinal Quarter of the
East or West.

Proposition III.
If that the second place with the first be not situated
FRom this Proposition depends the knowledge of the Original of Lines which the
Ship makes; therefore this ought to be well understood.

Let any two places be taken in the Globe, which neither of them are in the
Equator, nor in one Meridian, (for in these two kinds of situation the Quarter
of the second place is not varied at the intermedial places). For Example, Let
Amsterdam be taken for the first place from whence the Voyage is to be begun,
and Fernambuck in Brasil for the second, or unto which the Voyage is appointed.
Let Amsterdam therefore be brought to the Brass Meridian; Pole be Elevated for
the Latitude of the same (for so the Wooden Horizon represents the Horizon of
the place), let the Quadrant be affixed to the Vertex, and let it be applied to
Fernambuck, it will show the Quarter in the Horizon in which Fernambuck lies
from Amsterdam. And the Arch interjected between these two places exhibiteth on
the Globe the intermedial Points. It must therefore be showed, that the
Quarters in which Fernambuck lies from every one of these Points are not the
same, but all diverse, or that from every one of these intermedial places
Fernambuck does not lie toward one and the same Quarter.

For the understanding of this, we must repeat from the preceding Doctrine that
the Angle with the Meridian of this assumed place makes, which the Vertical
passing through the other place, shows the Quarter of another place from some
one place assumed; or the Arch of the Horizon, intercepted between the Meridian
and this Vertical, as the Angle shows the Quarter of Fernambuck from
Amsterdam, which the Quadrant* with the Brass Meridian^ makes (which is of
Amsterdam it self). Therefore to prove the truth of this Proposition, let what
Points you please be taken between Amsterdam and Fernambuck in the Arch,
subject to the Quadrant, and let the Meridians passing through by them be
conceived. It is best to take those Points, through which on the Globe the
Meridians pass (or the Circles of Longitude); because therefore the Quadrant
passes through every one of these places, and Fernambuck it self, it will
represent the Vertical of every place, in which Fernambuck lies from them.
Therefore the Angles which it makes which the Meridians of each place, are the
Angles of Position, and show the Quarters in which, or toward which Fernambuck
lies from every intermedial place. Now these Angles are unequal, and of a
different Magnitude; therefore the Quarters also, toward which Fernambuck
lies from those places, are diverse. Now that these Angles are unequal, is
manifest from the very Sight; or more evident, if that by any Interval of the
Compass, you draw an Arch from each Point, and measure these Arches intercepted
between each Meridian and the Vertical: Or if that we have ready by it self a
crooked portion, which may be fitted to the Superficies of the Globe; or if
that the places themselves be brought to the Brazen Meridian, and the Pole be
elevated for their Latitude, let the Quadrant be applied to the Vertex, and to
Fernambuck, and in that situation let the Degrees of the Arch of the Horizon be
reckoned.

Therefore the straight lined Maps, and Sea Charts are very defective, which do
so represent the places, that if that any two places be taken, at one of which
the Situation or Quarter of the other be examined, this other does seem to be
in one and the same Quarter from the intermedial places, which yet is false;
the cause of which is, that they exhibit the Meridians Parallels, which yet do
meet in the Poles: But few Seamen regard this fault, so that they do but relate
the Course or Quarter which they ought to have observed in Sailing from one
place to another.

Proposition IV.
If a Voyage be to be made, or that a Ship be to Sail from one place to another
(which two* places are not in one Meridian, or both of them in one Equator) by
a most short Cut, or by this means, that it may never recede from the
interposed Arch of the Vertical, in such a Voyage the Quarter is changed every
moment, or the Quarter
THis Proposition is manifest from the foregoing. For let the Voyage be taken
from Amsterdam to Fernambuck by the nearest way, that is, through the Arch of
the Quadrant affixed at Amsterdam, and passing through by Fernambuck; because
therefore every where in the Fernambuck; and it is showed in the precedent
Proposition, that the Quarters are diverse, toward which from those middle
Points Fernambuck lies; therefore it is manifest, that the Quarter becomes
another and another in every Moment, and in each Point into which the Ship is
to Sail, or to be Sailed, that it may respect Fernambuck.

But if that the places be situated in one Meridian, Equator, the case is
otherwise; for in them the same Quarter of the Voyage of the North or South
remains; in these the Cardinal Quarter of the East or West.

Proposition V.
A Voyage cannot be so undertaken, or a Ship so directed, that it may tend in
each moment to other and other Quarters; but for some time at
A Ship cannot tend from one Quarter to another in a moment of time; but whilst
Seamen should know the Quarters unto which the Ship should be Sailed, if that
another Quarter were so often to be assumed.

Therefore it is evident, that that Passage between two places is most
commodious for Navigation, whose every two vicine Points are situated in one
and the same Quarter, so that the Ship may be continually directed unto one
Quarter, Ship? which Way indeed, if that the places be situated in one
Meridian, shall be part of the Meridian it self: If in the Equator, that Way
shall be a portion of the Equator it self: If in a Parallel, it shall be a
part of this Parallel: If in any other Circle besides these, that Way shall be
another Line, not that Circle, as shall be showed hereafter.

Proposition VI.
If that a Voyage be appointed, or that a Ship be directed to the North or
South Quarter, (that is, if that the place from whence, and the place unto
which be in one Meridian) the Line of the Motion of the Ship it self shall be a
part of the Meridian.
IT has been already proved, for the place required at all the Intermedial
places, that is, at the Points of the Arch of the Meridian is situated in one
and the same Quarter of the North and South, as is there said. And by the
preceding Proposition such a way is commodious for Navigation, from place to
place, whose every two vicine Points are situated in one and the same Quarter.
Wherefore seeing that the Arch of the Meridian is such a way, that shall be the
Way or Line of the motion of the Ship, viz. which the Ship by its motion
describes, whilst that it is continually directed, or steered to the North or
South.

Proposition VII.
If that a Voyage be appointed from any place situated in the Equator toward
the East, or West Quarter, the Line of the Motion is a portion of the Equator
it self.
YOu are already showed, that if two places be taken in the Equator, the
first, from whence the second, unto which the Voyage is appointed; that the
second is situated in one and the same East and West Quarter from all the
interposed Points, that is, from the Points of the Arch of the Equator it
self. Because therefore the Ship is continually directed unto these Quarters,
the Arch of the Equator interposed between these two places shall be the way
of the Motion of the Ship. And because we have already supposed, that such a
Way between two places is to be chosen, and is commodious for Navigation, viz.
whose every two vicine Points are situated in one and the same Quarter, such a
portion of the Equator shall be chosen for the Way of the Ship.

Proposition VIII.
If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place situated without the Equator,
toward the East or West Quarter, so that the Ship continually may be directed
to either of these Quarters, the circumference of the vertical Circle shall not
be the Line of the Motion of the Ship; but the Parallel of the Equator, viz.
the Circle of the Latitude of the place from which the Voyage is appointed.
FOr because that a Ship, whilst it tends from one* Meridian to another, is
supposed to have respect to the same Quarter* it will not remain in the
Vertical, but presently into another Point of the vicine Meridian, viz. which
is a Point of the Parallel of the Equator, or of the Circle of the Latitude of
the place whence the Departure was made. For every Point of this Circle is
such, that the Tangent Lines of this Circle being brought unto them, may
respect the Quarter of the East and West of each of these Points. Furthermore,
the Keel of the Ship, because that it is continually supposed to be directed
Quarters, always shall touch this Parallel in any Point. Or by reason that any
two Points of this Parallel are such, that one is situated from the other
toward one and the same Quarter of the East and West, and the Ship is supposed
continually to be directed unto this Quarter, neither is there any other Line
on the Globe, whose Points are so directed; therefore it follows, that the Way
of the Motion of the Ship is this Parallel of the Latitude of the

From the three foregoing Propositions we collect, that if a Voyage be
undertaken from any place, or that the Ship be continually directed toward any
Cardinal Point, that the Way of the Ship is circular.

Proposition IX.
If that a Voyage be appointed from one place to
FOr that Line is chosen for the Navigation of the Ship, by which we arrive at
the place appointed, by directing the Ship continually to one and the same
Quarter. And any two of the Points of the Parallel of the Circle are Parallel
shall be the way of the Motion of the Ship.

There is therefore a threefold Situation of Places, from one of which to the
other, when a Voyage is undertaken, the way of the Navigation is the Periphery
of the Circle. 1. If that both places be in one Meridian. 2. If that both be in
the Equator: And 3. If that both be in one Parallel, or Circle of Latitude. In
the two former kinds of Situation, the Way or Line of Navigation is the same
with the Distance or shortest Way: But in the third Situation, the Line of the
Navigation is diverse from the shortest Way; for this is the Arch of the
greatest Circle, interjected between two places. In any other Situation of
Places, the Way of the Navigation cannot be the Periphery of the Circle, as is
just now showed.

Proposition X.
If that a Voyage be undertaken from any place toward any Quarter not
Cardinal, so that the Ship may be continually directed to that Quarter, the
Motion of the Ship is not circular, but a crooked Line, and encompassing the
Earth with infinite Bendings and Windings.
SUppose a Ship to Sail from some place, when she has arrived to the vicine
Meridian Point, it is directed toward the Point of the following, or nearest
Meridian, which is situated in the same Quarter unto the first Point, in which
this is first to the first place, and so also in the following Meridians. Now
these Points of all the Meridians do not make the Periphery of the Circle, but
a solid crooked Helicoides. A distinct explication of this matter is more
easily showed on the Globe, than by many words.

Loxodromy is a Way or Line of Motion, which the Ship makes whilst it moves
from one place continually toward one Quarter not Cardinal.

This is the Nominal definition; but the Essential definition of this Line,
that is, the knowledge of the Nature and Properties of it is most difficult;
for neither is it an Helix, as many think, neither does it depend on any
property of the Lodestone, who say, that it has its existency thence, because
the Ship follows the conduct of the Lodestone; neither is it composed of the
Minute Particles of many Peripheries, as Nonnius says. Neither is the
Explication of Snellius plain, who says, that Loxodromy is an Heliocoidical
Line in the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe, with a right Line touching
about every where with the Meridians in total, by contact it comprehends those
Points, equal Angles to those drawn out; for Snellius does not explain how such
a Tangent ought to be conceived, or how to be drawn: And to speak properly,
Loxodromy has not Right Lines Tangent, because it is a solid Line, when that
Tangents are drawn to plain Lines to a Curvature; for in solid Lines infinite
Tangents may be brought to any Point. Moreover, that Definition may also agree
to other Draughts of Lines, when unto any Point of such a Meridian, such a
Tangent, and crooked Line may be conceived to be drawn from the vicine Meridian.

Also our Definition may be thus proposed: Loxodromy is a crooked Line,
encompassing the Earth with many windings, every Point of which lies from all
its other Points in appearance in one and the same Quarter; or in which, if
that two Points be taken, one Point lies from another, and all the Intermedial
Points in one Quarter; or from any Point of which if that Circular Arches be
drawn unto all the rest of the Points, these Arches make equal Angels with the
Meridian, which passes through all these several Points.

Proposition XI.
If that a Voyage be undertaken from one place to another, which is not
situated with the former in the same Meridian, or Equator, nor Parallel; and
in the whole Voyage the Ship be directed to that Quarter in which the place
designed is situated from the place of the Departure, you shall never by this
Voyage come to
THis notable property of Navigation seemed miraculous to Mariners when that it
was first observed, which happened in the time of Petrus Nonnius, the Portuguez
Mathematician, who wrote two Books of this Subject; after him many
Mathematicians labored in the explanation of this matter, or crooked Line: And
lastly, Mariners found it necessary for the Nautick use, and thence Tables were
made.

But the cause of this Phenomenon is, that the Ship being continually directed
unto that Quarter in which the second place from the first is situated, it
remains not in the Periphery intercepted between these places, but whilst
that it comes to one Point; because here is a new Horizon, and another Quarter
the extension of the assumed Course; and this is continually Points, thence
existeth the crooked Helicoidical Line, in which whilst that the Ship is moved
in some places, it is more and more removed from the determined place, and else
where it approaches more near.

Proposition XII.
When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one Place toward another, situated in
the same
1. WHen a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and both are
in the Equator, the Ship shall be guided into that Quarter, in which the other
place lies from the Quarter of the East or West, or the Line of the Equator
is to be taken for the Way of the Ship.

2. When a Voyage is to be undertaken from one place to another, and that they
are both situated in one Parallel of the Equator, the Ship is not to be guided
unto that Quarter, in which this other place from the first lies, or which is
extended from the first to the other; for the Ship would never arrive at the
other place, but would Poles: But the Course must be made into the Quarter of
the East or West; for whilst that the Ship tends unto that, it describes by
its Motion the Parallels of the Equator, and so arriveth at the other place.

3. When a Voyage is to be made from one place to another, which are neither in
one Meridian, nor both in the Equator, neither in one Parallel of the
Equator; the Ship must not be guided to that Quarter in which the other place
from the first lies; for it would never arrive to the other place, but the
Motion of the Ship would describe the Loxodrome, which would not pass through
another place: But the Course must be directed unto that Quarter into which
(whilst the Ship moves) it describes the Loxodrome, which passes through
another place into that Quarter, whose Angle with the Meridian is equal to the
Inclination, or the Loxodrome, which passes through these two places.

Proposition XIII.
Infinite Loxodromes may proceed, or be conceived from any place of the Earth,
as there are infinite Verticals; but yet there are only 28 reckoned about every
place, viz. 7 in the Quadrant, between the Meridian of the place, and the
Parallel of the place, so that they divide that right Angle into 8 equal parts,
and the 2 vicine are distant an equal Angle; Yet the Parallel it self is termed
an Eighth Loxodrome.
BUt they are called by the same Names by which the Winds, or Quarters are
named. On the Globe they are beheld to proceed and turn round about the Earth
from the Center of the Compass, or also from other Points of the Meridian. But
in Nautick use, the Intermedial Loxodromes are denominated by a distance from
the adjacent Loxodromes: For Example, in a third part, a fourth part more
North, more East.

Proposition XIV.
A Loxodrome intercepted between two places is almost, or according to the
sense, equal to the Hypothenusa of a right Lined plain Triangle, whose one
Cathetus is of an equal distance of Latitude of those two places; the other
Cathetus is of an equal difference of Longitude of the places taken in the
Parallel, which is in the Middle, between the Parallel of those two places.
SUch Triangles are termed Loxodromical; but places very near are to be taken
for an accurate Calculation, that a small portion may be interposed, viz.
places whose difference of Latitude is only of one Scruple.

Proposition XV.
The Parts of the Loxodrome intercepted between Parallels distant by an equal
Interval are Equal.
THerefore many small Loxodromical Triangles are conceived in each Loxodrome;
of which, if that the Loxodrome of one be supputed, you have the quantity of
the Loxodrome from one place into another, whose Latitude is known.

Proposition XVI.
The Latitude, and difference of Longitude of two places being given, to find
out the Loxodrome, by which you may Sail from one place to another; or two
places being given on the Globe, or Map, to find out the Quarter unto which the
Ship is to Sail, or to be brought from one place to the other.
THis is the chief, or rather the only Problem of the whole Art of Navigation,
unto which all the rest are to be referred. If that there be no difference of
Latitude, the Loxodrome shall not be the Way of the Ship, but the Parallel of
those places which yet is commonly termed the Eighth Loxodrome; because after
the same Mode (as the other Loxodromes) it is generated by the Motion of the
Ship, which is directed Eastern or Western chief Quarter. If that therefore
there be no difference of Latitude, they say that the Eighth Loxodrome ought to
be taken, and the Ship must be Steered to the chief Oriental, or Occidental
Quarter in the whole Navigation. For although it be not directed to the
appointed place, yet by this false Direction the Ship shall be brought to the
place.

If that there be no difference of Longitude, the Way of the Ship shall not be
Loxodromical; Meridian in which both the places lie, and the Quarter of the
North or South is taken for the Direction of the Ship.

But if the places given be of a different Latitude and Longitude, and that you
are minded to work by the Globe, let the given Latitude be noted on the Brazen
Meridian; and if the Parallel of one Latitude have in it the Center of any
Compass, or from whence the Loxodromical Lines were drawn; let this be brought
on the Globe to the Meridian, under the noted Degrees of Latitude; then let the
Globe be turned round until so many Degrees of the Equator pass through the
Meridian, as there are Degrees in the difference of Longitude; and then let it
be observed, whether any Point of the Loxodrome (brought from the Center) be
under the noted Point of the Meridian, that is, the Loxodrome sought, and it
shows unto what Quarter the Ship is to be directed, that it may arrive from
Point of the Loxodrome under the noted Point of the Meridian, the Loxodrome
Intermedial between those two near to that Point must be taken.

But if that the Center of any Compass be to b^ found in neither Parallel of
the Latitude from which the Loxodromes were drawn, let some Loxodrome be chosen
which may appear near to that demanded, and let it be brought to one Latitude,
or of the Meridian; and let the Globe be turned (as before) until that the
difference of Longitude pass through the Meridian.

This being done, if that any Point of the assumed Loxodrome be under either
noted Point of the Meridian, the taken Loxodrome shall be that which is
demanded. If that such a Point be not found, another Loxodrome must be taken,
and you must do as before, until such an one be found; any Point of which being
found, let it be removed under the other noted Point of the Meridian, or at
least no long Interval from it, and the Loxodrome shall be denominated from
those nigh it, amongst which it is to be conceived as the midst.

In Sea Charts it is performed after this Mode, as the Quarter of one place is
found from another, which Method in Maps of equal Degrees of Latitude is
faulty; but in Maps of unequal Degrees of Latitude, it accurately enough
discovers the Loxodrome or Quarter unto which the Ship is to be Sailed.

Also Mariners have another Method easy enough, in which by the Solution of a
Plain right Angled Triangle the Loxodrome of Navigation is found; but to that
Method they use a Table, which they call a Table of Increasing Latitude.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Chief Problem of the Art of Navigation, viz. of finding out a Place in
the Maps, unto which the Voyage being performed, we arrive at a certain time;
or of finding out the Longitude, and Latitude of this Place.
Proposition I.
The Quarter cannot be known unto which the Ship is to be Sailed, that it may
come to the appointed place, except that the place be known in which the Ship
was at that time.
WE have said in the former Chapter, that this is the chief Problem of the
Mariners Art, concerning the finding out of the Quarter to which the Ship is to
be directed; but that cannot be found, except that the place be known whence the
Ship is to be directed; therefore the Solution of the Problem for finding out
the Place is necessary.

Proposition II.
To find the Place in the Maps, at which the Ship arriveth, or touches at any
time.
THis is that Work which the Dutch call, Het besteck in de Pas-kae^^. They note
with a Pin every Day on the Map the place to which they suppose the Ship to
have touched, that by this means they may discover in what place they are, and
unto what Quarter the Ship is to be Sailed. They use a threefold Method in this
Affair, as they suppose this or that to be more rightly observed.

1. The Rhumb being observed in which the Ship was directed from the place of
the first Day, or from the place given on the Map, or the Rhumb in which the
Ship was moved, and the quantity in the Interim of the Voyage made, being
observed. These two things being known, the place of the Ship is found thus on
the Map: Rule, or Compass be taken, and one Shank of it be applied to the place
of the former Day, or from which the Ship departed; let the other Shank be
applied to the Vicine Line, which represents the observed Quarter, or Course:
Let the Point of the Shank be noted with Chalk, which is eminent over the place
of the Departure. Then by the Interval of the Compass, let the Miles of the
performed Voyage be taken from the opposite Scale, and let one Foot of the
Compass Rule be moved on the Line of the Quarter until the other Foot of the
Compass touch the noted Point of the Rule. The place of the Map that is subject
to that Point in that situation of the Rule, is that demanded, viz. in which
the Ship then is.

But if that you determine to find out more accurately the Point on the Map by
Calculation, or the place of the Ship it self, the Problem shall Latitude and
Longitude of one place being given, and the Quarter being given in which they
Sailed unto the other place, with the Voyage performed, to find out the
Latitude and Longitude of the other place. For these being found, you may more
accurately note the place of the Ship on the Map.

2. The Quarter being observed in one known place, to another unknown, and the
Latitude of this other, or Elevation of this Pole being observed, Map.

Let one Shank of the Rule be applied to the Quarter observed near the place;
and let the other Shank be placed on the place known (or whence the Voyage is
begun) and make there on the Shank a Mark with a Chalk; then let the Shank
applied to the Quarter be moved until the other noted Point of the Shank
applied to the Quarter fall in on the Parallel of the observed Latitude. For
the Point of the falling in, is the place sought, viz. the place of the Ship.
But if that there be no Parallel of Latitude observed on the Map, let the
Degrees intercepted between this Latitude and the Vicine Parallel,) be taken by
the interval of the Compass, on the Lateral Line. And let the Rule in the Line
of the Quarter, and one Foot of the Compass, be moved together in this
Parallel, until the other Foot of the Compass, and the noted Shank do meet; the
Ship. Seamen use two Pair of Compasses.

If that you will determine more accurately by the Calculation of the place
demanded on the Map, or Earth it self, the Problem is this: The Latitude and
Longitude of one place being given, and the Quarter in which the Navigation is
appointed to another place, and the Latitude of this place given to find his
Longitude; for the Latitude and Longitude given is the place it self.

3. The quantity of the Voyage performed, from one known place to another
unknown, being observed, and the Latitude of this other being observed, to find
this other on the Maps.

Let the quantity of the Voyage performed, be taken by the Interval of the
Compass, from the opposite Scale. Then if the Parallel through the Degree of
Latitude be observed on the Map, let one Foot of the Compass be placed on the
noted place, the other Foot on this Parallel. This Point shall be the place
demanded. But if the Parallel pass not through the Degree of Latitude, let one
Shank of the Rule be applied to the Vicine Parallel; on the other Shank let the
Degree of Latitude be noted, and let the Rule be moved until the other Foot of
the Compass touches the noted Point of the Rule. The place of the Map subject
to the Point in this Situation shall be the sought for place of the Ship.

If that a more accurate invention is required by Calculation, the Problem
shall be this: The Latitude and Longitude of one place being given, and the
distance of the other on the Line of Navigation, and the Latitude of this, to
find out the Latitude of this other. For this being known, when the Latitude is
observed you have the Situation of the place it self on the Maps, or Earth.

The 4th and 5th Method also of finding out of this place is also given, viz.
in which the Longitude of the other, or sought for place is supposed to be
observed; but the Latitude is unknown. But because that very seldom the
Longitude can be observed on the Sea, therefore this Method is omitted, as
useless. But he that desires more concerning this Method, let him read
Snellius, Stevens, Metius and others that have treated at large thereof.

Proposition III.
To conjecture to what Quarter the Ship is moved, and in what Rhumb, although
the Signs be fallacious.
IN this solution of the former Proposition for the finding out the place of a
Ship, those things as noted were taken and observed, 1. The Quarter unto which
the Ship is moved, and the Rhumb in which. 2. The way made. 3. The Latitude of
the place unto which it has arrived. Now therefore we must show how these
three may be observed on the Sea, that they may be used for the finding out the
place; for if that these be not rightly known, or observed, the true place
shall neither be found or discovered. First therefore let us see concerning the
Quarter of the Course of the Ship, and the Rhumb.

The Pilots know the Quarter from the Compass, or Loadstone; For what Quarter,
or Rhumb of the Compass agrees with the Line of the conceived Longitude of the
Ship, the same is put into the Quarter of the Ship to be moved, and to describe
its Rhumb. For they seldom use the Sign taken from the Quarter of the apparent
rising and setting of the Sun, which they compute.

These Signs may be corrupted by diverse causes, so that they may deceive in
showing the Rhumb, or Quarter. 1. If that the Declination of the Magnetic
Needle, be uncertain in that place, and therefore the Quarters of the Compass
do not show the true Quarters. 2. If that the Sea in that place has a Flux to
a certain place; for it will Ship from the true Rhumb, although the Ship be
directed to the same Quarter: The Fluxes and Refluxes are the frequent cause of
this Error. And in many places of the Torrid Zone, a general motion is of
force, and in many places a stated and fixed motion from stated Winds. 3.
Winds, especially Storms remove the Ship from the Rhumb of their Voyage,
although they ply in the same Quarter. 4. The Fluxes of the Sea, which are
carried toward other Quarters, Ship with it. 5. The Rudder and Helm cannot be
moved by him that steereth unto any Quarter, as it ought to be, the Waves of
the Sea obstructing it. All these hinder the Ship to be moved in the same
Rhumb, whose Quarters are showed by the Compass. But how much it is drawn aside
must be learned by conjecture from the Vehemence of the Flood, and of its
Quarter, and the like; but the Method is very imperfect.

Proposition IV.
To cast up the Voyage made upon the Rhumb, to measure it at the given time
from the given place.
PIlots conjecture the same, 1. When they observe or know by experience what
Course a Ship is wont to make, with such a Wind. 2. If Sailed in the same
Meridian, or vicine Line with any Wind, and have observed the Latitude of the
place, in the beginning of the motion, and the Latitude of the place, in the
following time. For the difference of Latitude turned into Miles, shows the
Course made for so long a space of time, and such a Wind. Whence for the time
given and such a Wind continuing, the Course made is collected. 3. With more
Industry they measure the Boat and String; one end of which is fastened to the
Boat, and the other with the Globe is in the Ship; for the Ship remains
unmovable. Sailing is permitted to the Boat until it be removed 10 or 12
Orgyas of the String, and the time elapsed between is observed. And from this,
for any time of the performed Course of the Ship is found out.

The Signs of the performed Sailing of the Ship are corrupted, and rendered
uncertain by Ship makes lesser, or greater Way than the Conjecture affords,
viz. because in many places of the Sea the Flux is unto a certain Quarter, or
the Billows are rouled unto a certain Quarter. If therefore the Ship be
directed into the same Quarter, the Way made will be greater than the
Conjecture makes it; but if into a contrary it will be lesser. 2. Because the
Ship is carried by other Causes into other Quarters, and so by Windings
arriveth at another place. 3. The Winds are variously changed. 4. By how much a
Ship has the greater Altitude, by so much its Motion seems more slow, though
it be not so.

Proposition V.
To observe the Latitude of a place to which a Ship is arrived.
THe Seamen observe it by the Sun in the Day, and by the Stars in the Night.
They use three Instruments, viz. the Astrolabe, the Radius, and the Triangle.

Proposition VI.
From whence it is manifest, That the Methods used by Seamen, to find the
places on the Maps to which they have arrived, are fallacious; because that
they can neither be certain of the Rhumb, or Quarter of the Way, or of the
Quantity of the Way made, or of the observed Latitude of the place: Yet the
observation of the Latitude of the place unto which they are arrived, because
that it is not less subject to Error, especially the Air and Sea being
tranquillous, may be exempted from this Fallacy.
BUt from that alone the place it self is not found on the Map, or Earth, but a
second is required, viz. either a distance from another place given, or a Rhumb
by which they Sail from the given place to that; or lastly, the Longitude of
that place from this. We have said, that the Observation of the Way made, or
Distance is uncertain, as also that of the Rhumb. Therefore they return back to
find out the Longitude of the place. For the Latitude and Longitude of the
place being known, the place it self is found on the Maps, and determined on
the Globe of the Earth.

Whence it is evident, That the Art of Navigation requires the Solution of this
Problem to the making up of its perfection: viz. to find out the Longitude of
the place where we are at any time, or on any day.

CHAP. X.
Of the Variation of the Weather.
ACcording to the Opinion of Aristotle, Pliny, and others, the Variation of the
Weather proceed from these Reasons: Viz. When the Sun rises fair and clear, it
denotes a fair Day; but if yellow, or deadish, it signifies a Tempest: When the
Sunbeams are red and short at the Rising, Rain proceeds; if the Clouds, or
Mists, make a Circle about the Sun or Moon, by how much the greater the Circle
is, by so much the greater shall the Tempest be; and if there be two Circles,
the Tempest will be greater: Also at the Rising of the Sun, if the Clouds are
red, it is a sign of a great Tempest. When the Moon rises bright, and shines
with a pure color, it is a sign of Fair weather; if Red, signifies Wind; and if
Black, Rain. If the Horns of the New Moon appear sharp, it denotes Fair
Weather; but Sun sets Red, it denotes a Fair day; but if the Heavens are Red
in the Morning, it signifies a Tempest. When a Cloud rises in the West, it
shows Rain; and when the Wind is in the South, it produces Heat.

CHAP. XI.
Of TIDES; High and Low Waters.
TIDES by Mariners ought to be well and carefully observed, otherwise great
dangers may ensue in the entering into Ports, passing Flats and the like. Now
for the better knowledge of the Tides, or the Increase and Decrease of the Sea,
it is agreed that the cause thereof proceeds from the Moon, which alters the
Tides sooner or later, according to the Age and Variation of the Moon.
Therefore to give you a Rule how you may (knowing the Age of the Moon) find out
the Tides in any part of the World: Observe this Rule; First, Note what Moon
makes a Full-Sea at the place desired, as also the Hour Compass; which done,
multiply the Age of the Moon by 4, divide the Product by 5, and add to the
Quotient the Hour which makes Full-Sea in that place upon the Change Day: If it
exceed 12, cast away 12 so often as you may, and the Hour of the Full Sea
remains; and to every Unite that remains upon your division, allow 12
Minutes, which add to the Hours; as if there remains 1, add 12 Minutes; if 2,
add 24; if 3, add 36, Moon being 12 Days old, to know what Hour it is High Water
at London Bridge. High Water being at 3 of the Clock, then according to the
former Rule, multiply the Age of the Moon (which is 12) by 4, which makes 48;
which divide by 5, and the Quotient will be 9, and 3 remaining, which added to
3, makes 12 Hours, 36 Minutes, which is the time of High Water at the same
place: And by this Rule knowing what Moon Full-Sea thereat, you may know the
Tides at any place; and this is to be performed by Tables fitted for the
purpose.

And seeing that the Alteration of the Tides does proceed through the effects
and operation of the Moon, it will be necessary to give you her Motions, by
which the Tides are known.

The Motions of the Moon are of two kinds, viz. a Natural, and a Violent
Motion: Her Natural Motion is from West to East, contrary to the Motion of the
First-mover, wherein the Moon has three differences of moving, viz. a swift, a
mean, and a slow Motion, all which is performed in 27 Days, and 8 Hours,
nearest through all the Degrees of the Zodiac.

Her Violent Motion is from the East toward the West, and is caused by the
violent swiftness of the Diurnal Motion of the Primum Mobile, in which Motion
the Moon is carried about the Earth in 24 Hours, and 50 Minutes, nearest one
day with another; for although the Diurnal Period of the First-mover be
performed in 24 Hours; yet because the Moon every day in her slowest Natural
Motion moves 12 Degrees, therefore she is not carried about the Earth until
that her Motion be also carried about, which is in 24 Hours, and 50 Minutes
nearest.

Her slow Motion is in the Point of Auge, or Apogeo, as being then farthest
distant from the Earth, and then she moves 12 Degrees in every Day.

Her swift Motion is in the Opposite of the Auge, or Apogeo, and then is
nearest to the Earth, at which time she moves 14 Degrees in every Day, or 24
Hours, with some few Minutes difference. And so between these two Points is her
mean Motion, and then she moves 13 Degrees nearest.

In every 24 Hours the Moon departs from the Sun 12 Degrees, or 48 Minutes of
time, and in this Separation she moves from the Sun Eastwards, until she be at
the Full; for between the Change and the Full it is called the Moons Separation
from the Sun; so that between the Full and the Change it is called the Moons
Application to the Sun, in which time of Application she is to be Westward of
the Sun, as in her Separation she is to be Eastward.

Then if the Moon does move 48 Minutes of time in 24 Hours, it is plain that
she moves 24 Minutes in 12 Hours, which is 2 Minutes in every Hour. And such
as is the difference of her Motion, such is the Alteration of the Tides, so
that every Tide differs from the former 12 Minutes; because there is 6 Hours
between Tide and Tide, and in every Hour the course of Flowing and Reflowing
alters 2 Minutes, by which it is visible, that in 24 Hours the 4 Tides of
Ebbing and Flowing differ 48 Minutes of time.

CHAP. XII.
Shows how to work your Observation, made at any STAR that rises or sets.
THe Rule for the STARS is the same as for the Sun, there being no difference,
but in the Declination. Therefore for a General Rule observe, The Declination,
which is of contrary denomination; As for Example, that which is South when you
are in North Latitude, or North when in South Latitude, is to be subtracted
from the Complement of the Meridian Altitude, except you are between the
Aequinoctial and the Star; or that the Stars Declination Zenith, for in such
case the Complement of the Stars Altitude, or Zenith Distance from the
Declination of the same Star is to be subtracted, and the Remainder will be the
Distance of your Zenith from the Aequinoctial, which is your Latitude.

Note, That the Stars that set not, come also to the Meridian under the Pole,
and then their Altitude is least of all. For to know when a Star draws near the
Meridian under the Pole, take a Plummet, or a Thread with Lead at the end, and
hold it so that it cuts the North Star in the middle; and if the Star you
observe begins to draw near the Thread, it will not be far from the Meridian.
Observe then its Altitude several times, until you find it ascend or rise; for
the least of all will be the Stars Meridian Altitude, to which if you add the
Complement of its Declination, or Pole Distance, you shall have Pole.

If you observe the Meridian Altitude of a Star that sets not when it is above
the Pole, whose height you would know, only subtract the Complement of that
Stars Declination from its highest Meridian Altitude, and the Remainder is the
height of the Pole.

The Height of the Pole of the Stars may be known without their Declination, or
Pole Distance, and that after this manner: Observe the highest Meridian
Altitude of a Star that does not set, and add them together, the half of the
Sum will be the height of the Pole.

The same is to be understood of any Star that does not set, as well in South
as in North Latitude: But you must not alter your Parallel until both
Observations are made; for if you should Sail by any other Rhumb than East or
West, it will cause some Error, which will be so much the greater the further
you are from the Parallel of your first Observation, when you observe the
lowest Altitude of the Star.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the North, or Pole Star, with a Table of its Distance from the Pole-Artick,
for the four Chief Points of the Compass the Guards are upon; as also to know
when the Guards are upon each Point of the Compass named on the said Table.
THe POLE STAR is so called, as being nearest to the North Pole, from which it
is distant 2 Degrees. 22 Min. This Star has a slower Motion than any other, as
having a lesser Circuit to move in, which it finisheth in 24 Hours, as all
other Stars do theirs.

The TABLE.
When the brightest of the Guards is D. M. North, subtract 2. 4. from the
Pole Star Altitude. East, add -- 1. 10. to the Pole Star Altitude. South, add
-- 2. 4. to your Observation at the North-Star. West, subtract 1. 10. from the
Pole Star Altitude; and the Remainder will be the height of the Pole, or
Latitude you are in.

For your knowing which of the 4 Points of the Compass the Guards are upon from
the North-Star, Suppose a Line drawn from your Zenith through the Pole Star to
the Horizon, and that shall be a Line of North or South, by which you shall
know when the Guards are North or South; For when you perceive the brightest of
the Guards exactly on that Line under the Pole Star, you may conclude that the
Guards are North; but when the brightest of the Guards is on the same Line
perpendicularly above the Pole Star, then the Guards are South; as for the
other two Points set down in the Table. Suppose likewise a Line of East and
West drawn Parallel to the Horizon through the Pole Star; and when you see the
brightest of the Guards on that Line with the Pole Star, and to the Right Hand,
you may conclude the Guards are East or West.

For the finding the height of the Pole-Artick by the North-Star, and the
Guards, you must stay until the brightest of the Guards be exactly upon one of
the Points of the Compass set down in the Table, (viz. either East, West,
North, or South, for the Pole Star) that being the best time to observe the
Altitude of the North-Star; to which if you add, or subtract what the Table
shows, you shall have the height of the Pole.

Note, That the Guards are East or West, when you find that the brightest of
them is neither higher, or lower than the North-Star; which may be soon
discovered by the Cross-Staff, or Quadrant, by observing the Altitude of the
North-Star.

DYALLING, OR HOROGRAPHY.
CHAP. I.
The several Sorts of SVN-DYALS.
DYALS are either moveable, being such that may be carried about them, as the
Cylinder and certain little Boxes, whose Needle (like Indexes) are touched with
the Lodestone; or Immovable, that is, fixed to some certain place. They are
also Regular, or Irregular; Regular are those that are described in a Plain,
disposed toward some one determined principal part of the World; For Example,
direct East, or direct West. The Irregular are those which do not directly
point to those principal parts of the World, but rather decline from them.

1. Of those Regular, the first is the Horizontal; Vertical Southward; the the
third, the Vertical Northwards; the fourth, the Meridian East; the fifth, the
Meridian West; the sixth, the Aequinoctial above; the seventh, the Aequinoctial
below; the eighth, the Polar above; and the ninth, the Polar beneath.

The Horizontal is that which is Aequidistant toward the Horizon.

The Vertical is that which is perpendicularly erected above the Horizon, and
tends directly Vertical Point, and it is Parallel to the Primary Vertical
Circle, and this is double, viz. North Vertical, as looking toward the other
which is South Vertical.

The two Meridians, viz. the Eastern and Western, each of them have their
several ways which are Aequidistant from the Meridian Circle.

The two Aequinoctials are those which each of them their several ways are
Aequidistant from the Equator, the one above, the other beneath Horizon.

The two Polars are those which each of them their several ways, the one above,
the other beneath, are Parallel to the Axis of the World.

The Irregular are either Declinant, or Inclinant.

The Declinant is that which is Aequidistant from any Vertical Circle, and it
is therefore also not amiss called Vertical; but it declines from the Primary
Vertical which is proporly so called, and it is of two sorts; for there is one
which declines from the South, either to the East, or West; and another that
declines from the North, either to the East, or West.

The Inclinant is that which falls off from the Vertical Point, and Inclines
toward the Horizon, as being not Aequidistant from it.

In respect of the Hours, Dyals are divided in Astronomical, Italick,
Babilonick, Ancient, or Judaick.

The Astronomical declares equal Hours from Noon to Midnight, and from Midnight
to Noon again; and it is principally in use all over Europe.

The Italick reckons equal Hours from West to West, so as that of the 24 Hours,
that is said to be the first Hour which is the Hour of the Suns setting, and
this would be called by us the 6th, 7th, or 8th Evening Hour, whereas on the
contrary the Babilonick reckons equal Hours from Sunrising to Sunrising.

The Ancient, or Babilonick reckons unequal Hours, as Chronology shows more at
large. I shall therefore treat only of Astronomical Dyals, because the
knowledge of them leads to all the rest.

CHAP. II.
What things in General are necessary for the Framing of a SUN. DYAL.
1. THe Elevation of the Pole is to be known, by which we are to determine of
the Center of the Hours, the Altitude of the Style, the ordering of the Dyal it
self, and all other things of that nature. Also the way of finding the Meridian
Line is to be known, to the end the Meridian Line of the Dyal may be rightly
placed under the Meridian of the place assigned. The Artist must also be
furnished with a Rule and Compass, as also with an Astronomical Quadrant, To
the Worshipful Thomas Stringer of Ivy Church near Salisbury in Wiltshire Esq^.

rightly divided into 90 Degrees, and wherein also there is rightly to be
described the Horary Line according to the Scheme; together with the Horary
Points, also according to the Scheme.

2. To perfect this Sun-Dyal three things in general are necessary; first, The
description of the Hours in the given Plain; Secondly, The Style, that is, as
to the Form and Altitude of it, and in what place it ought to be fixed; And,
Thirdly, The Application and Disposition of the Dyal it self thus finished.

It is to be noted, first in general for the describing of the Hours, that
there are commonly presupposed two right Lines cutting each other Cross-ways to
right Angles, whereof the one is the Meridian Line, or Line of the 12th Hour;
Occult Line, which cuts the first Cross-ways to right Angles: And this is also
vulgarly called the Line of Hours, because therein are designed the Horary
Points; but more properly the Aequinoctial Line, because it represents the
Aequinoctial Circle, which is the prime Rule of all Hours.

Note, Secondly, That all Hours (at least Astronomical, or Equal, are
distinguished proportionably among themselves by an Interval of 15 Degrees
orderly toward the Aequinoctial Circle; because in the space of one of these
Hours the Sun runs 15 Meridians, which pass through so many Degrees of the
Equator, whereupon an Astronomical Hour is thus defined. An Hour is the Space
of Time, in which the Sun runs through 15 Meridians, or in which 15 Degrees of
the Equator ascend above the Horizon, as has been before observed.

Note, Thirdly, That there is need of a Plum-Line, Dyal, the better to examine
whether it be Parallel to the Horizon, or Perpendicularly Vertical, etc.

CHAP. III.
To Frame an HORIZONTAL-DYAL.
FRom what has been said in the former Chapter, it is to be concluded that
three things are to be performed; First, The designing of the Horary Points;
Secondly, To find the Center of the Hours, from which the Hours, Circles, or
Lines are to be drawn through Points already found: And, Thirdly, the fixing
the place of the Style, and its Altitude. All which will be more distinctly set
forth in these following Problems.

Problem I.
To Design the Horary Points.


DRaw two Lines Cross-ways, viz. the Line a, b, (according to this Figure)
which is to be the Line of the 12th Hour, and also the obscure Line c, d, which
is to be the Aequinoctial, and to be expunged so soon as the Dyal is completed.

Next, from the Astronomical Quadrant, or Semicircle. For the purpose; Let the
Horary Points be transferred by the help of the Compass to the said
Aequinoctial Line; that is to say, Let those Points by a convenient extension
of the Compass be taken off from the Instrument, by fixing one Foot of the
Compass in the Concourse of the Meridian, and Aequinoctial Line, and extending
the other to the Spaces of the Hour sought; then keeping that extension, design
the sought Points in the Dyal, fixing the same Foot of the Compass likewise in
the Concourse of the Aequinoctial and Meridian Line of the said Dyal.

Observe, That the Morning-Hours are drawn in that part which is next the
Right Hand, the Evening-Hours in the opposite part. Note, Secondly, That in
this Aequinoctial Line there are only found of the Morning-Hours, 11, 10, 9, 8,
7; of the Evening, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Note, Thirdly, That after the Center of the
Hours is found, the description of the rest will of course be very easy as
hereafter shall be showed.

Problem II.
To find the Center of the Dyal, or of the Hour.
HEre chief regard is to be had of the Elevation of the Pole; for not any Dyal
of this sort will declare the Hours in any place, but only under a certain
Elevation of the Pole, which belongs to that Region for which the Dyal is made.

Suppose that in this Region or Country, the Pole be elevated 49 Degrees,
which is 41; then place the Foot of the Compass in the Center of the
Instrument, and extend the other Foot from thence to the Aequinoctial Line,
described in the said Instrument, in which part the 41th Degree is cut by the
Radius, numbering from the Line of of the 12th Hour. This extension of the
Compass transfer upon the Dyal, fixing one Foot of the Compass in the Concourse
of the Meridian, and Aequinoctial Line, viz. e; the other fix in a part of the
Meridian Line, that is, in f, and determine that point to be the Center of the
Hours; for from thence, and through each point marked Aequinoctial Line are all
the Lines to be drawn, which some call the Arches of the Hours, as in the
Scheme does appear.

But there is also to be drawn through that Center of the Hours a Line Parallel
to the Aequinoctial, which is to be the Line of the 6th Hour Morning and
Evening. Also the Lines of the Hours IV and V in the Evening, are to be drawn
out beyond the Center of Hours; for the Hours IV, and V in the Morning, (in
like manner as the Lines of the Hours VII and VIII in the Morning) are to be
drawn further out to design the Hours VII and VIII in the Evening. Thus you
have a perfect description of an Horizontal Dyal, which may be drawn in what
Figure you please, and may set down the Characters of the Hours at the ends of
the Lines: Then the Aequinoctial a, b, is to be expunged.

Problem III.
To determine the Place and Altitude of the Style.
NOt only the Center of the Hours in these sorts of Dyals, but also the place
of the Style is in the Meridian Line

Note, First, That this Style is commonly Triangular, and its Basis lies upon
the Meridian Line, and terminates in the Center of the Hours, but it rises in
Altitude toward the Aequinoctial Line, as is observed in the Scheme of the
first Problem.

Note, Secondly, That this Style has no determ^^ed Altitude, except in respect
of the place in which it is fixed; for one part of the Basis of that Triangle
being Placed in the Center of Hours that is in (...), by how much this Basis
shall be, whence consequently the other part of this side will be more distant
from the Center; so much the more is the Altitude of the Style to be, and so
much the bigger will the whole Triangle be. Thus the Triangle o, n, f, or m, l,
f, or g, e, f, will be bigger than k, h, f. Moreover such ought to be the
Altitude of the Style that the side f, o, which is subtended to the right Angle
n, or l, or h, may agree with the Axis of the World, and tend directly to the
Pole. And it is therefore called the Axis, because it agrees with the Axis of
the World; and that side only, or shadow projected from it designs the Hours.
Therefore that a fit Altitude of this nature may be had.

Note, Thirdly, That the Degrees of the Poles Altitude ought to be numbered, and
recourse had to the Instrument, by fixing the Foot of the Compass in the Center
thereof, and then extending the other to that part of the Aequinoctial Line
wherein the Radius cuts that Degree, which answers to the number of Degrees of
the Poles Elevation; For Example; Supposing that in this Country the Pole is
Elevated 49 Degrees, the Foot of the Compass ought to be extended to that part
wherein the 49th Degree is cut by the Radius, numbering from the Line of the
12th Hour. This extension of the Compass being made, is to be transferred to
the Dyal in this manner; fix one Foot of the Compass thus opened in the
Concourse of the Aequinoctial, and Meridian Lines, that is, in e; then with the
other Foot mark in the Aequinoctial Line the Point g. Lastly, from f, the
Center of the Hours draw through the said Point g, the f, k, g, m, o, without
stint: This will give the sought Altitude of the Style; for if the Base be only
f, h, the whole Style and its Altitude will be f, h, k: Otherwise if the said
Base be extended to e, the Style will be f, e, g; if to l, the Syle, will be f,
l, m; if to n, the Style will be f, n, o, and so ad infinitum.

Note, Fourthly, That the Angle which the said Axis makes at the Center of the
Hours, in the Horizontal Dyal has always the Degrees of of the Poles
Elevation; and consequently that in our Hypothesis this Angle is in 49 Degrees.

Note, Fifthly, If in place of a Triangular Style there should be only a right
Style erected, such as would be b, k, or e, g, or l, m, or n, o, the extremity
of it only would show the Hours by the Shadow projected from it. But observe
that the Horizontal Dyal thus finished ought to be so ordered and disposed in
its proper place; first that it be Parallel to the Horizon, which is tried by
the use of a Plum-Line, or Level; and some try it by casting in Quicksilver;
for if the Plane incline never so little, the Quicksilver will slide into that
part. Secondly, the Line of the Hour XII is exactly to be placed within the
Meridian of the said place, which Meridian, how it is to be found, has been
already declared.

CHAP. IV.
To Draw an Horizontal Dyal by another Method.
ALthough the precedent Method ought not to be unknown to any Horographers, as
being (as it were) the Basis and Foundation of all Horography by proper and
apparent Principles of the said Praxis; yet there are others (which being of
more expedition) may very aptly be made use of, as well for advantage as
delight.

The first is by the help of a Rule, usually called a Square, in which are to
be inscribed the Degrees of the Astronomical Quadrant, with a fit Center to the
opposite side; which Figure is here set down.

In this Rule, rightly placed beneath the Aequinoctial Line, and by the
Meridian a Thread being drawn from the Center through 15 Degrees marked in the
Rule, the Horary Points are designed in the Aequinoctial Line. Then the Center
being placed in the Concourse of the Meridian and Aequinoctial Lines, It is
brought about until it touch the Meridian near the Degree of the Complement of
the Poles Elevation, to find thereby the Center of the Hours. Lastly, The Rule
Meridian Line, and the Longitude of the Aequinoctial, a point at the Degree of
the Poles Elevation, from whence through the Center of the Hours the Axis is to
be drawn to find the Altitude of the Style.

The second Method, is by an Astronomical Quadrant, which is also called an
Aequinoctial Arch, or Quarter of a Circle; because it is supposed to have a
division through 15 Degrees, as it is observed Scheme; where you see how it
ought to be disposed by the Meridian-Line under the Aequinoctial, and how by a
Thread drawn from its Center through Degrees, the Horary Points are marked in
the Aequinoctial Line. Then the like Arch being drawn out of the Concourse of
the Aequinoctial, and Meridional Lines in e, from the Point in which it touches
the Aequinoctial Line, mark in that Arch the Degree of Elevation, that is, 49.
Next, through that Point from the Center e, draw a right Line, through which
(at the Section of the said Arch) let another right Line be drawn at right
Angles at no limited extent. This in the Meridian Line will mark out the Center
of the Hours, and will be instead of an Axis, to determine the Altitude of the
Style.

CHAP. V.
With one Opening of the Compass to describe an Horizontal Dyal.


ACcording to this Scheme, the two Lines, viz. the Meridian, and the
Aequinoctial, being drawn Cross-wise to right Angles; then opening the
Compasses at pleasure, describe a blind Circle from the common Section of the
said double Line, marked on one side the point of the Hour 3, and on the other
the point of the Hour 9. Then, First, From the point f, still at the same
opening of the Compass, mark in the Circumference of the Circle here and there
the Points l, and p. Secondly, From the point l, mark the point m, in the
Aequinoctial Line for the Hour 4. Also, by fetching about the Point of the
Compass to a second remove; at the same opening from the said Point of the Hour
4, along this Aequinoctial Line, mark the point n for the Hour 5; and then from
the Compass (being four times fetched about) as far as the point o, mark the
Hour 11. Thirdly, Do the same again on the opposite side, that is, first from
the point p, mark the point q in the Aequinoctial Line for the Hour 8; then
from the said point, the Foot of the opening of the Compass being twice
measured to r, mark the point of the Hour 7: Afterward, from the said point of
the Hour 7, the opening of the Compasses being four times measured to 5, mark
the point of the Hour 1; but the Hour 12 is inserted in the Intersection of the
Meridian, and Aequinoctial Lines, This done, there remains only to be found the
points of the Hour 2 on the one side, and 10 on the other. Proceed therefore
thus; From the point h, draw a faint right Line on the one side to the point l,
the Section in j will mark the Hour 2; on the other side another from h to p,
which will in like manner design the Hour 10, in the Intersection of the
Aequinoctial at the point n. Lastly, To find the Center of the Hour, and the
Axis, seek in the Arch f, j, the Degrees of the Poles Elevation from the point
j; also through the Degree of the Poles Elevation draw a right Line from c, the
Center of the Circle; and then through that Line, draw at right Angles another
right Line z, p, q. This will determine the Altitude of the Style, and on the
other side will mark the Center of the Hours in the Section of the Meridian
Line.

CHAP. VI.
To describe the Arches of the Signs in an Horizontal Dyal.
THe Arches of the Signs are those Lines drawn in Dyals, which by the benefit
of Shadow projected from the Gnomon, show in what Sign, or part of the Zodiac,
the Sun is; as also how the Elevation of the Pole being given, the length of
the Days may at that time be known, and this is commonly set down at the end of
these sort of Arches.

Note, That the Arches of Cancer and Capricorn describe on each side the
Longitude of the Horary Line, to which the Shadow of the Gnomon extends it
self; by which means the Dyal Figure, as appears by this Scheme.

And all this is to be performed by an easy Method, proceeding as follows:

First, The Horary being drawn, with the Intervals of each middle Hour; Suppose
the place of the Style to be in j. the Altitude of the Style to to be h, j, the
Apex, or Point of the Style it self h, the Center of the Hours to be in a.
These things thus granted. First, Draw the right Line H, E, perpendicular to
the Axis A, H, and so as to fall upon the point H. Secondly, Through the point
E, where it cuts the Meridian, draw at right Lines C, E, D, which is to be the
Aequinoctial Line, or as it were the Arch of Aries and Libra. Thirdly, Extend
the Line E, H, at pleasure, viz. as far as G, this is to be called the Radius
of the Equator. Fourthly, H, draw at pleasure the Arch M, G, N. Fifthly, From
the point G, toward M, and N, mark the points of the Solar Declinations, that
is; how far the Sun declines at his entrance into each sign. These Declinations
are found by the use of a Quadrant divided into 90 Degrees, by which also draw
an Arch by opening the Compasses to that extent: Then bring the Compasses to
the extent of 23 1/2 Degrees, applying that Interval to the Arch of the Dyal,
so as to mark on the one side, and the other the Points both of Cancer and
Capricorn, placing the other Foot of the Compass in the point G, and so
proportionally mark on the one side the point of Taurus, and on the other that
of Scorpio at the Interval of 11 Degrees, 50 Minutes, and in like manner at the
Interval of 20 Degrees, 12 Minutes, mark the points of Gemini, and Sagittarius.

Apply the Rule, or Thread to each point of these Polary Declinations, and at
the same time to the point H, and so doing, observe in what point the Rule, or
Thread touches the Meridian Line, marking at the same time three several Points
beneath, and three above the Aequinoctial Line: For these are the points
through which the Arches of the Signs are to be drawn. The three uppermost P,
Q, R, serve for the Summer Signs, and the three lower S, T, V, for those of the
Winter.

It is to be understood, that by these points of the Meridian Line are to be
found the points of the Arches in the Lines of other Hours; yet so as that by
the point proper to each Sign all the points of the opposite side may be found.
Thus by the Point P, proper to Cancer, will be found all the points through
which the Arch of Capricorn is to be drawn; and on the contrary, through the
Point V, proper to Capricorn, all the points will be found by which the Arch of
Cancer, is to be described. All which the better to exemplify;

First, for the describing of the Arch of Cancer, apply the Rule, or Thread to
the point V, which is the point of Capricorn; then on the other side apply the
same Rule, or Thread, to the Point of the Middle Hour, which is next after the
Point of the Meridian Hour, designed in the Aequinoctial Line; then where the
Rule, or Thread cuts the Line of the first Hour, there mark a Point. Then the
Rule being still placed in the Point V, draw through the Point of the Hour j,
set down in the Aequinoctial Line. Having so done, observe in what part it
touches the Line of the Hour 11; and there also mark a Point, still following
the foregoing Method, to keep the Rule, or Thread in the same Point V; at the
same time the said Rule being applied to the Intervals of the following Middle
Hours. Let the Points be marked in other Horary Lines, and so you will have all
the Points; which being connected together by certain crooked Lines, will give
the Arch of Cancer.

Just in the same manner you may describe the Arch of Capricorn from the Point
Cancer in P, extending the Rule, or Thread, to each Middle Hour marked in the
Aequinoctial Line.

CHAP. VII.
To make a Vertical Dyal.
THis is drawn in the same manner on a Regular Wall, and has the same kind of
Style as the Horizontal; however, they differ not only in Situation, but also
in this, that in the Vertical (for the finding the Center of the Hours) the
Degrees of the Polar Elevation are taken; and for the Altitude of the Style,
only the Degrees of the Complement; whereas in the Horizontal it is quite
contrary. But since there is a distinction here to be, between a Vertical to
the South, and a Vertical to the North; It is to be observed, First, That the
Vertical to the South has the Center of the Hours, and its Style, upwards, and
shows the Hours from 6 in the Morning to 6, at Noon. Secondly, That the
Vertical to the North, is (as it were) a Meridional inverted; for it has the
Center of Hours downwards, and falls short in showing the Hours. For France, it
shows but from 4 to 8 in the Morning, and likewise in the Afternoon the same
number of Hours, and no more. In like manner altogether are described the
Arches of the Signs in a Regular Vertical Dyal, as in an Horizontal.

CHAP. VIII.
To frame a MERIDIONAL DYAL, either to East or West.
A Scheme of both these are already treated of Chapter III, Problem II. But
first of the Meridian East Dayl: First, Draw the Line ab, Horizontal, or
Parallel to the Horizon. Secondly, From a, draw a slight Circle at any opening
of the Compasses, beginning from the Horizontal Line, namely from h, and that
toward the right side where the Oriental Dyal is to be drawn. Thirdly, Seek,
or imagine in the Instrument the like Arch, that is, at the same opening of the
Compass, then in that Arch cut off the Complement of the Poles Elevation, or
which is the same, the Elevation of the Equator; and transfer that Interval to
the Circle drawn from the point d, and let the Arch be cut off; For Example, in
the point e. Fourthly, through that point e, and through the extremity of the
Horizontal Line a, b, draw the Line e, a, which will be in the Head of an
Aequinoctial Line, because therein are to be designed the Horary Points. But
before the marking of these points, draw another Line Parallel to that
Aequinoctial. Fifthly, About the upper part of the Aequinoctial Line mark at
pleasure the Hour 6, and also the like point in the opposite Parallel, so as
that between these points the Line of the Hour 6, be made a right Angles. (Note
that this Hour 6 is the beginning of the Hours in this kind of Dyal, and that
their Intervals are taken from it. Also, that the place of the Style is
therein, which is to be fixed in the upper part of that Line, that is, where it
goes under within the Horizontal.) Sixthly, From the Horizontal Dyal, or from
the Instrument Intervals of the Hours, and first the Distance of the Hour I,
from XII; which is found in the Horizontal, or in the Instrument, will be in
this place the Interval of the Hour V, on the one side, and on the other, of
the Hour VIII; also the Distance of the Hour XII from II, will mark the Hour
VIII; also the Distance of the Hour III, will be the Interval of the Hour IX;
and likewise the Distance of the Line of the Hour VI, of this Dyal; and the
same proportional Distance is to be between the Hour V, and XI.

It is to be understood that the same Horary Points which are marked in the
Aequinoctial Line, are also to be marked in the Parallel, opposite (...) it, to
the end the Parallel Horary Lines may be commodiously drawn from Point to Point.

Note, Secondly, That the first Hour of the Sun, which appears in this sort of
Dyal, is V, and so forwards as far as II, inclusively; for XII cannot well
appear, when as the Dyal is supposed to be within the Meridian Circle.

Note, Thirdly, That the Style in this Dyal is a right Index of a determined
Altitude, and is fetched from an Interval which is found between the point of
the Hour VI, and the point of the Hour IX.

Now as for the Meridian West Dyal, it differs not much from the Meridian East
Dyal, except that the occult Arch, which is for distinguishing the point of the
Aequinoctial Line is drawn from the left side; and that in the West Merididian
the Evening Hours are to be drawn beginning from the First to the 7th
inclusively, with the like Intervals, as in the East Meridian: but the First is
in the lower place, and so the rest in their order. Moreover, the Hour VI, is
the place of the Style, in like manner as the East Meridian, and has the same
Altitude.

CHAP. IX.
To describe the Arches of the Signs in this sort of Dyal.
FIrst, From the point in which the Style is erected, draw a right Line to cut
all the Lines of the Hours to right Angles, and this will be the Aequinoctial
Line, wherein all the middle Hours must be marked, as has been mentioned in
the discouse of the Horizontal Dyal.

Secondly, From the point in which the Line of the Hour III, from the
Aequinoctial is cut, extend the Compass at pleasure to describe an Arch, in
which the Solar Declinations may be designed in the same manner, as in the
Horizontal Dyal.

Thirdly, The Rule is to be applied as well to the points of those
Declinations, as to the point in which the Line of Hour III, is cut by the
Aequinoctial, and at the same time the points are to be observed in which the
Line of the Style is cut, as well beneath as above the Style it self.

Fourthly, By applying the Rule, or Thread to those points, as also to each
point of the middle Hours, designed in the Aequinoctial, it may be observed in
what part the Hour Lines will be reached, so as that through those points the
Arches of the Signs may be drawn.

CHAP. X.
To frame an Aequinoctial Dyal.
IT is so called, as imitating the Aequinoctial Circle divided into 24 equal
parts, which are each of 15 Degrees for each Hour. Moreover, because Dyal is so
to be ordered, that it may keep the same Elevation above the Horizon which the
Equator has for its given place.

The Description of this is easy, and universal for any part of the World, or
Elevation of the Pole whatsoever, as appears by the Scheme in Chap. III,
Problem 2.

First, Two Lines are to be drawn at right Angles, whereof the one a, b, is to
be the Meridian, c, d, the Line of the Hour VI, both Morning and Evening.
Secondly, From the common section of both these Lines make a Circle, at
pleasure to be divided into 24 equal parts; for in this sort of Dyal the
Intervals of all Hours are equal, and altogether alike.

Note, That in the uppermost Aequinoctial the Morning Hours are set down
toward the right Hand; and the Evenings toward the left: In the lowermost
quite contrary, wherefore take notice that they are false done by the Cutter.

Also that the uppermost is of use to us, only when the Sun is in the Northern
Signs. The lowermost (which shows fewer Hours than the other) when he is in the
Southern Signs.

Note, Secondly, That it has a right Style, and that fixed Perpendicularly in
the Center, and is instead of an Axis, and within the Axis of the World, yet
not with any determinate Longitude, but rather at pleasure.

Note, Thirdly, That the Aequinoctial may be Globe, that it may show the Hours
without a Style, only by the extremity of the Shadow going back by Degrees into
the adverse part, according to the continual access of the Suns Irradiation.
But upon this occasion the Hours must be set down in another order.

CHAP. XI.
To describe the Arches of the Signs in an Aeqninoctial Dyal.
FIrst, Design the Longitude of the Style drawn out from the Center in the Line
of the 6th Hour. Secondly, From the extreme Point of that Longitude, draw at
pleasure, a Perpendicular to the Line of the 6th Hour. Thirdly, From the same
point of that Longitude draw also at pleasure an Arch at the extreme part of
the Perpendicular Line last mentioned; but this Arch is to be directed only
toward one side, namely, that opposite to the Meridian Line; in which Arch,
according to the usual manner let 3 points of Solary Declinations be marked.
Fourthly, The Rule, or Thread being applied to the points of those
Declinations, and at the same time to the extreme point of the Longitude of the
Style, observe what points are likewise marked in the Line of the 6th Hour; And
at length. Fifthly, From the Center of the Dyal through those 3 points of the
Line of the 6th Hour, describe 3 Circles. These will be the Arches proper to
those 6 Signs which serve to this Aequinoctial Horizon, wheither above or
beneath.

CHAP. XII.
To frame a Polar Dyal.
THis is Parallel to the Axis of the World, and lies as it were in it, as has
been already Treated of; Wherefore it is to be Elevated above the Horizontal
Plane, as many Degrees as the Pole of the World. The lowermost has only 4
Hours apparent all over Frame, namely toward the right side, the Morning Hours
IV, and V toward the left side, the Evening Hours VII, and VIII; But the
uppermost shows the Hours, from VII in the Morning to V in the Evening
inclusively; but no VI, because the Sun at the 6th Hour is Parallel to the
Dyal, and only glances upon the side thereof, and is thus described.

First, After the usual manner, draw the Meridian Line a, b, and the
Aequinoctial c, d, cutting each other cross ways at right Angles. Secondly, And
on each side make 2 Parallels at the Aequinoctial, at what distance you please.
Thirdly, Let the Horary Points be transferred upon the Aequinoctial Line from
the Instrument, in the same Method as mentioned in Chap. VIII, for the Oriental
and Occidental Dyals. Fourthly, Through those Points draw the Hour Lines
Parallel to each other; which that it may be the more commodiously done, let
the same Points be marked in those Lines which are Parallel to the
Aequinoctial. Fifthly, The Gnomon, or Style in the Meridian Line is to be
Perpendicularly straight, and to have a determinate Altitude, according to the
Distance of the Meridian Line, from the Hour, III. In the Scheme this sort of
Dyal is taken notice of in Chap. III, Problem 2.

By the same Method altogether, and the same way of Computation are described
the Arches of the Signs, in Polar and Meridian Dyals; for in like manner as in
the Polar Dyals the Aequinoctal Line is described by the Basis of the Style,
cutting at right Angles the Lines of all the Hours; So in this Line, and by the
same way is described the Arch in which the Suns Declinations are marked. From
the Points, the Rule being applied at the same time to the Point to which the
Line of the Hour III, is cut by the Aequinoctial, the several Points are marked
in the Line which is subtended to the Style. Lastly, In like manner as in the
Meridian Dyals, the Rule being applied to those Points, and at the same time to
the middle Hours distinguished in the Aequinoctial Line, the Points are showed
in the Horary Lines, through which the several Arches of the Signs are to be
drawn.

Hitherto of Regular Dyals; which however not to be drawn according to a right,
or Vertical Sphere: for in the right Sphere, those which are Horizontal differ
not from our Polar Dyals of the oblique Sphere. Also in the right Sphere those
which are Vertical differ not from our Aequinoctials; but the Meridian Dyals in
that Sphere are like to ours, except that in those the Aequinoctial Line is
Perpendicular to the Horizon, But those which are with us Polar, are to them
Horizontal. And those in the Vertical Sphere have the Aequinoctial for the
Horizontal.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Irregular and Declinant Dyals.
THe nature and kinds of these Dyals, have been already declared in the
beinning of this Treatise. There wants only the practice of finding the
Declination, and also of framing a Declinant Dayl.

1. The Declination of the place may be easily found by the help of the
Mariners Compass treated of in the Art of Navigation. But in this particular
the most Accurate way, is to apply the Semicircle divided in the Plane to a
fitting Degrees, the Gnomon being placed at its Center. For in that Meridian
Hour you will see what Degrees the Shadow Cuts, and which way it is cast, the
better to determine of the Species, and quantity of its Declinations. These
things thus premised, you may without any other Art draw a Dyal in any place,
fixing therein at right Angles any right Style of whatsoever Magnitude.

2. Wherever the Meridian Hour is marked, Shadow projected by it with a Prick,
then at that Prick, by the benefit of a Plum-Line, if it be in a Vertical Plane
draw a Perpendicular, This will be the Meridian Line. Then Thirdly, At any
convenient time either before, or Afternoon, having by inquiry learnt out the
certain Hour of the Day, from any true made Dyal, mark with a Prick, the
extremity of the Shadow then projected; and this do till you have pricked out
all the Hours that may be set Plane.

Then intermitting for some Days, or Weeks, as shall be thought fitting, take a
review of some of those Hours, and you will find the extremity of the Shadow
some space distant from the Prick of the same Hour, marked some Days, or Weeks
before. Through those two Pricks draw a right Line without any certain Bound;
this will Cut the Meridian Line drawn at the beginning; and the Section so made
is to be the Center of the Dyal, from whence the other Hour Lines are to be
drawn through other Pricks for the finishing of the Dyal.

By the same Method, once in a Year, or half a Year, as the Sun is just entering
into a new Sign, observe each Hour the extreme point of the Shadow cast by the
Style, so as by those points to draw the Arches of the Signs.

CHAP. XIV.
The common way to Draw a Declinant Dyal.
FOr this we use the Aequinoctial Quadrant, already mentioned in the last
Scheme of the Fourth Chapter. But the first thing in this Operation to be taken
notice of, is whether the Declination be from the North, or South; or to the
East, or West. Next, How great, that is, how many Degrees the Declination is.
For Example, In our Scheme, or Figure, the Declination is from South to East;
which way of Declination requires this following Praxis.

1. Describe the Horizontal Line a, b.

2. Draw the obscure Perpendicular c, d.

3. Fix at right Angles the Style, in the Intersection of those two Lines, at
the Point e.

4. Mark the Longitude of the Style, in the Line c, d, at the Point f.

5. Dispose the Instrument to the Line c, d, its Center being applied to the
Point f, but to be turned to the Declining part, that is, to the East; if the
Declination be Eastwards; but on the contrary Westward, if the Declination be
Westward.

6. Number the Degrees of Declination from the Point g, For Example, to the
Point h. Then from the Center of the Instrument in which the extremity of the
Style is designed, draw a Line from the Point h, to the Horizontal Line in j.

7. Through the Point j, draw the Perpendicular l, m, which is to be the
Meridian Line.

8. To find out the Center of the Dyal, the Longitude of the Line f, j, is to
be marked in the Horizontal Line from the Point j, toward either part; For
Example; Toward the part n, at the Prick n, in which Point the Center of the
Instrument is placed, the side thereof lying upon the Horizontal Line. Then
from the Horizontal Line beginning at the Point o, number the Degrees of the
Poles Elevation; which, for Example may cut the Degree p, then without limit
draw the occult Line n, p, l, which in the Section of the Meridian Line is to
mark the Point l, for the Center of the Hours.

9. From the Center of the Hours l, draw the occult Line l, q, through the
place of the Style e.

10. Upon this Line l, q, at the Intersection in the Point, raise the
perpendicular r, e, according to the length of the Style.

11. From the Center l, to the point r, draw the occult Line l, r.

12. In the point r, of the Line l, r, raise a perpendicular to cut l, q, in
the point f.

13. In the Point f, erect a Perpendicular; or draw at right Angles through the
point s, the right Line t, u, and this is to be the Aequinoctial Line in which
the Horary points are to be marked.

14. Measure the Longitude of the Line r, s, from the point s, to the point x,
in the Line l, q; then from the point x, draw a right Line at the Intersection
of the Meridian and Aequinoctial Lines in the point y.

15. In the point x, place the Center of the Instrument, the side thereof lying
upon the Longitude of the side x, y.

16. From the Center of the Instrument draw Lines, through 15 Degrees, which
cutting the Aequinoctial Line, will mark therein the points of the Hours XII,
XI, X, IX, VIII, VII, VI.

17. If the Plane be such as to be capable of containing more Hours, whether
Morning or Evening, regard being had of the Declination, the site of the
Instrument will be to be changed. Wherefore to gain the Hours before VI, change
the Instrument, so that the Center may be disposed to the said point x, and the
Style to the Line which marks the point of the 6th Hour. Then through 15
Degrees, mark in the Aequinoctial Line, what other Horary Points you please.
For Example, the points of the Hours V, and VI.

18. To gain the other Afternoon-Hours, the Position which the Instrument has
in the Figure, or Scheme, is so to be inverted, that it be beneath the Line x,
y, the same side being applied along that Line x, y. In a word, the Instrument
is only Line x, y, as to be beneath it, which done, first draw an occult Line,
cutting the Aequinoctial from the first Hour, and so in the like manner for the
rest, still observing the space of 15 Degrees.

19. And at last all the occult Lines being expunged, the Hour Lines are to be
drawn from the Center of the Dyal through the assigned Horary Points.

CHAP. XV.
To find out the Hours of the Night, by the Rays of the Moon.
1. It Is to be supposed an Horizontal Sun-Dyal at hand, is either fixed or
moveable; such as is usually carried about.

2. We suppose, join to the other a Moon-Dyal as they call it, framed of two
Concentrick Cirles, in the one of which are set down the Days of the the Moons
age, by a Globule applied to the number 30. In the other the 12 Hours here and
there set down.

3. Suppose the age of the Moon known, either by the Epact, or some other way.
These things thus laid down, proceed as follows by the benefit of a Sun-Dyal
applied to the Lunar Beams in the same manner as used to be applied to those of
the Sun. See what Hour the Moons Shadow points; As for Example, the 8th. Then
place the Globule to that Hour set down in the Horary Circle. And Lastly have
recourse to the age of the Moon, and that will give the Hour sought. For
Example, If it be the 12th Day of the Moons age, it will declare the Hour to be
about 5. But if, as it often happens, a Lunar-Dyal be produced, made up of 3
Concentrick Circles, whereof the last and biggest is that of the Lunary Days;
the second and next to it is the Horary Circle; the innermost contains the
Index. Apply that Index to the Day of the Moon; Then in the Circle of the Index
seek the number of the Hour marked by the Lunary Shadow in the Sun-Dyal u, g,
8, the said Number will declare in the Horary Circle the Hour sought.

CHAP. XVI.
Upon a Lunar Dyal, to find the Periodick Motions of the Sea.
IF you would know at what Hour it will be high Tide, or as they call it, Full
Sea in any given place, For Example sake, at Rochel.

First, It must be known at what Hour it happens in that place at the time of
full Moon, and this may easily be known both by observation and enquiry. This
done, place the Globule fixed to the moveable Wheel of the Lunary Days at that
Hour in which these Tides happen in that place at the full of the Moon. For
Example, at the Hour X. Then seek the age of the Moon for the given day; As
suppose the 9th of the Moon. Lastly, observe to what Hour the said number 9,
being the age of the Moon, is opposite, and that is the Hour sought.

To the Worshipful John Speccott of Penhele in the County of Cornwall Esqr.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by R. Blome.



ARCHITECTVRE.
ARCHITECTURE is the Art of well Building.

Buildings are either Sacred, or Profane. Sacred Buildings are either Public,
or Private; the Public are Churches, Chapels, Cloisters, Hospitals and the
like. The Private are Hermitages, Sepulchers, etc.

Profane Buildings are also Public or Private; the Public are either for
Defense, or Conveniences; Those for Defense are Citadels, Forts, Redoubts, and
the like, which more properly belongs to Fortification, and will be there
treated of; Those for Convenience are Piazzos, Portico's, Streets, Walks,
Bridges, Posts, Sluices, Aquaeducts, Wells, Fountains, Cisterns, Marketplaces,
Courts of Judicature, Halls of Public Societies, Colleges, Arsinals, Magazins,
Prisons, Ports, etc.

Private or particular Buildings are the Habitations, as well of the Nobles and
Gentry, as of the Pesant.

In all Buildings, Beauty, Convenience, Healthfulness and Duration is to be
considered.

The Healthfulness of a place, is chiefly known by the Goodness of the Water,
the wholesome Constitution and long living of the Inhabitans, and its Remoteness
from Fens, and Boggy places.

A Habitation should not look toward the East, if it be near great Marshes,
Ponds, Rivers, Woods, etc. by reason of the Mists and Vapors Morning Sun; but
if it borders upon dry places, as Hills, Pasture-Groun^s, or the like Champain
Places, an Easterly Situation may be well enough. A Southern Prospect in many
places is dangerous, but most tolerable in Winter; But the North is always
good, as yielding a Fraisheur and Coolness against the Heats of Summer: Such a
Situation is proper for Granaries, Caves, Grotto's, Libraries, and such like
places. A South West View is proper for Chambers; Building indifferent good, it
ought to Front the North-West; but the most complete of all Situations is when
each of the 4 Angles of the Building answer to each of the 4 Cardinals Points,
and when the Face of the Building is terminated on the one side, and has an
open Prospect on the other.

For the Building of Country Houses, a place is to be chosen near Towns,
Woods, Waters, and High Roads.

The Apartments of the Building ought to be disengaged, and of a free Access.
They are these following, the Anti-Hall, and Hall, Parlours, Chapels,
Dining-Rooms, Withdrawing-Rooms, Bedchambers, with Alcou, or without,
Dressing-Rooms, Closets, Closetool-Rooms, places for Wood and others
Conveniences, Anti-Chambers, Chambers, Wardrobes, Nurseries, Galleries,
Libraries, Armories, Kitchins, Scullery, Bake-House, Pastery, Larders wet and
dry, Cellers, Panteries or Butteries, Wash-Houses, Landeries, Brew-Houses,
Daries, Granaries, Stables, Coach-Houses, Dog-Kennels, Volaries, Cow-Houses,
Hogs-Coats, Hen-Houses, Wood-Houses, Dove-Houses, etc. Also Tarrass Walks,
Wells, Fountains, Canals, Grotto's, Arbours, Avenues, Tards, places for
managing the Great Horse, Fish Ponds, Parks, Warrens, Orchards, Gardens, etc.

The principal parts of the Building are the great Outward-Wall, the several
Partition Walls, the Entry, the Jambs, Doors and Windows, the Passages or
Avenues from Room to Room, the Roofs as well Vaulted, or Arched, as otherwise,
the Floors, Stair-cases, and the Covering of the House.

The weight of the Building ought to be placed upon the Parts capable to
sustain them; so the Beams, or Summers which sustain the Planks, ought never to
be put upon an empty space, as over Windows, and Doors.

Void always ought to be upon Void, and Solid upon Solid.

The Beams should never be placed upon the Chimneys, by reason of Fire; nor no
other Timber whatsoever.

The length of the Beams, and of the Joists ought to be proportionable to their
thickness, and the distance of the Beams not to exceed 10, 11, or 12 Foot.

The Beams ought to bear into the Wall about 12 Inches, where the thickness of
the Wall will bear it, and admit no more.

The Joists ought to take up the full, as well as the empty spaces.

The Apartments of the same Story are to be placed in an even plain.

The parts which are remote from the middle, ought all to have an equal
distance.

The upper Stories ought always to be less in height than the lower.

The Columns.
There are 5 Orders of Columns; according to the Ancients, viz. the Tuscan,
Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and Composite.

From these Orders of Columns all sorts of Buildings take their Names; so that
if the Architect changes his Measures in any of these Ornaments, it is called
The new Fabric.

The squared Columns that are implanted in the Wall are called Pilasters.

There are a sort of Columns called French, which a^ composed of several pieces
put together, and this Invention arose from the difficulty of finding Materials
of one piece big enough for the purpose.

There are also wreathed Columns, otherwise called Salomonick.

Sometimes Columns are Canell'd, or Fluted, and these Flutes for the most part
reach but to two Thirds of the Column; the other part below being set out with
Flowers, Vine-Branches, and other sorts of Foliage.

Columns are divided into the Trunk, Basis, and Capiter, the Ornaments whereof
are different according to the diversity of the Orders.

The Pedestal, upon which the Column commonly stands, is divided into the upper
Cimatium, the Cimatium below, and the space between, which is indeed most
properly called the Pedestal.

On the Top of the Column is the Capital, upon which is the Entablature, which
is divided Architrave, Friese, and Cornice.

The Semidiameter of the Column below is called the Model, and gives measure to
all the parts, and Ornaments.

The Model is divided into 12 equal parts in the Tuscan* and Dorick Orders, and
into 18 in the other three Orders.

The Pedestal is always a third part of the Column, and the Capital a fourth.

The Wreaths on the Top ought ever to be Column, and not in the Out-settings.

The TVSCAN ORDER.
THis Order according to Vitruvius (Lib. 4. Cap. 7.) having its height
sevenfold to its thickness, it follows that its height must be 14 Models, the
Base 1, the Capital 1, and the Trunk, or Body 14.

The Ornaments of the Base, are
Parts. Projecting. The Plinth should be in Solid Bigness 6 4 The Torus 5 4 The
Cincture of the Basis 1 1

The Ornaments of the Capital, are
The List of the Abacus 1 5 The Abacus 3 4 The Ovum, or Ovolo, or Quarter round
3 3 The List under the Ovum 1 1 The Friese of the Capital 4 0

Beneath the Capital is the Roundel, or Astragal, and the Collar, which makes
part of the Trunk of the Column, not of the Capital.

The Astragal, or Roundel 1 2 The Collar of the Column 1

The Trunk of the Column is of the height of one Model, and 7 parts over, in
like manner as the Friese of the Capital, which for that reason has nothing of
projecture.

Although the Tuscan Order seldom has a Pedestal, yet it is made here for
Example sake, as in the Figure marked B. And in all the 5 Orders take this for
a general Rule, That the Pedestal with its Ornaments must be one third part of
the Column, with its Basis and Capital; likewise the Ornaments above, viz. the
Architrave, Friese, and Cornice must make one fourth part of the same. And if
you are to make any of the 5 Orders, you must divide the height of the Column
with its Ornaments into 19 parts; then take the height of the Column with its
Basis, and Capital, and make the divisions of the Models according to its
Order, as the Dorick, Ionick, etc. Then frame the Fabric with this Model,
dividing its parts, as may be seen in the said Figure marked B, where A, does
represent the Body of the Column; B, the nether Band or Swathe; E, the List; F,
the Gula, or Throat reversed in the Pedestal; G, the Body of the Column, and so
forth.

The Figure A, shows the Capital, Architrave, Friese, and Cornish of the said
Tuscan Order; And the Figure B, tho Base, and Pedestal thereof.

The Names of the several Parts, or Members of the Column, according to the
Figure marked A.
THat marked A, is called the Ovum, or Ovolo. B, the Tondino, or round. C, the
List or Rule. D, the Crown. E, the List. F, the Gula or Throat reverst. G, the
Friese. H, the List of the Architrave. J, the Architrave. K, the List of the
Abacus. L, the Abacus, or Cimatium. M, the Ovum, or Ovolo. N, the List. O, the
Friese of the Capital. P, the Neck of the Column. Q, the hanging over the
Capital. And R, the Body of the Column.

The Cornish which consists of a Model, and 4 of its parts, has these parts
following, with their Projectures.

Parts. Projecting. The Ovum, or 4th part of the Round 4 18 The Round 1 14 The
List, or Reiglet 13 The Corona, or Gutter 6 13 The List beneath 4 The Doucine,
or Cimatium reverst 4 4 The Friese is not subdivided, it is of 14 4 The
Architrave is divided into the List, and Architrave. The List of the Architrave
2 2 The Architrave 10 0

The Architrave, and the Friese are to bear upon the Friese of the Capital.

If over and above the Entablement, the Column be allowed a Pedestal, it must
be divided into 19 Parts, whereof the Column is to have 12, the Entablement 3,
and the Pedestal 4, so that the whole height is to be 22 Models and.

The Ornaments of the Pedestal are the upper Cimatium, and the lower Cimatium,
and both are to be of 6 parts.

The upper Cimatium has 2 parts.

The List 2 4 The reverst Cimatium, or Doucine 4 3 The beginning of the shall
have of Projecture 0 The lower Cimatium 2 0

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Thomas Fitch of Eltham, and Mount-Mascall in Ken
t, Knight and Baronet* Sr. yo^. great Knowledge in the Art of Architecture
renders you the Fittes ^ Person to be Selected in this Concern, whose name and
Countenance will much add to the Reputation thereof, to whose Patronage, this
Treatise with the Sculptures of the Several Orders, is humbly Dedicated, by
Richard Blome.



To the Right Worshipful Sr. Thomas Fitch of Eltham and Mount Mascall in Kent
Knight and Baronet, Descended from the Ancient Family of the Fitches of Fitches
Castle into the North. These Plates of the five Orders is humbly dedicated by
Richard Blome.



The List, or Reigle^ 1 2 The Plinth of the Pedestal 5 4

Observe that for the finding the Model of the Column the height being given,
whatever division be otherwise made, the height of the Column must be divided
only into 14 equal parts, one whereof is to be the Model required.

The Intercolumnium from Trunk to Trunk, is to be of 4 Models and; but if there
be Portico's Pedestal, then the Pilaster is to be of 3 Models, the Impost of 1,
and the Projecture of 1 fourth of a Model; The distance of the Arch to the
Architrave of 1 Model; The Foot of the Arch of 3 Models. The Door must be 13
Models high, and 6 wide, and the distance from the Impost to the Architrave
must be 4 Models; but if there be Portico's with the Pedestals, then the
Pilasters are to be of 4 Models, the height of the Door of 17 Models, and
Models.

Of the DORICK ORDER.
THe Dorick Column is Octuple, or Eight-fold in its thickness, so that its
height must be of 16 Models.

The Figure marked C, represents the Dorick Order whose parts are thus marked:
A, The Grove or hollowing of the upper List. B, the Dentils or Teeth. C, The
Capital of the Triglyph. D, the Triglyph in which those parts that are framed
inwards are called Flutes, or Hollows, and the Square place of the Friese
between the Triglyphs is called a Metops. E, the Props, or little Bells. F, the
Cimatium. And G, the Annulets, Bands or Lists. This Figure represents the Base
and Pedestal of the said Order.

They give one Model to the Base, and one to the Capitals, and by consequence
the Shaft of the Column is to be 14 Models, The Column must be of 1 Model in
height. The parts of the Base are as follows.

Parts. Projecting. The Plinth 6 5 The Torus 4 5 The Roundel, or Baston 1 2 The
Cincture of the Base 1 2

The Parts of the Capital.
One Cimatium, one List 5 which has one Doucine 1 5 The Abacus 2 4 The Ovum 2
3 Three Rings, Cinctures, or Astragals, each 1 1 The Frise of the Capital 4 0

In the place of Rings, are
One Baston 1 2 One List

The Astragal, and the Collar, are of the same Measure, as in the Tuscan Order.

The Entablement is to be of 4 Models; for the Cornish 1, for the Frise 1, and
for the Architrave 1.

The Parts of the Cornish, are
The List 1 24 The half Doucine, or straight Geul, 3 23 One small List 20 The
Doucine, or Climatium Reverst, 1 20 The Corona 4 18 The small List 6 The
Dentelets 3 2 A small List The Doucine, or Cimatium Reverst, 2 2 A List 2 1 The
Frise is of 1 Model 18 0

The Friese is adorned with Trigliphs, and Metophes: The Trigliphs are 1 Model
in bigness, and the Metophes 1. The Trigliphs have 2 Triangular Canals in the
middle, and half a Canal upon each Angle; every one of the Canals has 2 parts
of Front, and the Entredeux of the Canals is also of 2 parts; the last List of
the Cornish serves then for Capitals, and there wants 2 parts or thereabouts of
their attaining this same List. For the Metophes they are Square, and are the
Space betwixt the Trigliphs, whose Ornaments are commonly consisting of two
Sheeps-Heads, with Cornucopia's, or Bucquets of Flowers hanging upon the Horns,
and a Garland or several Rings one within another, also Coats of Arms,
Escocheons, etc.

The Parts of the Architrave, are,
One List, 2 2 The Architrave (properly so called) 10 0

In the Architrave there are under- Trigliphs after the List of Gutters or
Clochets, which depend upon another List; but if besides the Entablement you
would also have a Pedestal added to the Dorick Column, it must be divided into
25 parts, whereof 16 will be for the Column, 4 for the Entablement, and 5 for
the Pedestal; and the whole height is to be 25 Models,

The upper Cimatium of the Pedestal, has these Parts follwing,
The List 6 The Ovum 1 5 Another List 4 The Corona 2 4 The Doucine 1 1 The
Pedestal (properly so called) has 4 Models 48 0

The Parts of the lower Cimatium of the Pedestal, are
The Cincture 1 The Baston 1 1 The Doucine 2 3 The Plinth 2 4 Another Plinth 4
4

The Intercolumn^um from Trunk to Trunk, is to be of 5 Models; but if there are
Portico's, and the Columns be without their Pedestals, the Pilaster is to be of
3 Models, and the Impost of one.

The Parts are to be these following.
The List 1 4 The Ovum 2 3 The Baston 1 2 Another List 1 A Fash Fascia 4 1
Another Fascia 3

The Arch is to be composed of Bastons or Tayaux of the same bigness and
projecture as the Parts of the Impost; the Door is to be 14 Models high, and 7
wide below the Arch. There are to be two Lists to answer the Astragal, and the
Collar of the Column, and are to be of the same wideness and projecture; But if
there are Portico's, and the Columns have their Pedestals, Pilaster is to be of
5 Models, the Impost, and the Arch with their parts according as is already set
down, and the Door is to be 20 Models high, and 10 wide.

Of the IONICK ORDER.
THis Order as it is Nine fold in thickness, so its height is to be of 18
Models: 1 Model is given to the Base, and of a Model to the Capital, and so the
Shaft of the Column will be of 16 Models and, the Column it self is to be of 1
Model, and in height.

Observe, that in the Tuscan and Dorick Orders, the Model is divided only into
12 equal parts; whereas in the Ionick, Corinthian, and Composite Orders, it is
divided into 18 equal parts, because the ornaments of the three last are
smaller, and more curious than those of the two first.

The Figure marked D, represents the Ionick Order, whose parts are thus marked.
A, the Scotia, or upper hollowing. B, the Astragaloes, or Rounds. C, the
Scotia, or nethermost hollowing. Also the Figures marked E, F, and G, are parts
of the Ionick Order, the later of which is the Voluta, or Scroll.

The Figure D, shows the Base and Pedestal of the said Order. E, the Capital,
Architrave, Friese, and Cornish. F, the Base and Pedestal; and G, the manner of
designing the Voluta of Capital.

The Ornaments of the Base, are these
The Plinth 6 1 7 A List 6 6 The Scotia, Gutter, or Cavity 2 4 4 A List 4 4 A
Baston, or Torus 1 5 5 Another Baston 1 5 5 A List 4 4 Another Scotia 2 2 2 A
List 3 3 A great Baston, or Torus 5 5 5 Above there is a Face which belongs to
the Shaft of the Column, and not to the Base, 1 2 2

The Base I have already described, is peculiar to that Order; but the
following Base is common to these three Orders, viz. the Ionick, Corinthian,
and Composite; and this Base is commonly called the Attick Base.

The Ornaments of the Attick Base, are these,
The Plinth 6 7 A Baston, or Torus 4 7 A List 4 A Scotia 3 1 A List 2 Another
Baston, or Torus 3 4 And above there is a Face named also the Cincture of the
Base, which belongs to the Shaft of the Column, not to the Base, 1 2

The Ornament of the Capital, are
A List 1 5 A Doucine 2 4 Another List 1 2 An Abacus 3 1 A 4th part of a Round,
or Ovum 5 7

And beneath there is a Baston, or Torus, and a List which belongs to the Shaft
of the Pillar, and not to the Capital.

A Baston, or Torus 2 3 A List 1 1

Then to make a Voluta; a Line is to be drawn level from beneath the Doucine,
and to be prolonged as far as the Line, which makes the upper Abord of the
Baston, the Point of Intersection of these 2 Lines will be the Center of the
Eye of the Voluta; then from the Center trace every one of the 4 Lines of one
part of the Model, and drawing through their extremities other Lines, you will
make a Square cut the sides into two equal parts; draw 2 Lines through the
opposite Divisions which will pass from the Center; divide each one into 6
equal parts, and you will have the 12 Points marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, which will serve for Centers to 12 fourths of Circles that compose
the Voluta, which consequently will have 3 entire Revolutions, and will end in
a Point, as it began at the lower side of the Doucine; but from the upper side
of the Abacus there is to be begun another Voluta, which will end at the first,
and whose 12 parts of the Circle will have the same Centers as the first, and
the Eye of the Voluta is the Circle described from the Intersection of the 2
first Lines, as Center of the overture of one part of the Model.

Observe, That the Abbacus having left off Projection, then its upper List will
make the Creux of the Voluta, and the same List which is comprised of the 2
Lines of the Voluta will be the part Projecting.

The Entablement will be of 4 Models and 1/^^ that is to say, 1 Model for the
Cornish, 1 Model for the Friese, and 1 Model for the Architrave.

The Parts of the Cornish, are
One List 1 31 One Straight Gueul, of Demi-Doucine, 5 per Emb. 26 Another List
26 One Gueul Reverst, or Doucine, 2 25 1/^ One Gutter, or Corona, 6 23 One Ovum
4 13 One Baston, or Torus 1 10 One List 1/^ 9 Dentelets, or Modillons, 6 9 One
List 1 5

1 Doucine, or Gueul Reverst, 4 per Haut 4 per Base.

The Friese has 1 Model; it has no Ornaments of Architrave, but of Sculpture
only.

The Parts of the Architrave, are
One List 1 5 One Doucine, or Gueul Reverst, 3 Per Embas 1 The first Fascia 7 1
The second Fascia 6 The third Fascia 4 0

The Pedestal is to be of 4 Models, viz. a Model to every Cimatium, and 5
Models to the Entredeux.

The Parts of the Upper Cimatium, are
A List 10 A Doucine 1 per labas 8 A Gutter 3 8 An Ovum 3 5 A Baston, or Torus
1 2

And below is a List which belongs to the Entredeux, and not to the upper
Cimatium.

A List 1 1

The Parts of the Lower Cimatium, are
A Plinth 4 8 A List 7 A Doucine 3 0 A Baston 1 2

And a List above, which belongs to the Entredeux, and not to the lower
Cimatium.

A List 1 1

The Intercolumnium from Trunk to Trunk, will be of 4 Models: But if there be
any Portico's, the Columns being without Pedestals, the Pilaster will be of 3
Models, and the Impost of 1, and it will have these Parts following.

A List 1 6 A Doucine 1 5 A Band to the Corona 3 4 An Ovum 3 3 A Baston 1 2
Another List 1 A Fascia 4

The Door is to be 17 Models in height, and 8 wide. The Arch is to be composed
of Ornaments of the same Wideness and Projecture as those of the Impost. And if
when there are Portico's, the Columns have also their Pedestals. The Pilaster
will be of 4 Models; the Door will be of 22 High, and 12 Wide; the Impost and
the Arch will be as already determined, and the Impost from one high will be 1
Model wide, and 2 Models long, and will have for Cornish 1 List, and 1 Doucine
of the Capital, as the List and the Doucine of the Capital; but the Projecture
of this Impost from one high will be a Model, as that of the Impost.

Of the CORINTHIAN ORDER.
THe Corinthian Column is Tenfold in thickness, and therefore its height is to
be of 20 Models, whereof one is allowed to its Base, 2 to its Capital; and so
the Shaft of the Column will be of 16 Models. The Column it self will be of 30
Parts in height, that is to say, of 1 Model.

The Figures marked H, I, K, L, and M, represent the Corinthian Order. In that
marked K, the Letter A shows the upper Torus, or Swathe; and B, the Nether
Torus, or Swathe. In that marked L, the Letters A, B, together, are called the
Abacus of the Capital; but for distinction A is taken for the Cimatium of the
Abacus; the Stalks C; D, the lesser Leaves; E, the middle Leaves; F, the under
Leaves; and G, the Flowers. The Figure H, shows the manner of designing the
Capital. That of I, the Capital, Architrave, Friese, and Cornish. That of K,
the Base, and Pedestal. That of L, an Example of the Pillars. And that of M, of
Pilasters.

The Parts of the Base, are
A Plinth 6 7 A Torus 4 7 A List 4 A Scotia 1 A List 2 A Baston, or little
Round 3 Another Baston 3 A List 2 A Scotia 1 A List 1 A Torus 3 2

And above is the Cincture of the Base, which belongs to the Shaft of the
Column; and not to the Base.

The Face, or Cincture of the Base 1 1

The Base is described in the Ionick Order, which is the same as this; but
instead thereof is used an Attick Base, which is common thereunto, with the
Ionick and Composite Orders.

The Capital has its Cimatium of a square Form, whose Diagonals have 4 Models,
upon the side of that Square is described an Equilatera Triangle; from the
Point of which, as Center to the Overture of the Side, if you intend an Arch*
there you determine the Compass of the Cimatium; and in the middle of that
Compass may be put a small Projecting, which may be made into ^ Flower. Its
Diameter will be 6 Parts, and it^ Projecture also 6 Parts, which will be
determined by the side of the Square.

The Parts of the Cimatium of the Capital, are
An Ovum 2 A List 1 An Abacus 3

The Extremeties of the Abacus may be Retrenched,

The rest of the Capital has the Figure of a Bell reverst, whose Side (which
is under the Abacus) has 2 Parts of largeness, and 4 of Projecture, It is
divided into three equal Parts, and each of them again into 12, for the
Foliages which serve for ornament to the Column. These Foliages consist of
Acanthus, or Olive-Branches, which are to hang down about 4 Parts; but their
Projecture is to be determined by a Line Cimatium to the Roundel, which are
under the Capital. Some are of Opinion, that the Foliage may pass a little
beyond this Line, and the Angles of the Cimatium are carried by Rollers, which
others call Tigats; besides two other Rollers, which are turned one toward the
other so far, as to touch under the Flower, which is most commonly a Rose.

Under the Capital is a Roundel, and also a List which belongs to the Shaft of
the Pillar.

A Roundel 1 3 A List 1 1

The Entablement is to be of 5 Models; that is, 2 Models for the Cornish, 1 for
the Friese, and 1 for the Architrave.

The Parts of the Cornish, are
A List 1 2 2 An Half Doucine, or Straight Gueul 5 from 33 to 38 A List 33 A
Doucine 1 32 A Corona 5 31 A Doucine 1 30 A Plinth, with the Modillons, 6 13 A
List 12 An Ovum 4 12 A Roundel 1 10 A List 9 Dentelets, or Denticles, 6 9 A
List 5 An Ovum 3 5

Below there is a Roundel, and also a List, which are a part of the Friese, not
of the Cornish.

The Friese has one Model and an half; its

A Roundel 1 2 A List

The rest is the Friese, properly so called.

The Parts of the Architrave, are,
A List 1 5 A Doucine 4 from 3 to 5 A Roundel 1 3 A Fascia 7 2 A Doucine 2 2 A
Fascia 6 A Roundel 1 A Fascia 5

The Pedestal being always the third Part of the Column is to be of 6 Models;
but some make it of 7 Models, to the end that the whole Order may be thereby
the more firm; and because the 2 Cimatiums being taken away, there remains 2
Squares for the Entredeux.

The Upper Cimatium is to be of 14 Parts, and its Ornaments are,
A List 2/3 8 A Doucine 1 7 A Corona 3 6 An Half Doucine 1 3 A Roundel 1 2 A
List 1 A Friese 3 A Roundel 1 2

Below there is a List, which belongs to the Entredeux.

A List 1 1

The Lower Cimatium is to be of 12 Parts; and its Parts are these,
A Plinth 4 8 A Torus 3 8 A List 1 6 An Half Doucine 3 from 2 to 6 A Roundel 1
2

And above a Cincture, which belongs to the Entredeux.

A Cincture 1 1

The Entredeux is to be of 5 Models, and 4 Parts, if the Pedestal be of the
Collar, according to the General Rule; but if it be allowed 7 Models, the
Entredeux is to be of 5 Models, and 10 Parts.

The Intercolumnium from Trunk to Trunk, is to be of 4 Models; but if there be
Portico's, the Columns being without Pedestals, the Pilaster is to be of 3
Models, and the Impost of 1.

Its Parts are,
A List 1 6 A Doucine 2 from 4^ to 5 A Corona 4 4 An Ovum 2 3 A Roundel 1 1 A
List A Friese 6 A Roundel 1 2 A List 1

The Arch must be composed of Ornaments of the Impost, of the same Accidents
and Projecture. The Door is to be 18 Models high, and 9 wide. And if when there
are Portico's, the Columns have also their Pedestals, the Pilaster is to be of
4 Models, the Door is to be the height of 24 2/3 Models, if the Pedestal be
Regular; but it is to be of 5 Models, if the Pilaster contain 7 Models; and its
wideness must be one half of its height. The Impost and Arch will be as Impost
on high is to be 1 Model large, and 2 Models long. It will have for Cornish an
Ovum, a List, and an Abacus, as the Cimatium of the Capital, and its Projecture
will be equal to that of the Lateral Impost.

The COMPOSITE ORDER.
THis Order, which is also called the Latin Order, as invented by the Romans,
is so named as participating of several Orders, the most Regular and Beautiful
is that which is composed of the Ionick and Corinthian, and comprehends what
there is of Elegance and Beauty in either of the two Orders; which also borrows
very much of the two first.

The Figures marked N, O, P, Q, represent the several parts of this Composite
Order, viz. N, the manner of designing the Capital. O, the Capital, Architrave,
Friese, and Cornish, P, the Base and Pedestal. And Q, an Example of the
Capital, with Birds and Beasts.

This Order has as great a Fame, as the Corinthian. Its principal Parts are
composed of the same Ornaments, and divided in the same manner; and indeed
there is no material difference to be found, except in its Capitals, and
Pedestals, whereof I shall only speak of the Parts of this Order, which differs
from those of the Corinthian.

The Pedestal of this Order differs not from that of the Corinthian, except in
some parts of the upper and lower Cimatium.

The Parts of the Upper Cimatium, are
One List 2/3 8 One Doucine 1 7 A Corona 3 6 An Half Doucine, or Direct Gueul,
1 3 A List 1 An Abacus 1 per Bas A Friese 5 A Roundel 1 2

Below there is yet another List, which belongs to the Entredeux.

A List 1 1

The Parts of the Lower Cimatium, are
A Plinth 4 8 A Torus 3 8 A Doucine Reverst 3 5 A Baston 1 2

And above a Cincture, which belongs to the Dee.

A Cincture 1 1

There might be added an Attick Base, which is common to this, with the two
preceding Orders. Or else there may be made a Base, compounded of the Attick
and Ionick, which will be particular.

The Parts of the Composite Base, are
A Plinth 6 7 A Torus 4 7 A List 4 A Scotia 2 2 A List 2 A Baston, or Roundel,
3 A List 2 A Scotia 1 2 A List 2 A Torus 3 3

And above there is a Cincture which belongs to the Trunk.

A Cincture 1 2

The Capital is composed of the Parts of the Corinthian and Ionick: It has a
Cimatium like to the Corinthian; a little Space of two Parts, whence spring the
Voluta's; and then an Ovum, a Baston, and a List, like to those that are in the
lowermost part of the Ionick Capital. The Voluta is the same as the Ionick,
having as much of the Front, as the Cornure of the Corinthian Abacus, that is
to say, four Parts, or a little more. It springs from the Foot of the Flower,
and its Eye is terminated by the Upper-side of the Baston, or Roundel. The
Capital from the Abacus is divided into three Parts; the uppermost is allowed
to the Voluta, and the other Ornaments drawn from the Ionick Order, and the
lowermost to the Foliages.

An Ovum 2 A List 1 An Abacus 3 A little Space 2 An Ovum 5 A Baston 2 A List 1
The Space of the Upper Foliage, 12 The Space of the Lower Foliage, 12 A Roundel
2 A List belonging to the Trunk, 1

Amongst the Antiquities of Rome, there has been found a very great number of
Capitals, which not belonging to any of the four Orders are to be attributed to
the Composite; because they have almost all the principal Measures of that
which is composed of the Ionick, and ^orinthian Orders, here described
oftentimes in the place of Voluta's, Rollers; or Tigets. There are Eagles,
Griffons, and other Animals; and in the place of a Flower there are Faces, and
other things.

The Composite Entablement has its principal Divisions, the same as the
Corinthian.

The Cornish has for its Parts.
A List 1 36 An Half Doucine, or Straight Gueul, 5 from 31 to 36 A List 1 31 A
Doucine 2 30 A Roundel, or Baston, 1 29 A Corona 5 28 An Ovum 1 19 A List 1 18
A Doucine 4 17 3/4 Dentelets, or Denticles, 8 14 A List 1 8 An Ovum 5 7

The Parts of the Friese, are
A Roundel, or Baston, 1 2 A List The Friese, properly so called, 25

The Parts of the Architrave, are
A List 1 7 An Abacus 2 Below 5 An Ovum 3 5 A Roundel 1 3 A Fascia 10 2 A
Doucine 12 1 Another Fascia 8

I say nothing here of the Intercolumnium without Portico's, or with Portico's;
of the Imposts, and of the Arch; because that the Measures and Divisions are
the same in this Order, as in the Corinthian, from which it need not differ
except in the Capital, and the Pedestal, though I have here set down some other
differences.

Of the Diminution and Enfleurs of Columns.
THe Diminution of Columns is made several ways; but it will be sufficient to
give Examples of the two chief of them. For the first, Let the Column A, B, be
divided from a third Part upward. Let the Semicircle E, D, C, E, and from A,
the Point of Diminution. Let the Line A, G, be let down perpendicularly; then
let the Point E, G, be divided into as many equal Parts as you please: For
Example, into six; and let E, A, be also divided into other equal Parts; and
when the Perpendicular and Horizontal Lines shall cut Line E, H, I, K, which
will give the Diminution desired, and the same way be made use of in the
Tuscan, and Dorick Orders.

This other way, though it be less common, yet is easy to be conceived by the
Lines. Then the Measure of the Columns being agreed on, a Line is to be drawn
ad Infinitum, beginning at C, and continuing through D. Afterward bring bakc
the Measure C, D, to the Point A, until it cut the Perpendicular at the Point
B; and A, B, being continued to E, from thence there may be drawn as many
Lines, as you please; which parting from the Perpendicular, will tend directly
to the Circumference of the Column; upon which applying the Measure C, D, you
will there have the Enfleur of the Column, as well above as beneath: And this
way may be applied to the Ionick, Corinthian, and Composite Orders.

But if it be thought fit to make these Columns Wreathed, after the manner of
those which are at St. Peter's, at Rome, there must be a Plane, as is here
marked, and that little Circle in the middle shows how it is to be Wreathed;
which being divided into 8 Parts, and 4 Lines being drawn parallel to the
Perpendicular, the whole Column is to be divided into 48 Parts; and this Spiral
Line formed through the Middle, which serves for a Center to the Column, upon
which is to be set forth the bigness of the Column Strait Line by Line, as it
is here represented. But it is to be observed, that the four Numbers, 1, 2, 3,
4, marked upon the Plane, are only to serve as far as the first half Story, in
regard the beginning parts from the Center, must be continued from thence
upward about the little Circle unto the last half Story above; where also the 4
first Points below are to be made use of.

Remarks.
THe Roundels, or Bastons, are designed by a Demy-Circle. The Ovum, or Quarter
of a Round, by a Quarter of a Circle. The Gueul Reverst, or Doucine, by the
Sixth part of a Circle, described with the Equilateral Triangles, in such sort
that the Crooking from below be inward, and the Crooking from above be outward.
The Straight Gueul, or Demy-Doucine, is designed at the Doucine it self, only
with this difference, that the Bending from below is outward, and that from
above inward. The Abacus is designed by an Arch, described with an Equilateral
Triangle, in the same manner as the Scotia's, and the Imbelishment of the Trunk
of the Column toward its Cincture, or Collar.

To the Worshipful in Essex and of Childerly John Cutts of Arksden in
Cambridgshire Esquire.

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.



WAR.
The Introduction.
THE Art of War is so noble and necessary a study for all Gentlemen as well as
Soldiers, that would fit and prepare themselves to be Instruments for the
glory of their King, and safety of their Country, that without it they must be
useless at home, and altogether Strangers to Battles and Transactions abroad.
Greeks to Conquer most of Asia, and subdue that mighty Persian Empire, more
likely to have given the Law to Europe, than to have received it from so small
a part, and People of it; but by being exceedingly their Superiors in Military
Arts and Discipline: Having for the Education of their Youth, their Tactici, or
Public Teachers: and their Gymnasias, or Public Schools; by which means the
Grecian Youth were so accustomed to Military Exercises, that it was a Reproach
and Ignominy to any that had not learned to handle their Arms; and (as some
relate) they were so trained up in their Schools, that they were Fed and Lodged
as if they had been actually on Duty in the Field; which doubtless was a Method
worthy of praise and imitation; for thereby in an instant they were able not
only to form an Army of Soldiery, expert in the use of their Arms; but also to
have it consist of Men, accustomed Diet and Hardships of War.

The Romans (those great Examples of Military Worth) although they had not such
Public Teachers, or Schools to fit their Youth for Arms; yet we find they had
their Field of Mars, whither the Roman Youth resorted to the practice of
Military and Warlike Exercises; and we read, they were so strict in the choice
of their Soldiers, that none could be admitted to, or attain the Dignity of
one of the 24 Military Tribunes Wars; and none that had less favor could be a
Tribune, before he had served in the Wars 11 Years amongst the Foot, or 15
amongst the Horse; whereby we see, none could be an Officer before he had been
a Long time a Private Soldier, judging him unfit to Command, who had not first
learned to Obey: And their great Care in this matter, we may learn from the
prudent distribution of Tribunes in their Legions; that whereas the first
Legion of a Consular Army had four Tribunes, which might have served in the
Wars but five Years, yet it had two Tribunes which had served 11, or 15 Years,
and so in course for the remaining three Legions; whereby they distributed as
near as might be the most knowing and experienced Tribunes in every Legion.
Such was the Excellency, of the Roman Military Discipline! War was the Policy
of their Commonwealth, the Renown of their Families; the Glory and Employment
of Private Men; It was a dishonor to their Great Men to be overcome; and for
their Followers, not to go as far as they: Their Soldiers went Singing to the
Battle; and such as owed their Safety to their Heels, were forced through mere
Shame to rid themselves with a Halter of their hated Lives. Thus they were
Endowed with such Noble Courage, for which they were celebrated above any other
Nation.

But why do we dazzle out Eyes with the Splendour of either the Grecian or Roman
Arms, or be so unjust to our selves as to diminish or Lessen the glorious
Actions of this Nation, that thereby we might only flatter Antiquity? The
English has filled their Histories with passages as truly noble as those we
read of with so much admiration in the Grecian and Roman Writers; and foreign,
as well as their own Histories do them the right to tell the World, how not
only Towns, but Provinces, and Kingdoms have been the reward of their
Victories, as their memorable Exploits, famous Victories, and large Conquests
in France, Ireland, and Cyprus, etc. how they brought under Cicily, and carried
the terror of their Arms into Asia; But withal they bid us observe, that such
great and noble Actions were due to their great knowledge in Military Arts and
Discipline, acquired by unwearied industry and pains, when their Youth were
bred up in shame of Vice, and boldness to undergo peril for Virtues sake; For
it is certain, as Plutarch speaks of the Lacedaemonians, in his Life of the
Theban General, Pelopidas, That it is neither Eurotas, nor the place betwixt
Babyx and Gnacion (Rivers in and about the City Lacedemon, then famous for
brave Soldiers) that brings forth Valiant and Warlike Men: There is in most
Men a kind of Fear that is born with them; few with Hercules in the Cradle dare
encounter and strangle Serpents. It is true, in some few Youths we may discover
a certain kind of greatness of Mind, that betimes by their forward and lively
Spirits, and by some brave excursions of Mind, may give sure Signs of their
innate Courage; yet we must do so much right to Discipline, as to acknowledge,
that Valor rather Springs from that than from any Prerogative of Birth; and
thus that Man that has been afraid at the very name of War, when brought (as
it were) to see and handle the Dangers thereof; and when he perceives, that
Death is not certain in Battles, that but a few Fall when it is courageously
fought, and that his Fears have often deceived and fooled him, now dares be one
in the hardest Service, and can meet the most threatening Dangers boldly and
cheerfully, obtaining that by Experience, which he never had by Nature. Where
Courage is natural, Discipline Courage is not innate, Discipline, when applied,
never fails to produce it. The Thebans (which till the Day they obtained the
Victory against the Lacedaemonians) had no Reputation of Valor; yet by Exercise
and Use of Arms, under their Experienced and Skilful Generals, Epaminondas and
Pelopidas, are too hard for the Brave Spartans, who before were accounted
Greece.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Old English Valor is still the same,
although it were to be wished, that Young Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality,
were more inclinable, in imitation of the Noble performances, and Illustrious
exploits of their Ancestors; to acquaint themselves with Military Exercises and
Manly Employments, that by their acquired Knowledge joining with their Genius,
they may be an Ornament to a worthy King and Country, like that brave and
resolute Spartan, Isadas, in a Just and Honorable War, whenever they shall be
called to the Field.

And can there be any greater Encouragement to set about the practice of this
so Great and Noble a Study, than to be blessed with a General to your Armies, and
an Admiral to your Fleet, in the Person of a King; and of as Active a Temper,
and Warlike Spirit, as either the Greeks Alexander, or the Roman Caesar, who
has Courage

I do not design in this small Treatise, to speak of the handling of Arms, nor
of the several Postures, and Motions, taught the Soldiers, nor of the diverse
ways of Exercising a Troop, or Company; since there is in the English Language
so many Printed Books on this Subject: And that which would make one the less
curious in doing it, is, because (though there be a great many fine things
taught in these particulars, which are graceful to the Sight, and makes
Soldiers the more ready) yet when they come in earnest to Fight, few of them
are practiced but to keep their Ranks even and close, their Files right, to
Fire nimbly, to Charge boldly, Word of Command from their Officer, and to be
exactly Obedient to it.

I shall only Discourse a little of the three Principal Heads in the Art of
War, viz. Marching, Incamping, and Imbatteling an Army, which if rightly
understood, with the following Treatise of Fortification; of Defending and
Besiedging a Town; the Ingenious Soldier will find them very useful
Instructions to him in diverse occasions.

Of Marching an Army.
BEfore the Army comes to their ^endevouz, in order to March, the Gene^^^ sends
an Officer with some Horse to the Neighboring Villages, to have a sufficient
number of Guides of those most knowing of the Country, and Ways, he designs the
Army shall March, and to bring them to his Quarters, which must be always near
the Generals, and there kept, especially if Men not thoroughly known, and to be
trusted. To this Officer the General gives the Title of the Captain of the
Guides. Having (upon the diligent comparing of their Informations) resolved on
the way to March, after the Reveil is beaten, all the Wagoners and Men that
attend the Baggage are to take up their Horse and Oxen, and make ready to load.
The Vag-Masters (whose Duty is to Mend the Ways, and Conduct the Baggage) are
to come to the Quarter-Master-General of the Army, to receive his Orders. And
being instructed in the Way the Army is to March, he is to provide himself
Guides, and to Assemble together all the Baggage of the Army, whose Colors
they must follow, and March according to the Rank of the Regiment they belong
unto, and according to the place the Brigade is ordered to March in, whether in
the Van, Body, or Rear.

After the Army is formed into as many large Squadrons and Battalions as the
Ground or Field (where they are drawn up) will admit of, and according to their
number regulated into the Van, the Body, and the Rear-Guard; all the Ordnance,
Carriages, and Baggage being drawn up on one side, ready to fall into their
places, as the Army Marches off; The General gives Orders for the Van to begin
their March, which for the first day is always begun with his Regiment, and
therefore is drawn up on the Right; and afterward every Regiment is to take it
by turns according to its Priority, being a General Officers, and Antiquity
being a Colonels. Then he sends out Guides, and Light-Horsemen to discover the
Ways and Passages, yet so that they keep always in sight of the Vanguard, that
upon the discovery of an Enemy they may give notice thereof in time. With the
Van he orders the Carpenters of the Train, and most of the Pioneers to march
for the mending of such Bridges that need it, or shall be judged insufficient
to bear the weight of the Carriages, etc. and when there are bad Ways for the
Horse, or Train, to mend them against the Army comes up.

The Ordnance and Ammunition do ordinarily march in the Center, or Body of the
Foot, as adjudged the securest place from the Attempts of the Enemy; for if the
Attack be in the Van, or Rear, or both, half the Army will be free from the
Encumbrances of the Carriages, and will be ready to make Head where need
requires; but sometimes, as Necessity requires, some small Fieldpieces March
in the Head of an Army, especially when the Enemy is expected to Fall on.

It Is impossible to give a certain, or standing Rule for the most advantageous,
and safe way of Marching an Army, since the Form must vary according to the
Country you march in, or the Enemy you have to do withal; although you are to
observe, when ever the Ground will Marching over a Heath, or large Field,
always to march in Battalia; and if the Army cannot, yet at least that the Horse
and Foot do march in as large Squadrons, and Battalions as the Ground will
admit of.

The Chief Officer that commands the Rear-Guard gives Order that some Troops of
Light Horse shall march within sight of the Rear, especially in passing over a
Heath, Forest or the Country be Mountainous, or Hilly, then the Light Horse
may be commanded to march sometimes in the Van, and sometimes in the Rear of
the Army, and to keep such Watches, and Sentinels on the high places, that the
Enemy may not discover the strength of the Army as it passes, or in what order
it marches.

In passing through narrow Ways, the Vanguard is generally strengthened with
some Foot and some Ordnance drawn up before it, lest the Enemy should surprise
it, and then march up by Defiles, and draw up as the condition of the place
will permit.

In passing through a great Wood, there ought to be placed good store of Horses
upon the Ways that lead into it, and to round and guard it very well on both
sides, to be secure from the Enemies Ambuscadoes, and if there be any plain, or
open places in it, the Horse are to overspread them, and to be drawn up to
secure the Passage until Ordnance and Baggage are past, and the Rear brought
up; And if after the passing the Wood the Army come into a plain Champain
Country, some Horse are to guard the Way that comes out of the Wood, until they
be drawn up again into large Squadrons and Battalions.

When an Army is to march through a Country where there are many Brooks and
Rivers, Bridges are to be made, which is easily done, if there be good
Ingeneers, Carpenters and store of Workmen. States of Holland provide their
Army continually with some Boats, laden with Planks, Spars, Beams, Anchors, and
Cables drawn upon Block-Wagons by 10, or 12 Couple of Horses, where coming to a
River they presently take them down as many as they have occasion for, cast out
their Anchors, joining them together, laying the Planks, and Boards upon them,
so in an instant a Bridge is made for their Army, Carriages, etc. to pass
securely. Sometimes Bridges are made with empty Barrels and Hogs-heads, laying
Planks over them and fastened together. Now for the securing the Bridges whilst
they are marching over, there should be some Pieces of Cannon drawn up, and
planted by the Riverside, to annoy the Enemy, if they should force their
Passage over it; and when the Bridge is laid over, some Firelocks, Half-Pikes,
and Horse should march over to make good the other side, until all the Army
with the Canon and Baggage are come over. If the River be fordable, but rapid,
and above Knee-deep, the strongest Horse by turns are to stand in Files in the
River on the upper and lower sides of the Ford, that the Foot may pass the
safer between them, the upper Files breaking much of the rapidness of the
Stream, and the lower saving such of them that by the violent Current might be
cast down.

There are several other cases which must be provided against, as emergencies
happen, by the Care, and prudence of the Chief Commander, for which no positive
Rules can be set down, but the Orders must be given on the place, and
proportionable to the Ground, the Enemy, and the Occasion.

Of Encamping an Army.
WHen an Army is to Encamp, and Quarter, especially not far from an Enemies
Country (although but for a Night,) the General sends out to view and inform
himself of the Nature and Condition of that place where they design to Encamp,
which must be a place (if possible) in a plain Field, near Water; to which
place the Army being come, and that in good time by Day, the Quarters may be
made near unto the adjoining Villages, if there be any; and the Horse Lodged
about them in the most suspected places of Danger. To this end, the
Quarter-Master-General is to go with the Camp-Mareschal that is upon Duty, to
the appointed Camp; and being there come, he divides the Ground, distributing
it to each Quartermaster of the respective Regiments of Foot, and Troops of
Horse; then he takes up a Quarter for the General, in which he marks out the
General Officers Quarters, and of all those that have right to be there. He
also takes care for the Artillery, and for the Provisions, which must be near
the Army, and covered by it.

When an Army comes to be Encamped near the Enemy, and that there is no River
betwixt them, the General gives Orders to Entrench his Army, and the greatest
part of the Troops must not go to Rest, each Regiment placing a Guard at the
Head of their Camp; and the Camp Marshall that is upon Duty takes care to
place the main Guard about a Mile beyond the Army toward the Enemy, choosing
for that purpose a place from whence they may discourse all round about them,
and there the Guards must stay until 'its Day; but when the Night approaches,
they must draw near the Army, putting themselves at the Head of the Foot. The
Colonel that is upon the Guard orders another Guard to be more advanced than
where he is, of about 20 Horse, commanded by a Quartermaster; this Guard must
be advanced a Musket Shot from the great or main Guard, in a place where they
may see all about them. Besides this Guard there must be made a Detachment of
about 50 Horse commanded by a Captain to march all about, especially upon the
ways that come to the Camp, that the Army may not be surprised.

It is not found that the Romans (who were the great Masters in Military Acts
and Discipline) ever used a Line about, or Entrenched their Camps, until such
time that they had vanquished Pyrrhus King of Epyrus, lying always before in
open Fields; but finding that Princes Army Entrenched, they liked it so well,
that afterward they did not allow themselves to Encamp in Fields, although but
Camps Entrenched; and it is almost incredible to read, in what little time they
Entrenched their Camp, and how laborious the Form of it was. So excellent was
their Military Discipline, their Soldiers being accustomed to it by constant
practice, whence they soon found the great advantages that attended it,
together with the many Dangers, and Inconveniences that before accompanied the
neglect thereof; such Entrenchments kept them safe, and freed them from Army
was always exposed by quartering in the open Fields, and Villages, where if the
Enemy was awake, he would sure every Night endanger the carrying or beating up
some Quarter of it, whilst on the other hand, being lodged in a Body, and
within an Entrenched Line, they were exempt from those Inconveniences; and to
assault an Army so Entrenched was held so daring and dangerous an Attempt, that
we Read of few that undertook it, and fewer that Romans (as we find by reading
their Histories) owed as much of their Conquests to their Encamping well, as to
their other excellent Military Discipline and Valor; and it would be almosts
endless to enumerate what Kingdoms, and Provinces they kept in obedience by
their standing Camps, having first wearied out their Enemy by such safe and
beneficial delays, and then on some great advantages they would give them
Battle, and so defeat them.

The ordinary Dimensions of an Entrenched Camp: 8 Foot are for the breadth of
the Ditch round the Camp, the depth 5 Foot, the exterior height of the Earth
thrown up 5 Foot, and the interior 6 Foot; although if need be, the Line may
be raised higher, and thicker, and the Ditch deeper and broader. On this Line
are to be made some sorts of Works, as Redoubts, Bastions, Tenails, etc. which
are to flank and defend the Line, and are to be about the distance of 720 Foot
Point Blank that a Musket does execution. The raising the Line and Works upon
it are to be distributed equally amongst the Regiments of Foot that are not on
the Guard, every Rgiment taking according to its number of Men, his equal
proportion, and every division of the Regiment relieving the other by turns
until the Work is finished. Every 100 Soldiers are to have a Commissioned
Officer, a Sergeant and a Corporal to supervise them, that Moorish Grounds,
they may be set with Turn-Pikes and Palisadoes, which may be taken up when the
Army Decamps.

The manner of Encamping of Horse and Foot is thus; For a Battalion consisting
of 12 Companies, and 50 Men in each Company, there is to be allowed 100 Paces.
For a Squadron consisting of 3 Troops, and 50 Men in each Troop, 50 Paces.

From the Head of the first Line to the Head of the second (if there be more
than one Line) there is commonly allowed 300 Paces, whereof 120 are for
Encamping the first Line, so that there remains 180 Paces, for the distance
between the last Tents of the first Line, and the Head of the second, the 100
Paces being allowed for the second Line to draw up in; and there must be as
much allowed for the Front of the first Line to the said purpose. It must be
endeavored as much as may be, that the second Line be equal to the first,
keeping the same distance upon the Right and Left. All the Troops, and
Companies of Horse and Foot, consisting but of 50 Men apiece, are to be
encamped in one Row of Tents and Huts; but when the Troops and Companies
consist of more Men, there must be 2, or 3. The Horse are to be Encamped on the
two Wings, and the Foot in the Center. The Generals Regiment is to have the
Right, and the Colonels Company the Right of the Regiment

The particular Dimensions of the Ground allotted to the Adjutant, or
Quartermaster for the Encamping a Battalion consisting of 12 Companies, and
each Company being Encamped in one File, is commonly 100 Paces, allowing 3 Foot
for a Pace, which he is thus to divide.

The Streets are each to be of 6 Paces, which is in all 72 Paces; the breadth
of each Tent 2 Paces, and of a Pace, or 7 Foot; the Depth is according to the
number of the Tents, and 4 or 5 Men to a Hut, each Tent taking 2 Paces, the
distance betwixt each being usually 2 Foot; The distance of the Subalterns from
the Soldiers, is 5 Foot; The great Street between the Captains, and the
Subalterns, is sometimes 15 Paces, and sometimes 20; Behind the Captains Huts
is their Equipage, and at a convenient Distance the Sutlers Encampt; the Pikes,
Colors, and Muskets must be placed at the Head of every Company; The Huts of
the Foot always to be open to the Streets, and those of the Cavalry toward the
Horses Heads; and it is always to be observed, that every Evening after the
Tap-too is beaten, the Word is to be given, after which none is to pass along
the Line that has not the Word.

To conclude, The Quartering the Army at all times, (especially when the Enemy
is very near) ought to be in such manner, as that the Soldiers may be soonest
in Battalia to receive them, that is, that such Forces as compose the Wings and
Body, may have only to go out of their Huts and Tents, to be in the Figure you
design to fight in; else in case of an Alarm, the dangers will be many, and
great.

Of Giving of Battle.
AS there is no Act of War so great in it self, or in the consequences thereof,
as Fighting or giving Battle, the Advantages being eminent to the General that
wins it, and the Prejudices many and considerable to him that loses it; so
nothing ought to be more exactly weighed, and judiciously considered, and
hardly any thing more essentially to be studied by a General, than perfectly to
know, and lay hold on all the Advantages in the Day of Battle, and to know all
the Disadvantages, to avoid them.

The Ranging an Army in Battle to the best Advantage is a great step to the
winning the Victory; which depends not only on the Wisdom, and Skill of the
General, the nature of the Ground, and the quality of his own Forces; but also
on those of his Enemies, and on the disposition of him that commands them. And
although Rule can be given to answer all these Varieties, yet some positive
Maxims may be set down, which if punctually observed may beneficially answer
all occasions that may fall out; for we find that even the greatest Captains of
ancient times (whose Military knowledge, and Practice the Moderns extol and
value) have not ever observed one and the same Form of giving Battle, but
varying as occasion offered.

Caesar at that memorable Battle fought on the Pharsalian Plains against
Pompey, did quite after the manner of the Roman Imbatteling; for having found
that Pompey exceedingly out-numbred him in Horse, he covered one of his Flanks
with a little River, and drew all his Cavalry to the other Flanks; among the
Squadrons whereof he placed Bodies of the best Infantry, and there he began to
Battle; whereby having all his Horse on one Wing, and these accompanied with
select Legionary Foot, he soon routed the half of Pompeys Horse that opposed
all his, and then falling into the Flanks, and Rear of his Enemy, won the
Victory.

The Maxims are as follows.
1st. TO be first drawn up on the Ground the Army is designed to fight on,
which is always attended with several considerabl Advantages, as the Honor
gained by being earliest on Soldiers, and often daunts the Enemy, having
thereby the opportunity of possessing all the Advantages of the Ground, which
are to be so exactly considered, and the Field you fight in viewed so well,
that when the Army is drawn up, the Order of it may not afterward be altered,
or the Ground changed; for all such mutations in the Face of an Enemy are very
Dangerous, giving them the greater confidence, and the Army the less Courage,
Field, the Army is in a posture to fall on, and rake the Enemy with their
Cannon, whilst they are drawing up, which Advantage when it may be taken, is of
great use.

Secondly, That a General is never to omit in the drawing up of his Army, so to
dispose of his Squardrons, and Battalions as that every one of them may come to
fight again and again, if need

It is also observable, that in a Battle who ever (...) in reserve a Body of
Men that are not lead to fight until all the Enemies Squardrons have fought,
rarely falls to get the Victory; and those that have the last Reserves are very
likely at last to be Victorious.

The Romans constantly fought their Infantry in there Lines, or Orders of
Battle; the one behind the other, if the Hostatii were worsted, they fell
between the Intervals of the Principi, and there Rallied again, whilst the
Principi advanced; and if both the Hostatii and Principi were routed, they fell
in between the Intervals of the Triarii, and if those could not sustain the
Shock, the Day was lost.

Thirdly, to have expert, vigilant and valiant Commanders to be at the Head of
the five gross Bodies, of which an Army is usually composed in the Day of
Battle; viz. the three Tertias of the Infantry (which as they March are called
the Van, the Body, and the Rear) and the two Wings of the Cavalry, and this in
the second Line, as well as the first (the distance between them being 300
Paces) since it is easier to attack well whilst all is in Order, than to
recover a disorder when once happened. With these Officers it is of great
importance to have an able General of the Artillery, and that he have
sufficient Officers under him. That the Carriages, Ammunition, etc. be in good
order, and the Cannon early, and well planted, as that the Shot may rake thwart
the Squardrons and Battalians of the Enemy, which will not only do great
execution, but also disorder Bodies of the Enemies Infantry and Cavalry.

Fourthly, Always place the best of the Soldiery in the Wings of the Army, and
to begin the Battle, on that side of the Army which is strongest, and the Enemy
the weakest.

This has been a very ancient Method, and seldom has been omitted, but to the
loss of those that are guilty of such omissions; and the reason is clear,
Because the Troops on the Wings are not wedged in, as the Troops in the main
Battle are, but are at liberty to make all the Advantages that by Accident, or
the ill Conduct of the Enemy may be offered; and it cannot rationally be
expected to fall upon the Enemies Flanks, and Rear, but by attacking them on
the Wings, which must be done as expeditiously as possibly (without disordering
the Troops) whilst the rest of the Army moves as slowly as they may; and if the
first Attack be succesful, then there is opportunity to fall into the Flank,
and part of the Rear of the Enemy, whilst the residue of the whole Army is
marching to Attack them in the Front, which must be quicker in motion when they
see the advanced Wing succesful. None are to speak but the Commander in chief,
or the Major by his Order. In advancing against the Enemy in Battle out of
their Musket Shot, the Captains, and other Officers at the Head of the
Battalions, are all to march in a Line, with their Pikes in their Hands two
good Paces before the Soldiers, and are often to look behind them, lest they
should insensibly get too much before the Body, and the Soldiers by following
too fast, fall into Disorder, at which time the Ranks are to be two great Paces
distant and the Files closed in such manner that every Soldier may march at his
ease, and so Charge and Fire without pressing one upon another, (...) causes
breach of Silence in the Battalion.

When the Army comes within Shot of the Enemy, and the Musketeers march ready
with their Pans guarded, instead of the Ranks being closed forwards to the
Swords-Point (which is usual) there is the distance of one Pace to be allowed
between the Ranks, and then the whole Line of Captains, and other Offcers are
to retire each of them into the Intervals of his Files next after his Post, yet
so as they may look to the right and left of the Battalions.

As soon as the Battalions come to 30 Paces distant from the Enemy, the
Musketeers are to Fire, the manner of which Firing being ordered them before.

The Officers Commanding the Rear, are to observe that the Battalions keep
marching, to cause the Soldiers to close forward easily, and without noise, or
confusion, that the Pikes march even with the Mnsqueteers; for if the Pikes be
even on the right and left, the Battalion cannot be

The Grandeers (if any) are to be drawn up on the Right of the Battalions, and
to augment them without intermixing with them, they being a separate number of
Men that are always to be ready for whatsoever shall be Commanded them.

The Commanders of the Battalions may be on Horseback at the Head of them, by
reason they are to be stirring to all parts, to see that the distances be
observed; and above all, that Major by his Order, although he is to alight when
the Musketeers make ready, and is to March with his Pike charged against the
Enemy.

Fifthly, The last Maxim is, To prohibit and forbid under severe Penalties,
the absolute Chase, or Pillage until the Enemy is totally routed on all sides;
and then have those Troops only to pursue, that are expressly appointed for it,
always having Squadrons to march after the pursuers as near, and in as good
Order as if they were going to the Charge, that if the pursued should Rally,
and face about, those Troops and Squadrons may be ready to fall on, and break
them a second time. This is of such importance, that a great many Victories
seemingly won, have in an instant been lost for want of due care in these two
particulars, and therefore ought never to be omitted; for there is nothing that
more incourages flying Enemies to rally and fight again, than the seeing a
disorderly pursuit of them.

And if Hanibal the Carthaginian General, who was so excellent a Captain to win
Victories, had but made this use of them during the second Punick War against
the Romans, having defeated them in four great Battles at several places, and
so routed their Army, that it had been easy for him to have taken Rome, had he
not (after being 16 Years in Italy) been forced to fly into Africa, overcome by
Scipio, and been obliged to beg peace of him.

FORTIFICATION. OR, The Art of Rendering a Place Defensible.
THat as nothing is at one brought forth to perfection in any Art or Science;
so in this of Fortification. At the first beginning the People (as Caesar in
his Commentaries. on the Wars with the Gauls, tells us, and as it is amongst
the Indians at present) were wont to surround their Towns with Piles driven
into the Ground in manner of an Impalement, as Figure appears.

But when they found that the Fury of an attempting Enemy (as well as Fire)
would soon destroy these Wooden Retreats, they began to build high and thick
Walls, defending the same from the Top, by throwing down Darts, Arrows, and
Stones to annoy Enemy, according to this Figure, as Cartins observes of the
Babylonian Walls, which were 150 Foot high, and 32 Foot thick.

Experience, the truest Cenfurer in this matter, finding the Imperfection and
Disadvantage of this sort of Structure, that the Defenders standing on the Top
of the Walls were no more safe from being exposed to Danger, than the Enemy
without; and that they could never hit or annoy them any more when they were
come near to the Foot of the Wall, unless they stood on the very Edge of it,
where bowing themselves to discover the Enemy at the Bottom, must be exposed to
the danger of Tumbling down; and therefore the Besiegers being hidden, it was
no hard matter for them to place there Battering-Rams, and other Engines (then
in use) to force down the Walls, and so get into the Town. For the remedying
this, they were forced to make Loop-Holes, or Windows below in the Walls,
according to this Figure, out of which they annoyed the Enemy.

(...) Hon.ble George Leg, Baron of (...) Master General of ye. Ordnance.
(...) Norse to his Ma^^ King James (...) Second Leivtenant of Alceholt (...)
Forest in (...) hire Admiral of his (...) fleet of (...) Mediteranian. (...)
General of his (...)



But it was found, that at the Enemies approaching the Wall, they were secure
betwixt these two Loop-Holes, or Windows, within the Triangle a, b, c,
according to this Figure; therefore they invented Square-flanked Towers,
parallel to the Wall.

The Besieged finding Tower to be out of sight, and the Angles easy to be
Battered by their Rams; and there yet remaining a Triangle a, b, c, in which
the Enemy was hid, they changed them to Round ones; by which means a Remedy was
found against the most pressing Force, threatened either by the Rams, or other
Ancient Engines, which by their Battering, instead of loosing the Stones,
forced them toward the Center, and made them stick closer together; Triangle
a, b, c, according to this Figure, yet they could not unfasten the Stones
without great difficulty, and by adding a few Windows, all Danger (if any
remained) was taken away.

Thus the Ancient manner of Fortifying at last was in this Structure of round
Towers, and so continued until about the Year of our Lord 1359, one BARTHOLDVS
SCHVART, a German Monk at Collogne, invented that admirable Composition of
Gunpowder, which was soon after followed with that of the Musket and Cannon;
so that by this means the manner of Warring was changed from the
Battering-Rams, to the Thundering of Guns; and the Round Towers (which were not
altogether flanked by the Besiegers Fire) were turned into Bulwarks and
Bastions, with sharp Points toward the Compaign, defending and flanking one
another without the least hidden place to the Enemy to lodge themselves in,
having thick and solid Ramperts of Earth behind their Walls, to resist the
Violence of the Enemies Batteries; the which are in use to this Day.

CHAP. I.
Of the Terms, and Angles, relating to Fortification, Illustrated by the
Letters of the Alphabet, as well on the Ichnography, or Ground-Plot, as on the
Orthography,
Of the Ichnography, or Ground-Plot Lines Plate I, Fig. II.

A, Is a Polygone, or a Figure made of several Sides and Angles.

BD, is the Radius, or distance from the Center of the Polygone, and represents
the Wall that surrounds a place.

A, a, is the Exterior circumference, or Polygone, that passes by the Points of
the Angles of the Bastions.

V, X, F, G, H, is the Plane of a Bastion, on which there is to be raised a
thick and solid mass of Earth, sometimes lined with Stone, or Brick; Their use
is to contain under Covert a sufficient number of Musketeers, and to plant the
Artillery thereon to scour the Campaign and Ditch round; a place to Flank and
defend the Body thereof, and by their solidity the better to resist the force
of Mines, and make Retrenchments behind Breaches, if need require; and they are
to be large, that Grenades do not much Execution on them.

Royal Bastions are such as are not able to resist the force of an Army Royal,
being so called when there is a Train of Artillery brought into the Field to
attaque the place. HV, is the Gorge of the Bastion, or the distance between the
two Flanks of the Bastion, and is the Ground where ordinarily the Besieged make
their last Retrenchments.

CV, is the Demi-Gorge of the Bastion, or the distance from the Angle of the
Polygone to the Angle of the Curtain and Flank.

CF, is the Capital of a Bastion, or the extension of the Radius betwixt the
Angle of the interior and exterior Polygone.

FG, is the Face of a Bastion, or the part of the Bastion that extends it self
from the Point of the Bastion to the Flank, and is the weakest part in all the
Fortification; because of its being more exposed to the Besiegers Batteries;
and being only defended by the opposite Flank, is the place where the Enemy
ordinarily makes their Breaches, to which they pass their Galleries, and where
they generally make their Mines.

HG, is the Flank, or the Line raised from the extremity of the Demi-Gorge to
the Face. This is the Post from which the Besieged defend the Curtain, and the
opposite Flank and Face of the Bastion, scouring the Ditch, Counterscarp,
Glassis, and other Outworks, which is the reason why the Besiegers endeavor
by their Batteries and Artillery to ruin the Flanks at the beginning of a
Siege.

H, is a Cazemat, and Orillon which covers the Cannon in the Flank from being
dismounted at any distance, and to this end obliges the Enemy to raise their
Batteries almost under the Besiegeds Fire.

HI, is the Curtain, or the part of the side of the Polygone that is between
the two Demi-Gorges of the two opposite Bastions; This is the part best
defended in all the Fortification, being thus secured by the two opposite
Flanks, and for this reason the Ports and Gates of a Town are ordinarily made
in the midst thereof.

PO, is the plain of the Rampert, or the Terrafe of the Town.

PZ, is the Parapet or Breast-work, that covers the Musketeers that are on the
Rampert.

HI, is the second Flank, or that part of the Curtain which defends the Face of
the opposite Bastion.

HE, is the Line of Defense, which extends it self from the Angle of the Flank
and Curtain, to the Point of the opposite Bastion, and is not to exceed the
Point Blank distance of a Muskets execution.

IE, is the Stringent Line of Defense, which determines on the Curtain the
length of the second Flank, the Flanks, and the Faces of the Bastions.

F, E, N, is the Ditch that goes round a place out of which the Earth is taken
that makes the Ramperts.

R, Y, M, S, is the Counterscarpe, or the Edge of the Ditch, that is, toward
the Compaign.

1, 2, 3, is the covered Way, or Corndor.

4, 5, 6, is the Base, or largeness of the Esplanade, or Glassis, or the
Parapet of the covered

Of the Angles. Plate 1. Fig. 1.
IT is to be observed, that an Angle is marked by three Letters, and the
middlemost always denotes the Angle.

C, B, D, is the Angle of the Center, and is made by the meeting of two
Semidiameters, drawn from the Angles of the Polygone to its Center.

A, C, D, is the Angle of the Polygone, and is formed by the meeting of two
sides of the Polygone.

X, F, G, is the Angle of the Bastion, or Flanked Angle, and is made by the
meeting of the two Faces of the Bastion.

F, G, H, is the Angle of the Shoulder, made by the meeting of the Face and
Flank.

C, H, I, is the Angle formed of the Flank and Curtain.

Of the Orthography, or Profile, with the Scenography and Perspective of a
Fort. Plate 1. Fig. 2.
ENgineers use to represent the different Heights and thickness of the Earth of
a Fort by a Section, through the middle of the Curtain, which they call Profile.

BB, is the Horizental Line, on which the Fort

B, C, E, D, is the Rampert, or the Solid Earth round a place.

BC, is the Base, or Foot of the Rampert, the distance between the Ditch and
the Town.

DE, is the Terraplane, or the upper largeness of the Rampert.

FD, is the Interior Slope of the Rampert.

EC, is the Exterior Slope, or Talum, which Brick, or Stone.

N, O, E, is the Parapet, or Solid Earth, that is raised upon the Rampert, to
cover the Soldiers from being exposed to the Besiegers Fire.

KN, is the Interior Height of the Parapet, which is always the height of a
Tall Man.

NO, is the Superior Slope, or Glassis of the Parapet, on which the Besieged
lay their Muskets when they Fire toward the Compaign.

4, are the Embrassures, or Cannon Ports.

LO, is the Exterior Slope of the Parapet.

P, H, I, is the Banquet, or Foot-Bank, at the Foot of the Parapet toward the
Town, on which the Musketeers stand when they Fire.

CR, is the Plane of the Fausse-bray.

R, S, T, is the Parapet of the Fausse-bray.

TV, is the Barm, or little Plane, to hinder the Parapet of the Fausse-bray,
which is always to be of Earth, lined with Turf, from tumbling into the Ditch.

V, Y, X, Z, is the Ditch, or Moat that is round the Fort.

VY, is the Scarp, or Slope of the Wall next the Ditch.

2, is the Cunet, or little Cannal in the midst of the Ditch.

ZX, is the Counterscarp, or outward Slope of the Ditch.

Z4, is the Covered Way, and is that which Soldiers ordinarily call the
Counterscarp.

6, 7, 8, is the Glassis, or Esplanade; or the Parapet of the Covered Way,
which slopes until it loses it self into the Campaign: On the Top of this
Parapet there are Palisadoes usually plantted.

CHAP. II.
General Maxims to be observed in Fortification.
1. THat there be no place, or Work that is not Flanked, and defended by
another. This is evident from what has been said already, and the common
practice of an Enemy teaches. For the Besiegers ruining by their Batteries the
Parapets and Flanks, as dismounting the Besiegeds Cannon, they have no other
Design than to make their Miners pass the Ditch, where if they find any place
out of sight of the Besiegeds Fire, it is easy for them in a little time to make
their Mines, and so by this means betwixt a Town Besieged and Taken, there is
often times no more than the difference of 8, or 10 Days; for which reason the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, improved the round Bulwarks of his Conquests, into
sharp-pointed Bastions.

2. That the great Line of Defense, or that which is near equal to it, viz. the
interior Polygone exceed not 120 Fathoms, or 720 Feet, which is the Point Blank
of a Muskets execution; for it is to be observed, that the Defense is to be
taken from the Musket, and not from the Cannon, seeing the Cannon require too
many Men to manage them, consumes a great deal of Ammunition, are easily
dismounted, and with great difficulty planted again, neither can they maintain
a continual Fire. And it has often times been observed, that Engineers to make
the fewer Bastions, and consequently to spare a little Money have committed this
intolerable Fault.

3. The greater and more spacious the Gorges and Flanks are (provided the rest
of the Works be not prejudiced thereby) the better is the Fortification.

The Gorges ought to be so large, that on both sides of the Flanks, Cannon may
be planted, that the Soldiers may go up and down to the Bastion, in a good
Front, without giving any inconveniences Flanks; likewise there must be place
to make Retrenchments, if necessity require.

The Flanks are the most considerable parts of Fortification, and from which
depends the Defense of the other parts, as the Curtain, Flanks and Faces of the
opposite Bastions, the Ditch and Counterscarp, etc. they are to be made so
great as the just proportion of the Bastion will admit of; for in making them
too great, the Capitals Line of Defense will exceed the Port of a Musket,
(which is against the second Maxim); or in making them too little, the Bastions
will become obtuse, and will entirely cut off the second Flank, while we ought
to have consideration for it.

4. That the Angle of the Bastion be not much less than 60 Degrees, or much
more than 90; for being less than 60, it is so slender, as easily Flank; and
besides it shall contain less Ground than the Bastion of an Angle of less
Degrees, built on the same Gorges and Flanks.

5. The greater the Angle is that is made of the outward Polygone and the Face,
the greater is the Defense of the Face; For then the Stringent Line of Defense
comes not so much upon Curtain, and consequently leaves the greater second
Flank.

6. All the Works ought to be Cannon Proof.

CHAP. III.
Of Regular Fortification.
IN the construction of Regular Figures, and how to Fortify them according to
the most modern ways used by the Italians, French and Dutch, with the Methods
of some Modern Authors.

Regular Fortification is that which is made upon Equiangular, and Equilateral
Figures described in a Circle, such as a Triangle, Quadrangle, or foursquare
Pentagone, or five-sided Figure to a Dodecagone, or twelve-sided Figure; the
Bastions being so placed that the Points of them are alike distant, from the
Center; the Curtains of one length, and all the other Lines and Angles of one
Form, and greatness.

Regular Figures are made by calculating the Angle at the Center, which is by
dividing 360, the number of Degrees, a Circle is always divided into, and in
which the Regular Figure is described by the number of the sides of any
Polygone, or Regular Figure the Fort is to consist of. The Quotient shows the
Angle of the Center. As in this Example of a Pentagone, or 5 sided Figure. By
the operation the Angle of the Center, is found to be 72 Degrees, and so of any
other Figure. Then if with a Protractor, or a Line of Chords you draw a Circle,
and set off the Angle at the Center, as in the Example 72 Degrees, it will
divide the Circle exactly into 5 equal Parts, on which strait Lines drawn from
one Point to another, gives the sides of a Pentagone.

The Protractor is described in the Treatise of Geometry, viz. surveying, and
is nothing else but a Semicircle made on Brass, or Horn divided into 180
Degrees.

The Line of Chords is the fourth part of a Circle, or 90 Degrees, projected on
a strait Line, such as are always upon any plain Scale.

The Radius, or Semidiameter of a Circle, for which this Line shows the
Degrees, is always represented by the Brazen Point at 60 Degrees on the same
Line, and if with your Compasses you take from the Line of Chords 60 Degrees,
and draw a Circle 72 Degrees, taken from off the same Line, will go 5 times
exactly round the Circle, and so of any other Figure.

Of the Italian Method according to P. Sardi.
THis Author being learned, and much experienced in the Wars in his time, has
wrote much, and to good purpose; so that I choose him as the most approved of
the Italian Authors. He makes the Interior Polygone 800, Venetian or
Geometrical Feet, (which makes 921 of the English,) the Demi-Gorges 150, and
the Flanks also 150, so that the Gorges and Flanks are equal, and in English
Feet make 172 1/2 for each, which is betwixt a 1/5 and 1/6 part of the Interior
Polygone; He raises the Flanks Perpendicular to the Curtain; and to set off the
Faces and Angles of the Bastions in a Square and Pentagone, he makes the Line
of Defense fall on a 1/10 of the Curtain in the Hexagone, or a 1/4 Part; in a
7, 8, and 9 sided Figures on a 1/3; and in all above on the half. In this
Example of a Hexagone, divide the Curtain into 4 equal Parts, from N. which is
1/4 of it, draw a Line by the Top of the Flank, until it cut the Radius
prolonged in the Point a, so you have the stringent Line of Defense, the Face
of the Bastion, and the Angle required, and so a Polygone.

To reduce this construction to the second Maxim, you are to find the
particular Measures by the Rule of Proportion, thus.

If 800 Venetian Feet, give 150 for the Gorge, how much will 921 English Feet
give? Answer 172. Then again, If 921 English Feet give 172 for the Gorge, how
much will 720 give? Answer 134.

After this manner all the rest of the Parts are found out.

Now to the Construction. Plate 1. Figure 3.
IN the Hexagone drawn as before taught on the side marked P. Sardi, divide the
side P, P, into 720 Parts, at 134, or cc, make a Mark for the Demi-Gorges, set
up Perpendicular to the Curtain; the same Measure for the Flanks c, f, and draw
the Faces as before. These parts may be taken off from any Sector, or Joint
Ruler, or Diagonal Scale of an Inch, or 1/2 an Inch divided into 100 Parts.

In a Book of Military Architecture entitled Corona Imperialis written by this
Author, he sets Cazemats and Orillons on the Flanks; Of which in their place.

Of the French Method as it is by Manesson Mallet Author of the Travaux de
Mars. Plate 1. Figure 3.
THis Author observes the same Rules for the construction of all the Regular
Figures, as are here given in this Example of a Hexagone.

Having drawn the Polygone PP, extend the Semidiameters by the extremities of
the side of the Polygone marked M. Mallet; divide the side P, P, into 3 equal
parts; set one of these parts, on the extended Semidiameter or Radius from P,
to A, for the Capitals; take a fifth part of the Polygone, for the Demi-Gorges,
set it from P, to C, to make the Faces and Flanks draw the Stringent Line of
Defense, from the Capital to the extremity of the Gorge, and raise the Flanks
at an Angle of 98, or 100 Degrees with the Curtain; where they cut the Line of
Defense determines the length of the Flanks and Faces, as c, f, and f, A; With
the length of this Face you may complete a Polygone all round by Transfering
Lines of Defense.

This Author has no second Flank, he makes the Stringent Line of Defense, 120
Toises, or Fathoms (allowing 6 Feet to a Fathom) which is 720 Feet.

See Travaux de Mars by this Author of de Ville, and Furnier's Method. Plate 1.
Figure 3.
THey Divide the Interior Polygone into 6 equal Demi-Gorge and Flanks Pc, cf,
both being equal, and at right Angles to the Curtain, for drawing the Faces of
the square, and Pentagone, lay a Ruler from the extremity of the Gorge C, by
the Top of the Flank f, until it cut the Capital in A; These have no Flanks.

For the Hexagone, and all Figures above it, join ff, by a Line; the Capital
will divide it into two equal parts at e, as a Center draw the Circle f, A, f,
at the Distance af, where it cuts the Capital at A, draw af, for the Faces.

These Authors make their Interior Polygone or Line of Defense 150 Toises, or
960 English Feet.

This Method is to be reduced to the second Maxim by the former Rules.

See De Ville's Ingenieur Perfail, and Furniers Architecture Military.

Of the Dutch Method, as it is abridged by the Emperor Ferdinand the Third;
with an Account of the Construction of the Fortifications at the Grave in
Holland. Plate 1 Figure 3.
THe Dutch have been as famous for their experience in Fortification, as their
Country at present is for their fortifyed Towns; and by their Engineers, as
Dogen, Marolois, etc. have filled the World full of their Books, and ways of
Fortifying; although they might have saved themselves the trouble, and laborious
pains in calculating Triangles, and other Mathematical Learning, more for
curiosity than use in this matter. For which reason the Emperor Ferdinand the
Third found out Rules approved of, by turning their Fortifications out of the
way of calculating Angles into Lines. He sets down this universal way of
drawing the Lines of any Fort.

It Is to be taken as a Rule, That if the Interior Polygone be 66 of any
Measure, the Gorge must be 15, the Flank 12, and the Capital 24.

Now in proportion according to the second Maxim, If the Polygone be 720 Feet,
the Capital will be 261 Feet, 9 Inches, the Gorge 163 Feet 7 Inches, the Flank
130 Feet 10 Inches, which is to be set at right Angles with the Curtain; thus
by taking of these proportions from the Sector, you may fortify any Figure
according to this Method.

This is an abridgment or Epitomy of all the Dutch Fortifications, except the
Square, which has no second Flank.

See Schottus Edition of Amussis Ferdinandea.

The construction of the Fortification of the Grave according to Monsieur Storf.
HAving drawn the Exterior Polygone AB, of 94 Rods, and divided it into two
equal parts in C, let fall the Perpendicular CD, of 15 2/3 Rods, which is 1/6
of the Exterior Polygone; then from the Points AB, draw the Lines of Defense
ae, and BY, through D, infinitely; divide the Perpendicular CD, into two equal
parts at F, by which draw FG, Parallel to AB, cutting the Line of Defense in
the Point G, which determines the Face AG. Then for the Point F, at the
interval FG, describe the Arch IH, and from the Point G, at the distance of 15
Rods describe IL, cutting the other in the Point I, which shall be the
extremity of the Curtain, and of the Line of Defense BY; To trace the Circular
Flanks and Oreillons, divide the Flank GI, into 3 equal parts, one of which is
for the Oreillon, and the other two the length of the lower Flank. Let also BN,
be 1/3 of the Face BZ, and draw NO, infinitely, by the Points N and M, on which
take MP, of 2 Rods; then draw IP, with the distance IP; From the Points P and
I, describe 2 Arches cutting one another in Q* which shall be the Center of the
low and high Circular Flanks; let the Interval of them be a Rod; draw RV,
Parallel to MO, and at the Interval QP, or QI, draw the Arch R, S, I; and
having taken ST, of 5 Rods draw the Arch VX, make X Y, 2 Rods; The
Ichnographicall and Scenographicall Lines of a FORT. Plate 1.

so you have traced the two Circular Flanks. For the Oreillon find the Center
W, which is the half of GM, and describing the Arch of a Circle, at the
distance WM, it comes to touch the Face prolonged in the Point 2.

Or the Construction may be more short thus: Having drawn as before the
Exterior Polygone, the Perpendicular, and the two Lines of Defense, take for
every one of 69 Rods 3 feet; take for the Face 25 Rods, and having drawn the
Flanks at the Lines of Defense to the extremity of the Face, the rest you will
find as before, or insensibly near.

The Method according to Count Pagen. Plate 1. Figure 3.
THis Author in his retirement after having been unfortunately Shot in the Eye
at the Siege of Arras, wrote a great many good things

He takes a Method quite contrary to any that wrote before him; he works by the
outward, or Exterior Polygone, and sets his Flanks Perpendicularly to the Lines
of Defense; he divides Forts into Royal, Mean, and small Royal.

Royal, when the Exterior Polygone is 200 Fathoms, or 1200 Feet. Mean, when the
Exterior Polygone is 180 Fathoms. And small Royal, when the Exterior Polygone
is 160 Fathoms.

The Example shall be for a great Royal. The Construction is as follows.
DIvide the Exterior Polygone AA, into two equal parts at M, each being 600
Feet; on M, ^aise a Perpendicular MM, take 180 Feet, or 30 Fathoms, and set it
on the Perpendicular from M to T; then draw A, T, C, for the Lines of Defense,
from A, set at AF, 60 Fathoms, or Feet; from f, let fall a Perpendicular on the
Line of Defense at c, or from T, set of 222 Feet; join cc, for the Curtain,
upon the Points aa, set at the half of the Angle of the Figure aoa, as in the
Hexagone 60 Degrees, that will determine the Centero; set of the Gorge PC, and
the Capital Pa, which you may Measure on the same Scale with the rest, and know
the length of them in Feet.

For the Mean Royal work, as before; Take 30 Fathoms, or 180 Feet for MF, the
Perpendicular, 55 Fathoms for the Faces, 32 Fathoms for Tc, or 192 Feet; the
Flanks will be found to be 24 Fathoms.

For the small Royal, Take 30, Fathoms, or 180 Feet for the Perpendicular MT;
50 Fathoms, or 300 Feet for the Faces, 27 Fathoms or 162 Feet for Tc; the
Flanks will be found to be 23 Fathoms, or 138 Feet, and are at right Angles, or
90 Degrees with the Line of Defense.

See Fortification de Pagen printed at Paris.

The Method of Monsieur * * * Plate 1. Figure 3.
HAving showed the several ways, and Rules for laying the fundamental ground
Lines, according to the most considerable Engineers of this last Age, I shall
end this Chapter by giving an Account of the Method used by a famous Engineer
Mounsieur * * * in the building of several Fortifications beyond Seas, the
which I suppose from the Advantages that attend it will commend it self.

You are to take the Interior Polygone of 720 Feet, or 60 Rods, (allowing 12
Feet to a Rod) according to the second Maxim the Point Blank that a Musket does
Execution; a fifth part of this you are to set off for the Demi-Gorges, which
is 12 Rods, or 144 Feet; a sixth part to the Flank, viz. 10 Rods or 120 Feet;
these two together, viz. 22 Rods or 264 Feet for the Capital, there remains 36
Rods, or 432 Feet for the Curtain. See the Figure.

The Reason why I give a 1/5 part of the Interior Polygone to the Demi-Gorge,
is; First, That the Line of Defense may never exceed the Port of a Musket,
which would happen, if I did but give a 1/6 part. Secondly, The Gorge being too
short, the Point of the Bastion would become too sharp, or the Capital too
short, and by consequence the Bastion too little: This proportion is the best
for the Pentagone, Hexagone, and Heptagone, because by these Figures we cannot
have the Flanks greater, or the Defense better. But for the Octogone, 9, 10,
11, and 12 sided Figures, the following Method is much better. There is given
to the Face 29 Rods, to the Flanks 12, and to the Curtain 36. The Point of the
Bastion is 90 Degrees, then the other parts, viz. the Demi-Gorge, the Capitals,
the Polygone interior and exterior are found by calculating and forming
Triangles.

This Method for these Figures is much the better, because the Flanks become
greater, and the Angle of the Polygon is greater, the Gorges become greater,
the interior Polygone longer, and consequently a great deal of more Ground
enclosed, than according to the first Method of Fortifying.

The Flanks ought to be perpendicular to the Curtain, or very near it, to the
end the Enemy may not make Batteries afar off, but be obliged to make them to
rume the Flanks just under the Besiegers Fire, which will cost them much blood
and pain; and the reason is evident: For in bringing them to fall perpendicular
to the Line of Defense, the Flanks are too much exposed to the Enemy, and so
discovered to the Campaign, that the Enemy finds all advantages imaginable to
raise many Batteries afar off to batter and ruin the Flanks with their Cannon,
which is an Enemies chief Design in a Siege, that they may the easier approach
the Town, and pass the Ditch. That the design of the Flanks are chiefly to
scour the Ditch and Counterscarp, to hinder the Enemy to pass their Gallery,
and make a Lodgement, the which seems very reasonable, seeing the Guns from the
Faces of the Bastions and Curtain, scours the Campaign more directly than the
Guns from the Flanks; and tis' found by the account of Sieges that an Enemy
advances in a little time very securely in their Trenches to the Counterscarp;
wherefore if the Guns be still mounted on the Flanks, to discover them at their
breaking the Scap, and that one or two Batteries at most can be raised to
dismount them, and that in so dangerous a Post too, to be under the Besiegers
Fire, it is certaily an advantage not to be found when the Flanks fall
perpendicular on the Lines of Defense.

CHAP. IV.
Of Outworks, and their Uses.
AS it is a great advantage to a place to be surrounded with a good Ditch, and
good Rampert and Walls; so likewise it is a considerable disadvantage when
there is found low, or rising Ground near the Counterscarp of a Town,
Besiegers, to facilitate the carrying on their Trenches, or for
Advantage-Ground, to raise Batteries against the Town. For this Reason,
Engineers have invented diverse sorts of Works for the remedying these Faults;
as, to take in the disadvantageous Ground, to Elong the Enemy, and to hinder
(by being low) their sudden Approaches by raising the Compaign almost with a
Horizontal Shot, and spend their time before they advance Works, and force them
to gain these Outworks with as great hazard and loss, as if they attempted the
Fort it self; and after the Outworks are lost, it may be a new Work to them to
approach the Town.

There are several sorts of Outworks, such as Ravelins, Half-Moons, or
Demi-Lines, Horn-works, Tenails, and Crown-works; of which in order.

Of the Ravelins.
THere are two sorts of Ravelins; the one with Flanks, and the other without.

The Ravelins with Flanks are set before long Curtains when the two Bastions
cannot Flank one another with Musket Shot, and the Curtain not long enough to
build a Plate Bastion on the middle of it. These Ravelins supply the effect of
a Bastion not only to cover, but also to defend.

The making of these Ravelins is thus; cut Ditch parallel with the Curtain,
above which set up a Capital from 18 to 22 Rods, the Demi-Gorges from 10 to 12
Rods, the Flanks from 8 to 10 Rods, the Ditch round them, the largness of the
Flanks going parallel with the Face of the Ravelin, till it meet the Ditch of
the Face of the Bastion of the place, to the end the two Flanks of the Ravelin
may scour over all the Ditch before the Face of the Bastion.

The other sort of Ravelins consist only of a Capital, and two Faces (as Figure
4, Plate 1. the Ravelin A.) the Capital from 12 to 18 Rods, the the Faces are
drawn toward the Shouldiers of the Bastions, that the Ravelin may be commanded
within not only by the Curtain, but also by the two Flanks.

This Work is oft-times by the Soldiers called a Half Moon; the chief use of
it is to cover the Curtain, Bridge, and Gate, and is very often used in most
Works. The ordinary way of making them is thus,

Take with the Compasses the extension of the Curtain B, Q; from the Points B
and Q, make two Arches crossing one another in D, the Line that passes through
the middle of the Curtain; then from the Point D, draw Lines toward E and F,
till they cut the Counterscarp in G and H. Joining GI, and HI, you have the
Faces and Demi-Gorges; the Ditch round this Work, as it is in all Outworks, is
half the breadth of the Great Ditch.

Because these Ravelins are weak, they may be made double, one within another,
seeing the Ditch round them is narrow, and the Profile slight, and therefore
soon Taken and Mined. The Interior Ravelin will serve for a good Retrenchment,
being four foot higher than the other. But both are to be Mined, least the
Enemy find too great advantage to make Batteries, and fill the Ditch. They are
to be lower than the Ramperts of the Town, to be always exposed to the
Besiegeds Fire, in case the Enemy make a Lodgment on them.

Of the Demi-Lunes, or Half-Moons. Plate 1. Fig. 4.
THe Demi-Lune, or Half Moon, is a Work raised always before the Point of a
Bastion, which is so called from the low Cavity of its Gorge.

The Construction is, by prolonging the two Faces of the Bastions; from the
Point O, at the distance OK, make the Arch KL, where the Faces prolonged out
the Counterscarp; raise the Capital MN, of 2/3 of the Face of the Bastion; then
drawing the Faces to the Angle of the Counterscarp I, till it cut the Face of
the Bastion prolonged at P, so you have the Flanks KP, and the Face NP, which
are to be set off on the other side from N to Q, and from L to Q, the Ditch is
to be Parallel to the Faces of the same Breadth with that of the Ravelin.

This Work is no more in use, seeing their Faces have but a weak defense from
the Ravelin, the Enemy may ruin them easily, and pass without any difficulty
their Ditches, and so make themselves Masters thereof; and the Faces and Flanks
of the Demi-Lunes will serve them for Batteries against the Ravelin, and the
Flanks of the opposite Bastions. And although they may be Retrenched by
Traverses, yet the Enemy will not fail to Attack the Face entirely, or the
place where the last Retrenchment is. This happens to another Work, called a
Counter-guard, which being likewise out of use, I shall not describe the Figure
of them. Vide Plate 1. Fig. 4.

Of the Horn-Works. Plate 1. Fig. 9.
HOrn-Works are to be set before the Curtains, in drawing Lines from it
perpendicularly at the two Flanks, toward the Campaign, of 60 Rods; their
Front is of 36 Rods, equal with the Curtain; this is to be divided into three
parts, one for the Curtain, the other two for the Demi-Gorges of the Horn-Work;
the Flanks of six Rods, or 72 Feet every one.

This Work is the principal of all the Outworks, and its found by Experience,
that an Enemy is kept back, and gains as little Ground as possible by this
Work, rather than by any other; they extend themselves far into the Campaign,
Fronts defend themselves, the Interior of them is open to the Town, they may be
often Retrenched, and consequently fatigue and cozen the Enemy.

But this Work requires many Men; the Flanks and Faces of the Demi-Bastions are
too little, and the Rampert too thin to plant Cannon, and to stay on when there
is a Breach. Thus an Enemy may easily Mine the Defenses on the Front, and by
force Master the Demi-Bastions, and on this Batteries to ruin the
Retrenchments.

For this Cause, these Works are only to be made when there is a great
necessity, and in such places only where the Enemy is obliged to Attack the
place.

To place Ravelins before this Work, observe only the Method in the first
Paragraph.

Of the Tenails. Plate 1. Fig. 4.
THe Tenails (if there be not time to make a good Fortification for the defense
of the Bridge and Passages) it is usual to raise in haste a Parapet in form of a
Tenail, as Fig. 4. their Sides are no longer than the 50 Rods, their Front is
of 36 Rods, which is to be divided into four parts; in the middle we draw a
Perpendicular, on which is set of a 1/9 part of the Front, toward the Town,
and draw Lines from the Sides forming the Faces.

This Work is very proper for the Counter Approaches, when we would succor the
place with Men; that which is the true Origin of so many Horn-Works, as well as
Tenails, being first invented to this end, in the Sieges of Bomel, and
Bergen-op-Zoom.

Having time, we make the Tenails stronger, and join them to Horn-Works, that
the Enemy may be the better discovered at the Angle of the Counterscarp, Work
better defended.

Of the Crown-Works. Plate 1. Fig. 4.
A Crown-Work is ordinarily made when a Height is so near a place, that the
Shot of a Musket reaches it; to this end we extend the Sides of this Work
(whether the Crown-Work be before the Curtain, or Bastion) 65 Rods, the Point
of the Demi-Bastions are to be at least 60 Degrees. Join the Extremities of the
Sides; on the Middle raise a Line perpendicular, on which set 18 Rods for the
Capital, making an Angle, and two Interior Polygons, every one of about 50
Rods, giving 10 to the Demi-Gorges, and 8 to the Flanks. We make Ravelins to
this Work, as is taught in the first Paragraph.

This Work may serve to adjoyn to Forts, that are too little to Lodge a great
Garrison, which oftentimes happens when small Places, or Towns of no great
Consequence, become great Frontiers, when it would cost too much to enlarge the
whole Fortress round by making of a new Wall: And it would not be so convenient
to throw down the old Work, which a small Garrison (if need were) could
maintain.

All the Outworks ought to be detached from the place, and environed all round
with a Ditch, having their Communication by Bridges; or if the Fosse, or Ditch,
be dry by Land, yet not joined with the Counterscarp, lest the Enemy invest
them behind.

All these Outworks (with many more) are represented in the Figure on the
second Plate.

Of Cittadels and Castles.
CIttadels, and Castles, are built to Command and Bridle a Town, in case the
Burgers should be Rebellious, and to be the last Refuge or Retreit. They are
commonly of four or five Bastions, and are used when a Town is so great, that
the Garrison makes in Number but a 1/5 or 1/6 part of the Burgers; although
sometimes they are used as Blinds, built on any Hill, or Rising-Ground near a
Town, from hindering an Enemy from Shooting into it. They are set so, that there
may be two Faces, and a Curtain toward the Town.

The Pentagon is the most advantageous Figure to make a good Citadel, which
opposes three Bastions to the Enemy, and two to the Town, Commanding at the
same time both the Campaign and the Town.

The Interior Polygon of the Pentagon may be made of 1/4 of the adjoining
Curtain, or a little more; the two Ports, or Gates of the Citadel are placed,
that one may be toward the Campaign, the other toward the Town, every one
covered by a Ravelin.

If the Citadel, or Castle, be a square, or 9 sided Figure, then the Center of
it may be on the Point of the Interior Polygon of the place.

The Center of the Pentagon, or 5 sided Figure, may be near on the Point of the
Bastion of the Town, taken away to make the Citadel in, although some use them
at a greater distance.

The Gorges, Flanks, and Capitals are set off in proportion to their Interior
Polygons; the Ramperts are to be as high as those of the Town.

For a more particular description of the Outworks, consult Travaux de Mars.

CHAP. V.
Of the Ramperts and Parapets; Walls, Cazemats, and Orillons; Faussebray,
Ditch, or Moat, and Covered Way.
Of the Ramperts, and Parapets.
THe Rampert is a great and thick Massy-Bank of Earth, raised round about the
Fort, Enclosing it to resist the Enemies Great Shot, and to save the Buildings
of the Town from ruin; and by their Height, the better to annoy the Enemy in
their Approaches: And therefore ought Artillery planted on them, the Campaign
all round, and that the Enemy may not Command them by raising the Batteries
higher.

But to this end, you must take notice of the Measure, and make the Ramperts
never higher than 20 Feet without the Parapet, that it may Command the better
the Covered Way, and Ditch, and not by too great height give opportunity to the
Enemy to be under Covert. And on the contrary, Rampert ought not to be less
than 12 Feet without the Parapet, otherwise the Enemy will Command it easily by
their Batteries.

The Thickness ought to be so regulated, that the Parapets builded on them may
be strong enough to resist the Violence of the Enemies Cannon; and that behind
them there may be place enought to plant Great Guns.

But as the Earth is not always the same, you Earth be Tough and Clayish, a
Bullet of 24 lib. will enter no farther than 10 Feet; but if the Earth be
Light, and Loose, or Sandy, then a Bullet of the same weight will enter 15
Feet, or more. Therefore the Parapet must be made from 16 to 24 Feet, chiefly
in the Flanks, and other places where there are made Counter-Batteries.

The Interior height of the Parapet is 6 Feet, the Exterior 4 Feet; the Base of
the Interior Talii, or Slope, 7 Feet, the Exterior Talii 2 Feet; the Banquet,
or Foot-Bank, 3 Feet broad, and a Foot and an half in height.

The largeness of the Terraplane of the Rampert, is always proportioned to the
Length, and Recoyling of the Cannon. Since then, that a Demi-Cannon, or a
Culverin, are about 15 Feet long, and they Recoil about 6, 7, 8, or 9 Feet; and
there being place necessary to manage them, the Terraplane ought to be at least
from 32 to

This Largeness ought to be set all round a place, and the Bastions ought to be
entirely filled, if it could conveniently be done; but so, that the Talii, or
Slope toward the Town may be proper to ascend with the Cavalry (as it is in
the Citadel of Antwerp.) In such Bastions you may more easily Rencounter and
discover the Enemies Mines; and they ought to this end be Vaulted, either in
Building; or if that be neglected, in time of a Siege.

The Interior Talii of the Rampert is equal to the height of it, that is, a
Foot for a Foot; the Exterior Talii, or Slope, is the half of the height, if
the Earth be good; otherwise. The Base of the Rampert is found by adding to the
Terraplane, the Banquet, Parapet, and two Talii's.

It were very convenient (if there were Earth enough) to make the Ramperts
larger, and Vault them under with Entries toward the Town, to be places of
Refuge for the Citizens, to be safe from the Enemies Bombs, which do great
Execution in their Houses. To this end, at the Grave in Holland, having Earth
enough, by reason of their enlarging the Fortifications of the Town, they do
intend to improve it to this Advantage.

But the Solidity and Dimensions of the Rampert, must have their determinations
from the Judgment of the Engineer, according as the Ground may prove; and from
the Purse of the Prince, according as there is Money enough to finish withal.
Therefore I have given the highest Measure that is to be used in some of the
Works, and the least in others; from which you may proportion any mean Measure,
according as the Ground and Money gives leave.

If it were the Custom now to agree with Engineers, as Princes and States did
not many Years agon, in the Building the Fortifications of their Towns, to
treat with them according to such and such a Design, as proposed to them, to
render the Town defensible in a limited Time; and it is to be their business to
provide Earth, Stone, Instruments, and all Materials necessary to the carrying
on and completing the Works; by this means the Engineer was obliged to
calculate the Thickness and Solidity of the Ramperts, to the end he might know
exactly how much Earth, Stones, and other Materials he must have; how much he
must dig and enlarge the Ditch; and consequently be able to tell in what Time,
and for how much Money he could raise and complete the Work. If this were the
Custom, it would not be impertinent to show how to build up a Fort, and make an
estimate of the Costs and Moneys required to perform the same; although it were
a very hard Task to perform exactly: For there being such a variety in the
Body, or Mass, whereon the Fort is to be built, as either Brick, or Stone,
Solid strong Earth, or Moorish, or Marshy Ground, where there will be a
prodigious Expense in Pilating the Foundations of the Ramperts, the neglect of
which has made very fine and fair Designs tumble into the Ditch. Upon this
Account Princes take another Method; they have particular Engineers, and
Intendants, of which the one gives the Design, and pays the Workmen, and the
other furnishes the Stones, and other Materials, and to keep the Workmen at
their Work, overseeing them.

In a word, This Business passes through so many Hands, that it is difficult to
know how much the Work will cost to raise it Complete, unless all the Accounts
be gathered into one, which cannot be done till after the Works are finished.

In Plate 1. Fig. 5. you have the Dimensions and Measures of the Rampert and
Parapets, and is as follows in the Profile, cut at right Angle through the
Face of a Bastion.

Feet. R, A, The Base of the Rampert, is 80 T, S, or Q, O, The Height of the
Rampert, is 20 R, S, The Interior Talii, or Slope, 20 O, A, The Exterior Talii
04 L. Q. The Base of the Parapet 21 Z, D, The Interior Height of the Parapet 06
N, P, The Exterior Height 04 N, Q, The Exterior Talii of the Parapet 02 Q, D,
The Interior Talii 01 V, Q, The Breadth of the Banquet, or Foot-Bank 03 V, X,
The Height of the Foot-Bank 01 T, V, The Largeness of the Terraplane 35

The Profile of the rest of the Works will be found in their particular
Paragraphs.

To give Rules, to cast up and find the solid Content in Feet, and Rods, of the
Rampert and Parapet, were to repeat what I suppose is handled in the Treatise
of Geometry; and I do not Rules to this purpose: For I do think, that if there
be not Earth enough had out of the just Deepness and Wideness of the Ditch, it
will do no great hurt to make either the Ditch Deeper, or Wider; and if there
cannot be had enough, but by altering too much the Proportion, or the Ground
not giving leave, it may be had somewhere else near the Town; and seeing
Workmen are to be paid by Day-Wages, if Overseers do their Duty right, the
Prince is not at all Cheated, although he knows not how many Baskets full of
Earth the Works contain, yet not to let this altogether pass.

Note, That the Earth, or Solidity that lies between T, Q, and S, O, is a
Parallelipipedon, all of one height and thickness, and the Content of it is
found by Multiplying the Superficies at the Bottom, by the height of the
Rampert. The Earth that lies on either side of this Body, and has Talum for its
Base, and ends at the Top of the Rampert in a Line, are Prismes, or half of
Parallelipipedons, as o, a, c, and S, R, T, and their Solid content is found by
Multiplying the Superficies at the Bottom, by half the height.

There is found in casting up the Solidity of the Ramperts, two sorts of
Pyramids, viz. erect Pyramids, and their Solidity is had by Multiplying the
Base into of the height, those ly to the outside of the Rampert, and have one
or two Sides to be seen.

The second sorts are Pyramids jacent, and their Solidity is found by
Multiplying the Superficial content of the Base, by of the height; these ly
with all their Sides hidden in their Rampert; all the Sums added together, give
the solid content of the Rampert. For the Parapet and Banquet, you are to
follow the same Rules.

Of the Walls.
THe Ramperts that are revetued; or Faces with Stone or Brick, are the best
both against Scaling and Mining, and are very useful to sustain the Ramperts
from tumbling into the Ditch, by the badness of the Weather.

Engineers have made a considerable improvement in the form of erecting the
Walls, which certainly must turn to a considerable Account. Instead of Building
the Walls, as before, Perpendicular toward the Town, now they bring them up
with such a Slope as they give to the Walls without, which both saves about a
or part of Stone or Brick, that must be used; and the Earth of the Ramperts
behind them lying almost in it its natural Position, does not press the Wall so
much forward into the Ditch, as when the Walls are brought up Perpendicular, as
is clear in Figure 6. Plate 1.

This they put in use at the Grave, where they find it turns to good Account;
and I am sure, that if what was before built of the Town had been after this
Method, the State had not been put to double Expenses.

The Walls of the Bastions are to be built higher than the Walls of the
Curtain, which may be only about 12 Feet in Perpendicular height, and 3 Feet
for the Slope, their Conter-forts may be about 14 or 15 Feet in length, 3 Feet
in thickness, and 12 Feet Distant one from the other. But the Walls of the
Bastions, may be erected so high as in the Figure, 22 Feet in Perpendicular
height, 4 for the Slope, 6 Feet thick at Top and Bottom, the Counter-forts 16
Feet long, thick at the Wall 5 or 6 Foot, 12 Foot of distance, or less,
according as the Ground or Foundation proves.

If the Ground be Moorish or Marshy, then the Foundation of the Walls must be
Piloted, and the Piles drove so deep, that a 16 or 20 hand Bill-bettle will not
drive at last above a quarter of an Inch, when then the Piles will touch the
firm Ground, The Piles are to be set at greater or lesser distance according as
the Foundation is, and are ordinarily of about 10 Inches Square. Over these
Piles there must be strong Timbers laid, and Cross these there must be others
of the same thickness, notched into one another, so thick as the seat of the
Wall is; at the inside thereof is laid a Timber of 6 Inches Square, or there
abouts, and at the forepart of the Wall, there is another of a Foot Square
laid over the Cross Timbers, and Notches into them to Prop the Foot of the
Wall; betwixt this Timber and the Wall, there are Planks of 4 Inches thick
joined together and driven into the Ground just with the Slope of the Wall, to
hinder the Water of the Ditch, from Washing out the Lime from the Walls, or the
Earth under the Timbers, betwixt the two Square Timber above the Cross ones;
there are to be Planks laid of 3 Inches thick, on which the Wall is to be
erected. The Earth betwixt the Counter-forts is to be well rammed and beaten.

If there be no Faussebray before the Faces of the Bastions, there ought to be
made a Vault or Alley of 3 Foot large, 6 Foot high, with small Windows to shoot
into the Galleries.

A (in Figure 7. Plate 1.) is the Figure of the Instrument the Workmen apply to
the Walls, to bring up the Slope true, by the Plumets playing down exactly upon
the Line.

Of Cazemats, and Orillons.
CAzemats are several Platforms for Guns to be made in the Corner of the
Flanks, to be hid conveniently from the Enemies Batteries, and Enemy shall
begin to lay their Gallery, and pass over the Ditch, or to plant their Guns,
and raise Batteries on the Counterscarp.

To this end there are Orillons set on the Flanks, of or of the Flank to keep
at least two Cannon under Covert, and are made either of a a round Figure, or
Square, as are to be seen on the Flanks of several of the Bastions of the
Figure on the second Plate. For the Construction of these Figures consult
Travaux de Mars.

Engineers of late do find fault with these Orillons since they ought
necessarly to be revetued with a Wall. If the Enemy do play with their Canon,
no body will be able to stand in the Casemats, by reason of the broken Wall
flying, and they find that the Orillons do hinder from defending from within
the Ravelins, and for these reasons they do not commend the use of them.

In Flanks that are not Perpendicular to the Curtain; and consequently too open
to the Besiegers Batteries, these Orillons supply the fault, of their being too
open, which I suppose has been the reason why some Authors seem so positive for
them; but where the construction of the Flanks is perpendicular to the Curtain,
they do not appear to be needful, seeing the Embrassures of the Parapets cover
enough.

Of the Faussebray.
AT the Foot of the Rampert Engineers make Faussebray all round a place, but
especially before the Faces of the Bastions; they are large, from 18 to 24 Feet
of a Terraplane, with a Parapet, as that of the Rampert; of late they have
neglected to make Faussebrays alleging for reasons,

1. Since the Faussebray is but a Parapet raised above the Level of the
Campaign, the Enemy being Counterscarp, which is ordinarily of the same height,
it may enfile it with their Batteries so easily, that it were impossible for
the Besieged to stay thereon, and hinder that the Enemy might not pass the
Ditch.

2. That the Ditch being passed, the Miners find place to Mine the Faces of the
Bastions where they will, and in many Places at a time, and the Mine being
made, the Besiegers may not only make the Assault at the Breach, but also on
the Faussebray, and Attack over all.

3. And that which is the greatest reason, that the quantity of Bombs, which
are at present Shot, the Faussebray will in few Hours be Totally ruined.

But in considering the great Advantages the Faussebray gives to a place, since
from them the escape which the Enemy is obliged to make through the Covered Way
is easily discovered, and the Enemy not only annoyed on the side, but likewise
on the Front, and so hindered by Musket Shot, Grenades, and Artificial Fire
to fill the Ditch, and make a Gallery; and seeing also they defend the
Ravelins, and Covered Way, much better than an high Rampert, it is more
reasonable to remedy the Faults, than to reject the use of the Faussebray
before the Faces of the Bastions.

As to the first Reason, viz. the Enfilement that the Enemy may make, the
Faussebray may be made 9 Feet higher than the Parapet of the Covered Way.

The second, and third Faults may be remedied by Traverses, Caponiers, with
little Palisadoes and Countermines; the rest of the Faults are remedied by
making a small Ditch of 20 Feet between the Rampert of the Town, and the
Faussebray.

When the Ditch, or Moat is dry, then the Faussebray is not found so
convenient, as when it is full of Water.

See (concerning the Advantage of the Faussebray) Chap. 2. Lib. 1. Dogen, and
Chap. 28. Lib. 1. de Ville.

Of the Ditch, or Moat.
THe Ditch or Moat is to be made so that the Flanks may command and scour it
before the Faces of the Bastions; to this end the Ditch before the Faces is so
broad as the Flanks are long, by drawing it toward the Shoulders of the
opposite Bastions.

A wet Ditch ought to be so deep, that in the Summer there be no less than 6
Foot of Water in it.

The dry Moats may be deep from 20 to 30 Feet; and the Moats that are deep, and
tolerable large, are esteemed better than such as are less deep and larger, to
render the getting up the more difficult to the Enemy; although the Moat should
never be less than 6 Rods, or 72 Feet; otherwise there cannot be made
Retrenchments, and other Works in it; and the Enemy by firing a Mine at the
Counterscarp, may cover and render all unprofitable. In the middle of the Ditch
there is a Cunet, or Canal, made of 20 or 24 Feet Broad, which serves in dry
Moats to Countermine, and to cause greater Pains to the Enemy to fill it.

The Ditches full of Water^, are much better than the Dry ones; because these
require too great a Garrison to defend them. For when the Enemy is once Master
of the Counterscarp, he may render himself Master of the whole Ditch, and
Attack in different places, in such a manner, that the Besieged will be obliged
to furnish all their Posts, and to have them ready over all. The dry Ditches
are likewise too much exposed to Surprise and Scaling; when (on the other hand)
the Wet Ditch costs the Enemy much Pains and Time before they can fill it, and
the Besieged see where they are to pass and Mine; and therefore has need only
to take notice of that Post, and at the rest to keep little Corpse des Guards,
and Sentinels.

See De Ville's Ingenieur perfaite on this Subject.

Of the Covered Way, and Counterscarp.
BEyond the Ditch, toward the Campaign, there is a large place of 20 or 30
Feet, Parapet, parallel with the Ditch, and sometimes made with salient Angles
in form of Ravelins; and if there be a Ravelin, then they are made on both
sides thereof.

The Covered Way is to Flank, and defend the Campaign Horizontally to hinder
the Eenemies approach, that it may cost them some pains and time before they
become Masters of the Counterscarp, and Ditch; the Besieged have their place of
Arms, to make Assaults, and their Retreits in Parapet is 6 Foot, and it falls
sloping 50 Feet, or there abouts, till it lose it self in the Campaign. This
sloping is called Glassis, or Esplanade.

This Parapet is ordinarily set on the Level of the Campaign; but seeing this
height gives too great an advantage to the Enemy when he once becomes Master of
it, therefore its better to take away 3 Feet from the height of the Covered
Way, and set the Parapet so that it may be elevated no more than 3 Feet above
the Level of the Campaign.

This is that part of the Fortifications of a Town that the Soldiers do
commonly call the Counterscarp; although Properly the Counterscarp is the Talii
or Slope of the Covered Way next the Ditch, whose Base is equal to the depth of
the Ditch* if it be not revetued, or Lined with Stone, or Brick.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Representation of Figures, and the Plat of any Fortified Town upon
Paper, by way of
FOr describing of Forts and Towns there is a kind of Perspective, called by
Engineers, Perspective Cavalier, that imagines the Eye at an infinite distance,
that is, at such a distance that all equal heights in the Fort are seen under
one Angle, whether further or nearer, and all I^nes which would meet at the Eye
are parallel, because of the distance; as we say the Rays of the Sun falling
upon a Burning-Glass are parallel.

The other kind of Perspective, that designs by a principal Point, from whence
all Parallels to that Principal do meet in that Point, being a very troublesome
way, and does so confuse the Body of the Work, that unless one be very expert
that way, he is not able to know what it means; although the Complete Engineer
ought to be skilled therein, as to represent a Body near at hand, or some
Engine.

Draw the Lines of your Fort with White-Lines, or with any thing that will rub
out, with all the Parapets, Ramperts, and Outworks; then considering what Side
you design toward you, whether the Curtain, or Point of the Bastion, or what
other Point, draw a long Horizontal Line A, B, (Fig. 8. Plate 1.) having a
Square of Brass, or Wood, run one side of it along the Line A, B, and at the
extreme Points of the Bastions, Flanks, and Shoulders, draw Perpendiculars
toward the Line A, B, over all, omitting those that will cut the Rampert; or
Parapet; because we cannot represent the Interior height of the Rampert O,
which is hid by the Exterior height, P; the Interior heights C, F, D, G, and E,
H, of the Rampert are represented by setting on the Person diculars, of the
Flanks of the Fort, and joining the Lines F, G, H, parallel to C, D, and E. For
the height of the Walls, take what height you please; as suppose the of the
Flank, and set it on all the Perpendiculars, from all the Faces, Flanks, and
Angles, and join them with Parallels to the Faces, Flanks, and Curtains, and
finish all, as you see in the Figure of a Nonagone completed.

The Angles that fall within the Body of a place, cannot serve to represent the
Exterior Elevation of the Bastions; because the Exterior is hid by the Interior
height of the Rampert and Parapet, as the height Z, Y, X, V, T, R, Q, P, on the
Perpendiculars that fall from the Angles of the Counterscarp in the Ditch, set
off of the Flank, to represent the depth of the Ditch. And Note, That Lines
drawn from the Angles of the Counterscarp that do not fall into the Ditch,
cannot represent the deepness of it.

The Outworks are represented after the same manner; only observe, that the
Works next to the Town ought to be represented higher.

The Talii, or Slope of the Walls, may be set off from the Perpendiculars, that
the Fort may be the more naturally represented.

Note, That in giving the Shadows to a Work, all Opaque, and Bodies not
transparent, cast their Shadows always opposite to the side from whence the
Day, or Light comes; or toward the Right Hand generally, when we design any
thing on Paper.

CHAP. VII.
Of Irregular Fortification.
FRom Regular proceeds Irregular Fortification, or the fortifying such Figures
as have not their Sides and Angles equal one to another, as the Forms of Towns
to be fortified commonly are, by reason of the Irregularity of their Form, and
Situations; and therefore are the harder to be fortified the more they differ
from Regular, which is the perfect. And because it happens but seldom, that a
Regular Fortification is newly raised, unless it be some small Field Forts, or
Cittadels, by reason that every one is inclinable to preserve his own;
therefore Irregular Fortification is more in use, and consequently necessary

The same Laws and Maxims for Regular Fortification stand, and are in force in
the Irregular, and serve for general Instructions, as occasion requires, to
fortify any place; and although they are not always to be precisely followed
(for Time, Place, and Charge, may hinder) yet they ought to be observed as near
as possible.

The greatest Art that is in Irregular Fortification consists chiefly in
rectifying the Sides Polygone that are too short, or too long; and in altering
the Angles that are too little or too great, by either going inward or outward
of the place to augment or lessen the Lines to such a Proportion, as that they
may be capable to receive a strong defenceable Bastion, (that is, a Bastion
according to the Maxims). The Angle of a Polygone less than 90 Degrees is not
fit to set a Bastion on, because then the Point of the Bastion will become too
sharp, the Flanks too Faces too long.

But before any Judgment can be made, it is requisite that there be made a Map
or Plat of the whole, with all the Ways, Passages, old Walls (if there be any
Rivers, Pools, Enclosures) and all other things fit to be known in the Draught;
and then there is to be designed what Works shall be thought most agreeing to
the Place to be fortified; and according to the proportion of the Draught on
Paper, the same is to be set Town.

A Polygone, less than 45 Rods, is incapable to place a Royal Bastion on. And a
Polygone longer than 65 Rods, is also too long; in such cases the Angle is
either to be made greater, the short Lines longer, or the long Lines shorter,
to the just proportion.

If therefore there be a Polygone of 50 Rods, and another of 60 Rods, then
according to the fifth Paragraph of the Third Chapter, take of Polygone for the
G^^ge, for the Flanks, and both these together for the Capital. Thus for a
Polygone of 50 Rods, there is 10 Rods for the Gorge, 8 Rods 3 Feet for the
Flanks, and 18 Rods 3 Feet for the Capital. For a Polygone of 60 Rods, there is
by the same Rule 12 Rods for the Gorge, 10 for the Flanks, and 22 Rods for the
Capitals.

Therefore divide the Angle of the Polygone into two equal parts, through the
middle draw Line, on which set the Capitals, the one of 18 Rods 3 Feet, the
other of 22 Rods; then draw from the Flanks of 10 Rods toward the Capital of
22 Rods, and so from the other Flank by his Capital, till you meet the Face of
the other, and so you have an Irregular ^^stion.

Thus by considering the Overture or opening of the Angles, and the length of
the Sides, you may fortify any Figure in proportion, observing always the
Rules and Maxims. As,

Suppose you find the Angle of a Polygone of 120 Degrees, consider to which in
Regular Fortification it comes nearest; as in this Example, To a 12 Sided
Figure, or Dodecagone; then according to the Rule of Proportion, If the
Polygone of a 12 sided Figure of 64 Rods give the Demigorge of 14 Rods, the
Flanks 12 Rods, and the Capital 24 Rods, 6 Feet, or a Rod; how much will a
Polygone of 50 Rods, and how much will a Polygone of 60 Rods give?

If a Line be very long, then it is to be fortified with a Plat Bastion in the
middle of it, the proportion is a great Royal.

A Polygone of 133 Rods, may be fortified after this manner:

If it be less, viz. from 90 Rods to 130, then it is to be fortified according
to the Rule of Proportion; if it be shorter than 90 Rods, the Plat Bastion will
be too little, and therefore it is better to set on the two Angles of the
Polygone two great Royal Bastions, and in the middle a Ravelin with Flanks.

The Angle of a Bastion less than 90 Degrees, is not well fortified with
Demi-Bastions, seeing the Face is much exposed to the Fire of the Besiegers
Batteries, and the Point too sharp; therefore the Angle is to be made greater,
or if the place will permit, to Retrench it in Form of an Horn-Work.

Seeing there is so much varlety in Irregular Fortification, the young Engineer
must practice by himself, by drawing several Plats of Irregular Places, and
fortifying them; and because Examples in this matter (as in other things)
exceeds all Precepts, he may peruse the best Books he can find on this Subject,
as Maralois, Dogen, and several others, where he will find infinite Cases and
Examples, that will help him, and inform his Judgment for effecting his desire.

The raising the Ramperts and Parapets are the same as in Regular
Fortification; and all or any of the beforementioned Outworks, may be placed
before the Curtains, and made in proportion to them as occasion requires.

CHAP. VIII.
The Explication of the Second Plate.
A, is a Town environed with a Wall and Moat, which serves to cover and defend
the Houses from the violence of the Enemy.

B, is the place of Arms where the main Guard is kept; or the place where the
Soldiers of the Garrison assemble at the time of Mounting the Guard, to know
their Posts.

C, are the Market Places.

The Scenography of a Town and Castle with all the usual Outworks and the
manner of carrying on a Siedge. Plate 2.

To the Right Noble George of Northumberland, Visof Pontefract, and noble order
of the Fitz Roy, Duke and Earl count Falmouth, Baron Knight of the most Garter
etc.a

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome



D, and E, are the Houses, by which is meant not only private, but public
Houses, as Halls, Prisons, Churches etc.

I, is a Bastion or Bulwork.

L, are the Cazemats.

6, is an Orillon.

P, is a Retrenchment, or a Work the Besieged make behind the place attacqued,
to keep the Enemy the longer off from being Masters of the Town.

7, are Fraises, or several pieces of Wood fixed in the Wall under the Cordon
or upper Row of Stone or Brick in a Wall. In places that the Ramperts are not
revetued, or lined with Stone, they are placed always at the Foot of the^
Parapet; their use is, to hinder Desertion and Surprises by Scaling.

M, is a Platform, or Earth thrown up along the Curtain, which serves to plant
Great Guns on.

N, is a Cavaleer, or a height sometimes of Earth, Stone, or Brick, raised in
the middle of a Bastion, to plant some Pieces of Cannon on, to scour the
Campaign to oblige the Enemy to begin their Trenches at a great distance from
the Fort, and to make them the deeper.

O, is a Countermine, or sort of a Well the besieged dig or make in their
Ramperts; toward the bottom of them they make several little Allies branching
under Ground, to discover the Enemies Mines, and to give Vent to them when made
and sprung.

S, is a Gwerit, which covers the Sentinel from the Weather.

V, is a Port, with a Stone Bridge. The Wooden Bridges are esteemed the best,
because as occasion requires they may be burnt down easily.

R, is a Drawbridge.

F, is a Citadel.

G, is the Castle or Governors Lodging environed Moat; there is ordinarily on
top of it a Tower, which discovers a great way into the Campaign, on which
there is a Bell to sound Allarum or Retreat, as there is occasion.

Z, is the Covered Way, or that which the Soldiers ordinarily call the
Counterscarp.

X, is the Glassis, or Esplanade.

Y, are the Trenches in which the Enemy under Covert approach the Fort.

H, are Batteries raised at every turning of the Trenches, to dismount the
Besiegers Cannon, and ruin their Walls.

1, is the Line of Contravallation to secure the Camp from Surprises from the
Town, by frequent Sallies, that the Besieged might make.

2, is the Line of Circumvallation, which is to hinder any Succor or Assistance
to get into the Town, and to hinder the Soldiers desertion.

*, are Redoubts, Triangles, Squares, and other Field-Works upon the Line, to
Flank and Defend it.

3, is the Ground and Tents of the Infantry.

4, are the Cavalries, Huts and Tents.

5, is the Artillery part, where the Cannon, and all Tools (and things ncessary
for Service) are kept.

7, are Brushes, and Faggots, or Facines, which serve both to make Parapets of,
and to fill the Ditch.

8, are Baskets full of Earth, which serve for Parapets, through which the
Musketeers Shoot.

9, is a Gallery, or a Frame of Wood, which serves to cover the Miners in
passing the Ditch, or Moat.

10, is the Quarters for the Victuals.

11, are big Pieces of Wood to mend the Ways, to facilitate the Passage of the
Artillery.

12, are Crow-foots, Calthrops, or Four-pointed Irons, one Point being always
uppermost, to strew on the Ground to hinder the Cavalry to pass, gauling or
pricking their Feet.

13, Horse de Freese, is used instead of a Gate; it is sometimes called a
Turn-Pike.

14, are Piles, or Pallisadoes made of Spars, plated or shod with Iron at the
Points, having two or three Nails droven through them: They are set in two or
three Rows, the lowest Breast-high, and every Row higher; so deep, as they may
not be pulled up. They are planted on the top of a Breach, or on some Pass on a
sudden.

15, is a Barricade, to plant on a Pass, or on the top of a Breach.

CHAP. IX.
Of Besieging Towns.
WHen a General does intend to Besiege a Town or Fort, he first sends to Invest
it, with a Body of Horse, Commanded by a Lieutenant General, and a
Camp-Marishal, that no succor may go in whilst he marches with the rest of his
Army to it; and to that end they take care to stop all the Ways, Passage, and
Intelligence that may be sent either in or out, of the Town. This is called the
Blocking up the Town.

When the Army is come before the Town, if it be Situated on a River, there
must be made a Detachment of some part of the Army, and send them of the other
side of the River, to take up their Quarters, having Bridges of Communication
laid over, and Redoubts made to defend them, in which there must be put a
strong Guard of Foot.

If the place be surrounded with Hills, then the General possesses himself of
the heights of them.

As soon as the place is Blocked up, and Consequently the rest of the Army,
Baggage, Provisions, Ammunition of War, and the Artillery are arived, and the
General has formed out his Camp for the Army, which in a Siege always Incamps
with theirs Backs to the Town, having Squadrons of Horse betwixt each
Battalion; then the Engineers mark out the Line of Contravallation, called
breaking of Ground, which is to be chosen beyond Musket Shot, or Falcon from
the Town, under which the Cavalry may securly lodge.

This Line is carried round about the Town, if the Garrison be very strong, and
full of Men; else on one part.

If the Enemy have Armies near, and that its thought they will endeavor to
raise the Siege, before the Town can be taken, then the Enginers mark out
another Line, further into the Campaign, whis is called the Line of
Circumvallation. Line is carried round about Enclosing Ground enough for all
the Army to lodge in. The Quarters of the General, and other chief Commanders,
are to be placed round about, so as one may relieve another conveniently.

Upon this Line, within Musket Shot one from another, are to be placed
Redoubts, Triangles, Long Squares, and other Fields-Works; each Regiment is to
Work at them before their own Camp. Their Ramperts are generally some 8 or 10
Foot Foot high, with a Foot-bank, to mount upon the Parapets. The outward
height 5 Foot, the Ditch cast about them 10 or 12 Foot broad, and 4, 5 or 6
Foot deep, although the proportions are to be made all ways according to the
danger the Enemy may put the Army unto.

The next thing to do, is opening of the Trenches, that is, beginning the Lines
of Approaches toward the Town, at about 1200 Foot from it. To this end the
Colonel, or Commander Infantry, (whose business is to open them, ought early in
the Morning to visit the General, or more particularly the Lieutenant General,
if he be appointed for this Action, and it were necessary he had well reviewed
the place himself, before he comes to discourse with those that know it. ^^hen
the Regiments make their Detachments, (...) are to furnish such number of
Workmen that (...) requires; and besides their ordinary (...) take along with
them Spades, Egineer is to show and inform (...) how they are to run their
Line, (...) ^raws out to them as necessity requires, (...) diverse lengths, but
most commonly (...) 40 Rods long, or sometimes shorter (...), and broken and
turned as often as is (...).

(...) the Workmen may begin with the more (...) where the Line begins (which
is with a Redoubt (...) Battery with Guns, and there are covered from (...)
Enemies Cannon, by two great Espaulments well Flanked, several Guards of Foot
and Horse, standing near to defend them, if the Besieged should Sally out. The
Line being laid out and marked, which is to be carried on Obliquely, so that no
Shot can be made out of any Work of the Town, that may scour that Line, the
Engineers are to divide and place the Workmen, in order

Now they give to every Man, the length of 4 or 5 Foot, and every one makes as
much have a possible to get into the Ground, for the avoiding of the danger
whereunto he is exposed while he stands upon the open Field. To this end the
Earth which he diggeth, he casts up before him, and he is to dig the Hole so
deep, that with the Earth thrown up he may be under Covert, which will be when
he digs three Feet into the Ground, the Earth thrown up making other three
above the Ground, or 6 Foot in all.

The Workmen being thus got into the Ground, they enlarge and deepen the
Trenches, as necessity requires; as when they come nearer to a Fortress, they
are to be made deeper. The breadth or width of them may be 12 or 14 Foot at the
Top, and 6, 8 or 10 Foot at the Bottom, with Foot-banks for the convenience of
Musquetteers; sometimes one is constrained to make them larger, in regard
Wagons may be driven through them, with Materials necessary for the Gallery;
and also Cannon must be drawn down and mounted on the Batteries. But it is
always to be observed, by how much larger the Approaches are made, by so much
ought, the Parapet of the Trench to be hightend, that the Enemy may not
discover the Soldiers that are in them; especially one ought to heighten those
Points, and Windings where the Line turns; and when it cannot be conveniently
done, the Soldiers are to take great Facines, and cover the place that is seen
with them.

The Trenches are to be relieved every 24 Hours; and in short, are to be
ordered with great care.

If the Ground be Rocky, Moorish or Marshy with Bogs, where one cannot dig,
then there is a Foundation made with Sinkers, that is, Bundles of Boughs
fastened together, upon which Earth is cast. Upon this Foundation there are
Traverses and Gabions, which are described in the last Chapter. These Gabions
are used also in stony Ground, where one cannot dig the Earth, because of
Stones.

As the Trench advances, there are at the Windings and turnings, Batteries to
be made about 10, 12 or 16 Foot high, the Breast-Works made with Gabions, or
Sacks of Earth, and Cannon-baskets; these Batteries are to shoot into the Town,
to beat down the Houses and terrify the Burgers, and to play continually Day
and Night. Or Batteries may be made on any Hill, or rising Ground to this
effect.

There must be a good Line of Communication, betwixt the two, or more
Approaches; when they are once advanced to the Foot of the Glassis take in and
fortify the Ground betwixt the Attaques, by which means the Enemy coming to
sally out, will find themselves betwixt two Firings.

In the carrying on the Lines of Approaches and Batteries, the Engineers must
be sure to be provided of Pallisadoes de Camp, and Piles of 6 Foot, Turn-Pikes,
Horse de Freez, Barricadoes or a Fence made of Pallisadoes, Thousands of
Crow-Feet, or Carthrops to hinder the March of Horse, together with good store
of Planks and Timber ready.

The nearer the Approaches advance to the Fortress, and the more Soldiers are
exposed to danger, their Pay is increased every Day; sometimes they have half a
Crown a Night, and sometime a Crown for an Hours work, if their Post be
Dangerous.

Every Morning as soon as Day begins to break, the Lieutenant General, or
Marshal de Camp, orders the Soldiers too low to the Trenches, and there take
their places, to Fire continually, and hinder the Enemy from showing their
Heads above the Works, whilst the Cannon from the Batteries are beating down
the Parapets, and levelling the Works; the Batteries to this end are advanced
as the Attaques advance, and the best place for them is betwixt the two
Attaques; for by this means one disposes them in such a manner, that he is
Master of the Firings of the two Flanks, of Bastions.

When the Approaches are advanced to the Counterscarp, along the Breast-work of
it, there is to be made a great Lodgment, in the middle of which, there is a
Descent cut into the Ditch, which is called the Sap; When it is brought to the
Ditch or Moat, there must be good store of Pioneers employed to run Earth in
Wheel-Barrows Night and Day to fill up the Ditch, and as soon as it is dark the
Horse of the Army; but those Facins to the Tail of the Trenches, to be cast
into the Moat, to fill it up even to that place where the Mine is to be made;
for in so doing, the Ditch will be filled up by degrees, and there will be a
good Foundation for the Gallery to rest upon; the Pioneers fetch in their
Wheel-Barrows good store of Earth, upon Planks laid in the Gallery, and bring
it to the Mouth thereof, casting it upon a heap, and some Workmen appointed to
work in Gallery, cast it into the Moat, to settle the Facins and Fagots.

This Earth thus cast up, serves to cover and make Blinds for the Workmen,
which they use to make at the Mouth of the Sap, and continue so doing till they
bring the Gallery to the Face of Bastion. The Blinds are to be raised on that
side which respects the Enemies Curtain, and opposite Flank.

To bring on the Gallery, first, there is made Timber, some 8 or 10 foot wide,
and about 9 in height, in form of a Gallows; the Timber may be 6 or 8 Inches
thick, and the side opposite to the Enemies Flank, ought to be double planked.
These Frames ought to stand 6 or 7 foot from one another, and so one after
another, till the Gallery reach to the Foot of the Bastion.

The Gallery is to be covered at the Top with Earth a Foot thick, to hinder
Fireworks from Windows made in the Gallery, betwixt every 3 or 4 Frames to give
the Workmen light.

When the Gallery is thus brought to the Face of the Bastion; The next thing is
to make a Mine, which is to be done by Miners, who are to have Pick-Axes and
all kind of Masons Tools, with all things requisite to pierce and break the
Wall. The height of the Mine is about 4 or 4 foot high at the most, the breadth
about 3 foot, according Mine is underproped. The Earth that is taken out of the
Mine under a Rampert or Bastion, is to be carried away in a Vessel, or Pail of
Leather, which is light in handing it one to another, till it be brought out of
the Hole or entrance of the Mine, and laid in the Gallery, to the end the Enemy
may not see it, and gess whereabouts the Mine is.

The Mine is wrought on by several Turns; to prevent the Blast of Powder coming
forewards, sometimes the Master Miner makes use of a Compass, and Conduct his
Mine by the help of the Needle, that he may carry it right, and always the
nearer he comes to the place where the Chamber is to be, the narrower he makes
the way of the Mine, in such sort, that it be no broader or higher at the
entrance into the Chamber, than a Barrel of Powder may scarcely pass into it,
for by this means the Mine is easier stopped.

The bigness of the Chamber is made according to the greatness and proportion
of the Wall and Rampert. The common Opinion is, that a Barrel of Powder will
blow up 12 foot of Earth; the Barrels are to be laid in such order, that in an
instant they may all take Fire together. The Chamber may be made 10 or 12 foot
wide, and about 5 foot high; The Earth is to be blown up either into the
Fortress, or else without, by making that side which is to be blown up, not so
thick as the other. Thus having made the Mine, place the Powder herein, and
close up the Mouth of it; which must be carefully done, putting cross Timbers
in every Return; and at the entrance stop it with thick and strong Planks,
rammed in with Earth, leaving a Trunk or hollow Pipe all the way filled with
Powder, and carried to the end of the Mine, at the Wall where the Passage is to
be well stopped, since the stronger a Mine is stopped, it takes the better
effect; then fire it as soon as conveniently may be, lest the Powder take harm
by too much moisture; after which follows the Assault, and seconding the Mine,
if the Breach be made considerable.

CHAP. X.
Of defending a Town or Fort.
IT is a certain Rule, That where there is an Offensive War, there is also a
Defensive; and therefore as soon as the Governor of any Fort gets notice of an
Army coming before it to Besiege the place; and before they form their Blocus,
or Block it up, he sends the Gunners to the Batteries, with orders to shoot
several Cannon, to inform the Country Round, and give the Signal of retreat,
that they may come in with all the Provisions they can find about the place;
And also by making several Shot, keep off the Light-Horsmen and Spies that they
approach not so near, as to view the Works of the Fort; and also to favor the
Foot and Horse, who ought every day to make a Sally, to show that the Garrison
is strong, and in good Heart: The Infantry must not go beyond Musket Shot; but
the Cavalry ought every day from the opening of the Trenches to sally in small
Squadrons to draw the Army near, that it may lay open to the Cannoneers, who
may make some good Shot, and cut off some of the Principal Officers.

If the Garrison be but weak, then the Governor is to manage it to the best
Advantage; and is not obstinately to defend the Outworks, but rather to look
to the defense of the Ditch, and the Body of the place, that the Flanks be well
furnished with Cannon, and as soon as he perceives the Attaques of the Enemy,
is to Countermine the Flanked Angles of the Outworks, and to blow them up, at
such time as he is forced to quit them; and after having Retrenched Bastions
after a considerable Breach, all that he can do, is upon the most Honorable
Terms to make Capitulations, as to March out with Arms and Baggage, Drums
Beating, Trumpets Sounding, Colors and Standards Flying, Matches lighted at
both ends, Bullets in their Mouths, with some Pieces of Cannon and Mortars, and
Ammunition necessary, the Besiegers furnishing them with Wagons, Horses, and
every thing necessary for their March. But if the Garrison be considerable

The Governor is to husband the Provisions well, and defend boldly the
Outworks, and to Counter-Mine round about them, as the Enemy shall Attack, and
to Retrench them, and also to make Retrenchments, and Barricadoes all along the
Covered Way; that he may lose all things piece by piece, and to quit nothing
but by main force.

After the Governor is Advertised, by small parties he sends out, what part the
Enemy will Sallies of the stoutest Soldiers two by two, and three by three,
who are to Fire upon the Pioneers, by creeping into the Field unperceived, and
not to give them rest or let the Trenches be quiet, and afterward to Retreat
into the Counterscarp; and in the mean time the Governor is to have the
Soldiers in readiness, to give Fire as soon as the Party is returned, by which
commonly many Officers are killed that do advance; to Outworks are to be well
furnished with men, to keep continually Firing; and to render them the more
able, they are to be relieved twice a Day, and twice a Night.

It is very ordinary to the Garrison, to make a great and brisk Sally about
Sunrising, or break of Day, after a Stormy or Rainy Night, as opportunity
admits; and to carry along with them a quantity of Nails to cloy the Guns,
Pick-Axes, Spades and Shovels to throw down their Lodgment, some Gra^adiers,
Musquetoons, to make a considerable Assault, and to throw down their Works in
such manner, that the Enemy coming to regain Ground, may say open to the Shot
from the Outworks, which ought especially then to be well furnished with men*
and in Readiness to make a continual Firing, to favor the Retreat of the
Sally; and so by this means the Enemy shall not gain a Foot of Ground but at a
very dear rate, and lose much of his time before he be able to gain any of the
Outworks. Outworks ought to be Mined and Retrenched, and the M^nes Fired when
the Enemy makes a Lodgement on them, and the Garrison forced to retire to their
Retrenchments.

The Retrenchments turn to account when their Ditch is 12 feet broad at top,
and 6 feet at the bottom, and 8 feet deep; and the Earth that comes out of the
Ditch makes a good Parapet. All these Retrenchments and Cuttings of are to lie
open toward the Town, or Fortress with this Proviso also, that they be not
made so high, but that the main Works may overlook and command them.

When the Garrison is forced to quit their last Retrenchments on the Outworks,
and Retreat into the Town, the Governor is to have the Flanks well furnished
with Cannon, which may beat upon the Flanked Angles, and scour the Ditch: for
there is nothing makes greater slaughter, o^ with greater ease hinders
Undermining than this and it is almost impossible for the Enemy to make any
Lodgment, or set any Miners at work upon the Body of the place; and being not
able to make a Breach, but by their Cannon, it is soon repaired with
Pallisadoes, and the Bastion cut off and Retrenched with Mines prepared under
the Breach, and the Batteries made firm before they can Storm; and for some
Days they cannot make any Lodgment, notwithstanding they have won the flanked
Angles, and made a considerable Breach, even to the Foot of the Bastion, yet
they cannot maintain it but with great loss; neither can they avoid the
Grenades, and Fireworks, that will be continually cast upon them, and so
forced to approach by Sap, which may be with all facility imaginable
Rencountered.

If the Enemy by dismounting the Guns on the Flanks and Batteries, with their
Counter-Batteries approach to the Foot of the Bastion, and set their Miners at
work, and prepare their Mines; then the Governor is diligently to search out
the Enemies Mines, and being assured of the place where they are hid, and a
working, which may be done by setting a Drum in the place suspected, with some
Dice, or Pease upon the Head of it, which with any stirring will leap upon the
Drum, when it stands over the place where the Miners are at work.

After the place is thus found out, nothing remains but to make a Countermine
against them, which is made after the same manner, as a Mine, described in the
last Chapter. Now, because one is not sure to meet just with the Enemies Mine,
which may be made either too high, or too low; therefore there are several
Mines to be made, till by one of them the Enemies Mine is found out, and so
take away their Powder out of the Chamber.

When an Enemies Mine is carried so secret, and hidden, that one cannot find it
out; then the Garrison must of necessity resolve to quit that part of the
Rampert, or Bastion, under which they suspect there is a Mine, and so Retrench
and Cut it off inwardly; but for their advantage they must make ready also
their Counter-Mines made in that place, and Chamber their Powder, attending the
effect of the Enemies Mine; and when they spring it, they must retire
themselves into their new Work cut off, or Retrenchment; and the Enemy being
Lodged on that part of the Rampert, or Bastion, which they have quitted, then
the Counter-Mine is to be blown up. The like is also done in Outworks, and on
the Counterscarp, when one is driven to quit them.

CHAP. XI.
Of GVNNERY.
THe General things to be known in the Art of Gunnery, next after the Names and
Parts of a Piece of Ordnance (which you may Figure of the Gun) in order to
Shoot securely, and make a good Shot, are, First, That the Piece be well
Tertiated, or squared upon its Carriage, and to know duly to Load and Level the
Piece.

Ca^cabal.

Base-Ring.

Touchhole.

Chamber.

Ranforcing-Ring.

Trunion-Ring.

Cornish-Ring.

Muzzle-Ring.

Concave Cylinder.



To Tertiate a Piece, is to know if it has its Metal at the Touchhole,
Trunions, and Neck; by which you may judge at the strength of the Gun, whether
well fortified, or no. This you do with a Coliper pair of Compasses; and if the
Piece be Home boared, the Diameter less by the height divided by 2, is the
thickness at any place.

To Quadrate, or Square a Piece mounted, is to see if it is directly placed,
and equally poised, Carriage, in regard of the Wheels and Axel-Tree.

To Dispart a Piece of Ordnance, is to set such a mark upon the Muzzle-Ring, or
thereabouts, that the visual Ray, or Sight-Line, taken upon the Top of the
Base-Ring against the Touchhole, by the Mark set at, or near the Muzzle-Ring,
may be parallel to the Axis of the Concave Cylinder. To do this, take the
Diameters of the Base-Ring, and the place at the Muzzle where you intend
Dispart to stand; divide the difference of these two into two equal parts, one
of them will be the Dispart, which you may set upon the Gun with Pitch, or Wax.
If you have not Compasses, measure the Circles about, and work with them.

The Weights of Shot are regulated by the Cubes of the Diameters, and by
knowing the weight of one, the weight of any other is found, thus:

A Bullet of Iron of 4 Inches Diameter is found by Experience to weigh 9 lb.
then say, as the Cube of 4 is to 9 lb. so is any other Diameter Cubed to its
weight; or as 9 lb. is to the Cube of 4, so is any other weight to the Cube
Root of its Diameter. Lead and Iron in weight is as 2 to 3, that is, a Shot of
2 lb. of Iron, and a Shot of 3 lb. of Lead, will have the same Diameter of
height. Iron to Stone is as 3 to 8; Lead to Stone, as 4 to 1; that is, a Bullet
of Stone of 10 lb. is equal in height to a Bullet of Lead of 40 lb. Therefore
knowing what a Bullet of Iron of any Diameter weighs, you will find the weight
of a Bullet of the same Diameter of Lead, and Stone; for Lead having the weight
of 9 lb. of Iron for 4 Inches Diameter. If 3 give 2, what will 9 lb. give?
Answer 6; and so of any other. As the Shot is regulated by the Cubes of the
Diameters, so also is the Powder. Suppose 1 lb. of Powder be a Charge for a
Falcon of 2: 68 Bore of Diameter; what weight in Powder will be fit for a
Charge of a Cannon of 7? The proportion is thus: As the Cube of 2: 68 is to 1
lb. of Powder, so is the Cube of 7 to 26.

The Names of the Pieces of Ordnance, which are taken from the height of the
Bore, are set down in the following Table, which gives in the first Column the
Names of the Pieces; next, the weight of Fortified Guns; the third, the height
of the Bore; the fourth, the height of the Shot; the fifth, the weight of the
Shot; the sixth, Powder for Proof; the seventh, Powder for Service; the eighth,
Paces (five Foot to a Pace) the Piece shoots Point Blank, or upon the Level;
the ninth, the outmost Random, the Piece mounted to 45 Degrees; the tenth, the
Horses; and the eleventh, the Men required to draw a Piece of Ordnance.

Names. Guns weight. Height Bore. Height Shot. Weight of Shot. Powder for
Proof. Powder for Service* Paces Point Blank. Utmost Random. Horses to Draw.
Men to Draw. C. lb. lb. lb. Can. 8. 70 8 7. 75 63 28 23 180 1800 18 100 Can. 7.
604 7 6. 75 42 24 18 180 1800 16 80 Them. C. 504 6. 3 6. 05 32 20 15 180 1800 12
60 24 lb. 404 5. 87 5. 62 24 17 11 180 1810 10 50 Culv. 40 5. 32 5. 07 18 14 10
184 1840 8 50 12 lb. 35 4. 46 4. 64 12 10. 5 8 178 1780 6 40 Them. C. 30 4. 25
4. 03 9 9 7 175 1750 6 35 Saker. 20 3. 58 3. 40 5 1/4 5. 25 4 160 1600 4 25
Minion. 12 3. 35 3. 18 4 4 3 120 1200 3 16 Falcon. 5 2. 68 2. 54 2 1/2 2 15 120
1200 2 10

As to the several Shootings in Artillery, and the knowledge of the true
Distance that any piece will carry to, is a matter that depends upon many
uncertainties, there being such varieties in the trueness of the Bore, in the
heights of the Shot, in the strength of the Powder, in the Disparts, in the
Levelling, and Direction, in the Air, Wind, etc.

The Ball, when it is Shot, flies through the Air with a violent, mixed and
natural Motion, describing a Parabolical Line, in whose beginning, and end are
Lines sensibly straight, and in the middle, Curved. The Shootings, or Shots in
Artillery, are therefore three; The first is called Point Blank, which is that
Space, that the Ball flies in a Line sensibly right without any inclination;
The second is called the Mean, which comprehends all that Space the shot flies
in a Curved Line; The third is called the Dead-Shot, which is the fall of the
Ball by a sensible right Line toward the Ground, after that the violence is
ceased.

Gunners do take notice of these three differences, and Ranges of Shot, for
three several ends. The Shots of Point Blank serve to Batter the Ramperts and
Walls of Forts, and Castles; the Mean, or Middle Range to molest afar off the
Troops in the Campaign, and in their Quarters, and to ruin the Houses within
the Cities, and Castles, etc. The Dead-Shots serve for Mortars to shoot Bombs,
and other Artificial Fire upon the Enemy, especially when they cannot be
otherwise offended, nor seen; being covered behind with Ramperts, Trenches,
Hills, and other Eminencies.

A shot Point Blank, which is the most ordinary and most Important, is
distinguished, in regard of the Horizon, and in regard of the Object which it
strikes. As to the Horizon they are of three sorts, First, Level; Secondly from
Low to High; Thirdly, from High to Low, called Under Metal.

The Horizontal, and by the Level of the Chase, or Concave Cylinder is the most
secure, and certain.

That from Low to High, proves fallacious, because by the Recoyling which the
Piece makes, the Shot flies higher than the Mark; and that from High to Low is
most fallacious, because the Shot (besides other notable effects) comes more
Low by the Recoyling of the Piece. Therefore an experienced Gunner must remedy
these faults by taking the due advantages in Shooting.

As to the Object, a Shot Point Blank is made either at right Angles against
the Superficies of Angles. At right Angles it strikes more furiously than at
oblique; therefore it is used against strong Walls, to batter them; and are
used to make Batteries of several Tire, and discharging them against the
self-same Mark, and in the same instant. At oblique Angles they strike either
Cross-ways, or Rebounding, like a Tennis-Ball. If they strike Cross-ways, with
two Batteries one upon each side of the Object, it ruins more speedily the
Defense either Earth, or Wall; if they batter Obliquely, or by a Rebound, which
is done when they cannot do it right forward: As if one would batter a Flank
covered with an Orillon, or Shoulder, one must strike the Curtain in so fit a
place, and obliquely, that by the Rebound the Shot may leap into the Flank;
holding it for a Maxim in this Operation, That the Angle of Incidence is equal
to the Angle of Reflection.

The Mean or middle Ranges are diverse, according Ordnance; the Elevations are
regulated by the Gunners Square, which is an Instrument made of Brass or Wood*
of two right Lines (See Fig. 10 Plate 1) one longer than the other, both which
make a right Angle, from which as from the Center is described an Arch divided
into 90 Degrees, or into 12 equal Parts, called Points; so much of the Arch as
exceeds a Quadrant, as 45 Degrees, or 6 Points, serves for shooting below the
Horizon, as the Quadrant does for above. From the Center hangs a Thread with a
Plumet, the longest Leg put into the Chase, or Concave Cylinders of of a Piece
of Ordnance, the Thread cutting the Arch, does show the Degrees of Elevation,
or Depression, one never exceeds 6 Points, or 95 Degrees of Elevation in
shooting with long Cannon.

The Dead-Shot which is made with Mortars, is done by giving Elevation from the
Points 6, or 95 Degrees, to the Point 12, or 90 Degrees, which are measured
with the Square, or with a particular Instrument like a Level, putting a Staff
across the mouth of the Mortar, and upon that the Quadrant.

In Shooting in these its observed, that at the sixth Point is the farthest
off, and that at the seventh Point comes the nearest, and at the eighth Point
nearer; and so nearer and nearer to the twelfth Point, in which the Bomb falls
in the same place from which it departed.

Of Shots made out of Mortars, betwixt the Middle or Mean-Shot, and the
Dead-Shot, it is to be observed by Experience, those are equal which are
equally removed from the sixth Point of the Quadrant, viz. that the Bomb fall
as far distant, being shot from the same Piece, and with the same strength at
the fifth as at the seventh Point, and the same thing at the fourth as at the
eighth, and as much at the third as at the ninth, and second as the tenth.

Shots from Mortar-Pieces are very fallacious, sometimes flying farther,
sometimes shorter than needs, and the Bombs break in the Air; sometimes after
the fall they do not break, which gives time to the Enemy to retire, or to
Choke it; therefore to have a just Blow, and to take effect, these following
Advertisements must be observed.

First, One ought to know how many Paces are to the place which you would
shoot, which may be done with an Instrument.

Secondly, That the Bombs, or other Bodies, which are to be Shot, be of equal
weight, otherwise the Shots will vary.

Thirdly, That the Carriage in breadth be always upon a Level, and without any
Descent, that it do not leap in Discharging.

Fourthly, That the Powder with which the Mortar is loaded, be always of the
same force and weight.

Fifthly, That the Charge of the Mortar, as well in Powder as in Wadding, be
always ramm'd in with Blows equally heavy, and of equal number.

Sixthly, That the Fusees be newly made in those days they are to be used, and
that they be made of a mixture proportionable to the Range the Shot shall make
in the Air, and that it break in the very Fall; which Skill is in the Fusee
filled with mixture of Composition, which is to be such, that although the Bomb
fall in the Water, it ought to break.

To measure a just Time, is done by filling the Fusee after the ordinary
manner; take a small Barrel or Cane of Iron of equal Bore to that of the Fusee,
but something longer, with many little Holes all along its length, and filling
it in the same manner as the Fusee, then the Bomb being fitted in the Mortar,
you give Fire at the same time to the Fusee in the Mortar and the Iron-Barrel,
letting the Barrel burn until you see the Bomb break, in which moment, you
Barrel, and to what Hole the Fire burns down, which will give an assured mark
of the time the Fusee ought to have.

If the Bomb in the very Fall shall break, the same quantity of Composition
should be continued in the Fusee, but if it break before the Fall you must
abate the Heat, by adding a small mixture of Charcoal-Dust incorporated in the
same Composition; and if after its Fall it shall delay its effect, then you
shall join with its mixture a little fine Powder-Dust, and so you may by
Experience with this Barrel observe into what Mark or Hole it burns, so that
with such Fusees the Bomb shall justly break in the very Fall amongst the
Enemies, observing always to fill the Barrel with the same mixture.

MUSIC.
Music is the Art of making Harmony, either by Voice or Instrument; Or, (which
is the same thing) the Art of well Singing, or playing on Musical Instruments.
The first is called Vocal, the other Instrumental Music, and consists both of
Sounds.

A Sound is that which affects the Ear, of which there are two Sorts, Simple
and Compound; The Simple is considered by it self.

There are 20 Simple, or Single Sounds mentioned Musicians, from Gam-ut to
E-la, and all contained in the Gam-ut; which is called the Scale, invented by
one Guido Aratin an Italian, the better to learn to Sing and Play well: The
Enumeration of which Simple Sounds take as follows.

The first, Gam-ut; second, A-re; third, B-mi; fourth, C-fa-ut; fifth,
D-sol-re; sixth, E-la-mi; seventh, F-fa-ut; eighth, G-sol-re; ninth, A-la-mire;
tenth, B-fa-B-mi; eleventh, C-sol-fa-ut; D-la-sol-re; thirteenth, E-la-mi;
fourteenth, F-fa-ut; fifteenth, G-sol-re-ut; sixteenth, A-la-mi-re;
seventeenth; B-fa-B-mi; eighteenth, C-sol-fa; nineteenth; D-la-sol; twentieth,
E-la.

Of which Simple Sounds, first are to be considered the Accidents, and then
their Division.

Their Accidents are Musical Time, or Measure.

Time in Music is a quantity which either lengthens, or shortens the Sound.

The Musical Time to express the Sound, is known by eight Characters, viz. A
Large, A Long, A Breve, A Semibreve, A Minim, ^ Crochet, A Quaver, and A
Semiquaver.

But the time to suppress the Sound is different, that is, in several sorts of
Rests or Pauses, longer and shorter.

Musical Measure, is that by which the aforesaid Simple Sounds are Measured.

There are two sorts of Measure in Music; the Spondaick, and called by the
Modern Musicians Imperfect or D^ple, the other Trochaick, which they call
Perfect, or Triple.

Secondly, these Simple Sounds are divided into seven Hexachords, vulgarly
called Cleffs.

An Hexachord is a Deduction, or Conduct of six Voices, as Vt, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol,
La.

The three first of which Cleffs that have G for their Character, are rough and
harsh, and called Tunes of B. Sharp.

The two others, whose Characters are F, are soft and sweet, and are called
Tunes of B Flat.

But the other two, whose Character is C, are the mean and between both, and
are called Tunes of a natural Key.

It often happens in these Cleffs, that the Natural Song is changed into B
Flat, or into the contrary: But Tunes in B Sharp, are never changed into B
Flat, nor those in B Flat into B Sharp.

The Compound Sound is that which is compounded, and repeated with another.

The Composition of Sounds is called in Music Interval, that is to say,
Musical Concord, as well of the Voice, as on Instruments; of which some are
Principal Chiefs, the others, effects of the Chiefs.

There are three Chiefs, viz. a Tone, a Semy-Tone, and a Diesis: And 4 Effects
of the Chiefs, as Diatessaron, Diapente, Diapason, and double Diapason.

A Tone is an Interval of Music, composed of two half Tones, and proceeding
from a Sesquioctave ration.

Musicians call it the second perfect; for Example; If when two Sing, one sings
Vt, and the other Re, this Composition of Sounds is called a Tone.

A Demi Tone is the Moity of a Tone, or of a Sesquioctave.

A Tone cannot be divided by Numbers into two equal parts, but only into
unequal; for when you have divided a Tone into two parts, you shall have two
Demi Tones: That which is the sharp of the two, is called the Demi Tone Major,
or greater, and is seldom in use; the other which is flat, is called the Minor,
or less Demi Tone, and is only in use, and called the second Imperfect, which
is made from Mi to Fa.

A Diesis or Perfation, (called by Boethius a lesser Demi Tone) is the smallest
of the Intervals, that is to say, the fourth part of a Tone, or a Sesquioctave.

A Diatessaron is a soft imperfect fourth, which is frequently used, as from Vt
to Fa; It contains two Tones, and a less Demi Tone.

A Diapente is called a fifth, which is a very sweet and frequent Interval; It
contains three Tones, and one less Demi Tone.

A Diapason is a most perfect Interval; and very much in use, and consists of
eight Sounds, and is called an Octave; It contains five Tones, and two less
Demi Tones.

A Double Diapason is the fifteenth, or a double Octave, and so two Octaves
make one entire Body of Concords, viz. the greatest System and Interval To the
Hon^ble: Sr. John Revers^y of Thribergh in ye West Riding of Yorkshire Baronet,
Governor of ye. City of York, and Burlington

This plate is h^^^bly dedicated by Ri* Blome

in Music, which is so vulgarly called, as a little before, so as well here
below, that is to say, twice through all the Sounds and essential Chords, A, B,
C, D, E, F, G.

Besides this Tract of Music, which is adapted to the Eliptical Table, it is
thought fit to add this following Discourse, as recommended from a person very
knowing in the said Art, where he says, That the two chief parts of Music are
Composition and Modulation.

Composition is the setting together of several Musical Notes, into a Tune of
several Parts, into a Consort fit to be Sung or Played.

There chiefly belongs to Composition the Knowledge of the Chords, of the
Moods, and of the several parts which make up a Music Consort.

In all the seven Notes, (for there are in nature but seven distinct Sounds,
however repeated in different Keys) an eighth, being but an Union to the first,
a ninth to the second, a tenth to the third, Key, a fifteenth to the eighth, a
sixteenth to the ninth, and so of the rest. In all the seven Notes (for an
eighth is but the first of another Septenary; and every Note whatsoever is a
First, or Union in Reference to its Octave) there are five Concords and two
Discords; of the five Concords, three are perfect Chords, and two Imperfect.

The three Perfect are an Octave, called by the Greeks Diapason, that is, from
A-re the Proslambanomenos to Alamire the Mese of the Greeks; A fifth called
Diapente, that is, from B-mi the Hypate Hypaton, to F-fa-ut the Parhypate Meson
of the Greeks; and a fourth called Diatesseron, that is, from D-sol-re the
Lichanos-Hypaton to G-sol-re-ut the Lichanos-Meson of the Greeks.

The two Imperfect are a third called by the Greeks Ditonum, that is, from
C-fa-ut the Parhypate-Hypaton E-la-mi, the Hypate-Meson of the Greeks; A sixth
called Hexachordon, that is, from F, fa-ut the Parhypate-Meson to D-sol-re,
above the Nete Synemenon of the Greeks.

The two Discords are a second, otherwise called a whole Tone, that is, from
C-sol-fa-ut, the Paranete-Synemenon to D-sol re, the Nete-Synemenon of the
Greeks; and a seventh called Heptachordon, that is, from D-la-sol-re, the
NeteSynemenon to G-sol-re-ut, in the higher Key to the Paranete-Hypaton of the
Greeks.

The most usual Moods of the Greeks (for Alipius names fifteen.) were five, the
Dorick, the Lydian, the Aeolick, the Phrygian, and the Ionick. What the use and
nature of these Greek Moods was, is not certainly determined, even by the most
diligent Inquirers into the Music of the Ancients; only thus much is generally
noted, That the Dorick is the most grave and solid, the Lydian the most
sprightly, and what we now-adays Air.

There are reckoned amongst the Moderns four Moods; two great, the Perfect of
the More, and the Imperfect of the Less: But of these the two last alone are
chiefly in use.

The Imperfect of the More is, when three Minims go to a Semi-brief, with a
Prick of Perfection* this is called Triple-time, and has usually this Mark c.3.

The Imperfect of the Less has as the former, two Longs to a Large, two Breves
to a Long, and two Semi-breves to a Breve; but in this it differs, that it has
also but two Minims to a Semi-brief, etc. and this is called Time, and thus
marked ^

The Parts of Musical Consort.
THere are indeed in Musical Consort but three Material Parts, viz. Treble,
Mean, and Base; but our Musicians commonly make four Parts, viz. the Supremus,
or Cantus, that is the Treble; the Altus, or Counter-Tenour; the Tenor, which
we call the Mean, or Tenor; and the Bassus, which we call the Base, or lowest
Part.

In the ordering of these Parts there are two several ways of Composition, viz.
Counter-Point, and Descant.

Counter-Point, is setting of Parts together in such sort, that they may answer
each other exactly, Note for Note.

Descant, is the setting of Parts together in such sort, that the Notes of one
may answer to those of the other, not in equality of Number, but only in Time
and Proportion; as two Minims, or four Crochets to a Semi-brief, and in like
manner in all the rest.

Modulation, is the Musical performance, or expression of Harmony, by Singing
or Playing upon an Instrument.

In Singing, or Playing, there are five things to be observed. 1. The Number of
their Notes. 2. Their Names. 3. Their Tunes. 4. Their Times. And 5. Their
Adjuncts.

The Number of Musical Notes is indeed but seven; for though from the lowest of
a Man's Base, to the highest of a Boys, or Woman's Treble, there are reckoned 21
Notes; yet they are really but 7, three times repeated; so that the whole Scale
of Music, commonly called the Gamut, should reach from Gamut below to F-fa-ut
above, that is, from G, to F, in the lowest Septenary, or Base; from G, to F,
in the middle Septenary, or Mean; and again from G, to F, in the highest
Septenary, or Treble. But the most usual Scale falls short a Note in the third
Septenary, reaching but to E-la; this possibly being supposed the ordinary
Compass of a Voice. But some there are, who add to the Scale several Notes
beneath Gam-ut, and above E-la, in Alt; this increased Scale being probably
supposed, the extraordinay Compass of a Voice, or Instrument.

The second thing to be observed in Singing, or Playing, is the knowledge of
the Names of the several Notes, which are commonly joined with the seven first
Letters of the Alphabet, which are properly to be looked upon as the Cleffs, or
Signs of the Notes.

The Names of the Seven Notes are, Vt, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La, Fa; where note,
that the seventh is called by the same Name as the fourth, as being but half a
Tone above La, as Fa is above Mi; and the truth is, considering that Vt and Re
are very much rejected by Modern Musicians, or at least accounted but the same
with Sol and La. There are indeed but four single Names, viz. Mi, Fa, Sol, La,
though often repeated, and variously commixt one with another, as appears in this
following Gam-ut, or Scale of Music.

The Treble, or highest Septenary, F-fa-ut, E-la, D-la-sol, C-sol-fa,
B-fa-bi-mi, A-la-mi-re, G-sol-re-ut.
The Mean, or middle Septenary, F-fa-ut, E-la-mi, D-la-sol-re, C-sol-fa-ut,
B-fa-bi-mi, A-la-mi-re, G-sol-re-ut.
The Base, or lowest Septenary, F-fa-ut, E-la-mi, D-sol-re, C-fa-ut, B-mi,
A-re, Gam-ut.

Of the seven Cliffs, or Keys, noted by the seven Letters, four only are in
use; the first is F-fa-ut Cliff, which is peculiar to the Bassus, or lower
Part; and at the beginning of Songs and Musical Airs, is set upon the uppermost
Line but one, and is thus marked *. The second is C-sol-fa-ut, which belongs to
the Mean, or Middle Part and is commonly (but not always) upon the Line, and is
thus marked *. The third is G-sol-re-ut Cliff, which is appropriate to the
Treble, or Uppermost Part; and at the beginning of Lessons, or Songs, is
usually set on the lowermost Line but one, being thus marked *. These are the
three first and Signed Cliffs: The fourth, which is called B Cliff is unfixt to
any particular Part, but goes through all, and serves wherever it is for the
Flatining, or Sharpning of Notes, where it is called B-fa, or B-flat, and is
B-mi, or B sharp, being thus marked.

Of all the four Notes, Mi is the principal, and claims a station in these
places, viz. in B-mi, E-la-mi, and A-la-mi-re: In the first, as in its proper
station, in the others when B flat chances to be placed there; also moreover
immediately from Mi, Fa-sol-la is Sung twice upwards, and La-sol-fa twice
downwards, and then you return to Mi again.

The third thing to be considered in Singing, or Playing, is the knowledge of
the Tunes of the Notes, wherein this thing is chiefly to be observed, viz. that
from Mi to Fa, and from La to Fa, is but half a Tone; but between any other two
Notes is a whole Tone, as will appear in these following Examples.

The fourth thing to be considered in Singing, or Playing, is the Time of
Musical Notes, which is denoted by eight several Terms of distinction, each
having their several Marks, or Characters, and each comprehending the other
double, viz. a Large contains two Longs, a Long two Breves, a Breve two
Semibreves, etc.

* A Large. * * A Long. * * * * A Breve. * * * * * * * * A Semibreve.
* A Semibreve. * * A Minim. * * * * A Crochet. * * * * * * * * A Quaver. * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * A Semiquaver.
The fifth thing to be considered, is the knowing the Adjuncts, which are
these, viz. A Tie, a Repeat, a Pause, a Direct, and a Close.

A Tie is a Mark, by which two Notes are signified to be joined together, and
especially when two Notes are to be Sung to one Syllable; this Tie is made by a
Semicircle, whose two Ends point to the two Notes conjoined; as thus, ^

A Repeat is to signify, that a part of a Song, or Lesson, is to be Sung, or
Played over again from that Note over which it is placed, and it is thus marked
{vocal join}

A Paus, or Rest, is to signify a ceasing for the space of some Note Sung or
Played; this Paus is named according to the name of the Note for which it
stays, as a Large-rest, a Long-rest, a Breve-rest, a Semibreve-rest, etc. all
thus noted: * * * * * * *

A Direct, is to show at the end of one Line, where a Note stands in the
beginning of the next Line; as thus marked, * *

A Close is the End of a Song, or Strain; the first is called Perfect, and thus
marked *. The other Imperfect, and thus marked {fermata below}.

As to the exact Rules of Composing, I refer you to larger Volumes of that
Subject, it not being designed here.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Richard Myddleton of Chirk Castle in
Denbigh-Shire Baronet. This Plate is humbly Dedicated By Rich: Blome.



CHRONOLOGY.
CHAP. I.
Of the Day.
THe Day is either Astronomical or Political, otherwise called Civil; The
Astronomical is that which is so termed by Astronomers, Natural, and Artificial.

1, The Natural Day is that interval of Time wherein the Sun departing from any
Point of the Heavens, or from the Meridian returns again to the same Point; or
otherwise it may be defined, The Suns conversion from any first Meridian to the
same again, which is performed in the space of 24 equal Hours.

2, The Artificial Day is the space of Time Sunrising to Sunsetting; or the
whole Time of the Suns-shining in our Hemisphere, the opposite Time whereof
must accordingly be called Artificial Night.

Note, That the Artificial Day differs from the Natural, in regard the Natural
is always and every where the same, whereas the Artificial has almost always a
perpetual Mutation, especially in Regions remote from the Equator; for, as I
said, the Artificial Day comprehends only the Suns rising and Setting, being
shorter in Winter and longer in Summer.

Note Secondly, That the Days are longer in Summer by reason of the Suns longer
continuing above the Horizon, and the larger Arches of Heaven the Sun runs
through in respect to our Horizon, as you may see in the Description of the
Sphaere: On the contrary, the Diurnal Arches the Sun makes in Winter, are
shorter. The Diurnal, and Nocturnal Arches appear almost all-equal. Twilights,
being an impression of Light from the Sunbeams upon the Air, either before
Sunrising, which is called Diluculum, or Daybreak, or in the Evening after
Sunset.

Note Thirdly, That the Natural Day has not the same beginning among all
People, but is determined according to the different institution of each of
them. The Babilonians use to denominate Day from one Sunrising to another. The
Italians on the contrary from one Sunsetting to another, and accordingly they
number their Hours. The Ancient Romans, and accordingly the Romish Church at
this day reckon from Midnight to Midnight. The Arabians and Astronomers from
Moon to Moon, because the Sun and Stars keep always the same regularity to each
other, in respect of the Meridian Circle, but not in respect of the Horizon,
which always varies according to the variety of the Polar Elevation.

Nor can we in respect to the Holy Scriptures omit the Custom of the ancient
Jews, who as they were commanded by God, began all their Feasts from the
foregoing Sunsetting, according to that of Leviticus, from Evening to Evening
ye shall celebrate your Sabbaths. Contrarily the Tyrians began their Day from
the Sunrising, and probably in this matter they differed not from the
Babilonians, and other Neihbouring Provinces, who computed the Hours not from
Sunrising, but from its Setting.

Further Note, This Natural Day consisting of Artificial Day and Night, is
called Civil, or Political, as it takes beginning, or ending from the different
Institution of People and Countries; And of these Political Days some Festival
or Holy Days, in which Shops are shut up, and common Works laid aside, or
Working-Days allotted for the exercise of all manner of Works and Professions;
and these Days are noted in these Tables, or Books, which from the Arabians we
call Almanacks, and from the Latins, Calenders; for a Calender is the Order and
Series of all Months, Lunations, and Festival-Days, which happen through the
Year; and it is called Calender from the Calends, which are the first Days of
every Month.

CHAP. II.
Of the Hours.
AN Hour is one of those lesser Spaces of of Time, into which every Day of the
Year is continually divided. It is more particularly thus defined: An Hour is
the 24th part of a Natural, or the 12th of an Artificial-Day.

Note First, That of Hours, some are called Equal; which are the 24 Parts (as
have been said) of a Natural Day, otherwise termed Astronomical, or
Equinoctial; because each of them is that Space of Time wherein the Equator
ascends 15 Degrees above the Horizon, or in which the Sun in his Course run
through 15 Meridians: Each Hour is divided into 4 Quarters, and every Quarter
into 15 Minutes, or Scruples, making in the whole 60.

Note Secondly, Others are called Unequal Hours by the Greeks. There are 12
Parts as well of Day, as of Night; that is, as well of that Time wherein the
Sun is above the Horizon, as wherein he stays beneath it: And they are called
Unequal, not that the Hours of one and the same Day or Night, are unequal
amongst themselves; but because when as there are 12 equal Parts of unequal
Days, that is, of Summer-Days, and Winter-Days, it must necessarily follow,
Summer, and Winter-Hours, are by this means Unequal amongst themselves. They
are also called Unequal, because in the Summer time the Diurnal Hours are
longest, and the Nocturnal shortest; but in the Winter time quite contrary.
They are also called Temporary, because according to the diversity, that is,
the Length, or Shortness of Days they have different Magnitudes. Lastly, They
are said to be Planetary, in regard certain Ancient Astronomers were of
Opinion, Planets ruled the Hours successively, that is, in such a manner as
this, That the first Hour of the Day should be allotted to that Planet from
whence the said Day took denomination.

It is to be observed out of Baronius, in his Remarks upon the Year of our Lord
34, that the Jews divided as well the Day, as the Night, not only into 12
Temporary Hours, but also into 12 Equal Parts, as it were into 4 Stations,
Temporary, and Unequal Hours; but the 4 Parts of the Night were called
Vigiliae, by a Name borrowed from Vigiles. The first began at Sunsetting; the
second ended at Midnight, where also the third began; and the fourth ended at
Sunrising.

Now the 4 Parts of the Day were properly called Hours, each consisting (as
aforesaid) of ^ Temporary Hours, so as that the last part of Hour, that is, the
Second, was the Sixth Common and Temporary Hour, which the Third proper Hour of
the Jews followed, containing of the Temporary Hours the Seventh, Eighth, and
Ninth: And according to this Calculation St. Mark rightly says, that our
Savior Jesus Christ, was Crucified in the Third Hour, that is, in the Third of
those Four equal Stations into which the whole Day was divided; whereas St.
John writing, that he was Condemned by Pilate in the Sixth Hour, that is, in
the Sixth Temporary, or Vulgar Hour.

CHAP. III.
Of the Week.
THe Week, called by the Latins Septimana, is a Period of 7 Days, still
circling in a Ring; first instituted by God in the beginning of the World,
Religiously observed by the Hebrews, and the observation thereof delivered by
Tradition from them to others. But the Hebrews themselves called the principal
Day of the Week the Sabbath, as it were a Day of Rest, in which God is said to
have Rested after his finishing the Worlds Creation: Moreover, amongst them
this Day gave Name to the whole Week, so that Sabbathum was the same as
Hebdomada; and what we call the first, second, or third Day of the Week, etc.
was by them called the first, second, or third Day, etc. of the Sabbath.

The Ethnicks gave to each of these Days the Name of one of the 7 Planets,
taking beginning from the Sun, whence the first Day was called Dies Solis, or
Sunday; after which followed the rest in order, as dies Lunae, Monday; dies
Martis, Tuesday; dies Mercurii, Wednesday; dies Jovis, Thursday; dies Veneris,
Friday; and dies Saturni, Saturday.

The Christians used to call these Days Feriae, to signify, that there ought
to be a Divine keeping Holy Day, by Resting from all Profane or Secular
Employments, and following only Religious Duties, especially those set apart
for the Holy Function. The first Feria they called Dies Dominica, or the Lords
Day; because on that Day our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, was Raised from
the Dead. The seventh Feria still retains the Name of Sabbath, to signify,
that the Jewish Sabbath was only a Type, or Shadow of the Lords Day, and as it
were a preparation to the celebrating thereof.

For the better representing the Revolution of these 7 Days throughout the
whole Year, the 7 first Letters of the Alphabet, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, have been
made choice of in such an Order and Method, that each of these Letters in their
turn should declare the Dominical-Day, whence they are generally called
Dominical Letters.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Month.
THe Month is twofold, Solar, and Lunar. The Solar, is that Space of Time in
which the Sun runs through one whole Sign of the Zodiac; wherefore in
consideration that the Sun runs through those 12 Signs of the Zodiac in 365
Days, and some odd Hours and Minutes there are attributed accordingly to some
of the Months 30, and to others 31 Days, February only excepted, to which the
Remainder falls, and compleats the abovementioned number of Days in the Year.
The Lunar Month, is that Space of Time in which the Moon runs through the
Zodiac; or the Space between the two Conjunction of Sun and Moon; for there is
a double Lunary Month, one called Periodical, being the Space wherein the Moon
departing from any Point, returns to the same again, that is, (as is vulgarly
computed) in 27 Days, 7 Hours, and odd Minutes The other Lunary Month, is that
which they cal^ Synodical, or the Month of the Lunary Syzygi^ or Conjunction,
and is that Space of Time wherein the Moon going from the Sun, returns again
into Conjuction with him; and this is said to be in the Space of 29 Days, 12
Hours, and an half; for when the Moon finishes her Period of 27 Days, and 12
Hours, the Sun in the mean time makes some Progress, that is to say, 27
Degrees; and this must be made up in the Moon Circle, before she can come again
to her Conjunction with the Sun, which cannot be done in less than 2 Days, and 5
Hours, which being added to the Number Periodical Months, make 29 Days, and 12
Hours; not to mention Minutes. And thus the Periodical Month are by turns of
29, and 30 Days; the twice 12 Hours remaining making in 2 Months one whole Day:
And this is that sort of Month that the Year is divided into.

Thirdly, It is to be noted, that the Lunar Months are joined with the Solar;
and that the Lunation is properly of that Solar Month, in which it ends,
according to the Vulgar Saying,

In quo finitur Mensi Lunatio detur.
The Reason of this is unfolded by Clavius in his Calendarium Gregorianum, C.
17. that is to say, for that it would otherwise happen, that sometimes the
Months would scarce have one or another Day of their proper Lunation through
the whole Year, especially when the first Lunation of the Year happens upon the
first of January; for Lunations of the same Year, begin only in the last Days
of the Month.

Fourthly, Observe that the first Month of the Year amongst the Ancient
Egyptians was called Thot, amongst the Romans, Martius; whence July was called
Quintilis, and August, Sextilis, as being the fifth and sixth Months from
March. But when Numa added January, and February, then the usual computation
was made from the first of January.

Fifthly, It is also observable, that the Months were divided by the Romans
into three sorts of Days, Calends, Nones, and Ides. The first Day of every
Month was called Calendae from the Greek Word (...), that is, to Call; because
on that Day the People were called as well to the Fairs and Markets, as to the
Capitol, to receive from the Priests what was to be observed for that Month, in
reference to the Worship of the gods. Next, followed the Nones, so called, as
contracted from Nundinae, that is, Fairs, as some are of Opinion. Eight Days of
the Ides, which follow the Nones; these Ides are generally supposed to be so
called from the old Word Iduo, which signifies, to Divide; because they make a
division between the Nones, and the Calends; which Calends, because they have
their fixed and certain Seat in every Month, as falling upon the first Day of
every Month, when as the Days of the Ides, and the Nones, are various disposed.
There are these following Verses vulgarly Nones, or Ides, are ascribed to their
respective Months:

Sex Maius Nonas October, Julius and Mars,
Quatuor, at reliqui dabit Idus quilibet octo.
So that when the Nones are once known, the finding out of the rest will follow
of course.

Sixthly, From these three Days all the rest take their denomination: For
Example, the Day which precedes the Calends, that is, the last Day of the fore
going Month, is called Pridie Calendas, or Primus Calendas, Secundus Calendas,
the Second Day before the Calends, and so of the rest; and the same is to be
said proportionable of the Nones, and Ides.

CHAP. V.
As the Month, so also the Year is Twofold, viz Solar, and Lunar.
1. THe Solar Year, is the Space of Time wherein the Sun departing from any
Cardinal Point of Heaven, returns again to the same. The Principal, or Cardinal
Points, are these four; the Vernal Aequinoctial, the Summer Solstice, the
Autumnal Aequinoctial, and the Winter Solstice; which gives beginning to the
four Seasons of the Year, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter.

But it is observed, that amongst the Ancient Egyptians, and the Romans, this
Circuit of the Sun was measured exactly by 365 Days, which computation was
found short of the Celestial Motion about 6 Hours; whence it came to pass, that
every fourth Year, the first Day of the Year, and consequently the rest
following lost their place, and had no first Station, whereupon those Feasts
which ought to have been celebrated at certain times, fell out sometimes in
Winter, and sometimes in Summer, as it happened. This Error Julius Caesar at
length corrected, by adding to the 365 Days, 6 Hours, which at the end of every
fourth Year being added together, made up a Day, which Day was inserted into
the Month of February, the last and shortest of all the Months; and it is
called Bissextile, because it is inserted, bis sexto Calendas Martias, twice on
the sixth Day before the Calends of March; and not only the Day, but the whole
Year is called Bissextile, or Leap-Year.

This Constitution of the Year was observed in the Roman Empire, and from its
Author called the Julian Account, being twofold; the one Common, consisting of
365 Days; the other Bissextile, of 366.

II. The Lunar Year, is that Space of Time wherein the Sun and Moon are 12 in
Conjunction; and thus the Lunar Year, consisting of 12 Synodical Lunations,
contains 354 Days; which Lunar Year is at this Day only in use amongst the
Turks and Saracens; neither has it amongst them any certain beginning, nor is
it determined by any certain Season, or Point of the Heaven, as amongst us the
Julian Year begins always about the Winter Solstice. Others have so
accommodated the Year to the Moons Motion, as to join also the Suns Motion
thereunto.

But it is to be noted, that the Lunar Year falls short of the Solar about 11
Days, so that if this Year the New Moon falls upon the Calends of January, the
Common Lunar Year of 12 Lunations will be finished on the 20th of December, the
New Mood still going back the Space of 11 Days, until by the third Year 13
Lunations are brought about, the last whereof will be finished 27th of
December; and this sort of Lunar Year is called Embolismical, or Embolismal,
from the Embolism, or Intercalation of that Lunation. And thus the Lunar Year,
as well as the Solar, is twofold; the one Common, consisting of 12 Lunations;
the other Embolismical, containing 13.

It has been observed by Meton a famous Astrologer, that the New Moons after
the Revolution of nineteen years Elapsed, return all again to the Year the New
Moon should fall on the first of January, it would in like manner certainly
fall on the same day on the nineteenth Year ensuing. Hence proceeds the most
famous Cycle, or perpetual Revolution of Numbers, from one to nineteen, by the
benefit whereof it may easily be understood, upon what day of every Month the
New Moon happens, insomuch that it is used to be set down in the Calender in
Golden Letters, and so it was called the Golden Number, being commonly defined
to be a Revolution of Years, from 1 to 19, which Revolution being finished,
there is a return again to Unity. For Example, in 1653 the Golden Number being
1, that of the following Year will be 2, and so forward to 19; and thus the
proper number of the Year in the Decennoval Series, extending through every day
of the Year, will show the New Moons, as often as it happens; but every Year of
the Golden Number Terminates in the end of December, and in the beginning of
January of the ensuing Year another takes its beginning.

And this was the Doctrine of Meton, which heretofore was vulgarly followed by
all; but at length it was found not absolutely free from Error, for as much as
by this Computation, the Moon appeared to have finished her Period sooner by
one Hour, and about 27 Minutes than she had begun it 19 Years before, whereupon
after 66 Cycles the Golden Moons; upon which the Epacts were brought into the
room thereof, of which more hereafer in the seventh Chapter; however it was by
no means thought fit to be left out of the Calender, since it is of great use
for the finding out of the Epacts of every Year.

III. Diverse Nations according as Custom has prevailed, have given different
beginnings to this Year: I shall only mention the Custom of the Jews* and
Romans, as being most observed throughout Europe.

The Jews heretofore began their Year from the Vernal Aequinoctial, because
according to the common Opinion, the World was Created at that time of the
Year, although when they sojourned amongst the Egyptians, they conformed to
their Custom, beginning the Year from the Month Thoth, which (by reason of the
neglected Intercalation of one day every fourth Year) answered to no certain
point of the Celestial Year; but as soon as they were come out of Egypt, they
were commanded by God to have recourse to their old beginning, as is mentioned
in the 12th of Exodus, the Month Nisan shall be to you the beginning of Months,
it shall be the first in the Months of the Year.

But this is to be understood out of the sacred Year, to which their Feasts,
New Moons, and all other sacred Rites were accommodated; for as the
Interpreters of Scripture observe, that the Civil Year of the Jews after their
departure from Egypt, began from the Month Thisri, and all their civil Affairs
and Negotiations were reckoned, according to the course of this Civil Year.
Hence it is, that some Authors assert, that the Jews before Moses, began their
Year in the Autumn, and make it their chief Argument to prove, that the World
was Created in the Autumnal Aequinoctial.

The beginning of the Roman Year, was from the Calends of January, and
consequently but a few days distant from the Winter Solstice: And the
Christians have for the most part followed their Example, upon the account of
our Saviors Birth, being so near that time. But the Franks not till the Year
1564, before which they began their Year from Easter Day.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Gregorian Account.
THe Catholics have thought fit in this one particular, to give some way to
the Jewish Ceremonies, that is, in exactly observing the time of their
Passover, in their Celebration of Easter, by reason that the one (as St.
Augustine observes) is a Type, or Mysterious Allegory of the other; so that as
the old Passover, as we have already mentioned, was celebrated by Gods Command
in the first Moon, or Month of the Year, so also the Christian Passover, or
Easter was by the Nicene Council ordered to be kept on that Month; and that no
Controversy might arise in the Celebration thereof, they pitch upon the 14th
day of the first Month, both as to the Feast, and as to be the Seat of the
Vernal Equinoctial, accounting that the first Month, whose 12th day should fall
upon the Aequinoctial, or immediately following it; afterward the Equinoctial
Epoch, was by the Judgment and Consent of the most skilful Astronomers
determined to the 21th of March; and at length the Golden Number was fitted to
the Calender, by the benefit whereof the New Mons, and other Days of the Moon
might be easily found. Moreover, herein also the Christians differed from the
Jews, in that they appointed Easter to be kept not as the Jews did, on the very
14th Moon of the first Month, but on the Lords Day immediately following it,
and that chiefly for this reason, viz. because on the first Dominical, or Lords
Day after the Jewish Passover, our Savior rose from the dead. For as the
Author of the Gregorian Calender says, the Jews Celebrate the Passover on the
14th Moon, which represented the Death of Christ, so we in this Feast Celebrate
the Memory of Christ's, which happened on the Dominical Day; so that not to
concur Jews, in case the 14th Moon of the first Month should fall upon the
Dominical Day, the observation of Easter must be transferred to the Lords Day
following; therefore for the more exact Celebration of Easter, upon which all
the rest of the moveable Feasts depend, these three things are especially to be
observed, viz. the Vernal Aequinoctial, the 14th Moon of the first Month, and
the Lords Day following the said 14th Month.

But after this Constitution it came to pass, however Astronomers, that the
Vernal Equinoctial at length, in stead of happening on the 21th of March, it was
on the 11th, nor could the New Moons be well computed by the Golden Numbers
placed in the Calender; but fell out above 4 days later than their just time;
and consequently, Easter Day could not be kept in its due turn, according to
the Sanction of the Nicene Council: Whereupon by the Authority of Pope Gregory
the 13th, who called together all the ablest Astronomers Calender was
rectified, Anno 1582. the Year brought to its just measure, and by taking away
10 days, the Vernal Equinoctial reinstated in its former Seat; and lastly, 30
Epactal Numbers put in the room of the Golden Number.

According to this Form, that space of time wherein the Sun departing from any
point of Heaven; for Example, from either Equinoctial, or Solstitial Point
returns again to the same, is called the Caelestial, or Tropical Year; and this
sort of Year is unequal, that is, sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser by
some Scruples; and by this means it leaves us in Obscurity as to its Solution.
Wherefore Astronomers following a middle way, have allotted to the Year 365
Days, 5 Hours, and 49 Minutes, reckoning it as a mean between the Tropic, or
Celestial Year, and the Julian Year which is greater by 11 Minutes, or Horary
Scruples; and because the Julian Year though greater Tropical, was not however
totally thrown aside, it was provided to prevent all Error for the future, that
every Century of Years one Bessextile Day should be omitted, excepting only
every 4th Century, which should retain the Bissextile, according to the common
Custom.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Various Cycles, and Periods of Years.
NOt to insist long upon the Explaining the several Epochs of Time, It is
enough to say that Epochs are certain Heads, or beginnings from whence Time is
computed, and agreed upon amongst all Chronologists, as among the Epochs of the
Old Testament, Noah's Flood, the Jews deliverance from Bondage, and the
Babilonish Captivity; Amongst the Christian Epochs, the Birth, and Passion of
our Savior, the Destruction of Jerusalem, etc. Amongst those of the Romans,
the Building of Room; And amongst the Greeks, the Destruction of Troy, the
Olympiads, the Death of Alexander, etc. Much of the same nature are the several
Areas, as the Area, or Hera of the World, that is, the number of Years from the
Worlds Creation; the Christian Area, or number of Years from the Nativity of
our Savior; also the Hegira of the Arabians from Mahomet.

The Cycles and Periods of Years are a certain number of Years Circuiting
about, by which as so many Faithful Guardians, the Series of Times are
preserved whole and entire: Famous amongst the Greeks were their Olympiads,
which were every 5th Year, in which all sorts of Games and Exercises were
performed. Amongst the Romans was their Lustrum, which was also the space of
five Years, at the end of which time all Tributes and Taxes were paid; but in
the Reign of Constantine the Great, the Olympiads, and Lustres being abrogated,
the Indiction was put in the room thereof: This Indiction was the space of 15
Years, which was the time allotted to the Provinces of the Roman Empire, for
the paying their Tributes; and the use of this Indiction is retained amongst
the Ecclesiastical Accounts; Amongst the Jews there were two noted Periods,
viz. the Sabbarian Year, that is, every 7th Year, in which the Earth was to
rest from all manner of Tillage, in like manner as Man from all manner of daily
Labor on the 7th day of the Week. Secondly, the Year of Jubilee, which was
every 50 Years, at which time not only the Earth rested from Tillage; but all
Debts were remitted, etc. There needs no more to be said of that which we call
Seculum, but that it is the space of 100 years; nor of the Acunm, but that it
may be properly said to contain 1000 years; as for the Decemnoval Circle of the
Golden Number, it has been sufficiently Treated of, Chap. 5. There now remains
only the Cycle of the Epacts, and the Solar Cycle.

1. The Epact is the Series of 11 days, by which space the Lunar Year is
exceeded by the Solar; so that if this Year the Epact be 11, the next Year it
will be 22, but the third Year not above 3; because that as often as by the
Addition of several Epacts together, the number 30 shall come to be included in
the sum of the said Epacts, 30 is to be taken away, and what remains is to be
retained for the Epactal Number of the following Year; so that every 3d Year in
which the Thirties are cast away, there happens an Embolismical Moon. Where
note, that the Epacts always proceed by the Addition of the Number 1^, till the
Golden Number happens in its course to be 19, and then the Number 12 is added
in the room of 11, for the Epact of the following Year, and therefore this
Cycle is called, because it is oftentime thus interrupted.

II. The Solar Cycle, or Circuit of Dominical Letters is a revolution of 28
Years, at the end whereof the same Order, or Combination of Letters returns as
at first; for since it has been said before that the Series of Letters A, B,
C, D, E, F, G, which represents the 7 Feriae, or Days of the Week, are so
disposed in the Calender that the letter A, prefixed at the beginning of the
Year, continues on in the same capacity, and denotes the self same Day of the
Week to the Year's end, Bissextile, the next Year in like manner B, and so
forward in their order. The whole Cycle, or revolution of the 7 Letters would
by this means be brought about, and finished in 7 Years, if the Bissextile Day
did not obstruct; for this being every 4th Year inserted, and in the whole
Series of Years 7 times coming about, though in a different manner, does not
happen in the same order of Letters, until all the 28 Years are completed, as
may be Calender; for it is called the Solar Cycle, because it consists of Solar
Years, which being 4 times Multiplied upon 7, complete that Number, and this
Cyle according to the Roman Custom begins from the Bissextile Year which has F
for its Dominical Letter. Of all the sorts of Cycles mentioned, the three most
in use amongst Chronologists are the Decemnoval Cycle of the Golden Number, the
Solar Cycle of 28 Years, and the Cycle of Indiction consisting of 15 Years.

The Solar Cyle being Multiplied by the Decemnoval Cycle of the Golden Number
produces the number 532, which is called the Dionysian Period, from the
Inventor thereof, Dionysius surnamed Exigans, who observed, that the revolution
of these 532 Years brought about an exact conformity of the 3 Cycles, and
consequently by that the New Moons return not only to the same Days of the
Year, but also the same Days of the Week, as they are noted in the Calender.

Hitherto may also be added the Julian Period, consisting of 7980 Years, which
arises from the Multiplication of the Dionysian Period by 15, the number of
Indiction; they call it the Julian Period, because it is composed of the Julian
Year, Multiplied upon each other; and it is finished of the same Conjugation,
upon the return of the 3 Cycles of which it is composed; neither will the same
Conjugation of the Solar Cycle, the Golden Number, and the Indiction ever
happen again in Period, until after the revolution of 7980 Years: For Example,
it is to be supposed from the Doctrine of Petarius, that 3983 Years, of this
Period had past from the Creation of the World, to the Birth of our Savior,
and that the Christian Area, or first Year of Christ began with the Year of the
World 3984^ and that the Solar Cycle then 10, the Lunar or Golden Number 2, and
the Roman Indiction 4, fell upon the first Year of Christ, as appears from the
exact computation of them. For if in this present Year of Christ the Cycle of
the Sun be 9, and of the Moon 10, as all Mathematicians agree; it follows, that
those abovementioned were in the first Year.

Lastly, It must be taken for granted, that those three Cycles agree together
in the Year of the Julian Period 4714; because if this Number be divided by 28,
which is the entire Solar Cycle, the Remainder from the Division will be the
Number 10; and by the same Reason, if afterward the same Number of the Julian
Period be divided by the Cycle 19, the Remainder will be 2; and if by 15, the
Cycle of the Indiction 4.

These things being first laid down, it follows, First, That the first Year of
Christ, which is supposed to be the Year of the World 3984, concurs with the
Year of the Julian Period 4714. Whence observe, Secondly, That the Years of the
World being subtracted from that Number, there remains out of the Julian Period
the 730 Years which went before, and were coexistent with no real Time, 731
Years of the Julian Period being past before the Creation of the World.

And thus we may understand what the true Reason is of the Julian Period,
namely, that every Year thereof may have its proper Cycles, all which can be
found in no other Year of the same Period.

CHAP. VIII.
Practical Examples of CHRONOLOGY.
To find the Solar Cycle of any given Year.
TO the Year of our Lord propounded, add 9; then divide the Sum added by 28,
and the Remainder is the Solar Circle of the given Year: If nothing remains of
the Division, the Number of the Solar Circle is 28.

Note, That the Quotient in this Division shows how many Revolutions of this
Circle have been made from our Saviors Nativity to the Year proposed.

It Is further to be noted, That the Number 9 is therefore added, because that
our Savior being Born in the 10th Year of this Cycle, 9 Years thereof had then
past.

To find upon what Day of the Week, the first Day of any assigned Year shall
fall.
DIvide the foregoing Year of Christ by 4; then add the Quotient to the Number
divided, omitting the remainder of the Division; from the Sum Total subtract
10, and then divide the residue by 7, and the Remainder from this Division will
be the Number sought; or if there be no Remainder, then 7 it self will be the
Number. For Example, Let 1654 be the Year proposed, the Year preceding being
divided by 4, the Quotient will be 413, which being added to the divided
Number, produces 2066; but 10 being subtracted, 2056 is the remaining Number;
which being divided by 7, has 5 for its Remainder; viz. Thursday.

To find the Dominical Letter of any given Year.
SUbtract the Day of the Week found by the former Rule from 9; for Example, 5
from 9 and there rests 4, which Remainder shows, that the sought Letter is the
4th amongst the Dominicals, A, whence it follows that D, is the Dominical
Letter of the said Year; for it may be taken for granted from what has been
said before, that A is always affixed to the beginning of the Year.

To find out the Bissextile Year.
DIvide the given Year of Christ by 4, if nothing remains, then that Year it
self is Bissextile, both for the time past and that to come; for Example, from
the Division of the Year 1654 there rests the Number 2, which shows that 2
Years before, that is 1652 was the last Bissextile, and that 2 Years after,
viz. 1656 will be the next.

The Year being given, to find the Number of the Roman Indiction.
TO the Year of our Lord proposed add 3, because it is determined that our
Savior was born in the 4th Year of this Cycle, so that consequently 3 Years
were then past. Now let the Number composed of the said Year and added, be
divided by 15, the Number left of the Division will be the Indiction sought; if
nothing be left, conclude it to be the Year of the Indiction completed, viz.
15, and the Quotient will show how many revolutions of this Cycle have past
until that given Year. For Example, in the Year 1654, the Year of the Indiction
is 7, and there have past to this time 110 Cycles of the Indiction.

To find the Golden Number of the given Year.
TO the given Year of our Lord add 1, which Number divide by 19, the Remainder
will be the Golden Number of the current Lord being 654, the Golden Number will
be 2.

To find the Epact of the given Year.
TO the Golden Number, which is supposed already found, and consists of 3, or a
composition of several Threes, add 20. The Sum, if it amount not to 30, or the
Surplusage if above, (for then the 30 must be cast away) is the the Epact
sought. For Example, The Golden Number of the Year 1651 is 18, being a
multiplicity of Threes, to which 20 added, makes 38; so that after the 30 cast
away, the remaining 8 is the Epact of the Year. Otherwise if the Golden Number
should be less by a Unite than 3, or a Composition of Threes, then add 10, and
the Sum thereof will be the Epact; yet still with a rejection of 30, when ever
there is a Surplusage of that Number. And thus in the Year 1654 the Epact is
12, but if the Golden Number chance to be greater by a Unite than 3, or a
Composition of Threes, the Golden Number it self will be the Epact sought.

To find when it will be New Mood in any given Month.
ADd the Epact of the Current Year to the Number of Months inclusively from
March, and Subtract the Product thence arising from 30, or if it exceed that
Number, then from 60, and the Remainder will show the Day of the Month on which
the New Mood happens. For Example, It is inquired on what Day of the Month of
August Anno 1651 the New Mood was, suppose the Epact of that Year was 8, Add
thereunto 6, the Number of Months from March, the Sum of both these Numbers
will be 14; then Subtract from 30, and there remains 16; whence it is apparent,
that the New Mood of that Month was about the 16th Day.

To find the Age of the Moon on any Day given.
HAving from the foregoing Problem gained the New Mood, if the given Day of the
Month be after the New Mood, reckon how many Days inclusively have past from
thence; but if before, it will belong to the last part of the preceding Moon.
For Example, If the Age of the Moon be sought on the 24th of August in the Year
1651, in which the New Mood is found to fall on the 16th Day, by consequence it
may be concluded, that she was 9 Days Old; but if it be sought on the 8th of
August, it was on the 22 of the Moon preceding; upon this Hypothesis, that 30
Days are attributed to the Moon; for if from 30 you Subtract the Days numbered
from the New Mood found, and consequently from the end of that preceding Moon
which is found to be 8, there remains 22.

There is another Vulgar way of finding the Age of the Moon. Add together these
3 Numbers, the proper Epact of the Year, the Number of Months inclusively from
March to the given Month; and lastly the given Day of that Month. If the Sum of
these Numbers added be under 30, it shows the Age of the Moon; if above 30,
then Subtract 30 from it, and the Remainder will be the Age of the Moon sought.

Note, That when the Age of the Moon is sought in the Month of January, or
March, nothing is to be added to the Epact, but the Day of the Month, and that
only 1 is to be added for the Month of March, and April. But remember, that
that Epact begins from January.

The Age of the Moon being known, to assign its
SUppose that on the 31th of October the Sun be in the 8th Degrees. of Scorpion,
and that the Moon be at that time 16 Days Old, consequently that 16 Days before
she was in Conjunction with the Sun in the 23th Degree of Libra; and lastly
that the Moon in one diurnal Circuit passes through very near 16 Degrees of
the Zodiac: Hereupon multiply those 16 Days Degrees, and the Product will show
how many Degrees she is distant from the Sun; then by reckoning the Degrees
which the Sun has finished at that time, and knowing how many Degrees the Moon
has departed from the Sun, it may consequently be collected in what Sign the
Moon is, and in what Degree of the Sign, since every Sign contains 30 Degrees.
Or thus, multiply the Age of the Moon by 4, and again the Product of this
Multiplication by 3, Degrees of the Moons distance from the Sun.

Note, That the Moon departs every Day farther and farther from the Sun about
of an Hour; so that if she rises to Day with the Sun, to Morrow she rises not
till of an Hour after.

To find the Paschal Moon of any given Year.
SEek in the Gregorian Calender, from the 8th March to the 5th of April, for
the Epact of the Year current, and that will show that the New-Noon is on such
or such a Day; then reckon 14 Days from thence, which done, seek the Dominical
Letter, which follows next after the said 14th Day; and hereby the true Time of
the Feast of Easter is known.

Note, That these Moons only which begin at the 8th of March, and end at the
5th of April, Paschal, and consequently that Easter cannot fall sooner than the
22th of March, since the 14th Day of the Moon falls upon the 21th of March, and
the Day following is the Dominical, or Lords Day, which is Sunday. But neither
on the other side can Easter fall later than the 25th of April; and
consequently, it is also to be observed, that a March Moon, that is, wholly
within the Month, can never become Paschal, since (as it has been already
observed,) the Moon is only attributed to that Month in which it ends; but the
Paschal Moon always ends out of the Month of March; whence it follows, that a
March-Moon can never be Paschal; or a Moon of the first Month, according to the
Jews, and the Decree of the Nicene Council.

The time of the Day, or Night being given, to find what a Clock it is.
FIrst, Let the Suns Elevation above the Horizon be known, and the Degrees of
the Zodiac, which the Sun or Moon possesses, be rightly disposed in the
Circle of the Elevation; then apply the Ostensor to that Degrees. or part of the
Zodiac, according to the Line of Direction, which upon the Limbo will point to
the Hour sought; that is, if in the East-part, the Antimeridian, or
Forenoon-Hours; if in the Westernpart, the Pomeridian, or Afternoon-Hour.

Where Note, That Equal, or Equinoctial Hours are here treated of; for if an
Unequal, or Temporary-Hour be sought, the Ostensor is applied to the part
opposite to the Sun, or to the opposite Sign and Degree in the Zodiac; the
lower part of the Ostensor will denote the Unequal.

To find the Rising, and Setting of the Sun; and consequently the quantity of
the Artificial Day, at any time of the Year.
PLace the Part, or Degree of the Sun, found by the Astrolabe, on the Eastern
part of the Horizon; then set the Ostensor to that part of the Sun, and it
shows the sought Hour of the Suns-Rising. In like manner the Hour of the
Suns-Setting, is to be found by transferring that of the Zodiac where the Sun
is to the Western Horizon.

The same is also done by the Globe, or Armillary Sphaere, by applying that
part of the Ecliptic where the Sun is, to the Meridian-Circle, and at the same
time putting the Horary Index upon the Meridian-Hour; and lastly, turning that
part of the Zodiac Eastward, till it exactly answer the Horizon and then the
Horary-Index will show at what Hour the Sun Rises: In like manner answerably
for finding the Hour of the Suns-setting.

Of the Morning and Evening Crepuscle, or Twilight.
THe Morning Crepuscle begins when the Sun comes within 18 Degrees of the
Horizon, toward his Rising in the Morning; the Evening Crepuscle ends when the
Sun Setting is gone 18 Degrees beneath the Horizon. To find the Hour of this
Crepuscle, turn the Globe so about, that that part of the Ecliptic where the
Sun is, may fall 18 Degrees beneath the Horizon, and then the Horary-Circle
will declare the sought Hour; and so the opposite part being Elevated 18
Degrees above the Horizon, proves that the Sun at the same time is descended 18
Degrees beneath, as will appear by numbering those Degrees upon the Equator.

To know what A-Clock it is in any part of the World.
THis will easily be found by the help of the Terrestrial Globe; the Hour being
first known of those Regions which lie under your Meridian, by moving that
Meridian, and directly applying it to the immovable Meridian of your
Instrument, and placing the Horary-Index Hour; then upon turning about the
Globe, the Immovable Meridian will point out those Regions, whose Hour desired
is shown in the Horary-Index.

First, It is to be noted, for the unfolding of several Problems of this
nature, That the Earth is daily surrounded by the Sun, who in that Quotidian
Course passes through a multitude of Meridians, successively one after
another; so that he must visit every Hour, 15 Meridian, according Country there
is a Midday, or Noon, when the Sun makes its Circle, which is thence called
the Meridian-Hour, the very midst of the said place, and consequently, that
every 15 Meridians he passes through, so many Hours he makes; and that the Sun
makes at the same time both the same Hours, and also both new Hours and Seasons
respectively, according to the several Countries Regions he passes through;
whence it may well enough be affirmed, That that very moment there is at one
and the same time every Hour and every Season of the Year throughout the
several Countries of the World, in so much that every Hour of the day
perpetually circuits round about the Earth, etc. Suppose therefore, that to a
man resting under the same Meridian there is always a natural Day of 24 Hours,
because there must needs be such a space of Time before the Sun can return
again to the same Meridian.

Note also, That to a Man journying Eastwards, the Day is less than 24 Hours:
for the Sun will be sooner in that Meridian in which he is to meet him, than in
that from whence he departed. On the contrary* to one that makes a Journey
Westwards, the Day becomes more than 24 Hours, because the Sun will sooner
reach the Meridian from whence the Person departed, than to overtake the Person
departing: Wherefore, Note in the last place, That it may so happen that two
Ships setting forth from the same Port, the one Eastwards, and the other
Westwards, yet at length may meet in some part of the World. In like manner,
Admit Peter go hence Eastward, and Paul at the same time Westward, and both of
them having surrounded in their Travels the World, after some Years, return on
the same Week to John, who remains all this while at Home; it may happen that
although every one of them observe the same way of counting the Time, yet John
may reckon Tuesday; Peter, Wednesday; and Paul, Monday; then the next day after
Peter may have Thursday, John Wednesday, and Paul, Tuesday; lastly on the day
following, Peter may reckon Friday, John Thursday, and Paul Wednesday, and so
of the rest; so that in one and the same Week in reference to 3 Men, Thursday
will be thrice reckoned.

Hence comes the Solution of a common Paradox, maintaining, That it may so
happen that two Brothers born at the same time, shall also dye together, and
yet one live longer than the other, because he has numbered more Days.

HISTORY.
AS the ancient Philosophers have very properly defined Time to be Mensura
Motus, the Measure of Motion; so History may not unfitly be defined Mensura
Temporis, the Measure of Time: But to give a more exact Definition, History is
the written Account of Memorable Things transacted, and of Persons transacting,
from the Creation of the World to this time. It is by Cicero more Elegantly and
Rhetorically styled Testis Temporis, Lux veritatis, Vita Memoriae, Domina
Vitae, Nuncius Antiquitatis, etc. The witness of Time, the Light of Truth, the
Life of Memory, the Mistress of Life, and the Messenger of Antiquity.

The Division of History is according to many Authors, threefold, viz.
Ecclesiastical, and Profane; Ancient, and Modern; and Universal and
Particular: But since there is no Essential difference between Ancient and
Modern, I shall only make use of a twofold Division, viz. First into
Ecclesiastical and Profane; next into Universal and Particular; the last of
which is included in each Branch of the First, that is to say, both
Ecclesiastical and Profane, is subdivided into General and Particular.

Ecclesiastical History is that which treats most Peculiarly of the Affairs of
the Church, that is, of the administration of Affairs by persons who profess an
Ecclesiastical Function.

The First, and principal part of Ecclesiastical History, is that of the Holy
Scriptures viz. the Old and New Testament; The Old Testament contains the
Creation of the World, the Transgression and fall of Adam, the universal
Deluge, the repeopling of the World, by the Sons of Noah, the Offspring of
Abraham, multiplied according to Gods Promise from the 12 Tribes of Israel,
into a numerous People; Gods deliverance of the Children of Israel, by the
Hands of Moses and Aaron, from the Egyptian Bondage; Their slow Marches, and
long Sojourning in the Wilderness; Their several Victories under Joshua, and
the rest of their Judges, until that complete Conquest of the Land of Canaan;
The rise of their Kingdom under Saul; the progress thereof under David and
Solomon; the Division thereof into two distinct Kingdoms, viz. of Judah and
Israel, with the double Race of Kings from Rehoboam King of Judah, and J^^oh^am
King of Israel, to the Assyrian, and Babyl^nish Captivity; The return of the
Jews from Captivity; The rebuilding of the Temple, and of the Walls of
Jerusalem, by the Interest of Ezra, and Nehemiah, with the Kings of Persia.

The New Testament contains the Incarnation and Nativity of Jesus Christ; The
Address of the Eastern Magi to Him with their Presents; His conveyance into
Egypt from Herod's Tyranny; John the Baptists Preaching, Baptism and Execution;
Christ's Temptation by Satan in the Wilderness, and his Conquest over him; His
disputation in the Temple, his Preaching to the Multitude and his Disciples;
his several Miracles; his last Supper; His approhension through the Treachery
Judas; His Trial, Crucifixion and Resurrection; His appearing amongst his
Disciples after his Resurrection; His Ascension into Heaven, and his sending
down the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles in cloven Tongues; the first planting of
the Christian Religion by the Preaching, Sufferings, Miracles and Writings of
St. Peter, St. Paul, after his Conversion, and other Apostles, and Ministers of
the Gospel.

The rest of the Ecclesiastical History continuing from the time where the Holy
Scriptures end, Christianity from that time until this: The ancient Fathers
what Times they flourished, with an Account of their Writings: The Exemplary
Lives of the Primitive Christians, and their patient suffering under the
Ethnic Roman Emperors, particularly the Ten cruel Persecutions, first under
Nero, lastly under Dioclesian; The Christian Faith first openly profess't, and
asserted by Constantine the Great in the Year of our Lord 306: The Popes of
Rome, from Linus to this present Innocent the 11th; The Transactions of the 20
General Councils from the first General Council at Nice, Anno 318, to the
Council of Trent, Anno 1563; The Contest betwixt the Catholics of the Latin,
and the Arrians of the Greek Church, as also about Image Worship; The first
Commencement of the Bishop of Romes clayming Supremacy over all the rest of the
Christian Bishops, and Patriarchs in the time of the Emperor Phocas, Anno 601.
The 26 Antipapal Schisms or Factions of one Pope setting up against another
from Novationus against Cornelius, Anno 255, to Felix against Eugenius, Anno
1439. The Reformation of Religion in England, Germany, Denmark, Sueden,
Switzerland, part of France, and else where in Europe; and the great
Animosities betwixt those of the Romish-Party, and those of the Reformation.

Profane History contains the various Accidents, Events and Occurrences in the
World in Secular Matters; The Acts and Designs of eminent Men, whether good or
bad, both in Peace and War; The strange alterations and vicissitudes of human
Affairs; The Fall and decay of Empires, Kingdoms and States, with the rise,
and growth of others.

All our late Writers of universal History agree in this one Method, that is,
of carrying on the main stream, or current thereof through the 4 chief Empires,
or, as some call them, Monarchies of the World, viz. the Assyrian, Persian,
Grecian and Roman.

The Assyrian Monarchy or Empire, which may also be called the Babilonian, in
regard the chief Seat of the Empire was for the most part at Babylon, until the
Empire came to be divided into a double Empire, viz. that of the Babilonians,
and that of the Medes, which was begun by Belus, vulgarly called Jupiter Belus,
and is thought by many to be the same with Nimrod mentioned in Holy Scripture;
others account Ninus the Son of the said Belus, to be the first Assyrian
Monarch; however there are named, (and for the most part only named) about 37
Monarchs from the original thereof to Sardanapalus, who being totally
overthrown, by his two Viceroys Beloch of Assyria and Arbaces of Media, the
Empire was divided, and there Sprung up a double Race of Kings, viz. of Babylon
from Belochus, and of Media from Arb^^es. The last of this Median Race was,
Astiages, whose Grandchild Cyrus by the Daughter of Mandana a Persian by the
Fathers side, got the Kingdom from his Grandfather, and United the Persian,
and Medes into one Empire.

This Grand Monarchy began about the Year of the World 1820. contemporary with
which was, first the Sicyonian Kingdom, much of the same origin begun by
Aegialus; next the Argive Kingdom begun, Anno Mundi 2100, by Inachus, whence
descended the family of the Inachidae, after whom succeeded the Dardanidae, and
lastly the Mycenaeans. The Kingdom of Athens, began by Cecrops, Anno Mundi
2426, and of Lacedamon by Leles about the Year 1500, The ancient Kings of
Latium from Janus, Anno Mundi 2700, and after them of the Silvian Race from
Aeneas, Anno 2803; and after them the Roman Kings from Romulus, Anno 3231, to
Tarquinius Superbus, Anno 3446. The Kings of Troy from Dardanus, Anno 2600, to
King Priamus, in whose time, Troy was Burnt and Sacked by the Greeks. The
Corinthian Kingdom from Sisyphus, Anno 2573. The ancient Macedonian Kings from
Caranus, Anno 3170.

The second Grand Empire called the Persian Monarchy, was begun by Cyrus, Anno
3425, and rendered the more potent by the Addition of the Median Kingdom, which
he got by conquest from his Grandfather Astiages, as before mentioned. (...)
Empire lasted not very many Ages, for it was not much more than 250 Years from
its first Rise, before it was brought to a Period by the Conquest of Alexander,
Son of King Philip of Macedon, commonly surnamed the Great. Contemporary with
this Monarchy, were the Great and Noble Actions of the Athenian and Spartan
Commonwealth. The Original of the Roman Republic, after the Expulsion of
their Kings, Anno Mundi 3475, under the Annual Government of Consul, and
Victorious Progress thereof.

The third Pancrastick Dominion, called the Greek Empire, is liable to some
dispute as to its Existence, Original, and Duration; for the height Grecian
Glory, and success was under the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians; but these two
People being in those days both Republic, the time of their Flourishing could
not properly be said to be one of the said Monarchies; besides in their highest
pitch of their Glory and Grandeur, they were Contemporary with the Persian
Monarchy, to which at first they were a Terror, afterward by turns, an Aid and
Assistance against each others dreaded Power; whereas all the 4 Empires must
Greek Monarchy to be a mighty Blase of an Empire, rising out of the Mocedonian
Kingdom; being raised to its height of Splendour, by the Great Success of King
Philip, who subdued the rest of Greece, and the great Success of his Son
Alexander, who about the Year 3650 and odd, with a small Army quickly overthrew
the whole Power of Persia, and carried Terror to the remotest parts of the
Eastern World; Conqueror was soon laid low, and small was the fruit he Reap't
of all his mighty Conquest; for he was taken out of this Life in the Flower of
his Age, and both his Paternal and subdued Dominions parcelled out into several
Kingdoms and Principalities, by his Successors the Grand Captains of his Army,
the chief whereof were, First, the Remnant of the Macedonian Monarchy, from
Cassander the Son of Antipater, Anno Mundi 3663, or thereabouts, to Perseus who
Romans, Anno 3816. Secondly, The Race of the Ptolemies in Egypt, from
Ptolemaeus Lagi, Anno Mundi 3660, or thereabouts, to Cleopatra the Sister of
Ptolemaeus Bacchus, and Mistress of the great Roman Captain Marcus Antonius,
with whom she died, to avoid being carried in Triumph to Rome, Anno Mundi 3954.
Thirdly, The Kingdom of Syria from Seleucus Nicanor, Anno 1672, to Antiochus,
12th Son of Eusebes, Surnamed the Asian, Anno 3718. Contemporary Monarchy, was
the growing greatness of the Romans, under their Consular Government, during
those above mentioned Dynastys, which Sprung out of the Greek, or Macedonian
Empire. The most noted Kingdom besides, was that of Pergamus in Asia, from
Phileratus the Eunuch, Anno 3700, to Attulus Son of Eumeches, who dying, made
the Commonwealth of Rome his Heir.

The 4th and last great Predominant Power of the Roman Empire; for it may very
well deserve the name of an Empire, long before it could be called a Monarchy;
which was not until the Caesar's had wrested the Supreme Power from the Senate
of Rome, and assumed the Title Imperator, attended with Regal Authority and
Dignity; whereas Romes Dominions were extended to their utmost Bounds, under
the Influence of a Common Wealth; and Julius was but the Senates Servant when
he Conquered Gallia, and a great part of Germany; however since our Writers of
Universal History, have for the most part thought fit to commence that Roman
Empire from its Imperial Monarchy; it will be convenient to subscribe to the
general Opinion, both as to the beginning, and continuance thereof; by which it
will appear, that the greatest part of the Roman Empire by far has been
Excluded out of Rome, having undergon such an Alteration, and such a
Transplantation from one Seat to another, as no other Monarchy beside, either
before, or since. From Julius Caesar, to Constantine, Rome was the Seat, which
was about 350 Years, and in that time it suffered much of Alteration and
Diminution. The choice of the Emperor was all this while, and for the most
part long after, at the Armies pleasure; and it remained in the Julian Race but
till Coccius Nerva. Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, at
least that openly profess't himself so, removed the Seat of the Empire from
Rome, to a new City of his own building upon the Thracian Coast, called from
thence Constantinople, or Constantines City; so it continued till the time of
Theodosius, Surnamed the Great, who divided the Empire between two Sons,
Arcadius, and Honorius, whence Sprung a double Race of Emperors, viz. the
Eastern of the Line of Arcadius, Reigning at Constantinople, and the Western of
the Line of Honorius Reigning at Rome; but this Western Empire was soon brought
to a Period by the incursion of the Goths, Huns, and Vandals into Italy. Three
times in one Age was Rome taken, and sacked by these Invaders, but the third
time it was taken, viz. in the Year of our Lord 475, by Odoacer King of the
Heruli, the Imperial Line was Totally Expelled Rome, and shortly after a new
Kingdom erected by the Goths in Italy. Thus Rome which had been the Mistress of
the World for so many Ages, and the Seat till of late of the greatest Monarchs
of the World; had now lost all its Glory, and become a common City; but that it
seems it was from its first Foundation to the Worlds end, designed for an
Empire in some sort or other; and now a greater Empire seems to attend it, by
how much the Spiritual Sword aws more than the Temporal, for not long after the
time now mentioned, the Bishop of Rome began to claim Superiority over all
other Bishops; and by that means has ever since kept under his Obedience and
Subjection all the Princes and Potentates of Europe (some few only excepted
since the Reformation) more than ever any Emperor kept the lesser Kings his
Tributaries. The Empire thus overthrown, however the Eastern Emperor kept a
kind of Viceroy in Italy, with the Name of Exarch, who held his chief Seat at
Ravenna. In this Estate continued the Succession of the Eastern Emperors, till
Charles Surnamed the Great of France had the Title of Roman Emperor given him
by Pope Leo the Third, for the Aid given his Successor Adrian, against the
Exarchs of Ravenna, and Desiderius King of the Longobards; so that a new Roman
Empire was raised again in the West, if it may be truly styled a Roman Empire;
which neither had its Seat at Rome, nor any continual claim from the first
Roman Emperors, but was only grounded upon a Title given by a Pope of Rome to a
French King. For some Ages the Imperial Title continued to the Successor of
Charles the Great, and had residence sometimes in France, and sometimes in
Germany; Henricus Auceps, to this present Leopoldus Ignatius, the Imperial Seat
has been continually in Germany. From the Inauguration of Charles the Great,
to the time of Frederick of Habspurg, there still remained a Series of Eastern
Emperors at Constantinople, so that all this while, namely for the space of
about 650 Years, there was again a double Succession of Roman Emperors, Eastern
and Western, though the truth is, which cannot be well understood how Roman
Emperors, excepting that the Constantinople Succession was more clearly Built
upon the Old Foundation; since all the vast Bulk of the Old Roman Conquest was
fallen in piecemeal, and was now almost reduced to nothing; so that no wonder
the rising Greatness of the Ottoman, so easily overpowr'd the fallen greatness
of the Roman. It was in the Year of our Lord 1453, that Constantinople was
taken by Mahomet the First, and Constantine the Emperor, Son of Joannes
Emanuelis Slain. In a Constantine this Dynastie began, and in a Constantine it
ended; and with it according to the Opinion of some, all that can rightly be
styled the Roman Empire, the Ottoman power succeeding as a Fifth Monarchy in
the room thereof.

Contemporary with this great Roman Power, and Name, have been several other
great Kingdoms, States, and Principalities, namely, with Commonwealth: The
Kingdoms of Pontus and Bithynia, and the Remnant of the Macedonian and Syrian
Kings, all subdued by the Romans; Great Mithridates of Pontus, Perseus of
Macedon; and Antiochus of Syria: The Carthaginian Commonwealth, subdued also
by the Romans, after the total Overthrow and destruction of Hannibal: The
Kingdom of Mauritania, and Numidia in Africa; the later overthrown by the
Romans after the Vanquishing of Jugurth; with the Western and Eastern Roman
Emperors, from first to last. The several Successions of the Persian Kings,
viz. the Arsacidae, or Parthian Race: The Persian Line restored, the Saracens,
the Tartars, the Armenian Turks, and of late years the Sophies, with the
Successors of Constantine. The Kingdom of the Goths erected in Italy, from
Theodorick to Tejas; afterward of the Longobards, from Albovin to Desiderius,
Anno Dom. 774. The Merovingian Race of Kings in France, from Pharamond (Anno
Dom. 400) to Childerick the Third, Anno Dom. 750, or thereabouts. The Visigoths
in Spain, from Athaulphus the Brother of Alaricus, Anno Dom. 415, to Alphonsus
the Second, Anno Dom. 800. The Saxon Heptarchy in England, from Hengist King of
Kent, Anno Dom. 457, to Crida King of the Mercians, Anno 1626. The Ancient
Kings of Scotland, from Fergus, Anno Dom. 422, to Achajus, about the Year 800.
The Vandals in Africa, from Geiserick, Anno Dom. 427, to Gilimer, taken
Prisoner by Belisarius, Anno 534; and after them the Sarazens. The beginning of
the Venetian Commonwealth; with the Western Empire, entitled from Charles the
Great, the Successors of the said Charles, who from him had the Imperial Title
themselves; and after them the other Line of French Kings, from Hugo Capet,
Anno Dom. 987, to this present King Lewis the 14th. The Remainder of the said
Succession of the Kings of Spain, from Ramirus the First (about the Year 800)
to this present Charles the Second. The Saxon Monarchy in England, from King
Egbert, Anno Dom. 800, or thereabouts, to King Harald, Anno 1066; and after
that the Succession of the Kings of England, from the Norman Conquest by Duke
William, to His present Majesty King James the Second. The Remainder of the
Dynasty of Scotland, from Achajus to his present Majesty King James the Fifth
of Scotland, and Second of England. The Remainder of the Dynasty, the Kings of
Spain from Alphonsus the Second, Anno 800, to this present King Charles the
Second. The King of Denmark. The Kingdom of Portugal, as taken out of the rest
of Spain, from Henricus Burgundus (Anno 1090) to the present King. Not to
mention the Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden; the several States and
Principalities of Italy, since the decay of the Roman Monarchy there, as the
Commonwealths of Venice, Genoua, etc. The Dutchies of Ferrara, Parma, and
Placenza, Modena, Mantua, Savoy, the Kingdom of Naples, which with the Duchy
of Milan is now under Spain; And the Dukedom of Florence. Thus you have a
general view of History from the Creation to this present Time, as far as
Brevity required will allow.



OPTICS.
THE OPTIC is an Art of Judging well at Sight, which has two Parts, viz.
Perspective and Specular.

Perspective is the first and principal part of the Optics, which teaches
Nature, and the projection of the Rays of the Sight, Colors, Lights, and Forms.

It teaches likewise to Judge rightly of the Situation, Greatness, Interval,
and Distance of all things visible.

The Sight is a Sense, by which Colors are represented and known by a
transparent and proper Interval.

Color is an Accident of a Superficies, which is the proper Subject of the
Sight, and is Simple, and Compounded.

A Simple or Primary Color, is the proper Subject of the Sight, which has but
only one temperament, as Black, and White; the definition of which two Colors
is made by the difference.

White is a Color which is nearest to Light; Black, nearest to Darkness.

Of these two Colors all the rest are compounded.

Compounded, or Mixed Color, is called the proper Subject of the Sight, which
has diverse temperaments; and is divided into an Extreme and Mean.

An Extreme Color is that which approaches Nearest to the Simple, which is
again Subdivided into Yellow and Blue.

Yellow is a Color approaches nearest to White, and to the Light; Blue is
nearest to Black, and to Darkness.

Blue, which is called Verditer, is only Blue washed, as Yellow is nothing but
Yellow washed.

Yellow therefore is a Color compounded of Simples, in which there is even
more of Light, and so Blue, in which there is already more Darkness.

Yellow, which is called Gold-Colour, is that which comes near to Light.

The Mean Colors between the two Extremes, are Red, and Green.

A Mean Color is the proper Subject of the Sight, and is made of the
Compounded.

Red is a Mean Color, made of the Compounded, in which there is always more of
Light; it is properly that Color which is seen in the Flames of Fire. Earthly
Bodies seem to look Red, if at any time they receive Light; but Watery Bodies
seem of a Purple Color.

Purple Color is properly that which is seen in the Waters; It is not a Violet
Color, although it seems near it; but it is Compounded of Light, which is
mingled with a Mass of Blue, because the greater clearness makes the Blue to
appear as it were Red.

Green is also a Mean Color made of Yellow and Blue, in which there is always
more of the Blue. Let this suffice for Colors, being more at large treated of
in Painting.

Light is a Splendor which flies Darkness: The true and proper Light is the
Sun, being called the Fountain of Light; other Lights proceed, and are borrowed
from that of the Sun: That Philosophers say, that the Celestial Luminaries
borrow their Light from the Sun; but since this Light is not Infinite where it
is not, and when it is departed, Darkness follows, which is nothing else but
the Privation of Light.

Now let us say something of the Interval, of which there has been already
something said, which ought to be commodious and transparent.

An Interval, is a Distance from the Eye to the thing that it Sees: no Body can
See so well without a commodious and transparent Distance; What we call
commodious, ought neither to be too long, nor too short; but a temperate and
transparent Clearness is requisite to spread the Rays of the Sight; for if it
be greater than it ought, we can see nothing, because that the Sight is not
Infinite; therefore of necessity we must have a temperate and finite Clearness
to see well; for that a two large Clearness, or dissipated Light dazles and
dims the Rays of the Sight: It must be also transparent, because the Sight is
made by Visual Rays, which are certain strait and great Lines from the Eye to
the Object, by the virtue and efficacy of which we may see there are Twelve
Axioms of the Optics in Euclid from whence may be collected. That the Sight is
made by strait Lines making an Angle in the which Axioms for Brevity sake are
here omitted.

There are three parts, or considerations concerning the Sight, viz. when its
Rays are cast directly, when they are reflected, or when they are refracted.

That which is direct, properly belongs to this first part of the Optics, the
two other reflected or lessened to Catopticks, or Speculars, which is the
second part, and contains the reasons of greatnesses, Fallacies or false
Appearances which are presented to the Eye, because of distances. It also does
demonstrate and discover all the Impostures, Cheats, Effects and Accidents that
happen by this reason to the Body, to the Sight, or to the Medium or Air, which
is between both, and what changes may appear in the thing, and in the Sight by
the various quality of this Air, or Medium, and by the Artifice of Glasses; the
experiences of which are best discovered accordto the diversity of their Forms
and Fashions; for there are some that are Concave, some Convexed, some Plain,
made in the fashion of a Pillar, or a Pyramid, viz. sharp at the Bottom,
sewlling out with Angles reversed, regular, irragular, massive or sloping; the
Sight transparent in the Travers where the Sight passes.

But to avoid Prolixity, here is enough already said of this; the Reasons and
Probations of things that concern the Sight, and of all that which depend on it
are more amply demonstrated by certain Axioms, and taught by the leaned
Mathematicians, as Euclid, Vittellio, Ajguilonius, Mersennus, Niceron, and many
others. By which Axioms may be learned by what manner the Sight is made, and
how we ought to Judge.

Aximos are gave Sentence, which are not to be contradicted, unless we will
dispute against the Truth: For the Mathematicians seek the things that are
true, and apply themselves upon those things that are Invented, seeking and
enquiring Sentence, by which all the Dispute of this Art of the Optics tends
to demonstrate, That such Sentence are not doubtful, to which (after having
diligently learned, and truly understood this little Aggression) we ought to
have recourse, and recommend the Reader thereunto.



The Organ of the Sight.
THe first thing that comes to be handled in this Part of Optics, is the
knowledge of those parts which constitute the Eye, viz. six Tunicles, three
Humors, two Nerves, called the Optic, or Visorian Nerves, and seven Muscles;
the description whereof appears by the first Figure; not to speak of the Fat,
or Glandule, of which the Ball of the Eye seems compacted; but because the
Nerves are the principal part from which the Eyes seem to proceed, we will
begin with them.

I. The Optic Nerves are produced from the foremost part of the Brain, whence
after they have proceeded a little way, they all join together, but soon depart
again asunder, so as that they form a Figure, resembling in some measure the
Letter X, as is showed in the second Figure. It is a thing worth the observing,
that both these Optic Nerves are, as it were, clothed with a double Tunicle,
whereof one is a Particle of the Membrane of the Brain, which is called the
Pia-Mater; the other, of that which is named the Dura-Mater; from the Tunicles,
and from the Optic Nerves themselves, proceed those various Tunicles of which
the Eye it self consists.

II. From the very substance of this Nerve dilated, and (as it were) interwoven
with several Filaments in form of a Net, arises the Tunicle, which thereupon
is called the Reticular, or Retine Tunicle, as from the Pia-Mater; that which
from the heat of the Husk of a Black-Grape is called the Weal Tunicle. This
Tunicle involves the Eye, but in such a manner, that in the forepart it has a
Hole directly answering to the Cristalline Humor, through which (as through a
Window) are taken the Species transmitted by the Objects; and this is called
the Pupilla, or Apple Eye; though Aristotle, and some others, makes the Pupil
and the Cristalline Humor all one. From the Dura-Mater springs that, which from
its hardness and transparency together is called the Corneous, and overspreads
all the Eye; but as it is continued farther, and closes the latter part of the
Eye, it is called the Sclerotick, and Consolidative Tunicle: But over this
there also runs another, which likewise overspreads almost the whole Eye; this
is called the Adnata. It Pericranium, and joins the whole Body of the Eye with
the Cranium it self, within its proper Cavity; wherefore it is also named
Conjunction: But where it extends it self almost over all the foremost part of
the Eye, as far as the Iris, it is called the Album Oculi, or White of the Eye,
and contains several small Veins and Arteries, as the Wea does, by which it
receives the Alimentitious Blood.

Tunicle there is a Hole, through which the Pupil, and the Wea is discovered
in manner of a Circle, which by reason of its diverse Colors is called Iris;
and persons are said to have Eyes, Black, Gray, etc. according to the Color
which predominates in this Iris.

III. In the Eye there are three sorts of Humors, the first and principal is
the Glacial, or Cristalline; this is encompassed by a Tunicle, which being as
thin as a Spiders-Web, is therefore called Arachnoides; the second, from the
similitude of beaten Glass, is called Hyaloides; the third, is that which is
called the Aqueous, or Albugineous Humor, from the likeness of Water, or the
White of an Egg.

IV. Each Eye has seven Muscles, whereof Eye upwards and downwards; two Right,
and Left; two in circumference; and one by which it is sustained, and the Sight
fixed.

How, and in what part of the Eye the Vision is made.
1. THe Opinion of Plato, or Gallen, is denied, who hold, That Vision is made
Light, or Visual Spirits, from the Eye to the Object; since when we look upon
Heaven, how can it be imagined that so great a plenty of Light, or Animal
Spirit, should be poured out to so great a distance, and such vast Spaces.

II. Aristotle's Opinion is much more to be received, which is, That Vision is
made by the reception of the Species, transmitted from the Object into the Eye,
as appears by the Emanation Colors, which are seen continually made from
Objects, nor could otherwise any Reason be given of reflected, or refracted
Vision.

III. The Seat of the Visual Faculty is not the concourse of the Optic Nerves,
since the Species could not be carried thither from the Object; neither is it
in Cristalline Humor, for it must be in a part which is capable of receiving
orderly Species, and terminating them; which cannot be Cristalline Humor, as
being altogether Diaphanous.

IV. This Visual Faculty is rather to be placed in the Retine Tunicle, both
because it receives more commodiously, and in greater plenty, the Animal
Spirit, necessary for Vision, as proceeding immediately from the Optic Nerve;
and especially, because therein the Species of Objects keep exactly their
distinction and order among themselves, as will appear in that noted Experiment
8th Figure.

These Species, though as flowing every way from all parts of the Objects, they
naturally Embody into a Sphaere, yet can they not be received by the Eye, but
in a certain Conical Figure, which they vulgarly call the Optic Cone, whose
Basis is in the Eye, but the Point of it in the Object; nor can any thing be
seen but under this sort of Optic Cone, whose Axis is a Line perpendicularly
from the Vertex, or Point to the Base.

Note, That the Parts, or to speak more vulgarly, the Points of the Object do
each of them (as it were) radiate in direct Lines, and are terminated in the
Eye at the opposite parts of the Retine Tunicle; wherefore when all those Rays
flow on every side from the Object to the Pupil, of the Eye, there they are
said to cross and interfere, and so to digress to the proper and directly
opposite Points of the Retine Tunicle, so as that those which are uppermost in
the Object, are terminated in the lowermost parts of the Retine, and in like
manner contrarily, as is to be seen in the Third Figure.

That Point which is vulgarly called the Punctum Opticum, or Optic Point,
although it naturally act in a Sphaere, whereby it may be seen every way,
enters not the Eye, but under a Conick Radiation, whose Apex is in that Point,
but the Superficies of the Eye, as is to be seen in the Fifth Figure.

Note further, That the Rays flowing from that Prine into the Eye, arrive not
at the Retine Tunicle but with Refraction, and as they meet with the Axis of
their Cone in one Point thereof. There are two Cones thence formed, of which
the one is External and direct, that is, whose Apex is in the Optic Point, and
its Basis in the Eye; the other Interval and Refracted, having indeed its Basis
common with the External or direct, but carrying out its Vertex toward the
Retine Tunicle: and these two Cones, as well the direct as refracted,
constitute the Irradiation, or that total Figure, which from the Visible, or
Optic Point is extended to the Point of the Retine Tunicle; and this Figure
they call the Optic Pencil, in Analogy to the Painters Pencil; because by the
benefit of that Irradiation (as it were) by a certain Pencil, the object Points
it self in the Eye.

This happens in the Retine Tunicle by the Picture of the Object, according as
is showed in the third Figure; and thus it must needs be depainted altogether
in such a proportion, as the external Objects are depainted in a Chart,
according to Experience now approved, and represented in the 8th Figure. Hence
also it is to be observed, That the Animal Spirits flow chiefly through the
Optic Nerve, from which the Retine Tunicle is derived, and that the Orifice of
the Optic Nerve is placed only on one side, and not in the middle of the
Retine Tunicle, as appears in the last Figure; lest that part of the Image,
which is produced from the Object perpendicularly opposite, should fall upon
that Orifice, and by this means the Picture of the said Image would be
disturbed.

Lastly, Take notice, that this Vision is either Perfect or Imperfect; the
Perfect is said to be that which is clear and distinct; that is, whereby a
thing is so represented, that it may easily be discerned by any other thing
whatsoever. The Imperfect is confused and altogether undistinct.

It has been already said, That Vision cannot be distinctly made, but by the
Axis of a Visual Cone perpendicular to the Eye; whereas the other parts of the
seen Object are discerned so much the more confusedly, by how much the farther
they receed from the Point of the Visual, or Optic Axis; and the Vision is but
confused, when the Species in the Organ are received without any distinct
Picture of the Object, or when the Object is depainted in diverse parts of the
Retine Tunicle.

Conditions required to Vision from the part of the Organ.
TO complete Vision, Sanity of the Eye is in the first place required, as on
the contrary any depraved Affection thereof, such as Glaucoma, Gutta, Serena,
Suffusion, Hardness and Thickness of the Corneous Tunicle, or the like, hurts
this Noble Operation of the Sensitive Soul.

Now supposing, as aforesaid, that Vision is made by a Picture of the Object in
the Retine Tunicle, to which the Weal and the Choroides are subtended both for
the strengthening the Retine, and for the stopping the Species, and hindering too
much Ingress of Light by the means of its replanted Blackness. It is
consequently to be allowed, that the Office of the Pupil is so to admit within
the Eye the Species, and as it were Rays of the Object, that by their
decusation they may be disposed into Retine, and consequently frame a
Legitimate Picture of the Object; whence the Pupil, which is already taken
notice of to be the whole of the Weal, is called the Window of the Eye; and in
Men, and some Creatures besides, of a Round, but in other Animals, of an Oblong
Form.

This Pupil has the force of a Sphincter, by which it is capable of dilatation
or contraction, not according to the pleasure, but as necessity urges; Light
is weak and thin, it dilates to take it in the more; but if it be over-powerful
and offend the Eyes, it contracts to keep it out as much as may be.

This Faculty of dilating and contracting is not from an Annular Muscle, as
that of the Sphincter; but from a virtue inherent in the Membranous Circle,
which Riolanus places about this Foramen, or Hole of the Pupil, much after the
manner of Diastole and Systole. Of all these Humors Pupil, that which obtains
the principal place, is the Cristalline; the use whereof is sometimes to draw
in, something to produce farther out the Apex of the refracted Cone, whence the
distinct Vision is formed. Where note, that a distinct Vision is then only
made, when the Apex of the refracted Cone falls upon the Retina, as in the 5th
Figure. For if the said Apex of the retracted Cone should tend beyond the
Retina, as in the 4th Figure, the Vision would Visible Object in diverse parts
of the Retine, is depainted by diverse Rays. There is likewise a confused
Vision, only when the Apex of the refracted Cone is on this side the Retina,
and comes nearer to the Cristalline, as in the 6th Figure; for then from that
Apex, or Point of concourse, the Rays of the said visible Point divert into
diverse parts of the Retine, and so that Picture becomes broader, and
consequently fainter.

Thus it is seen how the Eye disposes it self to perfect Vision, as well by the
motion of the Pupil either contracting or dilating it, as also by the
Cristalline, which is either dilated, or spread abroad, or conglob'd together
to give a just distance to the Vertex of the Refracted Cone; for this is the
effect of the Cristialline; in like manner as of the Vitreal Mote, according as
it receives different Forms thereof, wherefore Nature has bound the
Christalline with certain Filaments, which they call Celiar Processes, as it
were with Bonds, that by the benefit of them, there might be a Contraction and
Dilatation according as need requires; therefore as the Vitreal Mote, by how
much the more Globous it is, by so much the more it contracts to it self the
Apex of the Refracted Cone: So the Cristalline the more Globous it is, so much
the more it draws it back on this side the Retine, and makes the Pencil the
shorter; which very thing happens also if the Albugineous humor abound, so
that it obtains the Figure as it were of an Omphaloptra. Wherefore that this
fault may be cured, and things recalled to their natural Aspect, there is need
of the Myoptra, which is a sort of Optic Glass, hollow in the midst, and
representing things less than the free Eye shows them; when as on the contrary
the Omphaloptra being thicker in the middle than elsewhere, shows things bigger
than the free Eye represents them.

Thus it being evident, That Contraries are distinguished from each other, by a
contrary reason and Method, it follows, that those who have a plainer
Cristalline, or in whom the Albugineous Humor is thinner in the middle than
any where else about, have the Apex of their Refracted Cone extended beyond the
Retina, and see things less to the Life, and not so clearly and plainly if
placed near, as at a distance, and therefore have most need of the Myoptra;
whereas on the contrary those that are Purblind, and see things best nearest
hand, have most need of the Myoptra, or Optic Glass hollow in the midst.

Note, That the Cristalline is a kind of Natural Optic Glass in the Eye, whose
defects are chiefly to be mended, by the use of an Artificial Optic Glass, of
a contrary Frame.

The Eye, which is the Organ of Vision, could not have been conveniently of any
other Figure than Sphaerical, since thereby in regard of its Unequal Superficies
it receives more commodiously the Species from all parts. In the next place, it
is of all other Figures the most Capacious, and therefore most capable of
containing the Humors. Lastly, it is most apt for motion, and least obnoxious
to harm, as having no prominent Angle.

It is generally held, and doubtless not without reason, that Vision from both
Eyes is more clear distinct and perfect than from one; and herein we are more
to rely on Experience, than on the Opinions of Aristotle, and Gallen, objecting
that by the shutting, or taking away of one Eye, all the Animal Spirits retire
into the other; nor is it more available to urge, that those who Aim at any
Mark always shut one Eye, it is not because the Vision is thereby any whit the
better, but from the more sure taking Aim without interfering, or Confusion of
Images, so that Agnilonius observes very well, and proves it by the way of
taking Distances, That the two Eyes are given, not only for Ornaments sake, but
as well for Use and Advantage.

This also is very observable, That where there is such a consent of both the
Eyes, that according as one moves, the other must also of necessity be moved
the same way, and this consent more probably arises from the consent, and in
like manner of affection of the Optic Nerves, than from the consent of the
Muscles of Motion, as some will have it. But that which might seem stranger,
is, that every single Object, though appearing at once to two Eyes, is yet
represented single as it is, and not double, as one single Sound is heard also
single, though by two Ears; the reason is, because the Object is pointed in the
same manner, and in Retina's; whereas the manifold appearance of Objects
Artificially represented, arises from the many Angles in these Glasses, and
other Artificial Representations.

The Act of Vision, as well as of Hearing, or any Kind of Sensation, is made
out by Aristotle, to be perfected in the Brain; and that by the Internal
Concourse of that Sense, which is generally called Senses Communis, or common
Sense; and Unity of the Object, Seen or Heard, though the Sensation be External
in a double Organ.

Conditions required to Vision from the part of the Object.
I. THat nothing is visible, but by the Illustration of Light, appears
sufficiently by Experience, and it is a Tenent maintained in Phisicks, Color
is not the most proper, but Secundary Object of Vision; nor is actually capable
of being seen, but as it is overspread with Light.

II. The Visible Object ought to be Opaque, because as Experience teaches, the
Sight ought to be terminated in that which is seen; for a Body purely
Diaphanous, and having nothing of Opacity in it, cannot terminate Sight, being
altogether previous to it.

III. Every Visible Object ought to have some sensible magnitude; and this also
Experience shows, because in Material Causes there is no other force implanted,
than that they act in a Corporeal Manner, and according to a certain extension
of matter or Subject; nor can the Eye receive any kind of Species, unless some
way or other extended. It is commonly affirmed, that no Vision is made but by a
Pyramid, whose Basis is constituted in the Object, and its Vertex in the Eye;
Optic Pyramids have the greatest Angles in their Vertex; and so on the
contrary; for as the lateral Rays of those Angles are windened, so the Basis
obtended against the greater Angle appears greatest; and as those Angles
decrease, so the lateral Lines constituting the Optic Pyramid, seem to meet
nearer and nearer, till by degrees the Visible Base more and more disappears.

IV. The Sense of Sight as to it self, extends ad infinitum, for as much as
Vision is not made by Emission, but by reception of the Species, which the Eye
can as well receive from a remote, as from a near Space.

V. Nothing can be seen but by the mediation of some Distance, since every
Object must needs have some space to send forth its Species; and there is
required a convenient Medium between the Sight, and the thing seen: So
Aristotle observes, that every Sensible placed upon the Sense it self, makes no
Sensation; therefore things which are in the Eye, cannot be seen by the Eye;
nor can any thing held too near be perfectly discerned. But on the contrary, if
the Distance be considerable between the Sight, and the thing seen, the farther
the thing is from the Sight, the less it appears.

The Manifold kind of Vision.
ALl Vision is either a Simple Aspect, or a more close Inspection. A Simple
Aspect is that Act by which a thing is perceived, so as it first falls upon the
Eye, and this is called Vision primarily first, and is made in an instant; and
it may happen in this Case, that what we see, may not be perceived by us; but
by Inspection the several parts of the Object are Distinctly known; for there
cannot be a Distinct Vision, but according to the Optic Axis, by which every
part is successively viewed.

Inspection is either Simple, or from Praenotion, or anticipated Knowledge.
Simple Inspection is either made by Vision alone, as when it is only conversant
about its proper Object, that is, Light and Color; or when there is a
comparing of one thing with another, which is an Operation of Mind, and as it
were an Induction by way of Syllogism. But to come more close to our former
Proposition; Vision is either direct, that is, which tends in right Lines to
the Object, by a Medium of Density, or Rarity every way equal (and this is the
most Natural) or else refract, or lastly reflexed.

Vision Refract, is that which consists of Rays, refracted by the meeting of a
Diaphanum of a different, either Rarity or Density; which the better to
understand, Observe that no Refraction is made, but when the Ray is crossed by
Diaphanous or Transparent Mediums of a different, either Rarity or Density. As
Air, Water, Glass, etc. And that by which the Ray is directly carried, is
called the first Diaphanum; that by which it is broke, is called the second
Diaphanum.

Secondly, Note that those Rays only are refracted which are carried Obliquely,
for Perpendicular Rays pass directly through both Diaphanums; so that to
Refraction these two things are required, First a diversity of Diaphanums in
Density; Secondly, an Obliquity of Rays. For the better demonstrating whereof
two things are chiefly to be taken notice of, viz. the Line, or Ray of
Incidence, and the Line-Point, or Angle of Refraction.

The Line of Incidence is that which flows from the Object, through the first
Medium, in which the Object it self is, and falls upon the Superficies of the
second Diaphanum occurting, as in the 9th Figure, viz. The Radius is E, c, if
the Object is supposed to be in E, but c is the Point of Incidence, d, f, is
Superficies of the second Diaphanum, which is called Refringent, and in which
is the Point of Refraction to c; the right Line b, a, drawn through c, the
Point of Incidence is simply called Perpendicular; if it fall obliquely upon
the Superficies of the second Diaphanum, and inclines to the Perpendicular Line
b, a, the Refracted Line will be c, g, and the Angle of Refraction h, c, g. But
if it break, and recede from it, the Refracted Line will be c, j, and the Angle
of Refraction h, c, j. The same Proportionally may be seen in the 10th Figure.

Note, That this is ever observed in Refractions, that when the Ray is struck
through by the first Medium, or inclines from the thinner Diaphanum Medium, the
Refraction is made to the Perpendicular. But on the contrary, if it be produced
from a thicker Diaphanum through a thinner Medium, the Refraction is made from
the Perpendicular, and this is certain, That the Rays propagated through a
thicker Medium are thereby rendered the more strong and active, it being common
to all natural Agents to act the more vehemently in a thicker Subject; so
Combustion is made in Burning-glasses by the help of this sort Refraction.

The sight is very much helped by Tubes, Prospectives and other sorts of Optic
Glasses, because by the means thereof the visual Species pass more strongly and
directly to the Eye, by reason of the long passage, and have all their virtue,
the better rallied, and united together.

Amongst the Effects of Refraction, these are principally taken notice of,
First, that by this means Things appear greater, or lesser, according
Refraction is made from the Perpendicular, or to the Perpendicular. Thus to us
who are in the Air, Fish appear in clear Water bigger and nearer, because in
that case the Refraction is made from the Perpendicular, so that the Rays the
more they decline from it, the greater Picture they make in the Eye; whereas we
appear less and more remote to the Fish, by Reason of the contrary Picture in
the Eye. Thus by Refraction the place is apparently changed; in the same Stars
appear to us as risen, when indeed they are beneath the Horizon. Thus
Refraction changes the Figure, as when by reason of the Interjected Clouds, the
Morning, or Evening Sun seems under an Eclipse.

The second thing taken notice of amongst the Effects of Refraction is, that to
any one looking through a Triangular Prisme, there will appear Objects tinged
with strange Colors like a Multiplied Rainbow; and those things which are in
Plano, seem raised upwards in a strange manner. The Trigon being in a
particular manner disposed to the Eyes. Vision Reflect is what which is made by
the Species, not straight impressed from the Object, but rather directed from the
Object to the Speculum, and Reflect from the Speculum to the Eye. Thus in the
7th Figure, we may observe the Speculum a, b, receiving the Species from the
Object c, the Line c, d, is called the direct Radius; in d, is the Point of
Incidence, the Line d, c, is the Line of Reflection, making a like Angle of
Reflection c, d, b, with the Angle c, d, a, which is called the Angle of
Incidence.

The Speculum is either perfect, and properly so called, or imperfect, or
improperly so called; the perfect is that which should remit the Species,
wherefore it is to be Terse, P^lite, Equal, and Opaque, otherwise it will not
remit the Species and Image. The Imperfect is that from which the Species are
not Reflected to the Eye, but rather are as it were terminated in the
Reflecting Body it self.

Of the perfect Specula some are plain, some Sphaerical, either Unequal, or
Concave, some Conical either Unequal, or concave, and some Cylindrical,
Eliptical, Perabolical, etc.

Note, that in a perfect Speculum, that is not the Species which seems to be,
but rather the Object reflext by the Species from the Speculum, because
otherwise, the same must needs happen as in imperfect Speculums; for Eample, in
Paper wherein through the Hole of a Chamber, shut close from Light, the Species
are received, and that apparent Image would be seen in the Speculum, every way
in like manner as the Species received, whereas it is not seen but in the Line
of the Reflection.

But then some will say every Speculum ought to represent the Object under the
same Form, and Magnitude, whereas Experience shows that a smaller Speculum
shows it in a smaller Form and Magnitude. To which may be answered, That a
plain Speculum, whether little or great, attributes the same Magnitude to the
Object, only with this difference, that a small Object may be seen whole in a
plain Speculum, when a great one cannot. Moreover it may be said, that the
Speculum being divided into parts, the Object would not be manifoldly
represented, for as much as not the Image in the Speculum, but only the thing
objected by the Speculum, is seen. To which it may be answered, That the
breaking of the Speculum, if it change the Representation of the Object; for
when it does change it, it happens by reason of the changed Situation of its
Parts.

It is lastly Objected, that the Speculum being moved, and the Object unmoved,
the Object could not appear during the Motion; for as the Object only, not the
Species is seen in the Speculum, We answer that the Object unmoved seems then
to be moved, when in this or that part of the Eye, it is successively Painted;
but that the Motion of the Speculum does, whence it Represents the Object as it
were in Motion.

Concave Speculums render the Images greater, the Unequal show them lesser,
whereas the Plain ones Represent them as they are.

The 11, 12, 13, and 14, Figures make appear according to Rules of Reflection
already delivered, how an Image perfectly deformed, is represented in its true
shape in the Cylindricum Speculum, that is, a Division being made by diverse
Quadrangles at pleasure, these parts which are designed in each of these sort
of Quadrangles inscribed in the hidden Circles about the Cylindricum Speculum.

The Vision of common Objects.
THose thing are called common Objects, which are perceptible, not only by one
of the common Senses, but by other also, with the accession of the internal
Sense, which they call Sensus Communis, with the help also of our reason. Thus
Magnitude, Distance, Place, Figure, Motion, etc. fall not only under the Sense
of Seeing, but are likewise judged by the Sense of Feeling. As for Beauty,
Deformity, Shade, Darkness, etc. though they are Objects of the Sight only: yet
they are not the proper Objects of the Sight, as Light and Color, but hold as
it were a middle place between common and proper.

The Quantity of any Object seems bigger or lesser, according to the respect of
the Angles Vertex of the Optic Pyramid; so that through a small Hole of a
Board any thing appears so much the bigger, by how much the nearer it is
brought to the Eye; because the Angle of the Vertex of the Optic Pyramid is so
much the more widened.

It cannot well be judged what is great or small, thick or thin, long or bread,
but by the accession of the internal Sense to the external.

Distance is perceived by comparing together Heaven appears at the Horizon
joined with the Earth, because we can discern nothing interposed.

Motion may be perceived when we distinguish between the Thing moveable, and
the Space to whose parts it is successively applied. Whence it follows, That a
very swift Motion snatches from our Eyes the thing moved, as a Bullet from the
Mouth of a Musket; because by this

In like manner it is worth observation, that a very slow Motion is not
perceived when it is in Action, but only when it is completed; as the Motion
of a Shadow on a Dyal, because a slowness of that Nature renders the change
both of the Place and Thing insensible.

The Fallacies of Sight.
THe Fallacy of the Sight is, when an Object is sometimes represented otherwise
than really it is in it self; this arises sometimes from the vitiated Organ,
as in those that are troubled with the Jaundice, or from that defect of the
Medium; as if Snow be seen through a Red Glass, it appears otherwise than what
it is in it self.

There is also a Fallacy of Sight arising from Distance, when by reason of
overmuch Distance those Things which are really bigger, appear less; and long
Walks appear narrower and narrower from the beginning toward the end.
Moreover, Sight fails as to the Figure, as when a Circle placed obliquely
appears like an Ellipsis; because the Species proceeding from thence by reason
of the obliquity of the Situation is more contracted on one side, and so
represents the Image of the Circle as it is.

Lastly, There is a Fallacy as to Motion; as when to those that Sail, the
Shoars seem to move, and Cities seem to go back, when indeed it is the Ship that
moves.

All Fallacies in the Act of Beholding, arise from the short-sightedness of the
Beholder; as when there appears but a Foot in Diameter, when as it is a
Magnitude infinitely bigger. Or from a false Estimation; as when any one
beholding a Fire afar off, thinks it to be a Star: Or from a Paralogism, as
when that Motion is imputed to the Moon, which is really in the Clouds.

Sometimes the Error is only in the Mind, either wavering in doubtful things,
or moved by a contrary Affection; or by Frenzy justled from its proper Seat,
or for want of serious Attention.

These Errors may be corrected as well by the Mind, as by other inward and
outward Senses; as when the Touch finds that to be plain in Picture, which to
the Eye seems prominent, or jutting out; and the Understanding corrects the
erring Faculty, and it self, when the cause of the Error is taken away, and so
as well the internal, as the external Senses, have such a connection with the
Intellect, as to contribute mutual assistance to each other. Who desires to see
these things more fully discust, let him consult Vitelle, and Aguilonius.

PERSPECTIVE.
Of Necessary things in Perspective, relating to Drawing and Painting, which
every Practitioner ought to be experienced in, for the better understanding the
true Proportions and Distances of Figures, Houses, etc. in Landskips.
BY Persepective we behold, and draw the likeness of all Magnitudes in the
manner and Form as they show themselves to the Eye. The Matter to be seen is a
Magnitude, and the Manner of seeing is by Radiations of Light, either direct,
reflected, or refracted. Likewise, a Magnitude is that which has Form, and is
either lineal, superficial, or solid; that is, either a Complication of Points,
Lines, or Superfices.

A Line is a complication of Points, being a Length only, without Breadth, or
Thickness.

A Superficies is also a complication of Lines, being a Length with Breadth,
but without Thickness.

A Solid is a complication of Superficies, that is, a Length and Breadth with
Thickness.

To draw the Appearance in Lines is the chief part in this Art, whereby the
Idea conceived in the Mind by Sight, or otherwise, is brought

A Radiation is a Beam of Light, conveying the likeness of the thing to the
Sight, and the knowledge thereof to the Understanding. Direct Radiations are
those which consider the direct or strait Beams, that pass between the Eye and
the Object. Reflected Radiations are those that consider the reflection of
Beams, with their shape upon any polished Body. For Example, On a Globe,
Pyramid, Cone, Cylinder, or any other regular Soid; and this properly belongs
to Catoptricks. Broken Radiations are those that consider the breaking of
Beams, as they are to be seen through a Glass, or a Cristal cut into several
Plains, or Superficies: And this part properly belongs to Dioptricks.

The Active part of Perspective is either Ichnographical, Orthographical, or
Scenographical: Ichnography, is the description of the plain Base, or the
bottom of any Body, or Building, and is viz. Geometrical, or Scenographical;
the Geometrical is that which gives the Sight of the Bottom, or Base of any
Body, or Building; the Ichnography-Scenographical is the appearance of the same
Base in Section, or through a Mirror erected upright on the same Plain on which
the Base stands. Orthography is the Vision of the fore-right Side of any Plain,
viz. of that Plain, or Superficies which lies Equidistant to a right Line
passing through the outward or unequal Centers of both Eyes continued to a due
length; so that Perspective Orthography is the delineation of the apparent
right Plain. Scenography is the description of a Plain, or other Figure, that
declines from the apparent or fore-right Plain, that is, of that Plain which
makes Angles with the said fore-right Plain. Between the Orthographick and
Scenographick Vision there is this difference; the Orthographick represents the
Side of a Body, or Building, as it is beheld, when the Plain of the Glass is
placed Equidistant to that side; but the Scenographick expresses the Side of a
Body, or Building, as it appears through a Glass raised obliquely to the said
Side, or making an Angle therewith.

Of the Subject to be seen.
THe Base of any thing is the Plain, Flat, or Floor, upon which any solid Body
or Object

The Altitude is the Perpendicular space of place, betwixt the Base and the
Eye, or height of the Visual Point above the Base. The Visual Point is a Point
in the Horizontal Line, wherein all the Beams of the Eyes Unite. The Horizontal
Line is a Line that proceeds from the Center of the Eye, to the Visual Point,
parallel to the Horizon of the Earth.

The Distance is the space on the Base, between the Glass and Point in the
Base, that lies directly under the Eyes.

The Section is a Plain of Transparent matter (as of Glass) raised upright upon
the Plain of the Base standing before you, parallel to a strait Line, passing
through the Unequal Centers of both Eyes. Now without the understanding of this
Section or Glass, it is impossible to attain to the Knowledge of Perspective, and
by Consequence will not be able to give a reason for the difference betwixt the
Orthographick, and Scenographick Figures.

If the Glass is placed near the Visual Point, and remote from the Object, the
Figure which is seen will be very small; because all Rays comprehending the
Orthographical, and Scenographical, Figures fall into the Visual Point, as
their Common Center. If the Visual Point be more raised (though at the same
Distance) the Scenographick Figure or Form will appear much larger. And by
reason the Visual Radiations are higher, the various Perpendiculars raised on
the Section, or Glass, cut them in wider distances, as being more remote from
the Glass. If the Glass incline to the Visual Point, the Scenographick Vision
will be longwise between the Visual Point and the Object; But if the Glass
recline from the Visual Point, the Scenographick Figure will appear rounder,
and begin to resemble the Orthographick. But if the Glass is fixed Equidistant
to the Base, or Plain the Object stands upon, the Scenographick and
Orthographick resemblance will be one and the same.

Diagonals, or Lines of Distance, are such as are drawn from the Point of
Distance, to any other Point higher, or lower than the Horizon.

The Object is that Form, Body, Figure, or Building intended to be expressed in
Perspective Proportions.

The General Practice of Perspective.
LEt the Object you are to draw, standing on your right Hand, be also placed on
the same Hand of the Visual Point; and that on the left on the same side of the
said Point and that which is opposite before in the middle of it.

Let every Line which in the Object is Strait, Parallel, or Perpendicular to
its Base, be also so in its Scenographical Delineation.

Let those Lines that are in the Object Equidistant to the returning Line, be
drawn in the Scenographical Figure, from that Point found in the Horizon.

Let the Lines which in the Object return at right Angles from the fore-right
side, be drawn Scenographically from the Visual Point.

The Center in any Scenographical Regular Figure, is found by drawing cross
Lines from opposite Angles, for the Point where the Diagonals cross in the
Center.

In Drawing a Perspective Figure, where many Lines come together, for the
directing your Eye, you may draw the Diagonals in Red; the Visual Lines in
Black, and the Perpendiculars in Green, or any other different Color.

A Ground Plain of Squares is alike, as well above, as below the Horizontal
Line; Nevertheless, the more it is distant above or below the Horizon, the
Squares will be so much the wider and larger.

Let all Strait Lines which in the Object return from the fore-right side, run
in a Scenographical Figure into the Horizontal Line.

In Drawing Arches, Circles, Crosses, Ovals, Spirals, or the like Figures in
the Roof of a Room; Ichnographically, and so with Perpendiculars from the most
eminent Points, carrying it up to the Ceiling; from which several Points carry
on the Figure. And in setting off the height of Pedestals, Columns and the
like, measure the Height from the Base-line upward, in the Front or fore-right
side; and a Visual Ray drawn, that Point in the Front shall limit the Altitude
of the Column all the way, behind the fore right-side, even to the Visual
Point.

Thus having considered the Distance, Height and Position of the Figure, and
drawn it accordingly, with the Side or Angle against the Base; raise
Perpendiculars from the several Angles, or designed Points in the Figure to the
Base, and transfer the length of each Perpendicular from the place where it
touches the Base, on the side opposite to the Point of Distance; and so will
the Diametrals drawn to the Perpendiculars in the Base by Intersection, with
the Diagonals drawn to the several Distances, give the Angles of the Figure:
And so Lines drawn from Point to Point, will Circumscribe the Scenographical
Figure.

If in a landscape there be any standing Waters or Rivers, place the Horizontal
Line level with the farthest sight thereof. In Describing things at a great
Distance, the proportion as to Magnitude, and Distance must be observed, which
appears from the Object to the Eye. And if there be any Houses, or other
Edifices, consider their Position, to find from what Point in the Horizontal
Line, to draw the Fronts and Sides thereof.

And Lastly, in Coloring and Shadowing of every thing, observe the same in
your Picture, which you do by your Eye, especially in Objects that are near;
but according as the Distance grows greater and greater, so the Colors must be
fainter and fainter, till at last they lose themselves in a Darkish Skie-colour.

Of Catoptricks, and Dioptricks.
THe Catoptricks are best seen in a common Looking-Glass, where if the Glass be
exactly flat, the Object is in all respects like its Original, or Pattern; but
if it is not flat, the resemblance alters from its Original, and that more or
less, as the Glass differs from an exact Plain.

In the Drawing of Catoptrical Figures, the Surface of the Glass is to be
considered, upon which the Reflection is to be; for which you must make a
particular Ichnographical Draught, which on the Glass must appear to be a Plain
full of Squares; on which Projection transfer what shall be drawn, on a Plain,
divided into the same Number of like Squares; where though the Draught may
appear very confused, yet the Reflection thereof on the Glass, will be very
proportional and reregularly composed.

The Dioptrick, or Broken Beam may be seen in a Tube, through a Crystal, or
Glass, which has its Surface cut into many others, whereby the Rays of the
Object are broken. When these Faces on a Crystal are returned toward a Plain,
placed directly before it, they separate themselves at a good Distance on the
Plain; because they are all directed to various places, far distant places of
the same.

DRAWING, AND PAINTING.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
THE Art of DRAWING, and PAINTING, not improperly called POLYGRAPHY, so much
imitateth Nature, as that by proportional Lines, with suitable and apt Colors
it represents to the Life the Forms of all Corporeal things, with their
respective Actions, Gestures, and Passions.

It consists of three Parts, viz. Design, Proportion, and Color, all which are
express in as many sorts of Painting, to wit the Life, History and Landscape.

Drawing represents the shape and form of any Lines only, and if to
Proportioned quantity Color is added, you have the Form and Perfection of the
Figure. The Proportion gives the true breadth, length, and bigness of any part
in respect of the whole, showing how they bear one to another.

The Passions of the Mind are seriously to be considered, and well understood,
whereby to represent the same in the several Gestures, as Love or Hatred, Pride
or Humility, Joy or Sorrow,

The Original of this Art was taken from the Forms of Things that appear;
expressing the same with apt and proper Colors, thereby imitating the Life.
This imitation of things seen by the Eye, was very much furthered by the Idea's
of things conceived in the Mind, from the continual motion of the Imitation.
These Forms and Idea's were not singly considered, but complicately; And from
this manner of Imitation Designing, and from thence came the Arts of Painting,
Washing, etc.

As Invention gave way to the advancement of Art, so the advancement of the
same made way for its Perfection. Ease of Invention which gave Encouragement,
plenty of Matter which gave Formation, and Neatness of Work which gave Delight;
which was the Reasons that Art was so advanced. Likewise the ardent desire of
emulation to excel others, together with the satisfaction of doing well, gave a
large progress thereunto; Art therefore meeting with Success, created a
boldness in the Spirits of Artificers to attempt the greatest things. The
absolute Perfection of the Art of Painting, the excellency of Invention,
Proportion, Color, Life, Action, Passion, etc. must universally concur and
conspire to bringforth that gracefulness which is the very Life of the Work,
and the sum of all Perfection.

To Drawing and Painting belongs (as Handmaids) the true knowledge of
Arithmetic, Geometry, Optics, and Perspective, without which none can be
brought to Perfection; and to be Universal Painters, they must be grounded in
History, Philosophy, etc.

CHAP. II.
Of the Precepts of Drawing in general.
BE careful to be provided with all necessary things for Drawing, as Charcoals,
Feathers of Ducks-Wings, Pens made of Ravens Quils, Pastils, Crions, Black and
Red-Lead Pencils, Rulers, and Compasses; but it will be convenient to practice
as much as possible without the help of the Rule and Compass, for your Eye, and
Fancy should judge thereof without Artificial Measureings.

Thus being prepared with the aforesaid Necessaries, together with good Vellom,
Parchment, or fine thick Paper, begin with plain Geometrical Figures, as Lines,
Angles, Triangles, Quadrangles, Circles, Arches, Ovals, Polygons, Cones,
Cylinders, and the like, for the Circle helps in all round Forms; the Oval
gives a true proportion to the Face and Mouth; the Triangle in the Half-Face;
the Angles and Arches are in use in Perspective, and Architecture; the Polygon
in Ground-Plats, To the Right Honble Charles Bodvell, viscount Bodmyn Grandson
and heir to the Right Honorable John Earl of Radnor etc.a

This Plate is humbly dedicated by (...) Richard Blome.

and Fortification; the Cone in Spires and Tops of Towers and Steeples; and the
Cylinder in Pillars, Pilasters, and Columns.

Being expert and ready in general Proportions, endeavor to give every Object
its due Shade, according to its Concavity or Convexity; and to elevate or
depress the same, as the Object appears either nearer or farther off the Light;
and this is the Life of the Work. Next proceed to draw Fruits with their
Leaves, Flowers, Trees, Beasts, Fowl, Fish and Insects; And being a good
proficient therein, proceed to Naked Figures of Men and Women: but first to the
several parts of the Body; and then to Draperies, in all which be sure to
imitate Nature as much as possible; and in drawing all the aforesaid Forms you
must be expert in the exact Proportions, and in the general or Out-Lines,
before you venture to Shadowing.

You ought to be provided with good Patterns Copies to draw by, first using
your Coal, and then more exactly with your Pencil, after you have fully
examined it, found, and corrected the Faults, and this may be done by frequent
Trials.

Being arrived to Perfection in these Particulars aforesaid, you may begin to
Draw by the Life. which is the best and perfectest Copy; And in all sorts of
Drawing, be sure to attain to Perfection before you venture on Colors, for
that in a short time will be attained unto, after you

CHAP. III.
Directions for Drawing after a Print, or Picture.
IN drawing after a Picture, or Print, choose such a Light, that the reflection
of the Colors does not obstruct your Sight, that is, that the Light and your
Eye may equally fall obliquely upon your Piece; and withal at such a distance,
that you may see it all at once; so so that the greater your Picture is, the
further distance must you place it to Draw after; and

When you first proceed to work, Draw all your Out-Lines very faint with a
Charcoal, by reason you may rub them out if amiss, with your Feather, or a
Piece of Bread, and so mend the Faults more easily; these Out-Lines are to be
drawn very true, according to your Copies, before you begin to Shadow any part
thereof, and let the Out-Lines next the Light be drawn very soft and faint;
Thus having Drawn one Feature, Copy, proceed to the rest, until you have
finished the whole Draught; and think not your time long, for according to the
Proverb, Haste makes Waste, for you had better bestow three Days, and do it
well, than three Hours, and spoil it; besides, slubbering over Work spoils your
Hand, and begets an Ill habit in you.

Be careful in observing the true distance of one Joint, or Muscle, from
another; as likewise their Length, Thickness, Windings, Turnings, Shadows, and
the like.

In Drawing after Embossed, or Plaister-Works choose a good North-Light,
something above your Work: But if the Room has a South-Light, put before the
Window Oiled-Paper; and if you Draw by Candlelight, use a Lamp Shaded with
Oiled-Paper, instead of a Candle, which is not so good, as growing lower and
lower, and causes the Shades to change.

In Drawing the Muscles, be sure to follow the Life, or else to have good
Copies; and in that side where the Parts are most apparent in the performing
any Action, the Muscles must more or less appear, according to the force of the
Action. And observe, that the Muscles in Young or Fat Persons must not appear
so strong and hard, as in Aged Persons; and in Women they are scarce to be
expressed at all.

CHAP. IV.
Rules to be observed for the Imitation of the Life.
Choose a well-shaped Man, or Woman, which must be placed in a good and graceful
Posture; the like Rule must be observed in all Liveing Creatures; and first
make a Schetch.

In Drawing a Face, great care is to be observed as to the Imitation of the
Life; First, making the out-Lines, or Circumference of the Head and Face,
either Round, Long, or Oval as the Life; then to Draw the Eyes, Nose, Mouth,
and all the Touches therein, both strong and faint for the giving a Life and
Spirit thereunto; in all which observe in your Draught a kind of carelessness
and looseness; for a Picture that appears in any of the Joints Stiff, or Lame,
is of no Value. And in all things the Perfection of Nature must be observed.

Now for your better attaining the same, it were convenient to have the
Assistance of a good Master; likewise to be furnished with excellent Draughts
done by the best Masters, were not amiss; by which the true Shape of the Body,
and all its Limbs is expressed in all, or most Postures, Gesures, and Actions.
But for your better directions for drawing a Face, having, as aforesaid, drawn
the Circumference thereof, make a Stroke down from that place of the Forehead,
which is even with the Chin, coming down where you should place the Middle, or
Tip of the Nose, and Middle of the Mouth, which Stroke make strait down in a
full right Face, but Arched, or Oval in an Oblique Face, learning that way
toward which the Face does Turn; then cross the Stroke about the Middle of the
Eyes, either with a strait Line in a right Face, or with a Curved upwards or
downwards, according to the Action or Posture the Face you draw is in; then
make another answerable to that where the End of the Nose should come, and
another for the Mouth, that it be not made crooked. In a true Proportioned
Face, the distances are, 1. between the Top of the Forehead, and the
Eyebrows; 2. between the Eyebrows, and the bottom of the Nose; and 3. between
the bottom of the Nose, and the bottom of the Chin are equal. The distance
between Eyes is the length of one Eye, in a full Face, but in a three-quarter
or half Face, it is proportionally lessened, and place the Nostril exactly
underneath the Corners of the Eyes.

Thus having finished the several parts of the Face, with all the graceful
touches, proceed to the Hair, and Beard, in which no small care must be taken
in observing the Curles.

For Drawing of Hands, and Feet, with other extreme Parts, First draw them
faint Coal, observing all the Joints, Sinues, Veyns, etc. with their Bendings,
Turnings and the like; And for this Particular choose excellent Prints, or
Paintings, which will be very Advantageous in the perfecting your Drawing.

For Drawing the Wole Body, First begin with the Head, which must be in
Proportion to the bigness you design the Whole Body, next proceed to the
Shoulders, then the Trunk of the Body, from the Armpits down to the Hips, and
Legs, Arms, and Hands; all which must agree together as to Symetry of Parts.
Then let the Parallel Joints, Muscles, Sinues, and Veyns be placed opposite to
one another in a Strait Line, that is, Shoulder to Shoulder, Knee to Knee, and
the like; and to this end draw strait Cross Lines for your better directions,
observing, that which way the Body turns or bows, these Lines may accordingly
answer. In like manner all Perpendicular Joints and Parts are to be placed Body
be strait) from the Throat through the midst of the Breast or Privities, to the
Feet, to which Line draw all those Particular Points Parallels, that the Body
may not appear crooked, or awry.

As to Proportion, first draw out the Head in an Oval, allowing one 4th part
for the Hair, one 4th part for the Forehead and Brows, another 4th part for
the Nose, and another 4th part for the Mouth and Chin. Having drawn the Head,
measure out 8 times the length thereof, the Head making one of the eight parts,
and so draw a Line from the Top of the Head to the Feet, of these 8 parts, one
Heads length from the Chin, is for the Breast, another to the Navel, another to
the Privities, then one to the middle of the Thigh, also another to the Knee,
another to the small of the Leg, and another which is 8th part to the Heel.

The breadth of the Shoulders is about 2 measures of the Head; the breadth of
the Hips, 2 measures of the Face; the Arms stretched out are just the length of
the whole Figure, including the Breast; but without the Breasts they are but 6
Heads. The length of the Hand is exactly the length of the Face, and the Arms
hanging down reaches within a Span of the Knee.

In Shadowing, let the Shadow always fall one way, that is on the same side of
the Body, leaving the other side to the Light. Let the Shadow grow fainter and
fainter according to the greatness of the distance. All Circular Bodies must
have a Circular Shadow, according to their Form, or appearance, and the
Orbicular Shadow of the Object which casts it. When contrary Shadows concur,
let the meanest and most Solid Body be first served; and in double and treble
Shadows, let the first Line be very dry, for fear of blotting before you cross
them. All perfect Lights receive no Shadow at all, but being manifest, are only
to be made apparent by that Body which receives them, whose Shadow must be
according to the Efflux of Light.

In drawing of Muscles the Motion of the whole Body is to be considered; In the
rising and falling of the Arms, the Muscles of the Breasts more or less appear;
the like does the Hips according as they bend outward or inwards; and the same
chiefly in the Shoulders, Sides, and Neck, according to the several Actions of
the Body, all which alterations are to be carefully observed. These ensuing
Figures show the same in several sorts of Gesture, with the Poise of the Body
suitable thereunto.

CHAP. V.
Of Drapery.
FIrst draw the greatest and Principal Folds, which must be continued through
the whole Garment; the lesser you may break off, and shorten at pleasure; and
let them Cross one another. Likewise all the Folds must consist but of two
Lines, which may be turned with the Garment as you please, Shawdowing the
innermost deeper, and the outermost more light.

Let your Garments be suitable to, and bend with the Body in any Posture; and
the closer the Garment sits to the Body, the narrower and smaller must the
Folds be; and that part of the Garment which sits close to the Body must not be
Folded, but only sweetly Shadowed, whereby the Body that is under it may be
represented.

The Folds, or Plaits ought to run out every way, like Branches or Arms from
the Body of a Tree, and in such sort that there be no part of the Garment
without some Folds.

The Nature and Disposition of Light ought to be examined, especially as it
has Relation to the Sun, or any bright Body, for that Colors cannot be seen
but in the Light; for Example, Suppose Blue be equally dispersed through all
the parts of a Garment, yet when it is illustrated by any Light, it causes one
kind of Brightness in that part where it strikes strongly: Another kind of
Luster where it strikes more weakly; and another in that part where it yet
shines less. The Lights are made by mixing a greater or lesser quantity of
White to the Blue; and Darker, by To the Right Worshipful Sr. Henry Hobart of
Blickling in norfolk Knight and Baronet, Son and heir to Sr. John Hobart of
the said Place Baronet deceased.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

Painting

To the Right Worshippfull St John Osborne of Chicksand in ye County of Bedford
Baronet

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Ric: Blome.

Painting

To The Honorable Collonell Robert Feilding of Feilding Hall in the County of
Warwick

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

PAINTING

To the Worshipful Edward Montague of Horton in ye County of Northampton Es^^

This plate is humbly dedicated by Ric. Blome.

adding some of the darkest Blue, as Indico to the Verditer, or Bice. But where
the Light shines only by Reflection, there only mix so much Shadow as to
express that Counterfeit Light, losing it self (as it were) by degrees, always
observing, that you make you Light and Shadow to agree. For this reason there
must be more Light in fine Draperies, as those of Taffety, Cambrick, Cypress,
and the like, in which the Folds must be small, loose, and waving, as if blown
with the Wind, Women's Garments, which fall close to their Bodies on that side
where the Wind blows, and raised up on the other side. And contrary-wise,
Gross and Heavy Shadows are in stiff Clothes; as of Cloth, Plush, Velvet, Cloth
of Gold, and Silver, and the like; upon which the Air can have little or no
force, so that the Folds are few, and gross. The Folds for Stuffs, and Fine
Cloth, are (as it were) a Mean between both, and may be made as if moved by the
Wind, like Silks.

CHAP. VI.
Of Colors; and the Ordering them.
HAving treated of Draughts, my purpose in the next place shall be to treat of
the true Order, and Manner of the Colors; the Means to prepare them for the
Pencil, and to cleanse them from their corrupt Mixture, wherewithal they are
sophisticated, whereby the Practitioner may be able for their better
Illustration to put them into apt and fitting Colors, as well for distinctions
sake, as the delight of the Beholder; Picture. For by the assistance of Colors
(if Judiciously ordered) Angry People will look of a fiery, discontented
Countenance, and the Melancholy of a pale Aspect: The same will appear in all
sorts of Beasts, and Fowls.

The Definition of Colors, and how many Kinds there are.
ARistotle defines Color, to be a visible quantity limited in the Surface, or
Extremity of a dark Body, which before it be lightened, is visible only in
Possibility, and by the benefit of Light may be actually seen.

The Names of the Colors.
Cerus, Whites. Masticot, Yellows. White-Lead, Yellow-Oaker, Slat-White,
English-Oaker, Yellow-Otment, India-Lake, Reds. Sap-Green, Greens Kermine,
Green-Bice, Vermilion, Cedar-Green, Red-Lead, Spanish-Green, Red-Oaker,
Verditerra, Cherrystone, Blacks. Lamp-black, Ivory, Vmber, Browns. Indico,
Blews. Spanish-Brown, Vltramarine, Terra-Dicoloria Bice, Terra Lemnia, Smalt,
Verditer,

In this Account of Colors, I forbear to speak of Verdigrease, Orpment, and
several others, as being unnecessary, or dangerous, by reason of their
unnatural Quality, or else for their course and greasy Body, not suffered to
accompany with the other Colors, as being of a more fine, subtle, and
transparent Nature.

There are yet omitted diverse other Colors, as Saffron, etc. (which are very
good to be used) besides some others, which are Extractions from Flowers, Juice
of Herbs, or Roots, which by reason of their Cheapness are esteemed fitter for
those that wash Prints and Maps, than for Limning; yet of these, or the like
Extractions, from Flowers, Herbs, etc. though they be esteemed of so small
value, nevertheless they are exceeding good and pleasant; (if rightly
extracted.) There are also Colors which proceed from Berries, as Bay Berries,
French-Berries, etc. that make a good Yellow. Other Colors that are made of
Woods, as Brazil, Log-wood, and the like, which make good Reds, I have also
omitted other Colors, as Purples, Murreys, etc. by reason they are compounded
and made of those aforesaid, of which I shall treat in a place more convenient.

WHITE-LEAD, or FLAKE-WHITE, is better than Cerus, and less subject to
Inconveniences, which may be mended as follows.

CERVS will many times (after it is wrought) tarnish, starve, and dye; and that
which you laid on with the Pencil for a fair White, will within a few Months
become Rusty, Reddish, or incline to a Yellow.

White-Lead well ground (which it must be) will glister too much; if course
ground, is unserviceable.

The Remedies against these Inconveniences is thus prevented: Before you begin
to Grind them, set them (especially the White-Lead) in the Sun two or three
Days to dry, which will draw away the Salt and Greasy commixture, that poisons
the Colors; besides, you must scrape away the Superficies of the White-Lead,
leaving only the middle part, which is the best. You must be careful of this
Color, it being the Ground of all the other Work, and the loss, or safety, as
daily Experience teaches.

The Colors being thus dried in the Sun, grind them on a Prophire, Serpentine,
or Peble.

When they are ground very fine (and that in some good quantity, only in Water
without Gum) make ready a piece of thick white Chalk, wherein make certain
little Holes, in every one of which put the White thus ground, and as soon as
you have taken it off the Stone all wet as it is, let it remain till it dry,
and you shall find that the Chalk will suck away the filthiness, or greasiness,
and the Salt, which is the greatest spoil of this Color. When it is thoroughly
dried, keep it in clean Paper, or Boxes, for your use.

When you would Work, take thereof as much as will lie upon a Mussel-shell, and
put to this Color (as indeed to all others) a little Gum-Arabick, the whiter
the better, which must be dissolved in fair Water, (about two Ounces is Water)
with which you are to temper your Colors. But Verditer, Smalt, Bice, Red-Lead,
and some others, require a greater proportion of the Gum to a Pint of Water, as
being of a more grittish and course Nature; otherwise they will not so well
bind to the Paper, or Vellum. If you put too much Gum in the Water, the Colors
will shine; and if too little, they will come off.

If you leave any Color in the Shell, let it not Dust, and so let it dry.

Some Colors are to be Ground, and some Washed; those to be Ground, must be
used as aforesaid.

Colors to be Ground. Colors to be Washed. Cerus. Red-Lead. White-Lead.
Smalt. Indico. Blue-Bice. Indian-Lake. Vltra-marine. English-Oker. Verditer.
Pink. Masticot. Spanish-Brown. Cedar-Green Collens-Earth. Green-Bice. Ivory.
Sap-Green is to be Vmber. steeped in Gum-water only. Cherrystone.

INDIA LAKE must be Ground as the rest, Shell with Gum-water; and to avoid the
cracking, and flying from the Shell, which this Color, Vmber, and some others,
are subject unto; Take a little fine Powder of White Sugar Candy, and with it,
and a little fair Water, temper the Color over again with your Finger, until
the Candy be dissolved.

It is an excellent Crimson Color, and very good to shadow Vermillion withal,
as also the deep Shades of yellow Garments. It is a good Sky-Colour, if you mix
some White-Lead with it; also it makes good Flesh-Colours, by adding thereto
some White, Red-Lead, and English-Oker, as hereafter shall be treated of. But
by reason of the Dearness, you may use Couchaneil, or Couchaneil-Cakes, which
are to be sleeped in Gum-water, and the Juice or Liquor that comes from them
makes the Color. Also Red-Ink made of Brazil, will make a pretty good Red for
ordinary

VERMILLION is a fair and perfect Scarlet-Colour; and if you would have it
good, buy it Unground, or see it Ground, otherwise they will spoil it, by
putting thereto Red-Lead; and to make it bright put in some Clarified Honey.
This Color is chiefly for Garments.

RED-LEAD makes a good Orange-Colour, by putting thereto a small quantity of
yellow Berries. This Color is used for Buildings, and Highways, in Landskips,
being mixed with a little Cerus. It is also used to Color any Light Ground in a
Picture; But take only the thin Water of it. This Color is of great use for
the Shadows in yellow Garments, it is very good to make Flesh-Colours, as also
for several other occasions in Miniature.

ENGLISH-OKER serves for the Life, Draperies, the Hair, Rocks, and for the
Highways in Landskips: It lies well in the Shell if fine Ground.

PINK must be the finest you can get, because with it, and Blue-Bice, you are
to make your fairest Greens for Landskips, and Draperies; for the Color of
Green-Bice, and the transparency of Sap-Green, Spanish-Green, etc. does make
them in many things unserviceable; especially where you have occasion to use
beautiful Greens, which at your pleasure you may make Light, or Sad, by mixing
a little Indico, or Bice, with the Pink.

VMBER is not to be used, unless burnt in a Crucible, and being well Ground it
works well. It is a good Color for the Hair, as also for the Shades of the
Bodies of Trees, etc. It is the best and brightest Color when burnt, as
aforesaid; but if you would color any Beast, it must not be burnt. It is also
used for the Bodies of Trees, Boards, or the like Wooden things, as also the
Dark-ground in a Picture.

SPANISH-BROWN is a course Color, yet of great use for Shadowing Vermillion,
or to lay upon any Dark-ground behind a Picture, or to Shadow yellow Berries in
the Darkest places; but instead of this you may use Vmber, which mix with
Red-Lead, and a little quantity of Lake makes the same Color.

CVLLENS-EARTH works well when it is new Ground, and is especially to close
up the last, and deepest Touches in the shadowy place of Pictures by the Life.

CHERRY-STONE, and IVORY-BLACK, are both to be burnt in a Crucible.
Cherry-stone Black is very good for Draperies, and black Apparel; but if you
use it to make a Satin, it must be tempered with a little white India-Lake, and
Indico, but only to make it appear with a beautiful Gloss, which heightened with
a little Lighter mixter of a more Whitish in strong Touches, and hard
Reflections, and deepned with Ivory, will show very fair.

Ivory serves for a Velvet Black, and is not easy to be wrought with, unless
Tempered with Sugar Candy, to keep it from Cracking. Note, that you never put
any Black amongst your Colors to make them Dark, for that will make them seem
dirty; but Black may be permitted for a Shadow to Spanish Brown.

BLVE-BICE is an excellent Color, if well washed, as hereafter shall be
showed, which will serve in stead of Vltramarine. With this you may make diverse
Colors, as Purples, Greens, etc. This Color does make a light for
Vltramarine; nay you may use it for a Shade, and for the Lights add white
Cerus, by which you may make it as light or as deep as you please, by the
greater or lesser quantity of Cerus. This is also a Shadow for Blue Verditer.

VLTRAMARINE is a dear and precious Color, and not fit for ordinary Uses; but
if you would bestow Pains, and Curiosity in your Piece, then use it.

SMALT makes the same Color as Vltramarine, but it is a Course, and gritish
Color; therefore choose the finest, and wash it well.

BLVE-VERDITER is a light Blue, and very apt to lose its Color; therefore not
good, except for Greens.

INDICO is a dark Blue, and used most for Shades; it is very good to Color the
Waves of the Sea.

MASTICOT is a light Yellow, and very good for Garments, but choose the finest,
and let it be well washed: There are several sorts of Masticots, as Light and
Sad.

LITTMOSE is a very fair Blue, it is to be steeped in Sope-Lees, in which it
will dissolve, and make a Fine Azure Color, with which Water you may Diaper,
and Dammask upon all other Blues; as also upon Sanguines, to make them show
more Fair and Beautiful; and when this Blue Water is dry, you may moisten it as
often as you please with more of the said Water.

YELLOW BERRIES is of that great Use, being of so Bright a Color, and
Transparent Berries are to be steeped in Alome Water, and are made Lighter and
Darker by the less quantity of Water, and the greater of these Berries. This
Yellow being of a Thin Body, is most fit for Washing Prints.

CAMBOGEVM is an excellent Yellow, being of a Transparent, and bright quality;
it is dissolved in Fair Water; of this, as also of Yellow Berries, are made
exceeding fair and pleasant Greens; It is also good to brighten Vermillion, a
small quantity being mixed with it.

SAFFRON is a deep Yellow, and fit to Shadow Cambogeum, and Yellow Berries. It
is steeped in Gum Water, or else in Fair Water made warm, being set on a
moderate Fire, and so use it hot, which is best, for when it is cold, it will
not work half so well, neither is the Color so good; this Color is also only
fit for the washing Prints and Maps.

You may make such a like Color with Red Lead, and Yellow Berries.

GREENS are generally made of several Colors, as for Example, Cambogeum, or
Yellow Berries mixed with Blue Verditer, makes a Fair light Green; for a darker
instead of Verditer put in Bice or Vltramarine; and for the darkest of all, use
Indico. Also for a Fair and Transparent Green, use distilled Verditer, or
Verdigreace boiled in Vinegar; which you may make as light as Yellow Berries,
or Cambogeum.

Of these you may make about 20 several Greens, lighter or darker as you
please, by the Addition of more or less of the Blues.

Also Pink is very good to make Greens, especially the Grass-Green; the Shade
is made with Pink and Indico.

FRENCH-GREEN is made of Pink and Indico, the Shade is Indico.

POPINJA-GREEN is made of Pink and Indico, but a greater quantity of Pink.

SEAGREEN is made of Bice, Pink and White, it is Shadowed with Indico, and in
this nature you may make sundry sorts of Greens according to your use.

There are several other sorts of Greens, I shall only name them.

SAP-GREEN is a dirty dark Green, and of little use, except to Shadow in the
dark places; but Yellow Berries and Indico do make the same Color, and far
better. This Color is to be steeped in Vinegar, and so used.

SPANISH-GREEN is very good and pleasant Green, it must be steeped in
Gum-Water, letting it stand in some warm place for 20, or 30, Days, this is
good for Trees, being of a shining nature; it is of a Bluish Color, Yellow
Berries or Cambogeum being mixed with it, makes it better; but do not mix any
Yellow in it, but only as you use it, so that you may make it as light as you
please, for the light Shades, it serving of it self for the dark ones. This
Color is Poison, so that care ought to be taken in using it. It is very good
to be used in Landskips, in those places that seem a great distance off. Blue
Verditer does almost make the same Color, but not so Transparent, therefore
not so good.

COPPER-GREEN is also a Transparent and Glossy Color, it is thickened on a
gentle Fire. It is most used for Washing Prints, being very good for Trees, or
Grass, it being of so perfect a Grass-Green Color.

SPANISH, or FLAKE-WHITE is the best White, if it be good and well ground; this
being added to any other Color, does make it become lighter, so that the
Color it self may be the Shade; as by putting this Color to Indian Lake, is
made a Blush, so likewise to Vltramarine or Bice; for it is not only of use to
make Lights to them, but also to make them go far.

For as much as there is a natural Concord, and Discord between the Colors
themselves, insomuch that if some Colors be mixed, will suddenly spoil each
other; I think it convenient to set down such as agree together, by which with
the Practitioners Experience, may soon arrive to the mixture thereof; not that
I intend to limit out the exact quantity of Colors to be mixed, being but to
show that Colors serve for the true expressing of all Natural things.

Colors that are Compounded and made of others.
COrnation, is made of Lake and White; the Shadow is Lake.

Scarlet, is Vermillion, and the Shadow, Lake.

Violet, is made of Bice, and Lake, the Shadow Indico.

Purple, is made of Lake, Bice, and White; the Shadow Indico, and Lake.

Skie-Colour, is Bice, and White; the Shadow Bice.

AshColour, is made of Lamb-Black, and White; the Shadow Lamb-Black.

Straw-Colour is made of good quantity of Pink, Saffron, White, and Vermillion;
the Shadow Lake.

Orange-Tawny is made of Vermillion, or Red Lead, Masticot and Pink; the Shadow
Lake.

Light Hair-Colour is made of Oker, Vmber and Black; the Shadow Vmber and Black.

For changeable Silk, the Water of Masticot, and Red Lead for the Lightning,
and deepen the same with Sap Green.

Also a Light Blue lightened with White, and deepned with Lake.

For White Sat^en, Flake White, or fine Cerus, deepned with Cheristone Black,
hightned again with the said White where the Light does fail.

For Black Satin, Cheristone Black and White, deepned again with Cheristone
Black, and lastly, with Ivory Black.

For Black Velvet, lay your Garment over with Ivory Black, and then highten it
with Cherystone Black, with a little White.

For Cloth of Gold, use Brown Oker, and Liquid Gold Water, heightning the same
with small Strokes of Gold.

Out of Masticot, Vmber, Flake-White, or Cerus, Yellow-Oker, Spanish-Brown,
Red-Oker and Black, are made all sorts of Hair-Colours.

To make a Peach-Colour, take Brazil Water, Logwood Water, and Flake-White, or
Cerus.

To make a Crane Color, mix the said White Blue. This Color is also made with
Black Lead, being ground with Gum-Water.

Vermillion and Lake makes the color of a ripe Strawbery, and a Red Rose, and
by adding a little White, makes it a Damask Rose, and by a greater quantity of
White a Blush Color.

All these, and the like Mixtures are lightened, darkened, or diversely varied
according as they are mixed; that is, in a Mixture of 2 or 3 Colors, that of
which there is, the greatest part will Predominate; also White being more or
less added to any Color, does much vary, and alter them, as well as lighten
them.

In this Nature, by your Practice you may know how to mix and compound all
other Colors you have use of.

Flesh Colors are thus made; for a fair Compexon use White, a little Lake,
with a little Red Lead mixed together; it may be made as light, or as red as you
please, by putting thereto more or less White. The Shadows of the Face, as the
Cheeks, etc. are made by adding a little more Lake and Red Lead. If you would
have it of a swarthy Complexion, to distinguish a Man's from a Woman's, add a
little Yellow Oker; and for the Shadow put in a little more Lake, with a small
quantity of Burnt Vmber.

To make Colors for the Sky.
TAke light Masticot, for the lowest and highest places Couchaniel, or Red Ink
not thickened, and White for the next Degree, Blue Bice and White for the next,
and for the highest of all, Blue Bice, or Vltramarine; all these must be so
laid on, and incorporated one into another, that you may not receive any
sharpness in the edge of your Color, or to perceive where you first began to
lay them on, as being so mixed one into another.

For the Color of the Clouds, Blue Verditer may sometimes be used, and White
Shadowed with the said Verditer: Sometimes Lake and White, or Red Ink and
White, Shadowed with Blue Verditer; and sometimes light Masticot, Shadowed with
Blue Verditer or Bice.

What Shadows ought to be used to every Color.
BUt by the way, take this for a General Rule, That every Color is made to
Shadow it self, either by taking the thinnest of the Color, which serves for
the light, and so to Shadow it with the Thick; or else by mixing thereto a
little White for the light, and so Shadow it with the Color it self: But if
you would have your Shades to be darker than the Color it self, for the deep
and hard Shades, then follow these Instructions.

Lake is not to be shadowed with any other Color, it being the darkest and
deepest Red; but for Variety, you may Shadow it sometimes with Vltramarine,
Bice, or Verditer, which will make it show to be changeable Taffety; and by
adding thereto some White, you may make several Lights.

Vermillion, is Shadowed with Lake, Spanish Brown, or Couchaneil Cakes.

Red Lead, is Shadowed with Spanish Brown.

Red-Oker, is Shadowed with Lake.

Vmber, is Shadowed with some Black mixed with the Vmber.

Spanish-Brown, is Shadowed with thin Black; but it is not of use in bright
Garments.

Black, is not to be Shadowed, with any other Color, but for Lights use it
thinner.

Blue Verditer, is Shadowed with Bice, Vltramarine, or thin Indico.

Blue Bice, is Shadowed with Vltramarine, and in the deepest places, with
Indico.

Vltra-marine is a very deep Blue, and not to be used but for Shades: There may
be Lights made of it, as before showed, by adding to it some White.

Smalt is a deep Blue, and chiefly used for Shades; but it may be Shadowed with
Indico.

Indico is only fit to shadow other Blues with.

Masticot is to be shadowed with the thin Water of Red-Lead; and is also
shadowed with Saffron.

Yellow-Berries are naturally shadowed with Vmber; but for the better Beauty,
it is shadowed with Red Lead, or Saffron, and in the deep places with Spanish
Brown, or Lake. Sometimes for varieties sake it is shadowed with Blue Verditer,
or Bice; and sometimes with thick Copper Green, or indeed with any other bright
and pleasant Color.

Cambogeum is to be shadowed with the same Colors, as the Yellow-Berries.

Saffron is shadowed with Lake, or thick Red Ink.

Yellow Oker is shadowed with burnt Oker.

Copper-Green is shadowed with Indico, and yellow Berries, or else with
Sap-Green.

Spanish Green is shadowed with Copper Green.

Green Verditer, is shadowed with Copper-Green, and in the darkest places with
Sap Green.

Sap-Green, is only used to shadow other Greens. There are several other Greens
as has been treated of, which I shall here omit.

Cerus, White-Lead or Flake-white, are shadowed which a small quantity of
Black, mixed therewith, or a shadow is made with some Blue-Bice, and white.

Thus having given you the shadows to every Color; in the next place, I shall
proceed to such Colors that set off best together.

What Colors set off best together.
REds set off well with Greens Yellows, Whites, and Blues; but best with Blues
and Yellows. They set off not well with Purples, Blacks or Browns.

Blues set off well enough with Yellows, Browns, Reds, Whites, and Blacks. They
set off best with Reds, Browns, and Whites. But not well Purples and Greens.

Yellows set off well with deep Blues, Reds, Browns, and Purples; they set off
not well with Whites, Blacks or light Greens, but best with Reds, and Blues.

Greens set off well with Reds, Browns, and Purples; they set off best with
Reds and Purples, but not well with Whites, Blacks and Blues.

Browns set off well with no Color, but worst with Black.

Blacks set off well with any Color, except Browns.

Whites set off well with all Colors.

How to make Changables.
CHangables are such kind of Paintings whose Lights are of one Color, and
their shadows of another; which is very delight-ful to the Eye, by reason of
the Variety of Colors therein used, according to the several Degrees of Light,
which White is used alone for the Light.

In the first Degree White may be shadowed with faint Yellow, Pink mixed, Light
Green, Light Blue, Light Purple, Light Ash Color, Flame Color, Light Tawny,
and Light Red.

In the second Degree the Light Colors, that serve for shadows (in the first
Degree where the Lights of Changables are,) White must be shadowed in this
sort, with deeper Colors, as with Purples, Straw-colour, Oaker, Sad
Ash Color, Tawny, Bice, Pink, Vermillion, Red-lead, and Spanish-brown.

And in the third Degree those Colors which serve for shadows in the second
Degree, are again shadowed with other deeper and darker, as Vmber, Lake,
Indico, Smalt; and lastly, as White hightneth them, so does Black shadow them.

In the next place, I shall give you some directtions for the Grinding and
Washing of your Colors.

Grinding of Colors.
Colors are to be Ground upon a Peble-stone, or some other that is hard, for
the hardest is the best; then Grind them with fair Water without Gum, and when
they are very Fine Ground, put them upon a Chalk-stone to dry, and reserve them
in Boxes, or Papers for your use.

Washing of Colors.
THe reason why Colors are to be washed, and not Ground, is because they are
of so sandy, loose, and gravelly a Quality, and of so heavy, and Solid Bodies
that they can hardly be reduced to the fineness by Gringding as is required;
besides that way they presently become starved and dead; and Masticot and Red
Lead becomes greasy, clammy, and utterly unserviceable. But to proceed.

Take an Ounce or two of Read Lead, put it into an Earthen-dish full of pure
Water, stir it for a while together with a Spoon till the Water be all
Colored, then let it stand a little, and there will be on the Water a greasy
Scum, which together with the Water cast away, then fill the Basin with Fresh
Water, and stir it as before, till the Water be thick and troubled, which done,
before it be half settled pour it out into another Dish, reserving behind in the
other Basin, the Dregs and settling of the Color, which cast away, for you are
to seek not much, but good; if a Pound of it will yield 2 or 3 Shells of fine
Color, it is sufficient. The troubled, and Colored Water being cast into the
second Dish, put more Water to it, and wash it as the former, then let it
settle until it be clean, and so pour off the Water, washing it again and
again, if any Scum arise you may make 4 or 5 sorts, still pouring half the
thickened Water into other Dishes, and washing them as aforesaid; when you have
washed it enough, and the Color is quite settled, pour off the Water, and let
the fine Color dry; then with a fine Feather take off the finest part of the
Color, reserving it for your curious Works, and the other for that which is
more course. You must temper them with Gum Water for your use, as aforesaid.
What is said for washing Red Lead may be said for the washing all other Colors.

Rules for the tempering of your Colors.
1 IN Tempering, or Mixing your Colors have a great care not to put your
Pencils out of one Color into another, for that will make them dirty, and
Spoil them; for prevention of which, have by you at your working a Poringer, or
Pan of Fair Water to wash your Pencils in, when you have done with any Color,
so that it will be clean to put into any other.

2. In Mixing your Colors, stir them about well in the Shell, with your
Pencil, before you Mix them together, for the Thick is not good as well as the
Thin, but let the Water be well Colored, and all of a thickness; then pour
them into a Shell together; but first pour in your lightest Color, by which
you will know how much of the Sad will serve you turn.

3. In Mixing your Colors be careful that you make it not too Sad, for then it
is hard to recover it without spoiling; therefore when you have occasion to Mix
any Sad Color with those that are Light, put in but a little and a little of
the Sad Color, until you find it Sad enough for your purpose; but if it be too
Light you may make it as Sad as you please, by adding the greater quantity of
Sad Color thereunto.

4. Black is unfit to be Mixed with any Color, except White, by reason of its
unpleasantness, making all other Colors dirty.

CHAP. VII.
Rules for laying on your Colors.
LAy on your Colors so smooth with your Pencil, that they may be all of one
thickness; for to lie thick in one place, and thin in another is odious;
therefore you ought to have Pencils pretty full of Color, especially when you
are to cover a Garment all over; (otherwise not) for by this means you may be
the better able to lay them smooth.

Some Colors are harder to lay on than other, as Red Lead, Bice, Verditer,
Smalt, etc. as being of a more Sandy and grittish a nature, so that the greater
care ought to be taken therein.

Always lay on the Lightest Color first, and then proceed to the shadows.

Directions for bestowing your Lights.
LEt all your Lights be placed one way in the whole Work; as if the Light falls
side ways on your Picture, and you must make the other side, as being farthest
from the Light darkest, and so let your Lights be placed altogether on the one
side, Lights, for the Light does not with all its brightness illuminate any
more than that part, which is directly opposite to it.

Another Reason is taken from the Nature of your Eye; for the first part of the
Body coming thereunto with a bigger Angle, is more distinctly seen; so likewise
the second part being Eye in a lesser Angle, and being lesser lightened is not
so plainly seen as the first. By this Rule, if you are to Draw two or three Men
standing together, one behind another, although all of them receive equally the
Light, yet the second being farther from the Eye must of necessity be made
darker than the first, and the third most dark.

That part of the Body that stands farthest out must be made lightest, by
reason it comes nearest the Light, and the Light loses so much Body bends
inwards; because those Parts that stick out do hinder the brightness of the
Light from those Parts that fall more inward: Therefore how much one Part of
the Body sticks out beyond the other, it must be made so much lighter* and if
it falls more inward* it must be made so much darker. Also, that Part of the
Body must be made lightest that has the Light most directly opposite to it; as
if the Light be placed above the Head, then the Top of the Head must be the
lightest, the Shoulders less light, and so losing by degrees.

Sattins, Silks, or the like bright shining Stuffs which have certain bright
Reflections exceeding Light, sudden bright Glances, especially where the Light
falls brightest; and so the Reflections are less bright, by how much the Garment
falls more inward from the Light.

Directions about choosing Pencils.
LEt your Pencils be clean, sharp Pointed, not cleaving in two, but full and
thick next the Quill, and so descending into a round and sharp Point: If you
find any one Hair longer than another, take it away with the Flame of a Candle.
You cannot be without two Dozen of Pencils at the least for all your Colors,
and their Shadows.

Those Pencils that you use for Gold and Silver, keep them only for that
purpose.

CHAP. VIII.
The Table to Work on, for Miniature; with the Manner of Working.
LEt it be an ordinary plain Card, or a pure thick and smooth Velom; Polish
them well, and with thin white Starch pass on it a piece of an Abortive, the
outside outward, and when it is dry* Polish it as follows: Make clean your
Grinding-Stone, and lay the Table the Parchment-side downwards on it, and so
Polish it with a Tooth on the Backside, and then that side that is toward the
Stone will be very smooth, and good to Work on.

Lay on your Card thus prepared, a Primer of Flesh Color, before you begin to
Work, tempered according to the Complexion of the Party whose Picture you are
to Draw. If Fair, you may temper the Complexion with White, Lake, and Red Lead
mingled together to a pretty quantity; but if your Complexion be Brown, then
mingle with the White and Red a little fine Masticot, or English Oker, or both;
but be sure this Ground, or Primer, be fairer than the Complexion of the Party
whose Picture you Draw; for you may darken it in Limning, but not lighten it,
for the general way is to Work them down whole.

The Ground thus tempered, lay on the Card with a greater Pencil than ordinary;
but lay it on smooth and clean from Spots, Hairs, or Dus^. Remember to fill
your Pencil full of Color, and rather thin and waterish, than thick; and with
two or three Sweeps lay it on very quick, and cover rather more than less, lest
you be not able to follow the same Color afterward. Besides, if you be long
in laying on the Ground, the Abortive will become rough, and rise from the Card.

Next, take a pretty large Shell of Mother of Pearl, and before you begin to
Work, temper certain little heaps of several Shadows for the Face, and lay them
handsomely severed about the Borders of the Shell. Some temper them as they Work
them; but this Way is more Methodical, Labor in Working.

First then, remember that in all these Shadows you mingle some little White,
for the Red in the Cheeks, Lips, etc. temper Lake, Red Lead, and a little White
together, for the Blue Indico and White: But note, that neither Bice, nor any
Black, is used in the Face.

For the fine Bluish and Grayish Colors, which are the faintest and weakest
Shadows, White, a little English Oaker, and a little Indico, (and if you will)
add a little Masticot, or Pink, which will give that Shadow a good Grace, so it
be not too Green; for the deeper Shadows, White English Oaker, and Vmber; and
for the dark and hard Shadows in many Pictures use Lake, and Pink, mixed with
Vmber; they make an excellent and Fleshy Shadow. The varieties of Shadows are
so great, that no certain Rule can be given for them, your own Discretion and
Observation Life must be your best Guide.

The Light to Work by.
LEt it be somewhat Clear, and Darkish, with soft and gentle Reflections upon
the Party you Draw; for hard and bright Lights make hard and unpleasant
Shadows. Let your Light (if conveniently you can) be toward the North; let it
be high, and let the Shadows fall sloping Work will be rounder and fairer.
Place your self to your desire, that the Light may strike Side-long from the
Left Hand to the Right; and observe, that in all your Work it will show to the
best advantage, being turned and seen to the same Light it was wrought to. Let
a Saucer of clean Water be always on your Right Hand vvhere-withal to wash your
Pencils, together with a Brush-Pencil to cleanse your Work from Dust, and a
sharp Penknife to take away such Spots, or Hairs, as may mix with your
Colors. You may likewise cover your Picture with a small Paper, whereon to
try your Pencil before you begin.

All things thus accommodated, Draw the Lines or Perfile of the Face very
faint, with Lake and White mixed, for you may mend it then with a stronger
Stroke. The Line thus Drawn (in which be exact) observe the deeper and more
remarkable Shadows, and with some faint Color of Lake and White, give some
slight Touches somevvhat roughly of those Shadows for your better Memory.

The Lines of the Face thus Drawn somewhat sharp and neat, Draw out the fashion
and posture of that Part of the Body that you intend to add to the Face, which
commonly is not lower than the Shoulders. And this you may Draw with a darker
Color.

CHAP. IX.
The first Sitting, and Lead-Colouring.
AT the first only Dead-colour the Face, not meddling with Hand, or Apparel.
This first Sitting will take up three or four Hours, to be exact; the second
Sitting will take up four or five Hours; for in about that time you are to go
over the Face curiously, observing whatsoever may conduce to the likeness
(which is the principal thing,) or the Judicious Coloring and Observation of
the several Graces, Beauties, or Deformities of the Face, as they appear in
Nature; or else in close, sharp, neat, elegant Workmanship, with sweetness of
the Shadows, and smooth Touching of the Colors.

The third Sitting is commonly a Work of about two or three Hours, and is spent
in closing what was before Imperfect, and Rough; but principally in giving to
every deep Shadow the strong Touches and Deepning, as well in the dark Shadow
of the Face, as in the Eyes, Eyebrows, Hair, etc. and these Touches and
Observations are always the last part of your business, and never to be done
until all the Apparel, Hair, etc. be finished; for this being done with
Judgment, adds exceedingly to the Life, and roundness of the Picture.

Of Lead Coloring.
LEad Coloring, must be done the roughest and boldest of all; having Drawn the
Face with Lake and White as aforesaid, take the said Color with Vermillion,
Tempering it to the Color of Red in the Cheeks and Lips, but very faintly; for
remember that both in this and in all Colors of Limning, you may add when you
please, to make your Color Deeper or Stronger, but never make your Color too
deep; for then you can hardly help it, without spoiling or defacing your
Picture; because, as I have said, you never lighten in this Art, except the two
specks in the Eyes, and a little of the Hair. The first Color you are to begin
the Face with, is the Reds of the Cheeks and Lips somewhat strongly, the bottom
of the Chin; if the party be Beardless, over and under the Eyes you will
perceive a delicate and Faint Redness, and underneath the Eyes, inclining
somewhat to a Purple Color, which in Fair and Beautiful Faces is ordinary, and
must be carefully observed. The Ear is commonly Reddish, and sometimes the
Roots of the Hair; all this you must work after the manner of Washing, or
Hatching, drawing the Pencil along, and with Facility and gentle Strokes,
rather washing and wiping it, than with pricks to pick it, as many affect to
do: But the manner of working must be the Fruit of your own Industry; for now
Rule can be prescribed for it, beyond your natural Dexterity.

To conclude, in your Dead Coloring, wash over and cover your Ground, and
Complexion with this Red, and the following, Shadows, not coming to be exact,
but rather bold and judicious; for though it be never so rough at the first,
yet its in your power to make it neat in the close. The Red being Work is the
Faint Blues, about the Corners of the Eyes, and the Grayish and Bluish Shadows
under the Eyes; and about the Temples, which in like manner you are to work,
from the uppermost part of the Face, almost all over, but exceeding Faint, by
degrees sweetning your Shadows, or deepning it as the Lights fall hard or
gentle. In going over the Face, be sure to make out the hard Shadows in the
dark side of the Face, under the Nose, Chin, and Eyebrows; Work together into
an equal roundness, not giving Affection to any particular part of the Face,
but rising all the parts curiously; by which means you will better observe the
Likeness, Roundness, Posture and Coloring. The Fainter and Lighter Shadows
being done, and somewhat smoothed and wrought into the Red, you may go over the
Hair, disposing of it into such Foldings, as may best become Picture. You must
at the first only draw them with Color, as near as you can suitable to the
Life, and after them roughly as the rest; and then once more peruse your Work,
and fill up the bare and empty places, which are uncovered with Color; and for
a parting Blow, deepen it more strongly than before, still carefully observing
the Life, and deepen not too fast, but by degrees.

CHAP. X.
The Second Sitting.
THe Second Sitting will take up 5 or 6 Hours, more or less as you intend to
bestow pains; Party being set just in his former Posture, you are most exactly
to observe, and more curiously with your Pencil to draw the several
Delineaments, and Varieties of Nature, which before you had rudely Traced out,
wherein there can be no more said but this; that you must use again the same
Colors, in the same places you did at the first, working and sweetning the
same one into another, that nothing be left in the Work with a hard Edge, or
uneven; sweeten them with somewhat a sharper Pencil than you did at the first,
that your Shadows may be soft and smooth, being dispersed, and gently extended
in and toward the lighter part of the Face, like Vapor or Smoke. But be sure
when you have proceeded thus far, you are carefully to observe the aforesaid
Shadows and Colors, and by little and little, Work them over into one another;
when you have wrought an Hour or two, it will be time to lay your Ground behind
the Picture, to Color the Apparel, and what else you please.

The Ground behind the Picture is commonly Blue, or Crimson, something like
Satin, or Red Velvet Curtains; If Blue, first wet the Card with a Waterish
Blue (after you have with a small Pencil, and the same Color go about the
Purfile of the Face and Body) and then with a reasonable great Pencil full of
Color, swiftly Color it all over, suffering no part to dry until all be
covered, and by this means it will lie even.

If you would have your Ground Crimson like Satin, mark out with Indian Lake,
where, and in what places you would have those strong and hard Lights to fall,
which are seen in Satin, and Velvet; there lay your Lights with a thin
waterish Lake, and while it is wet, with a stronger and darker Color of Lake,
thick Ground, lay in the deepnings and strong Shadows, close by the Lights; the
best way is to take a piece of Taffety, etc. and work it by the Life.

When the Ground is laid, you will find the Picture to be strangely changed,
the Beauty of the Grounds will so dead the Picture; therefore lay all your
Lines over with a flat White, and the Apparel with fitting Colors, only flat
without heightning or deepning; then go over the Face again, reducing the
Shadow to as much neatness as you can, Dravving the Lines of the Eyelids,
expressing the Red dark Nostril, the Shadows entrance into the Ears, the
deepness of the Eyebrows, and the most perspicuous Marks of the Face, with a
more sharp and curious Pencil than before.

Leave not the Ground too hard upon the Face with an Edge, but with your
Pencil drive in the Colors of the Ground into the out- Line of the Face, that
when the Work is done, the Ground may seem a great way behind the Picture,
and the Face it self may seem to stand forwards, and off from the Ground,
raising it by darkning the Ground on the light side of the Picture, and below
on the dark. Then go over the Hair, heightning and deepning it, as the Life
directs, and gently dravving the Lines of those Locks of Hair uppermost, and
behind over the Ground, which else look hard and unpleasant.

If when you have done the second Sitting, and the party gone, or weary with
Sitting (as commonly they are) and yet the Work is rough (as it is not possible
in so small a time, to bring of curious a Work to Perfection) in his absence
spend some time by your self in Polishing, and working it to Perfection,
filling up the empty places, and sweetning the Shadows that be hard; which
being done, begin with the Linen and Apparel, marking out the several Folds
and Shadows that you shall find in the Life; heighten the Linen with the
purest White, and deepen it with Faint Shadows made of Black, White, a little
Yellow, or else Blue. Your Black must be deepned with Ivory Black, and if in
working in the heightning and light Reflection you mingle with your ordinary
Black a little Lake and Indico, or rather a little Litmus in stead of Indico,
you shall find the Black to render a rare Reflection, like to that of well Dyed
Satin; especially if your Lights be strong and hard.

CHAP. XI.
The Third Sitting.
THis Sitting will be wholly spent in giving the strong Observations necessary
for the rounding the Face; which you will see better to do, the Apparel, Hair,
and Ground being already finished. In this Sitting curiously observe whatsoever
may conduce to the likeness, as Scars, Moles, Glancings of the Eyes, Extending,
or Contracting of the Mouth, narrowing the Eyes in Laughing and Jovial Aspect;
and you must be sudden and ready to catch your Observations, and to express
them with a bold and quick Hand, remembering not to deepen too fast.

In Armor lay liquid Silver flat and even, which being dried, burnish with a
Tooth fitted in a Pencil Stick for that purpose; then Temper the Shadow for it
of Silver, Indico, Litmus, and a little Vmber; and Work your Shadows upon, and
over your Silver, according to the Life; the heightning is your bright
Burnished Silver, your deepning the deepest part of the Shadow, the thinner
part whereof, must be neatly wrought into the Silver; and for your Shadow, take
English Oaker Tempered with Liquid Gold. There is a Stone growing in an Oxes
Gall, which being Ground, and Tempered with Gold, is excellent for all Gold
Works; and gives an excellent Luster and Beauty in your Shadowing, which in the
deepest and darkest Shadows, must be mixed with Black, the heightning must be
the purest and finest Liquid Gold; the manner of working is as follows.

If in any Gold Work there is Carving or Embossing, and that in your lighter
parts it must be Sparkling, you may very finely express it, by raising in those
high and round places a little heap of the Gall Stone, or English Oaker, by
often touching with your Pencil full of Color, and resting Work; that done,
cover over your raised Work with Gold, and you shall find it exceeding Fair and
Bright.

The like do in Silver, to express the round^ess, and Luster of the Pearl; the
Ground must be White and Indico, the Shadow Black, with a little Pink.

Diamonds are expressed with flat Liquid Silver, Cheristone Black, and the
deepest Ivory Black; the Silver dried and Burnished, is best for the lightning,
the stronger and darker your Shadow is, the fairer is your Diamond.

CHAP. XII.
Of Drawing Beasts, Birds and Flowers.
YOU shall find amongst Beasts some more difficult than others, and that for
two Reasons; first, for a clean making and neat Shape, together with the finest
of the Coat and Skin; secondly, for their Nimbleness, both which for an
Example, you may see in a Horse whose Lineaments are both so curious, and Coat
so fine, that many Sinews and Veyns are seen in him.

Note, for the manner of Drawing the Horse or any other Beast, begin with your
Black Lead, or Coal at the Forehead, drawing downwards the Nose, Mouth, upper
and neither Chap, ending your Line at the Throat; then searching it again where
you began from the Forehead, over the Head, Ears and Neck, continuing it until
you have given the full Compass of the Buttock, proceeding also to the hinder
Foot; then begin at the Throat, compassing the Breast; which done, bring out
the Fore-Feet; then finish the Belly-Stroak ending at the hinder Leg where you
left; which done, draw forth the other hinder Leg, and so proceed to the Tail,
Tongue, Teeth, Eyes, and lastly to the Shadows; and this Method observe in the
Drawing of all Beasts, and in what Form soever they stand.

Beasts most easy to be drawn, are the Sheep, Cow, Hog, Camel, Dromedary,
Elephant, Fox, Wolf, Badger, Otter, Bear, Coney, Hare, Ass, Spaniel, and other
rough and thick haired Dogs, with diverse others too tedious to Name. The most
hard are the Horse, Unicorn, Lion, Leopard, Tiger, Panther, Stag, Greyhound,
Ape, etc.

In Drawing of these and all other Beasts, the better you observe their Action
and Shape, the better you may be sure will your Work be esteemed; therefore be
Experienced in the True and Lively Shapes, and to render them in their proper
Colors.

Of BIRDS.
IN Drawing Birds, begin first with the Head, and bring from under the Throat,
the Breast-Line down to the Legs, where rest; then begin at the Pinion to make
the Wing, which being joined to the Back, is soon finished; the Eyes, Legs and
Train must be the last; and be sure you make the farther Leg ever shorter, as
you do in Beasts. For the Feathers, take your beginning at the Head very small,
and so proceed downwards greater and greater; for the true Drawing of Birds,
you may procure some living ones.

The Birds most easily to be Drawn, are all sorts of Water-Foul: the next are
those of Prey, and the hardest are those that are Tame. The Action of Birds is
Flying, Pruning themselves, Bathing, Swiming, etc.

FLOWERS, FLIES, etc.
FOr Flowers, Flies, and such like, I will leave to your own Discretion, as
being not so hard, nor of so great concernment; yet very delightful to the Eye,
if well performed. For your better assistance observe these Directions: Begin
it in the middle; then Draw your Lines equally divided from thence to the Line
of the Compass, which is the hardest; and then proceed to the Shades, and other
Touches, as the Beards, Seeds, etc. You may make your Flowers either open, in
the Bud, or otherwise; and in the same manner as you Draw your Flowers, so Draw
your Leaves, making only your Out-stroaks first with a Pencil, or Coal, before
you give them their Veins and Jaggedness.

For Butter-flies, Bees, Wasps, Grasshoppers, and the like, some are also more
easy to be Drawn Flowers, I would advise you in time of Year, to get as many
several sorts of them as you can, which you may preserve in Boxes (if kept
from Air) a long time.

But do not keep them too hot, as near the Fire, for that will dry them too
much, and also take away the true Color from them; also do not Touch them too
much, nor lay one upon another, for that also spoils them.

CHAP. XIII.
Of LANDSKIPS.
A Landscape is the expressing the perfect Vision of the Earth, and all things
placed Horizon, as Mountains, Hills, Valleys, Rivers, Seas, Rocks, Groves,
Woods, Forests, Plains, Castles, Towns, Ruins, etc. in which for the better
Adornment, there may be several sorts of Beasts, Fowl, etc. in all which great
Care ought to be taken. I shall give you some Directions therein.

Take fine Vellom, strain it on a thin Frame; fasten it with Starch, or Glue,
and work on it without paisting it on a Board. This is the Italian manner: You
may Work it on a Card prepared with an Abortive, as aforesaid. Begin with the
Skies, and if there be any Shinings or Reflections of the Sun, let those be your
first Work, always observing to represent a fair Horizon.

The yellow and whitest Beams of the Sun must be wrought with Masticot, and
White, and lay by that Pencil (except washed clean;) for if any Masticot be
mingled with Blue for the Clouds, or the like, it will make all greenish, and
so spoil it.

Work the Bluish-Sky and Clouds with Smalt, and not Bice, which is too green a
Blue: You may likewise use Vltramarine, were it not too Dear.

At your first Working, Dead-colour all your Piece, and leave nothing
uncovered. Let your Pencil be ever full of Color; but lay not your Colors on
too thick and rough. Work your Sky down in the Horizon fainter and fainter, as
you draw nearer the Earth; unless it be a Tempestuous Sky. Let your remote
Mountains appear sweet and misty, almost indistinguishable, mixing (as it were)
with the Clouds aloft in the Air. Your next Ground must be of a bluish
Seagreen; and as you draw near your first Ground, let them decline sometimes
into redish, and sometimes into yellowish.

Your first Ground must be ever of the Color of Earth, which is dark,
yellowish, brown, green, etc. easier to be distinguished by the Pencil, than
otherwise: Of the same Color (or near it) must be your first Trees, and still
as they are removed in distance, they must lose their Colors, Largeness, and
Perfection.

For the nearest, darkest, and saddest Hills lay burnt Vmber; and for the light
places, mix some Yellow with your Vmber. For the next Hills lay Copper-Green
well thickened on the Fire, as aforesaid. The next Hills further off, mingle
some yellow Berries with the Green; and let the fourth degree be done with
green Verditer; and the farthest and faintest places with Vltramarine, Smalt,
or Bice. The Highways are commonly done with Red-Lead, and White; but for
variety sake use yellow Oker, which must be Shadowed with burnt Vmber: This
Color is also to be used for Sandy-Rocks, and Hills. The Rocks ought to be
done with various Colors, in some places with Blew and White; in others with
Black and White; in some with Vmber and White, and in others with Red Lead and
White, and such other Colors as resemble Rocks; but observe always to do them
with the pleasantest Colors you can. The Bodies of Trees must be done with
burnt Vmber, and the Leaves with such Greens as the Ground is. And the whole
Landscape must be Shadowed after you have laid on your first Colors. The darker
Greens must Shadow the lighter: Spanish Brown must then Shadow Red Lead, and
White; the Water must be done with Black, Verditer, and White. Sometimes
Shadowed with Copper-Green; a little blue Verditer, when the Banks cast a Green
Shade upon the Water: At other times it must be shadowed with Blue Verditer
alone, and where the Water is very dark in the shadows use Indico, some Blue,
Verditer, and Copper-Green well thickened.

Let every thing be made to have its true Motion, as when Trees are shaken with
the Wind, the small Boughs must be represented as if they struck one against
the other by their yiedling; In a Word, Trees ought to be expressed with great
Judment, the Leaves folding, and falling one over another.

In your Land-skip always show a fair Horizon. And express the Heavens more or
less, either over-cast by Clouds, or with a Serene Sky, showing the Sun
Rising, or Setting over some Hill or Mountain. The Moon and Stars are not to be
seen, but in Night-pieces.

When you show the Light of the Sun, be sure that all the Light of your Hills,
Buildings, Trees, or any Figure be given thitherwards. Shadow all your Clouds
from the Sun, and take a great care to lessen your Bodies by their distance,
and not to represent them so plain as if they were nigh at Hand: As suppose you
were to Draw a Land-skip, in which some part were to be in distance 8 or 10
Miles off, in such a case do not express any particular Sign, as in Buildings,
the Balconies Turrets, or the like; or in Figures the Lively Colors, but
represent them as weakly, and faintly as possible, because all these
particulars through the Greatness of their Distance are taken away.

The best way of making Land-skips, is that way which has been practiced of
late days by our best Workmen, which is to make them shoot, away one part
lower than another, and not as many do, in making the Land-skip to ascend
higher and higher, nay so high, that it does appear to touch the Clouds, as if
they had stood in a Bottom, when they took the Draught thereof, which is
altogether improper, for what Prospect can be discerned at the Bottom of a
Hill; therefore the Hill the highest, and so the rest that are farther to shoot
away under, that the Land-skip may appear to be taken from the Top of a Hill.

Make all your Lights and shadows to fall one way, both upon the Ground, as
also upon Trees, and all things else.

Clouds, require to have their Motion, sometimes violently Condensated into
Rain, Hail, Lightning, and the like; and sometimes gathered Winds.

Note, that all your Motions which are caused by the Wind, must of necessity be
made to move one way, because the Wind does blow but one way, at once.

The Motions of the Sea are to be observed, by Representing the diverse Movings
of the Waters, as the Flashings of the Waters upon Boats, Ships or the like,
and to be Represented as it were Floating up and down the Waters; You must
Waters, descending from high places.

Be sure always to place Light against Dark, and Dark against Light, the
meaning is, that the only way to remove the Ground, and extend the Prospect, is
by opposing Lights to Shadows, yet so as they must ever lose their force and
vigor proportional as they remove from the Eye; and the stronger Shadows ever
nearest hand (or as they call it) on the first Ground.

If you draw your Landscape according to your Invention, it is good to observe
some Directions, viz. to show in it the fair side of some City, Haven, Forest,
curious House with delightful Gardens, etc. Also Country Villages, a Farm-house
with Barns, Stables, Water-mills, Wind-mills, etc. Also the Ruins of Castles,
Monastaries, Churches, or the like Pilgrims traveling through Wildernesses,
Shepherds keeping Sheep, etc. These and a Thousand more Inventions are to be
observed in Landskips.

When you color any Buildings, do it with as much variety of pleasant Colors,
as is proper to Nature, and not unnatural.

Thus much for Directions to those that can spare time for the attaining this
noble Art: Now to those that are unskilful, or have not spare-time to spend in
the practice of these Directions aforesaid, yet are desirous to take the Copies
of Prints or Pictures which are not to be obtained, let them follow these
Directions.

CHAP. XIV.
How to take a true Draught of any Picture.
TAke a Piece of white Lanthorn Horn, and lay it upon your Picture; then with a
hard-nib'd Pen made with a Ravens Quill, draw the Out-Stroaks of your Picture
upon the Horn; and when it is dry, breath two or three times upon the Horn; and
press it hard upon a Piece of clean White Paper a little wet, and the Picture
that you drew on the Horn will stick fast to the Paper.

Also take a Sheet of Fine Paper, and rub it all over on one side with
Vermillion, or Black Lead; then lay this side of the Paper which is colored,
upon another Sheet of White Paper; then lay the Picture you would Copy, upon
the other side of the Sheet so colored, and with a Ravens Quil, as aforesaid,
draw neatly over all the chief or Master-stroaks of the Picture, and they will
all appear on the Paper.

Also take some Printers Black, grind it fine, and temper it with Fair Water;
then take a Pen, and dip it therein, and with it draw over all the
Master-stroaks, and Out-lines with the Muscles; then with a Sponge wet a clean
Sheet of Paper, and clap the Paper upon it, pressing it very hard, and the
Strokes will all be on the Paper.

CHAP. XV.
To make Pastils.
YOU need not be overcurious in grinding your Colors exceeding fine; but be
sure to mix them well together; and to the Colors add a reasonable quantity of
Plaster of Paris burnt, and finely sifted; mix them well together thick and
stiff like moist Clay; then take the Color off the Stone, and betwixt the
Palms of your Hands rub it out as long, or as little as you please, and dry them
in the Sun or Wind, not by the Fire; when they are dry, with a Penknife scrape
them to a fine sharp Point at one end.

Remember that when you temper fast and firm Colors, as Vmber, Oaker, Indico,
etc. you use the less quantity of Plaster of Paris; but where your Colors are
loose, and sandy, or Smalt etc. add the greater quantity.

CHAP. XVI.
Rules for Painting in Oil.
HAving already treated of Drawing, and Painting in Miniature, there requires
the Painting in Oil, the chief difference being in the mixing them with Oil,
and preparing them on the Pallet fit to work with; yet you must take notice,
that some Colors fit for Miniature are improper for Oil: I shall not descend
to the particulars, for you may be supplied either with a whole Set of
Colors, or with what you have occasion for ready made up in Bladders and sold
by most Colour-Shops.

Of these Colors some are to be tempered on Pallet at first; some must be
ground, and then tempered; and others must be burnt, then ground and tempered.
Those tempered on the Pallet without grinding in Oil, are Vermillion, Bice,
Verditer, Smalt, Vltramarine, Lamb-Black, Masticot, and Orpment. Those to be
burnt, and then ground and tempered, are Cerus, Ivory, Vmber, and Oaker; and
those that must be ground in Oil, and then to be tempered on your Pallet, are
all the rest of the Colors used in Oyl-Painting; White-Lead, Cerus,
Flake-White, Seacoal-Black, Charcoal, Colens-Earth, Lake, Kermine, Red-Lead,
Ornetto, Verdigreace, Terra-Vert, Pink, Masticot, Smalt, Spanish Brown, etc.
Oil Colors (if not timely used) will have a Skin grow over them; to prevent
which, (for those that you will grind your self) put the said Colors into
Glasses, with Fair Water over them; but for those that you buy ready prepared
in Bladders, that trouble, as also that of burning and

The Materials for Painting in Oil are, the Easel, on which your Piece to work
on is set; the Pallet used for putting on the Colors for your Work, and there
tempered and mixed together as occasion requires, with a thin Knife; the
Straining-Frame, to which is nailed the Primed Cloth you are to paint upon; the
Stay or Molstick, being a small Stick about a Yard long, which is to rest your
Arm upon, when you are at work, Pencils, which must be of several Sizes,
lengthned with neat Pieces of Brazil-Wood for your better commanding and
holding them. The several sorts of Pencils are generally known by these names,
Ducks-Quills fitched and pointed, Goose-Quills fitched and pointed,
Swans-Quills fitched and pointed; Jewelling Pencils, and Bristle Pencils. As
for the Priming-Cloths on which you Paint, they are cheaper bought, than to be
troubled with the

Upon the Pallet let your Colors be so disposed at convenient distances, that
there may be room for the mixing of some of them together for the making of
proper or mixed Colors, for the Face, Garments, and other occasions, as
Shadows, etc. and let the White be next your Thumb, it being most used; for
with it all Shadows are to be lightened.

Further Directions in Painting.
HAving all your Pencils, which should be two of a sort, as two Duck-Quills
fitched, and two pointed; the like of all the rest: These Pencils being thus in
a readiness in your left Hand, with the Pallet on your Thumb prepared with
Colors, proceed to Work, as follows:

Set the Frame and Cloth on the Easel at a convenient height, so that sitting
on a Stool you may have the Face of the Picture something higher than your own.
Let the Easel be set to the Light, which must come in on your left Hand,
casting the Light toward the Right.

Let the Person you are to Draw, sit before you at about four or five Foot
distance, and in the Posture you design the Picture. Then with a Croyon, Coal,
or the like, draw the Proportion of the Face upon the Cloth, putting in the
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Ears, Hair, etc. Then with your Swans-Quill Pointed-Pencil,
begin to Paint some of the lightest Parts of the Face with the lightest Color;
as the heightning of the Nose, Forehead, and the Cheek-Bone of the lightest
side: Then the mean Parts; as the Chin, over the upper Lip, and the Cheek-Bone
of the dark Side; and so proceed gradually until you come to the reddest Part
of all.

Lay faint greenish Shadows in convenient places, and where it is necessary to
soften harsher Shadows.

The faint and light Parts being thus done, take a Goose-Quill pointed, or a
Ducks-Quill fitched Pencil, and begin at the Eyes to Shadow with Lake, going
over the Nose, Mouth, Compass of the Ear, etc. before you lay on any Color,
wiping it lightly over with a fine Rag, or Cloth, to prevent the overcoming of
the other Colors.

The light and dark Colors being thus put in, take a large Fitch-Pencil, and
sweeten the Colors therewith, by going over the Shadows with a clean soft
Pencil; and thus doing will intermix the Colors one into another, so that they
will look soft, and as if all laid on together.

At the second Sitting, begin again with clean Pencils of such bigness as your
Work requires: And at this Sitting you must observe well the Person whose
Picture you Draw, taking notice of all the Features, and to amend what you find
amiss at your first Sitting: Then heighten, or deepen the Shadows, as you see
occasion. And lastly, Take a Goose-Quill Bristle, and put in the Hair about the
Face (if any,) and rub in the greater Hair with the greater Bristle, heightning
it up with the Goose-Quill Pencil.

CHAP. XVII.
How to Distemper Colors.
TAke about a Quarter of a Pound of Ising-glass, and put it into a Skellet,
with about Water; let it boil gently until the Ising-glass is dissolved, which
done, pour it out of the Skellet hot into a dry Bladder, for if it be cold it
will turn into a Jelly; then tie up the Bladder, that no Dust get in, and hang
it up in some convenient place where the Sun comes, for about a Month, by which
time the heat of the Sun will rot, or turn it to fair Water, which Water put
into Glasses for your use, for it is better than Gum-water; for it heightens
the Colors, sets a fair Gloss upon them, and preserves them from tarnishing,
and resembles Oyl-Colours as to the Gloss. The Water is made weaker, if too
strong, by putting a little fair Water into the Glass, or as you Work with it;
for the thicker the Jelly is, the stronger will the Water be.

CHAP. XVIII.
To Paint in Frisco.
THis way requires not only a quick and ready Hand, but also a profound
Judgment; and that for these Reasons: First, Because the Painter must begin no
more in a Day than he can finish; for this kind of Painting is to be done upon
the Wall, or Ceiling, whilst the Lime Lime; as also the Wall will gather a
certain hard Crust, which either with the Cold, Frost, or Heat, will destroy
that part which is not finished. And, Secondly, Because the Colors show after
one fashion when they are first laid on, and the Wall remains wet, and of
another when they are dry. The Colors that are used in this manner of Work,
are only such as are Earths; for such as are made of Minerals are obnoxious,
and will spoil the Work.

Now for preparing your Colors, they are to be Ground, as formerly has been
showed, with fair Water, and are to be tempered with the same; for if
tempered with Size, or Gum, the Wall will not continue its clearness; and
besides, the Colors in a short time will decay, and turn Black.

If you mix your Colors with the Whites of Eggs beaten to an Oil, it is very
good to preserve them.

Let your Pencils be long, and soft, that your Work may be smooth: And let your
Pencils and Brushes be full of Color, to flow freely from them.

CHAP. XIX.
Rules for the disposing or placing of Pictures, and Paintings.
LEt the best Pieces be so placed as to be seen with a single Light, by which
means the shadow falls naturally, and the more under the Light the better.

Let the Porch or Entrance into the House, be adorned with Rustic Figures, and
things Rural. In the Hall Shep-herds, Peasants, Cattle, Sheep and the like.

The Staircase, ought to be set out with Pieces of Buildings, Land-skips,
History, etc. the like in the Dining, and Withdrawing Rooms, but with those of
better Painting.

For the Galleries, let there be good Histories. In Banqueting and Summer
Houses, put those Pieces that seem cheerful and merry; with good Land-skips.

In your Bed Chambers, place your own, with your Wives, Children and Relations.

If your Pictures hang high, let them incline something forward at the Top,
otherwise the Visual Beams of the Eye, extending to the Top of the Picture,
appear further off than those at the Foot.

For the cleansing Old, or Foul Pictures.
TAke good Wood Ashes finely searced; or else Smalt, or Powder Blue, and with a
Spung and fair Water gently wash over the Picture, (taking great care of the
shadows) then dry it very well with a clean Cloth; which done, Vernish it over
with some good Vernish; but such as may wash off, if occasion requires.

HERALDRY.
ARMS according to their Original use are Tokens, or Resemblances signifying
some Act or Quality of the Bearer, either Military or Civil, and of sundry
Forms of Bearing, for the adorning their Shields, Banners, Coaches, Houses and
the like. And there is (as it were) a kind of Sympathy between the Arms and
their Bearers, insomuch that he that Dishonourably uses the Arms of any Man,
seems to offer an Bearer.

The Skill of Armory consists in Blazoning and Marshalling. By Marshalling is
understood the joining of diverse Arms in one Shield: By Blazoning is meant the
Displaying; or expressing a Coat of Arms in its proper Colors, and Metals; for
to lay Color upon Color, and Metal upon Metal, is a great fault, and a
different Form of Blazon makes the Arms not the same; And you must avoid
Repetition of words, a Concise way being

In Blazoning, first begin with the Field, and then proceed to the Charge; and
if there be sundry things charged in the Field, whether of one, or of diverse
kinds, you must name that first which is most Predominate.

The Blazon of Arms consists in their Accidents and Parts, and such Accidents
are Tincture and Differences.

Tincture (as Guillim notes) is a variable Hew of Arms, and is as well common
to Differences Arms, as to Arms themselves, and the same is Distributed into
Colors, and Furs.

Color is an External Dye, wherewith any thing is Colored, or Stained; or
else is the Gloss of any Body beautified with Light; and Color here mentioned,
is both General and Special; by General, is understood the Proper and Natural
Color of each particular thing, whether Natural or Artificial, of what kind
soever they are, Illustrated

Things Born in their Natural Colors, are to be Blazoned proper, and not to
mention the Color.

Other things there are in Armory, that have only Name attributed to them, and
no Color Specified in the Blazon thereof, the Name being sufficient to express
the same, although the Form is all one and the same; and that is, the
Resemblance of a Ball or Bullet, the Names of which, as also Colors
Appropriated unto them are as follows. 1, Besants whose Color is Or. 2,
Plates are Argent. 3, Hearts are Azure. 4, Pellets or Ogresses are Sable. 5,
Torteauxes are Gules. 6, Pomeis are Vert. 7, Gospes are Purpure. 8, Orenges are
Ten, and 9 Guzes are Sanguine; and in these 9 are all the Colors usually
made use of in Blazonry.

Arms are Blazoned by Metals and Color, by Precious Stones, and by Planets. By
Metals and Colors when belonging to Gentlemen, under the Degree of Nobiles
Minores, as Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen; By Precious Stones,
when to those of Nobiles Majores, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and
Barons; and by Planets when to Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes.

Metals and Colors. Precious Stones. Planets. Or. Topaz. Sol. Argent. Pearl.
Luna. Gules. Ruby. Mars. Azure. Saphir. Jupiter. Sable. Diamond. Saturn. Vert.
Emerald. Venus. Purpure. Amethist. Mercury. Ten. Jacynthe. Dragons Head.
Sanguin. Sardonix Dragons Tail.

These Colors are distinguished from each other, by several Hatches or Marks
in Graving, as are Represented in the Plate of Arms, for Examples of Bearings
Number 1 signifying Or, Number 2 Argent, 3 Gules, 4 Azure, 5 Sable, 6 Vert, and
for the three last Purpure, Ten, and Sanguin being seldom used, are expressed
by Strokes overthwart the Shield, as in Number 7.

From Metals and Colors, I shall proceed to Furs, used as well in Doublings of
the Mantles appertaining to Coat Armor, as in the Coat Armor themselves.

Furs consist of one Color alone, or of more than one.

Furs that are Compounded of two Colors only, are sorted either with Black,
and are either Or Black, mixed with White, as Ermine. and Ermines.
Or Black mixed with Yellow, as Ermeneis. and Pean.

without Black, such are according to Leigh Vairy, Argent and Azure, and Verry,
Or and Gules, or the like Color.


For your better Explanation, Ermine is when the Field is Argent, and the
Powdring is Sable, as Number 8. Ermines, when the Field is Sable and the
Powdring is Argent, as Number 9. Ermenois when the Field is Or, and the
Powdring Sable, as Number 10, and Pean is when the Field is SaSable, Io the
Right Honble. Charles Lord (...) Earl of Worcester, Son and heir of the Right
Noble Henry Duke of Beau^^^rd Marquest and Earl of Worcester etc.a

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Rich. Blome

The Body of Heraldry.

To the Rt: Worshipful S^* Iustinam Isham of Lampor in Northamptonshire
Baronet. This Plate is Humbly D* D. by Ric* Blome

and the Powdring Or, as Number 11. Vaire is represented by Number 12; and for
Vairy Copy, or Potent-Counter-Potent, which is another sort of Fur where the
Colors must be expressed in the Blazoning, as in Number 13.

BORDVRS.
BORDVRS were first devised for distinction of, Coat Armor of particular
Persons of Plain, Engrailed, Invected, Indented, Checky, Gobonated, Vaire,
Counter-Compony, and also Charged; Examples of some of which are taken notice
of in the Table, which may serve as Examples for any other.

More Modern Differences, and now used in Coat Armor, are Labels, Crescents,
Mullets, Martlets, Annulets, and Flower-de-Lis. Examples of Table, under the
Head of Modern Differences, by which every House ought to be distinguished from
the Elder; the second Brother, or House, bearing the Crescent, the third the
Mullet, the fourth the Martlet, the fifth the Annulet, and the sixth the
Flower-de-Lis. The Label being the distinction of the Elder Brother, during the
Life of his Father. But as to Daughters, they bear their Fathers Coat Armor
without any distinction.

Parts of Arms.
THe Parts of Arms are the Escocheon, and the Ornaments without it.

The Accidents in the Escocheon are Points and Abatements. Points are certain
places in the Escocheon diversely named, according to their several Position,
whereof some are in the Middle, and some Remote; those in the Middle, are in,
or Center of the Escocheon, and such are the Honor, the Fess, and the Nombril
Points.

The Fess Point is in the exact Center of the Escocheon; the Honor Point is
next above the same in a direct Line; and the Nombril Point is next underneath
the Fess Point.

Remote Points are those placed at a further distance from the Center of the
Escocheon; and of these some are Superior, and some Inferior. The Superior
are those that have their being in Escocheon, and of these there are Middle,
and Extremes; the Middle is the precise Middle of the Chief between the two
Extremes: The two Superior Extreme Points do possess the Corners of the chief
part of the Escocheon, and are called Dexter, and Sinister.

The Inferior Points do possess the Base of the Escocheon; and of these there
are also both Middle, and Remote. For the Explanation of all Escocheon in the
Table with Letters showing the same. And the knowledge of these Points are of
great use and concernment, and ought to be well observed.

ABATEMENTS.
AN ABATEMENT is an Accidental Mark annexed to Coat Armor, showing some
dishonorable Quality in the Bearer, whereby the Dignity of the Coat is abated.

They consist of Diminution, and Reversing.

Diminution is the blemishing of some particular Point of the Escocheon by some
Staynard Color, as Ten, Sanguine, or Purpure; or by reversing the Charge in
the Coat. But not knowing any that bear any Abatements in their Arms, it will
be to little purpose to tell what they are.

REWARDS of HONOR.
THere are several Forms of Charges, on which Rewards and Additions of Honor
are oft-times placed in Coats, as Cantons, Quarters, Escocheons, Girons,
Flasques, and Voiders; but those in most use are the three first, according to
Number 14, 15, 16, as Sable a Canton Or; Argent, a Quarter Azure; and Or, an
Escocheon Gules.

ESCOCHEONS, and the HONORABLE ORDINARIES.
ESCOCHEONS are either of one Tincture, or more than one: Those of more than
one, some are more predominate; and that is said to predominate, when some one
Metal, Color, or Fur is spread, or understood to be spread all over the
Surface of the Escocheon, which is termed the Field, or Shield. And in such
Escocheons as have in them more Tinctures than one (as most have) the Field and
Charge must be observed: And in your Blazoning first name the Field, and then
proceed to the Charge thereon; and if there be several Charges, then name that
first which is most predominate, and nearest the Field.

The Charge is that which possesses the Field, whether it be Sensitive, or
Vegetable; Natural, or Artificial; and is placed either throughout all the
Superficies of the Escocheon, or else in some special part of the same.

The common Accidents of Charges are Adumbration, or Transparency; or they are
Transmutation, or Counter-changing.

All Charges of Arms are either Proper, or Common, and in these the making and
manner of Bearing must be considered.

The making of the Ordinaries consists of Lines diversely composed, which is the
Matter whereof they are formed, and according to the diverse tracts and forms of
Lines, they receive their Shape and variation of Names; and the property of
these Lines are their Rightness, or Crookedness, which are set down in the
Table, being Strait, Engrailed, Invected, Waved, Nebule, Embatuled, or
Crenelle, Indented, and Dauncette.

The Honorable Ordinaries are the Bend, Cheveron, Cross, Fess, Chief, Pale,
Pike, Saltier, and Escoche^n; and were modernly invented for the Distinction of
Coat Armor; you will find their Forms or Shapes set down in the Plate of Arms.

These Ordinaries are Born sometimes of themselves, in plain Fields, sometimes
between a Charge, sometimes Charged, sometimes two or more of them joined
together in one Shield with a Charge, and sometimes Counter-changed; Examples
of all which are at large set down in a Volum of Heraldry,

The BEND does contain the Fifth part of the Field, in breadth, if Uncharged,
but if Charged then the third. It is said to Represent a Ladder, set Slope to
Scale the Walls of a City. This Ordinary is divided into a Bendlet, which is
limited to the Sixth part of the Shield; Into a Garter, which is the Moity of a
Bend; into a Cost which is the Fourth part of a Bend, and into a Ribon which is
the Moity of a Cost. In the Plate Arms, Number 17 Represents a Bend, which is
Charged with Pellets: Number 18 a Bendlet; Number 19 a Garter; Number 20 a
Cost; and Number 21 a Ribon.

There is also a Bend Sinister which goes thwart the Escocheon from the
Sinister Chief to the Dexter Base, which is quite contrary to the other Bend;
And this Bend is subdivided into a Scrape which is the Moity of the Bend, and
into a Batune which is the Fourth part of the Bend, Escocheon, Number 22
shows the Bend Sinister; Number 23 the Scrape, and Number 24 the Batune,
which must not extend to the extreme Points of the Escocheon, but only to be as
a Bar over the Charge.

Two Bends are also Born; Also Bendy of 6, or 8; and a Bend between two
Cottizes, according to the Examples, Number 25, 26, and 27.

The CHEVERON Represents the Rafters Women Priests. It takes up the 5th part of
the Shield, and is subdivided into the Cheveronel which is half the Cheveron;
and into a Coupleclose, which is the Moity of the Cheveronel; and this is not
Born, but by Pairs, except there be a Cheveron between them.

The Cheveron is sundry ways used in Bearings, as well as the Bend, and other
of the Honorable Ordinaries; Examples of which are in Table of Arms, which are
thus Blazoned, Number 28 Gules, on a Cheveron, Agent, three Mullets Sable. 29
Ermin, a Cheveron Couped Sable. 30 Azure, a Cheveron in Chief Argent. 31 Sable,
a Cheveron Rompe Argent. 32 Vert, a Cheveron Engrailed voyded Argent. 33 Gules,
three Cheveronels, reversed Argent. 34 Or, three Cheveronels, braced in the
Base of the Escocheon Sable. 35 Vert, a Cheveronel Argent. 36 Or, two Cheverons
Gules, and commonly 3 Cheverons, are born Lines.

The CROSS takes up the 5th Part of the Escocheon, but if charged then the
third: There are diverse sorts of Crosses, but those most usally Born amongst us
are set down in the Plate of ^^rms; and are thus Blazoned, Number 37 Argent, a
Cross Pierced Gules* 38 Or, a Cross Couped Sable. 39 Azure, a Cross Potence
Argent. 40 Vert, a Cross Pattee Fitchee Or. 41 Or, a Cross Molin Sable. 42
Gules, a Cross Botony Argent. 43 Azure, a Cross Croslet Argent. Cross Croslets
are Born more than one in a Shield, and likewise as well on, as between any of
the Ordinaries. 44 Or, a Cross Flory Sable. 45 Argent, a Cross Voyded Sable. 46
Argent, Cross Wavey Voyded Sable between 4 Torteauxes. 47 Ermin, a Cross Ragule
Gules.

Note, that any of the Crosses may be Born Fitchee, as also Pierced, or Quarter
Pierced, also between, or upon any of the Ordinaries.

The FESS contains the Third part of the Escocheon in breadth, and does
Occupy the Center of the Shield. This has formerly been taken for the Belt, or
Girdle of Honor, as dividing the Shield into two equal Parts.

The BAR differs not from the Fess, but only that it contains the Fifth part
of the Shield, whereas the Fess does possess but the Third. It is divided into
the Closet, which contains the Moity of the Bar, and into the Barulet, which is
half the Closet. The Bar is generally Born two in one Shield.

The Examples of the Fess and Bar in the Plate of Arms, are Number 48 Azure, a
Fess Wavey between 3 Flower-de-Lis Argent. 49 Argent, a Fess Humid Sable. 50
Argent, a Fess Per-Fess, indented Gules and Sable, between two Cottizes
Counterchanged. 51 Per Fess Sable, and Argent a Fess Batile, Counter-Batled
Counter-changed. 52 Per Fess Or, and Sable, a Fess Nebule Gules. 53 Azure 4
Fusils in Fess Argent. 54 Gules, two Bars Or. 55 Barry of six Or and Gules. 56
Ermin a Closet Vert. 57 Sable a Barulet Argent.

The CHIEF does contain the Third part of the Escocheon in depth. It is divided
into the Fillet, which contains the Fourth part of the Chief, and stands in
the Chief Point. This Ordinary is also subject to a Charge, and is Born with
strait and crooked Lines. The Examples of which are Number 58 Azure, a Chief
Indented Or. 59 Ermine, a Chief quarterly. Or, and Gules. 60, Or, a Chief
Checky Argent, and Azure. 61 Gules a Chief Argent surmounted by another, Or. 62
Argent, a Chief Sable in the nether part a Fillet Argent. 63 Azure three Bars
Argent, in Chief as many Bezants.

The PALE contains the third part of the Field; It is subdivided into the
Pallet, which is the Moity of the Pale, and is never to be charged with any
thing, neither must it be parted; and into an Endorse, which is the Fourth part
of the Pale, and is not used but when the Pale is between two of them. If the
Pale be upon any Beast, that is the Beast as it were behind it, then the Term
of Blazoning it is, he is Debrused with the Pale; but if the Beast be on the
Pale then he is supported by the Pale. The Examples for Pales in the Plate of
Arms are Number 64 Or, on a Pale Azure 3 Bezants. 65 Argent a Pale Gules,
between two Endorses Sable. 66 Vert, a Pallet Argent. 67 Party Per Pale Argent
and Sable, a Pale Counter-changed. 68 Argent, 3, Pallets Wavy Azure. 69 Paly of
six Argent and Gules.

The PILE, consists of twofold Lines, formed like a Wedge, and was a Warlike
Weapon, used amongst the Romans. It is by some not allowed to be one of the
Ordinaries. It is Born several ways, and more than one in a Shield, according
to the Examples, Number 70 Or, on a Pile Vert, 3 Garbs or Wheat Sheaves of the
Field. 71 Ermin, two Piles Sable. 72 Argent, 3 Piles, one issuing out of the
Chief, between two others reversed Azure. 73 Gules, a Pile waved issuing out of
the Dexter Corner Bendways Or. 74 Argent, a Triple Pile-^lory on the Tops,
issuing out of the sinister Base in a Bend Sable.

The SALTIER contains the fifth part of the Shield; but if charged, then the
third. This is said to be about the height of a Man, and was used to Scale the
Walls of a Town, being driven full of Pins, which served for Steps.

It is born with strait, or crooked Lines, with a Charge, or Charged,
Counterchanged, one Saltier per Saltier, a Saltier Counterchanged, and
Quarterly quartered, etc. according to the Examples in the Plate of Arms,
Number 75, Vert, a Saltier Engrailed Argent. 76 parted per Saltier Argent and
Gules, a Saltier Counterchanged. 77, Azure, a Saltier Quarterly quartered, Or
and Argent. 78, Gules, on a Saltier Or, another Sable. 79, Gyrony of four
Argent and Gules, a Saltier between four Mullets Counterchanged.

An ESCOCHEON contains the fifth part of the Shield, and must be placed in the
Fess-Point. This is also termed an Escocheon of Pretense, and is so Born by
those that Match with an Heiress, giving therein her Coat of Arms.

About an Escocheon is usually an Orle of something, as Martlets, Cinquefoils,
or the like, as in the Example 83. Sometimes it is born as an Orle it self, as
Example 81. Sometimes an Orle of two Pieces, that is, one within another, as
Example Escocheons without any Charge in them. Sometimes double, or single
Treasures (a Charge much used in Scotch Coats) as Example 84.

PARTITIONS.
PArtitions are such in which there is no Tincture, that is, Metal, Color or
Fur predominating in them, and are formed of sundry sorts of Lines of
Partition, occasioning often times Counterchanging, and Transmutation, and these
kind of are subject to be born Engrailed, Indented, Wavey, Invected,
Embattuled, Nebule or the like; Examples of which are in the Plate of Arms,
viz. 85 per Pale Argent and Sable. 86 per Fess indented Or and Gules. 87
Quarterly Ermine and Vert. 88 per Bend Embattuled Argent and Gules. 89 per
Cheveron Engrailed Gules and Argent. 90 per Pile, Or and Sable. 91 per Saltier,
Gules and Ermine. If the Field is divided into 6, 8, or more Pieces, then it is
Blazoned Gyrony of 6, 8 or more Pieces, and name the Colors as Example 92
Gyrony of 6 Pieces, Or and Azure. 93 Gyrony of 8 Pieces Azure and Argent.

COVNTERCHANGES.
COunterchanges are commonly Born where the Field has a Charge, which is
always Counterchanged according to the Examples. 94 per Pale, Argent and Gules,
a Bend Counterchanged. 95 per Pale, Or and Gules 3 Rundles Counterchanged. 96
per Fess, Argent and Gules a Bar between 3 Crescents Counterchanged. 97 Paly
Bendy, Argent and Sable. 98 Checky, Argent and Azure, a Chief Gules. 99 Barry
of 6 parted per Pale indented, Argent and Gules Counterchanged.

There are Sundry Bearings of 2 or 3 Ordinaries in one Shield, as on a Cheveron
3 Bars Gemele. A Pile Surmounted on a Cheveron on a Saltier Engrailed an
Escocheon charged with a Cross. A Fess between 2 Cheverons. Two Bars and a
Chief indented. Paly of 6, a Cheveron, A Saltier, and Chief vary. Per Pale a
Cheveron Countercharged. A Cheveron within a Border engrailed. A Cross, and
Chief, etc. Examples of which are in the Plate of Arms, from Number 100 to 109.

For the better Methodizing a Body of Heraldry, all sort of Bearings may be
comprehended under these Heads, viz. Civil Artificial things, Military things,
Celestials, Vegetables, the Parts of Man's Body; Animals, as Beasts and Insects,
Fowl and Fish.

CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS are such that are made by Man, and for his use; which
may be reduced under several Heads, as they relate to the use of Civil Life, as
the Ensigns of Dignity, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical; or of Professions
both Liberal, Mathematical, and Mechanical* as they relate to Military Actions*
as well for Land as Sea: And such are Scepters* Crowns, Mounds, Caps of
Maintenances, Mantl^^ of Estate, Maces, Garters, Tassels, Sword (...) Estate,
Crosiers, Annulets, Billets, (...) Maunches, Purses, Rural Instruments, as
(...) Harrows, Scithes, etc. Barrels or Tuns. (...) Tools, as Squares, Mallets,
etc. Bells, (...)* Fish, Wheels, and Nets, Cards, Dice, Tab^^* Cups, Lozenges,
Fusils, Mascles and Torte^^^es, with diverse other Artificial things used in
^^mory, too Tedious to Name.

MILITARY THINGS are such t^^t are as well for Offenses as Defense, as
Halber^s, Spears, Swords, Daggers, Cross-Bows Lances, Bows, Arrows, Darts,
Pheons, Clarions, Battering Rams, Shakbolts, Scaling-Ladders, Beacons,
Murdering Chainshot, Trumpets, Drums, Tents, Castles, Towers, Arches, Helmets,
M^rions, Saddles, Horseshoes, Gantlets, Armor, Waterbougets, Horses, Chaplets,
Anchors, Sails, Masts, Ships, Galleys, Ruthers, etc.

CELESTIALS are of sundry sorts, some are Natural and merely formal, as Angels
and Spirits, and others both Formal and Material, as the Sun, Moon and Stars,
as also such Natures as are Sublunar, as all kind of Minerals* which have Life
after a sort, as Angels, Cherubs, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Blazon Stars, Meteors,
and Comets, Flames of Fire, Crescents, Mullets, Clouds and Rays of the Sun,
Jupiters-Thunderbolt, Rainbows, etc.

Note, that Stars are born of several Rays, as 6, 8, 14 and the like, also the
Sun is born Eclipsed, likewise the Moon Eclipsed, as also in her Increscent and
Decrescent. Mullets are also born of 6 or 8 Points; but generally of 5* and
then you need not express the Number of Points; likewise Mullets are Born
pierced.

VEGETABLES do comprehend Trees, Fruits, Flowers, Plants, and Leaves; as Trees
growing with Fruit, Stems of Trees Radicated, Limbs of Trees Raguled, Stocks or
Stumps of Trees, Leaves of sundry sorts of Trees; and that born diversely, as
Slipped, Pendant, Bendways, Barways, Saltier Wise, etc. Trefoyls, Quaterfoils,
Cinquefoils, which are also Slipped; Roses, Flower-de-Lis, with other as Pears,
Plums, Pomgranets, Grapes, Sheaves of Corn, Wheat-Ears and Stalks, etc.

The several parts of Man's Body, as Heads Couped and Erazed at the Shoulders,
as well Sarazens, Blackamores, as others: Also Arms, Legs, and Hands, Dexter
and Sinister, both Couped and Erazed; likewise three Arms or Legs conjoined and
flexed in Triangle in the Fess Point* Hearts which are sometimes born wounded
and Stuck with Darts; Deaths-Heads, Shin Bones; Drops, as Gutte-de Sang, Gutte
de-E^u, Gutte-de Poix, Gutte-de Carmes, etc.

ANIMALS are Born both whole, and that in several Postures* as also in parts*
Those of Prey, as Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, etc. are in most esteem, and
whole Animals more than parts thereof.

All Quadruped Beasts are esteemed more worthy of Bearing, than Fowl or Fish,
in regard they contain in them more worthy and commendable Significations of
Nobility, and the Males are always esteemed the more worthy than the Females;
Fowl of Prey, the Female Hawks being the best. And all Savage Beasts must be
Armed.

The Lion being the noblest Beast, I shall chiefly make use of him for
expressing the Blazon of most Beasts, as to the several Postures. They are born
Rampant, Rampant Gardant, Regardant, and Coward; sometimes with two Heads, and
sometimes with two Tails; They are also born two together, as Rampant
Combatant, that is, Faces together, Rampant Endorsed, that is Back to Back.
They are also born Passant, Passant-Gardant, and Regardant; also Seiant,
Couchant, and Dormant. But instead of using the Term Rampant to a B^ck, or
Unicorn, say Springing: and to a Fox, Saliant. Dogs are generally Born Current
or Passant.

As to the Parts of Beasts, whether Lions, or other sorts, their Heads are
either Erazed, Couped, or Cabosed; and sometimes the Face only of a Lion, or
Leopard, is born. The Attires or Horns Buck are used in Wearings; also the Paws
and Tails of Lions and Bears are used both Erazed, and Couped.

There are several Monstrous Animals, such as are exorbitant from the general
course of Nature, either for Qualities, or Essence, that are Born in Armory;
and such are Amphibious Beasts, as Otters and Beavers, that live both on the
Land and in the Water. Also those of a prodigious Shape being formed, or rather
deformed with the confused Bats, Harpres, Wiverns, Cockatrices, Mermaids, and
Dragons.

There are diverse Creeping Things that are Born in Coat Armor, as Tortoises,
Moles, Hedg-Hogs, Snails, Scorpions, Adders, Emmets, Grasshoppers, Spiders,
Toads, etc.

AREAL ANIMALS, as Fowl and Birds, are much used in Heraldry, which may be
considered by their Feet, which are either whole and webby, as the Palm of a
Man's Hand, as the Swans, Geese, Ducks, etc. or divided, as the Eagles, Falcons,
Ravens, Herns, Peacocks, and other Fowls, and Birds of the Air.

All Fowl and Birds of what kind soever, must be Born in their natural Actions
of going, sitting, standing or flying.

Concerning the Beaks or Bills, as also the Feet of Birds, all those that are
either Whole-footed, or have their Feet divided, and yet have no Tallons,
should be Termed Membred; but the Cock and all Birds of Prey must be Termed
Armed. It is generally observed, that the Females of Birds of Prey are the
noblest and the most hardy, which Nature has so ordered, for that she takes
care of her young.

The Parts and Members of Fowl are usually Born both Couped and Erazed.

The more fierce the Bird is, the better it is esteemed in Heraldry; so that
the Eagle, which is the Prince of the Air, has the pre-eminence of all others.

Fish are not of that esteem as Beasts or F^wl, yet much used; and as Birds
have their Plumes, Wings and Trains for cutting their passage through the Air,
so have Fish their Fins by which they guide themselves, cutting the Current of
the Streams, their Course being directed by their Tail, which serves as the
Helm, or Ruther of a Ship.

Fish are Born after a diverse manner, viz. directly Upright, Imbowed,
Extended, Indorsed, Respecting each other, Surmounting one another, Fretted,
and Trianguled, etc.

All Fish that are Born Feeding, must be Termed Devouring, expressing what they
Feed upon. All Fish raised directly Upright, that have Fins, must be Blazoned
Hauriant; and all born Transvers must be Blazoned Naiant, or Swiming. Fish are
likewise Born in part, as the Claws and the Shells.

All these sundry sorts of Bearings aforesaid taken notice of, are Born in
Fields single or more than one; 3 or 6 are the usual Number. They are also Born
between, and charged upon the Honorable Ordinaries; Examples of all which are
given in some Volumes of Heraldry published by me, Entitled Guillims Display
of Heraldry, in Folio. An Essay to Heraldry in Octavo, and in a Map of
Heraldry, Entitled Heraldry Royal, comprehending the Body of the said Art,
Illustrated with apt and proper Figures.

But I have given some Examples thereof in the said Plate of Arms here
inserted, beginning at Number 110, which are thus Blazoned. Gules, 3
Katherine-Wheels Or. 111, Sable, 10 Billets, 4, 3, 2, and 1, Argent. 112, Or, a
Maunch Gules* 113, Gules, 3 Mallets Or. 114, Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Bells
Or. 115, Gules, 2 Fret Argent. 116, Argent, Fretty Sable. 117, Ermin, on a
Cross-Quarter pierced Argent 4 Ferdemolins Sable. 118, Azure 3 Lozenges Argent.
119, Gules, a Muscle Argent; 120, Argent on a Mount Proper, a Tower triple
Towered Sable. 121, Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Tents Argent. 122, Gules, 3
Clarions Or. 123, Azure, 3 Banners displayed in Bend Glues. 124, Ermine, a
Cross-Bow in pale Bent Gules. 125, Gules, 3 Trumpets Or. 126, Argent, a
Culvering Dismounted in Fess Sable. 127, Argent* 3 Battering Rams* Barways
Proper, headed Azure* Armed and Garnished, Or. 128, Argent, 3 Scaling Ladders
in Bend Sable. 129, Ermin, 3 Long-Bows in Pale bent Gules. 130, Azure, 3 Arrows
Argent. 131, Gules, 3 Pheons Argent. 132, Azure, 3 Spears-Heads Argent. 133,
Gules, 3 Anchors Helmets Argent. 135, Azure, 3 left Handed Gauntlets Or. 136,
Gules, 3 Water-bougets Or. 137, Argent, a Sword erected in Pale* Sable. 138,
Azure, 3 Swords in Pale, two with their Points downwards, the middlemost
upwards, Argent. 139, Gules 3 Swords Barways their Points toward the sinister
Point of the Escocheon Argent, pomeled Or. 140, Azure, a Sun in his Glory. 141,
Or, a Sun Eclipsed. 142, Gules, an Increscent* Or. 143, Moon in her Complement,
or Glory Argent. 144, Azure, a Moon Decresient Proper. 145, Argent, a Moon in
her Detriment Proper. 146, Azure, 3 Crescents Argent. 147, Argent, 3 Stars of 6
Rays Sable. 148, Or, 3 Mullets pierced Sable. 149* Argent, 3 Oaken Leaves
pendant proper. 150, Or, 3 Laurel Leaves slipped proper. 151, Argent, 3 H^lly
Leaves bendways Azure. 152, Or, 3 Fig Leaves barways proper. 153, Argent, 5
Vine-Leaves in Saltier proper. 154, Gules, a Limb of Tre^ Raguled and Truncked
in Bend Argent. 155, Azure, 3 Cinquefoils Argent. 156, Gules, a Garb, or
Wheat-Sheaf, Or. 157, Azure, a Flowerde-(...) Or. 158, Ermin, 3 Roses-Gules,
seeded and barbed proper. 159, Argent, a Man's Leg erazed at the Thigh, Sable.
160, Gules, 3 Dexter-Arms conjoined at the Shoulders, and flexed in Triangle,
Or. 161, Azure, 3 Sinister-Hands couped at the Wrists, Argent. 162, Argent, an
Arm Sinister issuing out of the Dexter Point, and Sinister Base in form of a
Bend, Gules. 163, Or, a Man's Leg couped at the Thigh, Azure. 164, Gules, a
Sarazens Head erazed at the Neck, Argent; and environed about the Temples with
a Wreath of the Second, and Sable. 165, Argent, on a Cheveron Gules 3 deaths
Heads of the Field. 166 Sable a Shin-bone in Pale, Surmounted of another in
Cross, Argent. 167, Gutte; These Drops are of different natures, according to
the Color, for they still retain their shape. Gules, they are Gutte de Sang,
that is, Drops of Blood. If Azure, Gutte de Larmes, which are Tears. If Argent,
Gutte de Eau, which are Drops of Water. If Sable, Gutte de Poix, which are
Drops of Pitch: And if Yellow, Gutte d'Or, or Drops of Gold. 168, Or, a Lion
Rampant Gules Crowned, Argent. 169, Argent, a Lion Rampant Gardant Sable. 170
Sable, a Lion Rampant Regardant, Or. 171, Gules, a Lion Saliant Argent. 172,
Argent, a Lion Rampant Coward purpure. Lion Rampant double Test, Azure. 174,
Azure, a Lion Rampant double Queve, Argent. 175, Or, 2 Liocels Rampant
Combatant, Sable. 176, Gules, a Lion Passant Argent. 177, Azure, a Lion Passant
Gardant Or. 178, Vert, a Lion Seiant Argent. 179, Or, a Lion Couchant Sable.
180, Gules, a Lion dormant, Or. 181, Vert, a Greyhound current in Bent,
Argent; Collered, Gules, 182, Vert, a Buck tripping Or. 183, Argent, a Lions
Head erazed Gules. 184, Gules, a Horses-Head Couped Argent. 185, Azure, a
Bucks-Head Cabosed* Or. 186, Vert, a Cheveron between 3 Leopards Faces* Or.
187, Gules, 3 Lions Paws erazed Argent. Or. 188, Sable, 3 Bears-Paws couped,
and erect, Argent. 189, Azure, an Eagle-displayed Argent. 190, Argent, an Eagle
displayed with two Heads Sable. 191, Argent, a Raven proper. 192, Azure, 3
Cooks Argent; Armed, Crested, and Velloped Or. 193, Or, 3 Martlets Sable. 194,
Azure, a Harpre Or. 195, Azure, 3 Bustarts rising Argent. 196, Gules, 3 Bees
volant en Arriere Argent 197, Or, 3 Eagles-Heads erazed Sable. 198, Sable; 3
Eagles Legs, erazed a la Quise Argent. 199 Or, 2 Eagles legs Barways Erazed a
la Quise Sable; Armed Gules. 200, Vert, a Tortoise passant Argent 201, Azure, a
Tortoise erected Argent. 202, Sable, 3 House-Snails Argent* 203; Azure, ^3.
Dolphins Naiant Argent. 204, Vert, a Dolphin Naiant Imbowed Argent. 205, Gules,
3 Salmons Hauriant Or. 206, Azure, 2 Barbels Hauriant Regarding each other,
Argent. 207, Gules 2 Pikes Hauriant Endorsed Or. 208. Sable, 3 Scallop-Shells
Argent.

Marshalling and Impaling of Coats in one Shield.
BY Marshalling of Coats is to be understood, an orderly disposing of sundry
Coat-Armours pertaining to distinct Families; and some have their place within
the Escocheon, and some without; Of those within, some have their Occasions
obscure, and others manifest, as are those whose Marshalling (according to
ancient form) do betoken Marriage, or some gift of the Sovereign: such as do
betoken Marriage, represents either a Match single, or Hereditary: By a single
Match is meant the Conjoyning or Impaleing the Coat Armor of the Man with that
of the Woman; but if she be an Heiress, then her Coat is to be born in an
Escocheon of Pretense in the midst of his Shield. It is also accustomary for
Bishops to Impale on the Dexter-Side of the Shield, the Arms belonging to their
Bishopric; And if a Man has had more than one Wife, the way of Bearing them
is to Impale them betwixt his own Coat, which is to be in the middle part of
the Shield.

External Ornaments.
EXternal Ornaments are Helmets, Torces, Caps, Crowns, Crests, Mantlings,
Escroles, and Supporters to Noblemen.

The Helmet is placed next above the Escocheon, or Shield, to all under the
Degree of a Nobleman, and to those there is a Crown, according to the Quality
of the Bearer, and the Helmet issues out of the said Crown. The Helmet does
distinguish the Dignity of the Bearer; for to a Gentleman, and Esquire, the
Helmet is placed Side-ways with the Beaver close; To a Knight, or Baronet,
(which is all one) the Helmet is placed Fore-right, with the Beaver open. The
Full-faced or Fore-right Helmet does signify Direction and Command; the close,
Attention, and Obedience.

The open Helmet placed Side ways, with Bars, belongs to all the Nobility under
the Degree of his Majesty, except Sovereign Dukes, or of the Royal Blood; and
to those the Helmet is placed Fore-right with open Bars; all which does appear
in the Circle of the Eliptical Table, as does the several sorts of Crowns and
Coronets, born by the Nobility, of which a word or two.

The Barons Coronet is with six Pearls of an equal height, and distance, from
each other.

The Viscounts Coronet is composed only of Pearls set close together, and of an
equal height.

The Earls Coronet is composed of Points and Flowers, and the Points are spiry
with Pearls on the top above the Flowers.

The Coronet, or Crownet of a Marquess, is of Leaves and Points, with the
Leaves or Flowers Points.

The Coronet of a Duke is only Floral.

The Coronet or Crownet of a Prince is the same with the Crown of a King, only
the Arches, Mound, and Cross are omitted.

The Crown of a King is as a Duke, but with Arches, a Mound and a Cross.

To a Bishop, instead of a Coronet belongs a Miter.

Next above the Helmet is the Wreath or Torce, which is always of the principal
Metal and Color in the Bearets Paternal Coat; and on this Torce the Crest is
placed, except to those Coats that have no Wreath, and then there is always
instead thereof a Mount, Hill, Cheapean, or Coronet on which the Breast is
placed.

About the Shield is the Mantle, which does admit of several Forms, those most
used are the Cloak-Mantles and the Folding Mantles; and the Colors are
generaly Gules and Argent, that is, Mantled Gules, doubled Argent. But to
Noblemen instead of Argent the Doubling is Ermins.

On each side of the Shield of Noblemen are the Supporters which stand on an
Escrole, or on a Hill. The Escrole is at the Bottom of the Shield, in which is
placed the Motto of the Bearer, which is altogether according to the Fancy, and
alterable at pleasure.

An Example of all which External Ornaments will appear by his Majesty's Royal
Achievement; with the differences of other Bearings in the Catalogue of the
Arms of the Subscribers to this Work, placed at the beginning of the Book, to
which I refer the Reader.

The End of the First Part.
THE GENTLEMAN'S RECREATION: TREATING OF HORSMANSHIP, HAWKING, HUNTING,
FOWLING, FISHING, and AGRICULTURE;
WHICH Are Collected from the most Authentic AUTHORS, and the many gross
Errors therein corrected; with great Enlargements made by those
well-experienced in the respective RECREATIONS.

And for the better Explanation thereof, great variety of useful SCULPTURES, as
NETS, ENGINES, TRAPS, etc. are added for the Taking of BEASTS, FOWL, and FISH;
not hitherto published by any.

The whole illustrated with diverse Ornamental SCULPTURES, Engraven in Copper,
relating to the several Subjects.

The Second Part:

LONDON, Printed for the Undertaker Richard Blome, Anno Domini 1686.

HORSMAN Ship Treats of HORSES and their

To the Honorable John Noel of ^uffingham in Rutlandshire Esquire third son of ye
Right Honorable Baptist Noel Viscount Gamden etc:

This plate is humbly Dedicated by Ric. Blome.

HORSMAN SHIPP

To the Rt Honble. Sr John Skeffington of Fisheriviek in Staffordshire Bart.
Baron of Lough-neagh; Viscount Massereene, Cysstos Ro^^ilorum and., Governor
of ye County of London any and Town of Coleraine and one of the Lords of his
Ma^^^^. most Honble. privy Council of ye Kingdom of Ireland etca.

This plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.



HORSMANSHIP.
PART I.
Wherein is treated of Horses, their Kinds, Breeding, Keeping, Uses, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
A Horse is a Creature so excellent in his nature, and so generally useful,
that all ranks and degrees of Men, either for pleasure or profit, are glad to
make use of his General at the head of his Army, and take notice of his Horse
under him, I need not tell you what an Air of Majesty and Greatness that Noble
Creature has; and if you have been in a Battle, to give you an account of his
Vigor, Activity, and Courage is as needless: But if you are a stranger to
these sort of things, and seek not a Horse for any such Employment, go to the
Huntsman, the Traveller, and the Husbandman, they will all tell you Horses are.
It would be endless to give a particular Account of their admirable nature and
great usefulness; but if you consider what long Journeys are performed on
Horsback, and in Coach; what heavy Loads and Burdens are drawn and carried
from place to place in City, Camp, and Country; what delight and pleasure is
taken in Hunting, Hawking, Racing, etc. to the increasing of Health and Vigor:
In a word, if Triumphs and solemn Pomps, in business of all sorts, and in our
pleasantest and most manly Recreations, a Horse is some way or other assisting;
you cannot but conclude, That of all those Creatures that are made for the
profit and delight of Mankind, a Horse is the most excellent, and consequently,
That Horsmanship is a very great Accomplishment in a Person of Quality, or
Gentleman.

The Design therefore of this Discourse is to lay down the Principles of
Horsmanship in a short and clear method; I think it may be called The Knowledge
of Horses, and the Art of Riding well. I shall speak only of such things as are
most useful and necessary to be known by the Gentry; as the several kinds of
Horses, the Rules for Breeding and Keeping them, what uses several sorts of
Horses are fittest for, and the like; avoiding the impertinent humor of too
many Authors, who endeavor nothing more than to make a show of their own
Knowledge, and nothing less than the benefit and advantage of those for whom
they write. If I should treat at large, some parts of this Discourse would
require Volumes; and therefore when I speak in general, and give only the
Grounds of things, I hope it will not offend the Reader. It may be of use to
him who is a good Proficient, and not an improper Grammar for one that is
beginning to learn; and I doubt not of its Approbation by the Judicious and
experienced Horsman.

CHAP. II.
Of the several sorts of Horses most in use.
Of the Turkish Horse.
THe Turkish Horse has a great deal of beauty and fire, being extraordinary
swift; with a good Mare he breeds very fine Colts, (especially for the Race) of
which some of our Breeders have had the experience: But the Turks are so
unwilling to part with their Breeds, that of those that come into England,
there are but very few (if any) good in their kind.

Of the Barb, or Barbary Horse.
THe Barb is very docile and gentle, being of all Horses in the World the
easiest to be managed, having naturally a very graceful Action, and a good
Disposition; he is of himself so negligent and lazy in his walk, that he is apt
to stumble even sometimes in plain Ground; but when he is wakened, and rode
upon his mettle, no Horse is more nimble, vigorous and adroit, and better for
an Action of one or two hours. He makes a good Stallion to breed Running Horses
out of, the Colts that he gets being generally well winded, fleet and good at
bottom. The Duke of Newcastle was of Opinion, That a Barb, though a Jade, would
get a better Horse for a Course than the best Running Horse in England; and so
was Sir John Fenwick of Northumberland, being a Man of great experience, and
esteemed to have one of the best Breeds of Horses in this Kingdom. The Duke of
Newcastle was likewise of Opinion, and not without reason, That the choicest
Barbs are not brought over: And his Reasons are, because they are bought up by
Merchants, or such that buy the cheapest for advantage; nor do they know how to
choose those

Of the Spanish Horse.
THis Horse, if he be well chosen, is of a noble Kind, his Shape being exact
and curious, not so thin and slight as the Barb, nor so gross as the
Neapolitan, but between both, being formed by Nature for strength as well as
beauty. He is very docile, has a great spirit and courage; Spain, that in
their Exercise of Riding at the Bull, when a Horse happens to be so sharply
wounded that his Guts hang out, he will yet obey his Rider, and continue his
Action to the utmost of his strength, though at the same time he tramples upon
his Bowels. He has the proudest walk and Trot, with the best action in his
trot, the loftiest Gallop, the swiftest Careers, and yet is the gentlest Horse;
and if he be good Generals and great Officers, none being more graceful in a
day of Triample, or useful in a day of Battle.

Of the Dutch or Flanders Horse.
THere are a sort of Dutch or Flanders Horses which we make use of in England,
which are the fittest in the World for the Coach; especially for the Town for a
fine Equipage, where Stones; for they are large and beautiful in their Kind,
and having a graceful and lofty trot, they give a better Air to a Coach than
any Horses whatsoever; besides that, they are stronger, and will endure the
Pavement better.

Of the English Horse, etc.
WE have in England several good Breeds; our Running Horses, Hunters and Pads,
and our Horses for all manner of fatigue of what nature soever, are not to be
matched in all Europe; nor is any Horse better for an Officer in the War, than
one of those which we call our Twelve-Stone Horses, (such as usually run for
Plates) if he be well chosen, and taken in time. He must be naturally of a good
disposition (which for the generality our English Horses are not) and one of
the strongest of that sort, with good Reins and Limbs, and a Head well set on;
and he must be put to the Manage before he is accustomed too much to go upon
his Shoulders, and to have his Will; for I believe that which spoils a great
many of our English Horses, rendering them so unfit for the Great Saddle, is the
Snaffle Bridle, and our particular method of Training and Galloping, so that
when they come to be 7 or 8 years old, they are grown so Headstrong, and their
way of going is become so customary, that there is no possibility of putting
them upon the Haunch, or bringing them into any manner of Subjection, either of
the Hand, or Heel.

There are several other kinds of Horses, which I omit, because we meet with
them but rarely in England, amongst which may be reckoned the Arabian, a Horse
of an excellent nature, and very beautiful.

CHAP. III.
Of Stallions.
IF you would choose a Stallion aright, you must consider the use you design to
breed for; for Example, if you would breed for the Manage (I mean the most
useful part which is termed Manage de Guere, of which I shall speak in its
proper place) let your Stallion be a Turk, Barb, or Spaniard, one that is good
in his kind, and naturally of a docile and gentle Temper, though lively,
vigorous, and bold in Actions. His Neck, and Crest must be so turned, and his
Head so set on, as not to hinder his reining well; for which you must observe
that his Neck be formed like an Arch, his Crest not too much charged with
Flesh, his Head when he stands in his own natural posture, falling as it were
perpendicularly toward the ground, and his Jaw-Bones standing so wide, that
his Head may not want room to play.

If you would Breed for Hunting, or the Race, make choice of a Turk, or Barb,
or a Well-bred English-Horse, that has given proofs of his Goodness and Speed.

If you would Breed for the Road, make choice of a good strong Hunter, that has
naturally good Legs and Feet, a short Back, and good Quarters, and let him be
one that is not of a Skittish, or Stubborn Temper; or if you are curious and
would have very fine Padds, you may take the same measures which I told you
before for the Manage, only Geld your Colts, and when you break them, if they
take it well, let them be taught to Amble.

It Is needless to give directions for Breeding any other sorts of Horses; As
for the Coach, Wagon, Cart, Servants, and all manner of Drudgery, because there
is not that Nicety required in their Breed; and from the Fairs and
Horse-Coursers you may be supplied, and save that trouble.

CHAP. IV.
Of Mares.
HAving told you how to choose your Stallions, it will be necessary to give you
some directions about the Mares; and certainly none in the World are better to
Breed on than our English, provided you Suit them to your particular design;
for instance, if you would Breed for the Manage or Pads, let your Mares have
fine Fore-hands, with their Heads well set on, but not too long Necks; broad
Breasts, large and Eyes, and great Bodies, that their Foals may have room
enough to lie; with good Limbs and Feet; let them be of a gentle and good
disposition, and their motions naturally nimble and Graceful; In a word,
remember always that the more good qualities your Mares have, the better will
your Colts generally prove.

If you would Breed for the Race, and Hunting, your Mares must be lighter, with
short Backs and long Sides; their Legs must be something longer, and their
Breasts not so Broad, and always make choice of such as you are sure have good
Blood in their Veins. If you have tried the Speed, and Wind of any particular
Mare, and find it good, you may the surer expect a good Colt, provided she be
still in her full Health and Vigor, and not above Seven years old, or eight at
most; for the younger your Breeders are, the better the Colts will be.

CHAP. V.
Of a Soil fit to Breed in, and of Pastures.
ONe of the first things (which you ought to consider) if you design to Breed,
is the commodiousness of the Place, and the Pastures where your Horses, Mares,
and Colts are to run. For he that Breeds in a place unfit for it, loses his
Money and Pains, and will never have good Horses.

The Ground must not be too rank of Grass, nor too bare, but a firm and sweet
Soil Situate in a clear and wholesome Air, where there are Hills, and running
Waters, with Quick-setts, and spreading Trees to shelter them from the Wind,
Rain and Sun. Nor must they be continued always in the same Pastures, but often
removed into fresh, observing still to put them into the Shortest feedings in
Summer, and the Richest in Winter, at which time of the year they must have a
Hovel, a Hay-Rick, or some convenient place to defend them from the Weather.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Time and Manner of Covering.
YOur next Care must be about the Time and Manner of Covering. The best time to
have your Mares Covered is in May, for then your Colts will fall the April
following, at which time there will be sweet and fresh Grass for them; the
manner is as follows; Let your Stallion, having eaten Grass for some time
before, and been so high fed, that he is full of lust and vigor, be brought to
the place where your Mares are (his hinder Shoes being taken off) there let him
Cover a Mare in hand twice or thrice to make him sober, then pull off his
Bridle and turn him loose to the rest of the Mares, which must be in a
convenient Close, not without strong Fences and good Food; and thus you must
leave him till he has covered them all, so that they will take Horse no more,
by which time his Courage will be pretty well cooled: More than ten or twelve
Mares is too much for one Horse in the same year. You must have some little
House or Hovell to defend him from the Rain, Sun and Weather (which are very
weakening) and a Manger to feed him in during the time of Covering; and you
would do well to have one to watch him all the while for fear of danger, and
the better to know how often he covers each Mare. All this being observed, when
you have taken away your Stallion remove your Mares into some fresh Pastures.

CHAP. VII.
Of Colts.
WHen your Colts are fallen, you may let them run with their Dams till about
Michaelmass (sooner or later, according as the Cold weather comes in,) then you
must wean them, and let them be kept in a convenient House with a low Rack and
Manger for their Hay and Oats, which must be sweet and good, with a little
Wheat-bran sometimes mixed with the Oats, to cause them to drink and keep their
Bodies open; and above all they must be kept from Wet and Cold, which are the
hurtfullest things imaginable to them, nothing being more tender, as the Duke
of Newcastle in his Book proves more at large. For proof of this take a Spanish
Stallion, and let him Cover two Mares, which for age, beauty and comeliness may
admit of no difference betwixt them, and if they be both Horse-Colts, or both
Fillies (which is one and the same) let one run abroad until it be Three years
and an half old, and let the other be Housed every Winter, kept warm, and
orderly tended, as aforesaid; and that Colt that has been kept abroad shall
have great fleshy Shoulders, flabby and gouty Legs, weak Pasterns, with ill
Hoofs, and shall be a dull and Legs and Hoofs, and be of good strength and
spirit: By which you may understand, that to have the finest Stallion and the
beautifullest Mare is nothing, provided you spoil them in their Breeding.

It is not amiss to let your Colts play an hour or two in some Courtyard, or
the like place, when

When the Winter is spent, let them be turned into some dry Ground where the
Grass is short and sweet, and where there is good Water that they may drink at
pleasure; for it is not necessary that a Colt immediately fill his Belly like a
Horse that labors hard. The next Winter you may take them into the House, and
use them just as your other Horses. But let not your Horse-Colts and Fillies be
kept together after the first year; This Method you may observe every Summer
and Winter till you break them; which may be done after Three years old, and
will be so easy a thing, if you observe the aforesaid Method of Housing them
and ordering them the Second year, as you do other Horses, that they will be so
tame and gentle, that you need not fear their plunging, leaping, kicking, or
the like Coltish tricks, for they will take the Saddle quietly: for

You need not a Cavezone of Cord, which is a Head-strain, nor a Pad of Straw,
but only an ordinary Saddle, and on his Nose an ordinary Cavezone, as you Ride
other Horses with; but it must be well lined with double Leather, as the rest
are, and if you think fit, you may put in his Mouth a Watering-Bit without
Reins, only the Head-stall, and this but for a few days, and then to put such a
Bit as he should be always rid with: And be sure use not Spurs for some time
after Backing.

Observe, that Yearlings must be kept abroad Yearlings, which ordering is most
agreeable to them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the several Uses of Horse, to Men of Quality and Gentlemen.
THE several Uses of Horses to Men of Quality and Gentlemen, may be reduced to
these three Heads, viz. for the Saddle, Burden and Draught. The Uses of the
Saddle, are for the War, Hunting, the Race or Pad; of Burden, for Sumters,
Packs, and such kind of Baggage; and of Draught, for the Coach, Carriages,
Waggens, Carts, Plough, and the like.

A Horseman should consider these things, that every Horse may be put to the
use he is fittest for, concerning which I refer you to the five following
Chapters, which treat of Riding the Great Horse, of Hunting, of the Race, of
the Pad, of the Coach, etc.

CHAP. IX.
Of Riding the Great Horse.
THere is certainly no Exercise more Noble and Manly than this of the Manege;
It makes a man firm and easy on Horseback, and vigorous and adroit in Action:
It increases health and strength; for none under the ill consequences of a
Debauch, be it of Wine or Women, can perform this Exercise as he ought, being
as unfit for it in such a case, as to go to Bed to a fair Lady: It also gives a
graceful and Martial Air, which one may perceive in some fine Horsemen, (even
when they are on foot) and therefore when the French would commend any Person
that has a good Mean, they say Il a l' Air fort Cavalier.

We may consider it in two parts; First, that sort of Manege, which is proper
for the Cheval d'Escole; Secondly, that which is proper for the Cheval de
Guere. The Cheval d' Escole is taught several Airs and Lessons, which as they
require a great deal of Vigor and Address (as the Gall^pade-Relevee,
Caprioles, Ballotades, etc.) so they are necessary to be learnt in Academies,
to give young Men a firm, and easy Seat, and a good Hand upon a Horse; making
them capable of humouring all manner of Horses according as it is requisite;
but are not in themselves, absolutely necessary, nor of any use in Action,
unless at Carousels, Triumphs, and the like. The Cheval de Guere is taught only
such Lessons, as are necessary in the Field, and without which one cannot
attack a good Horseman but upon very great disadvantages.

The confounding of these two, and not being able to distinguish the one from
the other, makes a great many talk very ignorantly about Managed Horses, some
despising the whole Art of Riding the Great Horse, because for want of
Education they The Managed Horse

To the Worshipful John Cutts of Arksden in Essex and of Childerly in
Cambridgshire Esquire.

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

Wyke del^n* Sol^ scul^

know nothing of it, whilst others are such formal Academists, that they
pretend every Lesson is as necessary in Action, as Stopping, Turning, and the
like: Both these are in the wrong; the first through Ignorance the latter too
often through Affectation; and I believe Mistakes of this nature have been
partly the cause why the Great Saddle has been so slighted and neglected in
England for some years past: But the present King is a Lover of Marshal
Exercises, and therefore we may hope to see them Majesty has been pleased to
make choice of Monsieur de Foubert (for the Governing of an Academy) one of the
best Masters in Europe, a Well bred, Good natured, and Ingenious Person, who
has a Stable of very fine Horses, and the best Masters for all sorts of
Exercises, that are necessary for the accomplishment of a Gentleman. In a word,
one that neither wants necessary qualications, nor spares any pains to teach
and improve Academy.

But (to return to my business in Hand) the Manege d' Escole, and the Manege de
Guere must both of them be learnt by every one that designs to be a good
Horsman, though it is necessary to distinguish the one from the other, that a
man my know what Lessons are only for the Academy, or the like, and what to
make use of in the Field, Enemy. A good Master will make you understand the
difference; so that I need not give you an Account here of all those Airs, and
Lessons which belong to the Manege d' Escole; and indeed, it would take up too
much room for this design: Therefore when you have been long enough in an
Academy to be firm, and easy, and have a good Hand upon a Horse, remember to
take notice of this distinction, that you may know how to choose a Horse for the
Field, or Action Academy-Horses it is hard to meet with Ten that are good for
the War) and take in short, the following Account of the Qualifications of a
good Horse for Service.

In the Manege de Guere a Horse must be taught to Gallop true, and change
readily; to go off from the hand like an Arrow from a Bow, and stop or turn at
a Point; to obey the Hand and Heel in advancing or retiring upon a strait Line,
or otherwise; or in going Sideways to the Right or Left; (a Courbets) enough to
keep him always upon the Haunch; to endure Fire, and to Charge up boldly
against any thing: And all this must be done with willingness, ease, and
subjection. For it is a Maxim in Horsmanship, That a Horse must never do any
thing of his own head, but in obedience to his Rider, and no more than he
requires of him; as also, that a Horse can never perform any Action gracefully
or well, that he does with an aversion and uneasiness. This is that which
War-Horse, and in this the Rider must be as perfect as the Horse, otherwise he
will be so far from receiving any advantage from his goodness and address, that
he will not only find himself often out of order (by making his Horse do things
mal a propos,) but in a little time quite spoil him, and make him good for
nothing.

But I will not undertake in this Discourse to teach you to Ride, it being an
Exercise, that as it is the finest and most useful of all (whatever some
pretend that never could attain unto it) so it is the hardest to be perfect in,
and is never learnt well without a great deal of Industry, as well in the
Practick, as the Theorick part, and that under careful and diligent Masters. It
is as necessary for a Young man, that designs to be a good Horsman, to perform
his course of Exercise in an Academy; as for him that whould be a great
proficient in Learning, to run through his course of Philosophy, Logic, etc.
in the University. I shall therefore undertake only to give some general
Directions which may be of use to such as learn and practice this Noble
Exercise. And I cannot imagine how a Young man of Quality (when by reason of his
Tender years he is not ripe enough for Business and Action) can spend his time
better, than in learning the Exercises of the Body, together with those of the
Mind; by which (provided he be under good Masters and Governors) he will find
so great an advantage, that he will not only be fitter to serve his Prince,
when occasion serves, with a virtuous Mind and a strong and active Body; but
avoid that lewd Effeminacy and those unmanly Extravagances, which so many are
ruined by through Ease and Idleness.

It Is to be hoped therefore (how negligent soever some are Educated) that a
great many of our Young Nobility and Gentry will be induced, by their Parents
Care, or their own Inclinations, to follow the great Example of the Roman Youth
(who were a glorious Instance of the advantage of good Education) and convince
the World by their Actions and Behavior, that they have spent their time as
well in the Academy, as the others did in their Campo Martis.

For the Service of such active and well disposed Youth, I shall set down these
following Rules and Directions; not that a good Master will omit them, but as
they are fundamental Principles of Horsmanship, it is not amiss to have them in
Writing, that by reading and considering them, they may never fail to have them
at command.

The first thing to be considered by a Young Horsman, is how to Approach and
Mount his Horse with safety, gracefulness, and convenience, which must be as
follows; If there be but one present to assist him (which may sometimes happen
to Persons of great Quality in the War, or the like) let him place himself on
the Right-side of the Horse, holding his Head with one hand and the Stirrup
with the other; then let him that is to Mount, walk up to the Horse, not
directly before him, lest if the Horse be fearful of him he put him in
disorder, or if merry and wanton he should strike him with one of his
Fore-feet: nor behind him for fear of the same Accident from his Hind-feet (for
a Mischance falls out sometimes in a Minute, that has not happened before in an
Age;) but let him approach him on the Left-side over against the Shoulder,
inclining something more to his Head than his Flank: This done, let him examine
if the Bridle be well placed in his Mouth, the Curb right, his Girts fast, and
every thing in good order; and then taking the Reins in his Left Hand, and the
Pummel of the Saddle (or a Lock of his Main) and laying his Right Hand fast
upon the hinder part of the Saddle, let him place himself in the Seat: And let
him endeavor to get a habit of doing this with so much case and liberty, that
his motion may not seem forced or painful, nor the Horse receive any
inconvenience, or apprehension Saddle, or brushing his Buttocks with his right
Leg, which are often the faults of unwildy, awkward and heedless People.

When he is mounted, having the Reins in his Left Hand, with his Thumb upon
them, and his little Finger between to separate the right from the left Rein,
let him take the end, (or Button) in his right hand, and lifting up his Arm
with a loose and careless Air adjust his Bridle, so that Pummel of the Saddle,
and exactly before him. Let him put himself from head to foot in the true
posture of a good and fine Horseman. He must be placed in the middle of the
Saddle, (not touching, if possible, any other part of it) and rest upon his
Twist, not his Buttocks, keeping himself all over straight and easy, as if he
were on foot, his shoulders Switch or Sword, with the point upwards, a little
enclining to the Horses left Ear, his Legs a little forward, with his Toes
pressing firm upon the Stirrups near his Horses Shoulders, his Heels lower than
his Toes, and turned outward, his Knees fast as if they were glewed, which
with the Counterpoise of the Body, by observing time is all that makes a Man
firm on Horseback: Nothing shows a good Horseman more than to sit Free and
Airy, and nothing shows more ridiculous than to see one sit in a starched and
formal way like a Statue.

This is the true posture of the Great Saddle, that he must keep himself in,
whatever Airs or Lessons the Horse performs, allowing only for Aids, and the
various counterpoise of the Body, according as necessity requires.

The Counterpoise of the Body must be in Galloping something backwards, both
for the Gracefulness of the Posture, and that the Horse may with more ease keep
himself upon his Haunch; the same is requisite in a Trot, or any other Pace,
and especially always in stopping, for in that case it is not only graceful,
and easy to the Horse, but prevents great disorder, which arrives Voltes,
Demy-voltes, etc. Unless a Horse be rough and Leaps; which if he does, his
Rider must observe to keep time with him, leaning backwards when his Croup is
in the Air, and forwards when he rises before, without confusion, or disorder.

And the better to know the different Aids, let him take notice and remember,
that there is in the Managed Horse two Motions, viz. that of the Shoulders, and
that of the Haunch; now that of Shoulder is governed by the Hand, and that of
the Haunch by the Heel.

The motion of the Hand is thus, if he turns to the right, he must turn his
Bridle-hand, so that his Nails come upwards, removing it little or nothing out
of the place: if to the left, he must keep it in its own natural posture
without turning, only moving it a little to the left. In both these motions he
must feel his Horse's Mouth, and work it insensibly as occasion requires. When
a Horse carries his head in the right place, and stedy, his Neck pliant, and
obeys these Aids readily, we say he is well in the Hand.

The motion of the Heel is as follows; when he is Galloping upon the Volte,
Demi-volte or the like, and would have his Horse keep his Croup inwards (which
is necessary) he must stretch out his Leg on that side to which he turns, and
move the other nearer to the Horses Belly, so that he may feel the motion. If
he would make his Horse go sideways upon a right line, he must first put his
Shoulders in motion, and then give the same Aids with his Legs as before, and
when ever his Horse (of himself, as by any accident) throws his Croup this way
or that way, by moving one of his Legs to him, and stretching out the other, he
will rectify him. A Horse that is well Managed will obey these Aids, if
rightly given, and then we say he is well in the Heel.

In these Aids of the Hand, and the Heel, lies the Art of making a Managed
Horse perform all his Lessons with exactness, which is not so easy a thing as
some imagine, who think if a Horse be perfect, the Rider has nothing to do but
sit still upon his Back; because if he does but sit fast, and keep in Action,
they look after no more, not heeding whether he guides the Horse, or the Horse
him. But let an ill Horseman be upon never so good a Horse and never so well
managed, if he Rides before a good Judge, or Fights with a good Horseman, his
weakness will certainly appear. Let him therefore that begins to Learn, make it
his first business to get a good Seat, a true and exact posture, without
stifness, or affectation, to gain which, let him add his own observation to his
Masters directions, and making choice of some well shaped Person (who is known
to be a fine Horseman) let him observe his posture and motions, endeavoring to
imitate them, for we are apt to learn faster from Examples before our eyes,
than from the best directions that can be given.

In the next place let him endeavor to get a just hand upon a Horse, and to
give his Aids true, and a propos, which must be done by a constant application,
and a good Memory; and by working with his Head, as well as his Body. And
lastly, I would advise him to stick to it till he is so far Master of a Horse,
that he is not only able to Ride one that is Managed to his hand, but to teach
a young Horse himself. For though the teaching a young Horse be too great a
drudgery for a Person of Quality, so that it is not fit he should practice it,
yet unless he knows what belongs to it, he will not be capable of Judging when
his Riders commit Errors, and whether his Horses be well Managed or no. And
when he leaves the Academy, let him be sure to be easy, and unaffected on
Horseback, with a loose and manly Gayety, free from scrued Grimances, and stiff
Postures. For some young Sparks upon their first leaving an Academy, have their
heads Post-horse, and are in the same Postures a Hunting, Hawking, and the
like, that they ought to be in at the head of a Squadron; whereas a complete
Horseman distinguishes always what Horse he is upon, and what he is doing; If
he is upon a War-horse going to charge, he puts himself in a firm posture, and
considers how he shall Attack, or defend; If a Hunting, his Stirrups are
shortened for the ease of Horse, and his posture is more negligent and loose: If
for Riding a Course, or Heats, his Feet are home in the Stirrups, his Elbows
close to his Body, lying snug upon his Horse, that he may have the advantage of
the Counterpoise, which does not hinder the Running so much before: In a word,
a good Horseman knows how to make use of all Horses for all uses, and in all
places.

I shall not trouble you with a Journal of Lessons Managing Horses, for if you
are an Artist it is needless, if not, you must know (what ever some Men have
pretended) it is a thing not to be got by Book, as a Lesson of Music is: I will
only tell you one thing and so conclude this Chapter, and that is, never to put
a young Horse to the Manege, that is not naturally made and disposed for it. He
must be of a good kind, strong and vigorous, and yet light and nimble, with
good Reins and Limbs, his Neck and Crest Head well set on, etc. (according to
the former directions, Chap. 7.) he must naturally have good motions which you,
may guess at, by seeing him Walk and Trot, and strikeing him gently to see how
he presents himself; and he must also be of a good temper: without these
qualities the best Rider throws away his pains, and the owner his Money. For
some Horses are so awkward, stubborn and dogged, having such skittish, resty
and Cross-grained Dromedary to fetch and carry, as to make them fit for any
Action, or service in the War. Therefore when you have a good Horse, prize him,
for they are very rare, though of so much use and consequence: And if you have
two or three particular Horses that you would choose in an occasion to venture
your life upon, keep them for their proper business, and put them to nothing
unnecessary that will fatigue them, or batter their Limbs.

CHAP. X.
Of Hunting, or Hunting Horses.
HVnting is (or at least ought to be) a pleasing and profitable Exercise,
intended to make us strong and active, and to recreate and delight the Mind:
therefore a Horsman that is of a warlike nature, ought to choose such sorts of
Hunting as are most capable to answer those ends; such as hunting the Stag,
Buck, Fox, and the like, and in other Countries that of the Wild-Boar and Wolf.
And as on the one side, I would not recommend to him deep mouthed Hounds, that
sort of hunting being too lazy an Exercise for one that would keep himself in
vigor; so on the other side, I would not advise him to such very fleet ones as
some of the Northern, that the following them is more properly called running
than hunting; and my Reason is, because to follow those extraordinary fleet
ones, a Man must have such light Horses, and keep them so finely and nicely,
that they are not fit for any other Service; not that I would have them put to
any other, but when occasion requires: As if a Man were to go to the Army on a
sudden, if his Hunters be a good strong sort of Horses, with firm Limbs, and
not too tenderly kept, what a great convenience it is to him, I leave to any
one to judge.

I shall not trouble you with any other directions for the choosing a Hunting
Horse, than to be sure that he has good wind and speed, that he is naturally of
a healthful and hardy Constitution, and withal that he has so much strength
(that as I said before) you may, if you have a mind to it, make use of him at
the Army for marching, and the like; and above all, keep him not too tenderly,
lest when you take him from hunting for another use, you find his Body not
hardy enough to suffer a new method of keeping.

Some of our well-bred Twelve-stone Horses; that have been sent abroad, have
proved extraordinary good for the War.

It is very requisite to make a Hunting Horse acquainted with a Bit, and to
teach him a little to stop and turn, which not only hinders him from galloping
upon his shoulders, and makes him surer footed than otherwise perhaps he would
be, but renders him more capable of being fitted for the War when ever you have
a mind to it.

I need not say much in telling you how to ride a Hunting Horse, the great
Saddle being the ground of all; in short, you must mount him as directed in the
former Chapter, and sit in the same posture, only make your Stirrups shorter,
and let your Legs fall nearer the Horses sides. In galloping lean forwards to
ease him, and if you have a Snaffle Bridle, in hard riding, lay your right hand
upon the Rein of the same side, the better to feel your Horse, and because
sometimes you cannot turn him with one hand.

In other Countries they hunt in light Bits, and though a Snaffle be very
pleasant and easy, yet I am of the Opinion that a Bit is much more
advantageous, in that it makes the Horse have a better mouth, and the Rider a
better hand.

I would not have any thing in this Chapter offend such Persons as are wholly
Strangers to Military Affairs, and not at all inclined that way, keeping their
Horses only for pleasure and ordinary business, they may (if they please) go on
War, and warlike Exercises.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Race, or Race-Horses.
IF you would have good Running Horses, they should be thus shaped; let them be
as light as possible, large and long, but well shaped, with a short back, long
sides, and a little long legged, and narrow breasted, for such will gallop the
lighter and nimbler, and run the faster.

The excellent Breeds of Running Horses that we have in England, though
(through the several

The advantage is this; by having Plates run for at several times, and in
several Counties, we come to know exactly the Speed, Wind, Force, and Heart of
every Horse that runs, which directs War, Hunting, Breeding, the Road, and the
like; whereas if we could see no such Trial made, we must stand more to our
hazards, and should not be so sure to meet with good ones: For a Horse may
travel well, hunt well, and the like, and yet when he comes to be pent hard,
and forced to the top and extremity of what he can do, may prove not good at
heart; and what Person of Quality Breed or buy the best? The same failure in
Nature which makes a Horse faint-hearted when he is strained to his utmost, and
kept to it, will make him so if he is desperately wounded: For some Running
Horses that have wanted neither wind nor speed, have been beaten only by their
Hearts sinking in them when they come to be hard pressed.

As for the regulating this matter, I could wish that our Nobility and Gentry
would not make a trade of Racing so much as some have done. When they run only
for Plates, or their Matches are for no more than may be lost without damage to
their Estates, it is very innocent diversion; but to run for so great a Sum that
the loss cannot be well born, and consequently one must endeavor to win the
same (if not more) back again, it draws one into vast Expenses by way of
preparation for a Revenge; and then if a second ill Fortune comes, I need not
relate the unhappy consequence; but if one proves successful, he is apt to
fancy he shall prove so again, and so before he thinks on it, he is declared a
Jocky, sets up for a Brother of the Spur, and runs so fast, that sometimes
neither his Estate nor Friends can keep along with him, turning his Diversion
into a Misfortune.

I shall speak of the Methods of ordering Running Horses, when I come to the
last part of this Discourse, which is of Keeping. We will therefore now suppose
a Horse set to run for a Plate, and that the Hour of starting is at hand.

When the Drum beats, or the Trumpet sounds (according to the Custom of the
place where you run) to give notice for stripping and weighing, In the first
place be sure to have your Stomach empty, only taking something to keep out the
wind, and to strengthen you. If you are so light that you must carry weight,
let it be shot, equally quilted in your Waistcoat; but if you are just weight
it is better, for then you have only to dress you according to your own fancy.
Your Clothes should be of colored Silk, or of white Holland, as being very
advantageous to the Spectators. Your Waistcoat and Drawers must be made close
to your Body, and on your Head a little Cap tied on: Let your Boots be gartered
up fast, and your Spurs must be of good Metal.

Thus equipped, you are to mount, and come to the place of Starting, where
going off briskly or gently, as occasion requires, make your Horse perform the
Course or Heat according to your design intended. For Example: If you would win
the same, and your Horse excells in goodness more than speed, start him off
roundly, and run him to the very top of what he can do during the whole Course
or Heat, and by that means, if the Horse you run against be not so good at
bottom, though he has more speed, you shall beat him, because he will be run
off of it a great way before he comes to the end: But on the contrary, if your
Horses Talent be speed, all that you can do is to wait upon the other Horse,
and keep behind him till you come almost to the Stand, and then endeavor to
give a Loose by him. Sometimes when you are to run more Heats than one, it will
be your Policy to lose a Heat; and in such a case, for the easing and safeguard
of your Horse, you must lie behind all the way, as much as you can, provided
you bring him in within distance.

As for your Posture, place your self upon your Twist with your Knees firm, and
your Stirrups just at such a length, that when your Feet are thrust home in
them, you can raise your self a little in the Saddle; for without that
allowance your Legs will not be firm when you come to run: The counterpoise of
your Body must be forwards to facilitate your Horses running, and your Elbows
must be close to your Body; but above all, be sure not to incommode your Horse
by swagging this way or that way, as some do; for since Weight is a great
matter in running, and a trouble some Horse Raceing.

Rider is as bad as so much more weight. I need not tell you how necessary it
is to take great care of your feat and hand; you must therefore beware of
holding your self by the Bridle, or of jobbing your Horses mouth upon any
occasion; you must take your right Rein in the same hand, holding up your
Horse, etc. as you find it necessary, and every now and then remove the Bridle
in his mouth. But these things are learned better by Experience and Practice
than by Book.

When a Plate is run for by Heats, every Man that rides must weight just at
Starting in great Scales brought into the Field for that purpose, and at the
end of the same Heat: For if you want of your weight at coming in, you shall
lose your Heat, although you are the first Horse. Between the first and second
Heat, you have half an hour to rub your Horses, and then the Drum or Trumpet
giving warning again, you mount, etc. as before, and so till you have finished
all, Heats, and sometimes three Heats and a Course, according to the custom of
the place.

I forbear saying any thing of the several Ceremonies relating to the Judges,
and the Articles by which Plate Races and Matches are regulated, because
besides that it is very easy to inform ones self of them at a Minutes warning;
they are more or less, according to the different Customs of the place where
you run.

When you keep running Horses, which I would advise you to do only for Plates,
and Matches of Sport and good Fellowship, and not for large Sums, if you do not
breed them your self, be sure to buy no Horse that has not extraordinary good
Blood in his Veins: For a Running Horse costs a great deal of Money to keep, and
a good one eats no more than a bad one, nor requires more attendance. Some men
to save Twenty or Thirty Guinea's in the Price of a young Horse, have

A Horse that you have tried once or twice at a Twelve-stone Plate, you may be
sure to make an extraordinary Hunter of; or if he be well turned, and disposed
for it, a War-horse: In such a Case a Man has a great deal of Satisfaction,
because he known what his Horse is, and what he can do.

Note, That the Posture, Manner of Riding, etc. is the same in a Match as in a
Plate-Race, only Course to be run, you must push for all at that one time;
whereas when there are several Heats, there is more saving, and variety of play.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Pad.
A Pad ought to be strong, light and nimble, which you will say are Qualities
not easy to be found together in one Horse; I own it; and therefore am of
Opinion that no Horse is harder to find than a true, right Pad, especially if
we consider, that to deserve that Name, his Goings must be likewise true, as
well as graceful and easy. If you are a Breeder, I refer you to my Directions
Chap. VII. where I discourse about breeding Pads as well as other Horses: But
if you must buy, take in short these following Directions, which may be some
help to you in choosing your Pads, and indeed almost all other Horses.

The Marks of a good Horse.
THe Marks of Beauty and Goodness in a Horse are these; his Ears should be
small, thin and sharp, carrying them well; or if they be long, but well set on,
upright and moving, it is not amiss. His Face should be lean and bony, his
Forehead swelling outward, and the Feather of his Face set pretty high, that
is, above his Eyes, or at the top of them; and if he is marked with white
(provided it is not too much) upon his Face, or the ship of his Nose, so much
the better. His Eyes should be round, black and shining, standing out from his
Head: His Cheekbones or Chaps, should be lean and thin, with the space between
them wide, and free from knots or kernels; and his Windpipe large. His
Nostrils should be dry and wide, so that upon the least straining a fiery
redness is seen in them. His Muzzle should be small, his Mouth deep, and his
Lips should shut tite and well, the Upper being about an Inch longer than the
Lower. The next thing to be observed is his Teeth, by which (now it falls in
our way) I shall (...) you direction to know a Horses Age.

To know the Age of a Horse.
YOu must remember that a Horse, when he has all his Teeth, has just Forty;
that is, Four and twenty Grinders, Twelve on each side, Six above, and Six
below, on the same side; then Twelve Gatherers, Six above and Six below, on the
fore part of his Mouth, which makes Six and Thirty; and lastly four Tushes, one
above and one below on each side, which makes up the Forty. The first year he
has his Foals Teeth, which are only Grinders and Gatherers, without any Tushes;
they are small and white. The second year the four foremost Teeth will appear
browner and bigger than the rest. The third year he changes the next to them,
and leaves no Foals Teeth before, but Two upon each side above, and the same
below. The fourth year he changes the next to them, and leaves but one upon
each side above, and the same below. The fifth year his foremost Teeth are all
changed, his Tushes being complete on each side, and the Teeth that came in the
room of the last Foals Teeth which he cast, are hollow, having a little black
Speck in the middle, which is called the Mark in a Horses Mouth, and so
continues till the eighth year, or thereabouts. The sixth year he has new
Tushes, about the bottom of which you may see a little Circle of new Flesh, and
the Tushes will be white, small, and sharp. The seventh year all his Teeth are
grown to perfection, and the Mark in his Mouth (as we call it) is very plain to
be seen. The Eighth year all his Teeth are full and smooth, the Mark being
scarce visible, and his Tushes grow yellower. The Ninth year his foremost Teeth
show longer, yellower and fouler than before, and his Tushes grow blunt. I will
go no farther, because I would not advise you to meddle with old Horses. But to
return to our business in hand.

The Shape of a Fine Horse.
FRom his Head look down to the Breast, which should be broad and beautified
with Feathers. His Fore-Thighs to the Knees should be firm and sinewy without
any swelling, and his Knees should be close knit, carrying an equal proportion.
From the Knees to the Pasterns his Legs should be clean and nervous, and the
Inside of his Knees should be free from any Seam, Scar or Scab. His Pasterns
should be well knit, and not too long, and he should tread right upon them. His
Hoofs should be black, smooth, tough and hollow, and rather a little long than
round. For the Shape of his Neck and Crest, and the setting on of his Head, I
refer you to Chap. VII. The Chine of his Back should be broad, eaven and
strait; his Ribs round in compass Fillets strong and short. He should be
Home-ribb'd, and his Body should be well let down. His Buttocks should be
round, full and plump, lying in a level with the rest of his Body. His Gascoyns
should be full and brawny, being well let down as far as the Middle-Joynt,
which should be nothing but Skin, Bones, Veins and Sinews; and his Hind-Legs
clean and sinewy. These are generally marks of Beauty and Goodness, and the
Horse has of them the better; for I never yet saw a Horse completely perfect.

To observe these things exactly, you should do well to have the Horse you
intend to buy, stripped naked and led out before you; and when you have viewed
him all over, having some able and trusty Farrier with you to make enquiry into
those hidden Maladies, which might escape your own or another search, you have
only to examine his Goings, which must be true Rider.

But the surest way of Buying is to be acquainted with good Breeders, and
taking Young Horses that are but just Backed, to have them Man^g'd and ordered
according to your own fancy.

If you have lived altogether in the Country, or have never learnt to Ride of a
Master, nor indeed never design any such thing, as having Military Affairs or
Martial Exercises (as it is not necessary all Gentlemen should) however it is
very commendable and Gentile to see you get up your Horse with a good Air, and
to sit handsomely; though it be only upon the Road, or a Hunting, Hawking, or
the like; and to hold your Reins like a Horsman, knowing which way to guide,
and stop without Jobbing and spoiling his Mouth, and making such odious and
ridiculous Postures that some are apt to do. To which end you may be pleased to
take notice thereof, and to consider what has been said concerning the Art of
Riding, Chap. IX. and endeavor to put so much of it in practice as you shall
find suitable to your Inclinations, especially that which relates to Mounting,
and the true Posture of a good Horsman; and if you would have that Character,
never Ride upon the Road in a Jocky-Cap or Snaffle-Bridle; but with a Bit and
Pistols well adjusted and fitted to your Pad.

I speak this to such that are not at leisure, or unwilling to learn in an
Academy; for though I think it absolutely necessary for those that are
Martially inclined, and requisite for all the rest of the Nobility and Gentry,
as it is a Manly and Gentile accomplishment to Ride well: Yet it is better to
know something, than to be ignorant of all; and for those that will not learn
of others, to get what they can of themselves.

If you are a complete Horsman, you will take delight in having your Pads stop,
and turn readily, and to make them be put a little upon the Haunch, which will
render them infinitely agreeable.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Horses for the Coach, Wagon, Burden, etc.
I Need not say much concerning the Coach, Wagon, Carriage, Burden, and the
like, it being not quite so difficult to find Horses proper for those uses, as
for what has been said in the foregoing Chapters.

For your Coach in Town Dutch or Flanders Horses are best (for which see Chap.
V.) in the choosing of which observe that they be well quartered and short
Backed; that they have strait and sound Limbs; that they Trot well and nimbly;
that their Eyes be good, and that they carry good Bodies; not but that I would
have you examine them at large, according to all the Rules of Beauty and
Goodness: But because the contraries to what I here particularly name are the
most frequent and usual faults in these kind of Horses.

In the Country, or for Traveling, our English Horses are the best, if well
chosen; for their size the best is about Fifteen Hands and an half high, and
they must be Squat and well Trust, with sound Legs and Feet, etc. In observing
their Trot, take notice if they lift up their Feet nimbly and evenly, and keep
their middle Joints behind wide asunder, it is very good.

For Carriages, Wagons, Servants, and all sort of Drudgery, you have nothing to
do, but to make choice of plain and strong Horses that are in health and
vigor, and withal free from Maladies, their business being nothing but Servile
labor; only be sure that your Baggage Horses above all have short and strong
Backs, and be of a pretty large size.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Riders, Keepers, Grooms, etc.
THE Business of a Rider being to Back, Mouth and Manege young Horses, he ought
to be very skilful and adroit, bold and firm on Horseback, with a just and
even hand, being exactly perfect in all the Lessons, Aids, and Horse, either
for the War, Pleasure, etc. He ought to suit to every Horse such a Bridle and
Saddle as is fittest for him. He should be a Man of Temper and Judgment, never
beating a young Horse, but when he is forced to it, and this with discretion,
endeavoring if possible to win him by sweetness and good usage; and withal
this, He should be sober and diligent, for without that he will not be able;
and unless he is diligent, he

By Keepers, I mean such as have the keeping Running Horses; and that you may
the better know their business, I will give you the Method of a Running Stable.
You must have for every Running Horse, a little Boy to Ride him his Airings,
Watercourse, and the like: And over all these a Keeper, who orders and
overlooks the whole Dyeting and Exercising; for which end he must understand
all that which belongs to the keeping of a Running Horse. See Chap. XIX.

A Groom should be sturdy, healthful and strong; His business is to understand
the ordinary ways of Keeping all sorts of Horses; that is, for the War,
Pleasure, Travel, and the like. And above all, he ought to be free from
Drinking; for the best Groom in the World, when he is Drunk, is in Horse by
Heats, Colds, and their giddy brain^d Extravagancies.

In general; As for all sorts of Servants in and about your Stables, be sure
that they understand their respective places, and deport themselves well
therein; for good Servants (well ordered) conduce very much to the preservation
of your Horses, and have always a good Equipago.

CHAP. XV.
Of Keeping, Dyeting and Ordering the Running Horse.
IN the keeping of Running Horses, unless a Man has Experience and Practice, the
best Rules imaginable are insufficient; but because it is impossible to set up
without a Fond, and build without a Foundation, I shall give you some
Directions, leaving you still the liberty to vary or add according to your own
Observation, as occasion requires.

There are Three States of Body in which a Horse may be.

1. Fat and Foul.

2. Lean and Poor.

3. In a moderate State between both.

Now you must be sure to proportion and order the Diet and Exercise of your
Horse suitable to the state and condition he is in. You must also (for the same
end) have a special regard to the particular Nature and Constitution of every
Horse: But your own Remarks (upon due Practice) and common Reason will direct
you sufficiently in these Points. For is it not very reasonable to take more
time to bring a Foul Horse to sharp Exercise, than one that is already in a
pretty tolerable condition; and that a Horse of a spending nature ought not to
have so violent Exercise, as one of a harder temperament? I will therefore
pitch upon a Fat Horse, that being the difficultest of the Three, and examine
how to bring him into such a good order, that he shall perform his Course to
the best advantage; and by discoursing of this, you will know how to deal with
the other two.

If therefore you match a Horse that is fat and foul, either by running at
Grass, or standing at Soil, by too high keeping, or by any other means of rest,
for the first fifteen days at least, rise by daybreak, and having put on his
Bridle washed in Beer, and tied to the Rack cleans the Stable from the Duug, and
then dress him very well, that is to say, first Curry him all over from the
Head to the Tail, from the top of his Shoulder to his Knee, and from the top of
his Buttock to his hinder Gambril; then dust him all over with a Horse Tail, or
a clean dusting-cloath, then curry, or rub him all over with the French-Brush,
beginning at his forehead, Temples and Cheeks, so down his Neck, Shoulders and
Forelegs to his Hoofs, then along his Sides, and under his Belly, and lastly
his Buttocks, and Hinder-legs; then rub him all over with your wet hand, not
leaving as near as you can one loose Hair about him, nor one wet Hair, because
you must keep rubing him until he is rubbed dry with your hands. Then with your
wet hand cleang his Sheath, his Yard, his Stones and his Tuel, and indeed you
must not leave any secret place uncleansed, as his Ears, Nostrils, Fore-Bowels,
and between his hinder Thighs. This done, take a Hair-cloth and rub him all
over, but especially his Face, Eyes, Checks, between his Chops, the Nape of his
Neck, and down his Legs, Fetlocks, and about his Pasterns. Having done all
this, rub him all over with a clean Woollen-cloth, beginning at his Head, and
so to every part of his Body as before directed; then take a wet Main-comb to
comb his Main and Tail; when you have thus dressed him, put over him his
Body-cloth, which must be thicker for the Winter Season than for the Summer,
for which fine Cotton is most fit; then Saddle, girting the foremost Girt
pretty strait, and the other a little slack, and wisp it on each side of the
Horses Heart, that both the Girts may be of equal straitness; then put on a
warm Breast-cloth, which may cover both his Shoulders.

When the Horse is thus dressed, and made ready, take a little Beer in your
Mouth, and Squirt it in his, and so lead him out of the Stable and mount him,
leaving some of the Helpers to cleang Litter, for besure that your Horse stands
upon a good store of fresh dry Litter both night and day, which Litter should
be Wheat-straw, if possible, or for want use Oa^-straw, but Barley and Rye-straw
are esteemed unwholsom, the one causing heart-burning, and the other scouring.

When you are thus mounted, walk forth your Horse a foot-pace (which is called
Rakeing) for about two miles upon sound and smooth ground, Sun will be risen,
so that you may walk him to some River or clean Pond, and permit him to drink
his fill; then Gallop and Exercise him moderately as before, and having walked
him a pretty space, offer him more Water; if he drink, then Gallop him again,
but if he refuses Gallop him to occasion thirst, and always exercise Hair;
when you are come to the Stable Door alight, (his Litter being prepared for
him) and by whistling, stretching the Horse upon the Straw, and raising the
Straw up under him, see if you can cause him to Piss, which if at first he does
not, yet by accustoming him to it, he will soon be brought thereunto, for it is
not only wholesome for him, but cleanly for the Stable.

These things being performed bring him into his Stall, and first tie his Head
up to the Rack in his Bridle, then with hard Wisps rub down his Forelegs as
hard as you can, then unloose his Breast-cloth, and rub his Head, Neck, and
Breast very well with a dry Cloth, then take off his Saddle and Body-cloth,
rubing his Body very well, especially his Back where the Saddle was, and so
clothe him up with a Linen-sheet, over Housing-cloth, and over that his Woollen
Body-cloth, which in the Winter may be lined with thin Cotton; then girt these
Cloths on with his Sursingle, which stuff round, with reasonable big, and soft
Wisps, which is more easy for him to lie down with, than with those small hard
Wisps.

After he is thus Clothed up, pick his Feet, and stop them up with Cow Dung;
then cast into his Rack a little bundle of Hay well dusted, and hard bound up,
for him to tear out as he is bridled up, and having so stood about an hour and
a half come to him, and first rub his Head, Face, and the Nape of his Neck,
with a clean Rubber made of new rough Hempen-cloth, which is excellent for his
Head, dissolving all gross and filthy humors, then draw his Bridle, and with a
clean Cloth make the Manger so clean as possible, taking away all the scattered
Hay, and cast it into the Rack; then take about a Quart of sweet, dry, old, and
clean Oats, the whitest, and heaviest being the best, for those that are musty
breed infirmities, the Moist causes swelling in the Body, the New breeds Worms
and pain in the Belly, and those half-drest deceive the stomach, and spoileth
the Horse. The Black Oats are not so good as the White, because they make foul
Dung, so that one cannot so well know the State of his Body.

This Quart of Oats put into a Sieve that is somewhat less than a Riddle, and
bigger than a Reeing-sieve, which will let the light Oats go through, but keep
in the full plump ones: In this Sieve ree, dress, and toss them very well, that
there is no dust or foul thing therein, and so give them your Horse, and if he
eats them with a good Stomach, you may give him as much more so ordered; and so
let him rest till about eleven of the Clock, and then visit him again, and
having rubbed his Neck, Head and Face, give him about the same quantity of Oats
so dressed and ordered as aforesaid; then shutting up the light that he may be in
darkness, leave him till about one of the Clock: For the darker you keep him in
your absence, the better it will occasion him to feed, and to lie down and take
his rest; and therefore it is customary to arm the Stalls where the Horses
stand, round about, and over the Rack with strong Canvass, as well for darkness
as for warmth.

About one of the Clock give him the like quantity of Oats dressed as aforesaid,
and after you have rubbed his Face, Head, the Nape of the Neck, and cleanged the
Stable from the Dung, give him a little Knob of Hay, and so leave him till
about four a Clock, if in the Summer, and three if in the Winter; then come
again, cleang the Stable, and Bridle him up, having wet the Snaffle with Beer,
and tied him up to the Rack, then take off his Clothes and dress him in all
points as before directed for the Morning, then Clothe and Saddle him as
aforesaid, and bring him forth, using what means you can to make him piss and
dung at the Stable door upon the foul Litter; then mount and ride him forth as
in the Morning, but not to the Hills, choosing plain grounds near some River,
and so give him his Airing, Galloping him before and after his Water, then
rakeing him gently up and down. In your rakeing you must observe in all your
passages (especially when you would have him empty himself) to let him smell
upon all the old and new Dung you meet with, which will make him empty his
Body, and repair his Stomach.

After you have watered him, and spent the Evening in Airing him (for nothing
is more wholesome, or sooner consumes foulness than early or late Airing) ride
him home, and observe to do all that you did to him in the Morning as well
within doors as without, and so leave him on his Bridle for above an hour; then
go to him, rub him well, draw his Bridle, cleang his Manger, put up his
scattered Hay, give him about a Quart of Oats well dressed and sifted, and Wisps,
then with a clean Cloth rub his Face, Head, Neck, and foreparts, then turn up
his Clths, rub his Buttocks, Fillets, and hinder parts, which done, put down
his Clothes, give him another Quart of Oats, and put into his Rack a little
bundle of Hay as before directed, then toss up his Litter to make his Bed soft,
and so leave him till the next Morning, and then come to him early as Heats.

As concerning his Heats observe these directions, First that two Heats in a
week is enough for any Horse of what state of Body soever. Secondly, that one
Heat should be given upon that Match, as for Example; If your Match is to be
run upon a Monday, then your fittest heating days are Mondays, and Frydays, and
the Monday, to be always the sharper Heat, because it is the day of the Match,
and there is three days respite betwixt it and the other Heat: If the Match day
be on a Tuesday, then the Heating days are Tuesdays and Saturdays: If on
Wednesdays, then the Heating days are Wednesdays and Saturdays; and Thursdays,
then the Heating days are Thursdays and Mundays, and so of the rest. Thirdly,
give no Heat (except in case of extremity) in rainy or foul weather, but rather
differ Hours and change Times, for it is unwholsom and dangerous; therefore in
case of shours and uncertain weather be sure to provide for him a warm lined
Hood with linen Ears, and the Nape of the Neck lined to keep out Rain, nothing
being more dangerous than for cold wet to fall upon his Ears, the Nape Fillets.
Fourthly, give your Heats (provided the Weather be seasonable) as early in the
Morning as possible, that is, by daybreak.

As to your second Fortnights keeping, observe all things, as before directed
for the first Fortnight, only before you put on his Bridle, give him about a
Quart of Oats clean sifted, which as soon as he has eaten, bridle him up, and
dress him in all particulars as in the first Fortnight, also Clothe, Saddle,
Air, Water, and bring him home in all points as in the first Fortnight, only
put no Hay in his Rack to tear out, but only draw with your hand as much fine
sweet Hay well dusted as you can well gripe, and let him as he stands on the
Bridle tear it out of your hand, which if he does greedily, then give him
another, and another, and so let him stand on the Bridle about an hour, then
come to him, and after rubing, and other ceremonies performed as aforesaid,
sift and dress about a Quart of Oats, and set them by; then take a Loaf of
Bread that is three days or more old made after this manner.

Take three Pecks of clean Beans, and one of good Wheat, mix them together, and
grind them to fine Meal, then sift it through a fine Seive, and knead it with a
little Water, and a good quantity of Yest to make it light, and so let it lie
for some space to make it light before you make it up into Loaves, which must
be well baked.

At three days old you may give your Horse some of it, but not sooner, new
Bread being dangerous, occasioning Surfeits; but if you are constrained to give
it sooner, or that it is then damp or clammy, then cut it into thin Slices and
lay it to dry, and so crumble it amongst his Oats.

But to return to our former discourse. This Bread of three days old chip very
well, and cut into thin slices (as much as may countervail the quantity of
Oats) very small, and mixed with the Oats, and so give them your Horse.

About Eleven a Clock visit your Horse, and having performed your By-ceremonies
before treated of, give him the same quantity of Bread and Oats as you did in
the Morning, and so let him rest till the Afternoon; and about one of the
Clock, or after, if you intend to give him an Heat the next day, feed him with
Bread and Oats, as you did in the Forenoon, and so consequently every Meal
following for that day, observing every thing as before directed you.

But if you intend the next day to give him an Heat, then only give him a Quart
of good clean sweet Oats, and as soon as he has eaten them, put on his Bridle,
and tie him up, not forgetting all the aforesaid Ceremonies; then Dress him,
Clothe him, Saddle, Air and Water him as before directed; and when you bring
him home, order him as before showed, only give him no Hay; after he has stood
about an hour on the Bridle, give him another Quart of clean Oats, which when
he has eaten, put on his Head a sweet clean washed Muzzle, and so let him rest
till about Nine of the Clock at Night.

As concerning the use of the Muzzle, and which is the best, you must know that
as they are most useful, being rightly made, so they are hurtful if falsely
made: The true use of them is to keep your Horse from eating up his Litter,
from gnawing upon Boards and Mud-walls, and to be short, from eating any thing
but what he receives from your hand. These Muzzles are sometimes made of
Leather, and stamped full of Holes, or else close, but they are not wholesome;
for if it be alom'd Leather, the Alome is offensive, if liquor'd, the Grease
and Ouze are as bad; besides, they are too close and too hot, occasioning
oft-times sickness in your Horse, and to keep his Dung longer in his Body than
otherwise he would do.

The best Summer Muzzle is the Net-muzzle^* made of strong Packthread thick
knit, with small Mashes at the bottom, and waxing wider and wider up to the
middle of the Horses head, and bound about the top with strong Tape, having on
the near side a Loop, and on the far side a long String of Tape to be fastened
to the Horses head.

The best Winter Muzzle is made of strong double Canvas, with a round bottom,
and a square Lettice Window of small Tape before his Nostrils, down to the
bottom of the Muzzle; and this must also have a Loop and a String to fasten it
to his Head as the other.

At Nine of the Clock at Night visit your Horse again, and having performed
your By-ceremonies as aforesaid, give him a quart of clean sifted Oats, and as
soon as he has eat them, put on his Muzzle, toss up his Litter, and leave him
for that Night. The next Morning very early go to him, and if he is laid, do
not disturb him, but employ your time until he rises, by sifting and cleaning
a quart of Oats, which rub between your hands, and wash them in a little Ale or
Beer, but not too moist, and so give it him; as soon as he has eaten them,
bridle him up, hang by his Muzzle, unclothe him, and dress him as before
directed; then put on his Body-cloth, his Breast-cloth, and so Saddle him; then
being ready to go forth, take his Bridle Rein, draw it over the top of the
Rack, then raise up his Head; then take a new laid Egg washed clean, which
break in his Mouth, and cause him to swallow it; after which wash his Tongue
and Mouth with a little Beer, and so lead him forth, observing the former
Directions to cause him to Piss or Dung; then mount him, and rake him gently to
the Course; and every while make him to smell upon other Horses Dung, whereby
to cause him to empty himself the better.

When you are come within about a Mile of the Starting Post, alight and take
off his Body-cloth and Breast-cloth, girting on his Saddle again; and having
sent away your Groom with those Clothes, and Rubbing-clothes, let him stay at
the last end of the Race till you come; then rake him gently up to the Starting
Post and beyond; make him smell to that Post, as also to the first Post, which
is called the weighing Post, that he may thereby take notice of the beginning
and end of his Course. And there start him roundly at near a three quarter
Speed, and according to his strength of Body, Ability, and cheerfulness of
Spirit, run him the whole Course through, but

During the time that you thus Course him, observe upon what Ground he runs
best, that is, upon the hilly, smooth, or rough Ground; and Course.

Having thus coursed the Course strongly and swiftly, and after a little
slightly Gallop him up and down the Field to rake his Wind, and cheer his
Spirits (your Groom being ready with your Clothes and other Necessaries) Ride
to some warm place out of the Wind, as under some Tree or Hedge, where alight,
and with a grasing or scraping Knife, which is commonly made of some broken
Sword Blade or Sithe, or for want thereof of a thin piece of old hard oaken
Wood, fashioned like a broad long Knife, with a sharp Edge, and using it with
both your hands, scrape off all the swet from every part about him; and thus do
until you find there is no more swet arise; and ever and anon move him up and
down, and then with dry Clothes rub him very well all over; then take off the
Saddle, and having scraped and rubbed his Back, put on his Body-cloth and
Breast-cloth, then his Saddle, well girted on, then Gallop him gently forth,
and again a little space after rubbing his Head, Neck, and Body as you sit on
his Back; then walk him about the Fields or Downs to cool him, and when you
find that he dries apace, rake him gently homewards, sometimes Raking and
sometimes Galloping, but do not bring him to the Stable until he is quite dry,
and when so, then dismount, and endeavor to make him Piss and empty himself;
then lead him into his Stall, and gently tie his Head up to the Rack with his
Bridle; which done presently, as having prepared it before, give him this
following Scowring.

Take a pint of good Canary, an ounce of pure clear Rosin bruised to fine dust,
and brew them together very well until incorporated together, then put thereto
a pint of good Sallad Oil, and brew them also well together; and lastly, take
an ounce and an half of brown Sugar Candy, finely beaten to powder, and mix
them together; then mull all upon the Fire, and being lukewarm, and your Horse
newly come in from his Heat, as before showed you, draw his Head up to the
Rack, and with a Drenching Horn give him this Scowring, which is strong, and
takes away all manner of molten Grease and foulness whatsoever.

As soon as you have given him this Scowring, presently let his Legs be rubbed,
and take off his Saddle and Clothes, and finding his Body dry, run slightly
over it with your Curry-Comb, and after with a Brush, then dust well, and
lastly rub over his whole Body with dry Clothes, especially his Head, Nape of
the Neck, and about his Heart; then Clothe him up warm as at other times, and
whisp him round with great warm Whisps, and if you throw over him a little lose
Blanket, it will not be amiss, especially if the Season is cold.

Your Horse must fast two hours after the raking the Scouring, all which time
continue with him, and keep him stirring, using some noise, for nothing is
worse than to sleep or rest at such a time, and hinders the operation of the
Medicine, whereas stiring enliveneth the Spirits, and stirs up those humors
that should be removed. After he has thus fasted upon his Bridle, take a
handful of Wheat-ears (being your Pollard that is without rough Beards) but
before you give it him, put your hands under his Clothes against his Heart,
also upon his Fillets, Flanks, and on the neither part of his Thighs, and if
you find any new swet to arise, or any coldness of swet, or if you find his
Body to beat, or his breath to move fast, then do not give him any thing; for
it is a sign that there is much foulness stirred up by the Medicine, and so
makes him sick; therefore in such case only take off his Bridle, put on his
Collar, and toss up his Litter that he may lie down, and suffer him to take his
rest for about Two hours, leaving the Stable dark and free from Noise. But if
you find no such symptoms of Sickness, then proffer him the said Ears of Wheat
by two or three at a time, and if he eats Bundle of Hay as before directed, and
draw his Bridle, rubbing his Head well. About an hour after he has had his
Hay, sift him a quart of good Oats, to which put two or three handsuls of
spletted Beans, which must be very clean dressed from the hulls, so that there
may be nothing but the spleted Beans themselves; to these Oats and Beans break
two or three good shives of Bread, clean chipt, which give him, and so leave
Horse, give him the like quantity of Oats, Beans, and Bread, and when he has
eaten them, bridle him up, and dress him as before directed; then clothe him
up, but neither saddle him, nor ride him forth for this Evening after his Heat
(he being inwardly foul, and the Scowring yet working in his Body) he must not
drink any Water. But after he has stood about an hour and a half upon his
Bridle, take three Oats, and wash them in strong Ale or Beer, and so give it
him, which will inwardly cool and refresh him, so well as if he had drank
Water. Then having rested a little while, feed him well that Night at his
feeding times with Oats and splet Beans, or Oats and Bread, or altogether, or
each apart, as you find his Stomach best inclined unto; then put some Hay in
his Rack before you leave him, and go to Bed.

The next day very early first Feed, then Dress, Clothe; Saddle, and Air him
abroad, giving him Water as has been showed before; then bring him home, and
feed him with Oats, Beans, and Bread as aforesaid, but give him very little
Hay, and keep your Heating days, and the preparation the day before as has
been showed without any omission, or addition. Thus you shall spend the second
Fortnight, in which your Horse having received four sound Heats, and as many
Scowrings, Rules.

The third Fortnight make his Bread finer than before, after this manner; take
two Pecks of clean Beans, and as many of fine Wheat, grind them on the black
Stones, searce them through a fine Range, and knead it up with Yest to make it
light, then work it up, and bake it as the former.

With this Bread, (having the Crust cut away, Oats, and clean splet Beans feed
him this Fortnight, as you did the former Fortnight; also you must observe his
Heating-days, and the day before his Heat, as in the former Fortnight, only
with these Differences.

First give him not his Heats so violent as before, but with a little more
pleasure, and not overstrain him; next, do not after his Heats when he comes
home, give him any more of the former Scowring, but instead thereof,
immediately upon the end of the Heat, after he is a little cooled and clothed
up, and in the same place where you rub him, by drawing his Head up aloft as
you set in the Saddle, or raising it up otherwise, give him a Ball somewhat
bigger than a French Walnut with the Rind and all, of that Confection before
mentioned, being the true manner of making the Cordial Balls.

But to return to our former Discourse: Having thus spent the three first
Fortnight, the fourth and last Fortnight you must make the Bread much finer
than either of the former; as thus: Take three Pecks of fine Wheat, and one
Peck of clean Beans, grind them to Powder on the black Stones, and bolt them
through the finest Bolter you can get; then knead it up with very sweet
Ale-Yest, and new strong Ale, with the Whites of about Twenty Eggs: Do not put
in any Water, but instead thereof you may put in a little new Milk; then work
it up, kneading it well; then bake it, and order it according to your former
Directions.

With this Bread (the Crust being cut clean away, and with Oats sunned, beaten
and rubbed over with your hands, then new winnowed, sifted, and fine dressed, and
with the purest spleted Beans) feed your Horse at his ordinary feeding times,
after such manner as you did the last Fortnight.

Keep his Heating days the first Week of this last Fortnight as you did in the
former Fortnight, only forbearing one Heat the last Week, and not give him any
Heat, at the least for five days before his Match, but give him long and strong
Airings to keep him in Wind; nor need you give him this Fortnight any Scowrings.

If in this Fortnight Morning and Evening, you burn in your Stable, upon a
Chasing-dish of Coals, some good Frankincense, or Olibanum mixed with Storax and
Benjamin, to perfume and sweeten the place, it is very good for him, and he
will take great delight therein. And in this Fortnight, when you give him any
washed Meat, wash it not in Ale or Beer, but in the Whites of Eggs, or
Muskadine which is less pursie. Also in this Fortnight give him no Hay but what
he takes out of your Hand after his Heats, except he is a very bad Feeder, very
tender, and a great Bellyloser.

The last week of this Fortnight, if he is a foul Feeder, use the Muzzle
continually; but if he is a clean Feeder, and will touch no Litter, then three
days before your Match it is convenient to use the Muzzle.

In the Morning before the Match, feed well both before and after Airing and
Water, as at other times before Noon; and after Noon lessen his Meat a little.

Before and after Evening Airing feed him as at Noon, and water as at other
times; but be sure to come before Sunset.

This day cool him, shoe him, and do all extraordinary things of Ornament about
him, provided there be nothing to give him offense, or to hinder his Feeding,
or any other material or beneficial Action: For sometimes it happens that when
they have been shoed with light shoes, and other actions of Ornament done about
them the Night before the Course, they have taken such notice thereof, that
they have refused both to eat and to lie down; but such Horses are old, and
long-experienced in this Exercise: For as to the nice and strait platting up of
their Tails, although Ornamental, yet I do not much approve thereof, Horse,
therefore forbear those unnecessary Ornaments. And as to the necessary things
to be done to him, rather do them the day before, because on the Morning of the
Course he should find no trouble or vexation.

On the Match Day come to him very early, take off his Muzzle, rub his Head
well, and give him a pretty quantity of Oats washed in Muskadine, or in the
Whites of Eggs; but if he refuses Oats, dry and mixed with a little Wheat, or
with your lightest Bread, and as to Beans give him none: Of any of these Foods
give him but such a small quantity, as may keep life and soul together; then if
he be a Horse that is an evil emptier, retaining his Meat long, walk him
abroad, and in the places where he uses to Empty there entice him to Empty;
which as soon as he has done, bring him home, put on his Muzzle, and

When you have notice to prepare for leading him forth, then come to him, and
having washed his Snaffle in a little Muskadine, take off his Muzzle and Bridle
him up; but if you think him too Empty, you may give him three or four
Mouthfuls of the washed Meat last mentioned, Saddle and Girts with
Shoemakers-Wax, put it on his back, girting it as gently as may be, so as he
may have a feeling, but no straitness; then lay a Sheet over the Saddle next
his Skin, and over it his ordinary Cloths, Wisping them about with soft Wisps;
then if you have a Counter-pane or Cloth of State for show sake, fasten it
above all. All these things being done and you are ready Muskadine, and give it
him in a Horn, and so lead him away.

In all your Leadings upon the Course, of gentle and calm motions, suffering
him to smell upon every Dung that thereby he may empty himself, and in special
places of advantage, as where you shall find Rushes, long Grass, Heath, or the
like, walk him and entice him to Piss; but if you find no such help, then in
special Course, and principally toward the latter end, and having used the
same means before, break some of your Wisps under his Belly to cause him to
Piss. And in your Leading, if any white or thick Froth or Foam arise about his
Mouth, wipe it away with a clean Handkerchief, carrying a small Bottle of clear
Water with you to wash his Mouth now and then with.

When you come to the place of Starting, before you unclothe him, rub and chase
his Legs with hard Wisps; then pick his Feet and wash his Mouth with Water;
then unclothe him, Mount his Rider and Start fair, and so with Success unto him.

The Course being performed, you must order him, as after a sharp Heat; for
which I refer you to my Directions about Heats.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Keeping any Horse for Pleasure, Hunting, Travel, etc.
I Would have your Keeper of these Horses to rise early in the Morning by
Daybreak, or before, according to the Season of the Year, and to sift your
Horse about three Pints of good dry old Oats, and put thereto one or two
handfuls of spleted Beans with the Husks, and give it him. After he has eaten
them, let him dress him according to the order of good Horsmanship; that is,
First Curry with the Comb, then Dust, then rub with the Brush; then Dust and
rub with your wet Hands, after that with a clean Woollen-cloth, next with a
clean Linen Cloth; then pick all obscure places, and lastly Comb down his Main
and Tail. Having thus done, Saddle him and ride him forth to Water, warming him
very moderately both before and after Water, and so bring him home without
Sweat. Then after you have rubbed him all over, Clothe him and let him stand on
his Bridle above an hour; after which give him the former quantity of the said
Provender, and when he has eaten it, give him in his Rack a pretty Bundle of
Hay, and so let him rest until after Dinner, and then give him the former
quantity of the said Provender and so let him rest till the Evening; only give
him more Hay, if occasion requires. At Evening Dress him well, according to the
Directions for the Morning; then Ride him forth to Water, observing the same
Method as in the Morning; and when you come home Dress and Clothe him up, as
aforesaid, and let him stand on his Bridle as before; then give him the former
quantity of Provender, letting him rest till about Nine of the Clock, at which
time give him the former quantity of Provender, and a pretty good Bundle of
Hay, and so leave him till the Morning.

This Method observe concerning his ordinary Keeping at home where he has
Rest, and that you may dispose of Hours at your pleasure; but if you are on a
Journey, or the like, so that you cannot observe these Times, then divide the
main and whole quantity of Meat into four parts, and by consequence into
greater quantities, and give him them at the best convenience, always observing
to give the least quantity before Travel, as a third part before taking Horse,
and the two others after you come to Rest.

The reason of my dividing his Meals is, because it is very advantageous for
the Horse; for to give it him at twice fills the Stomach more, makes the
Digestion worse and the Appetite weak; whereas to give little and often, makes
the Stomach always craving, the Digestion always ready, and the Appetite never
wanting. Grooms pains for the benefit of a good Horse?

If you intend to give him an Heat, as to Hunt, Travel, Gallop, or the like,
which were not amiss to do two or three times a Week; then observe all your
former Observations, only the Night before give him little or no Hay. In the
Morning early before his Heat, and before his Dressing, give him three or four
handfuls of clean sifted Oats, washed either in strong Ale or Beer; then Dress
him, Saddle him, and give him his Heat. But if it be sudden and violent, then
let it be when he has very well emptied himself.

After his Heat rub him very well, and bring him dry into the Stable; then
Clothe him up warm, and let him stand on his Bridle about two Hours; then give
him a little Bundle of Hay to Bridle, and an hour after feed him, as has been
already showed, only with the first Oats give him an handful or more of
Hemp Seed well dusted and mixed.

At Night warm him a little Water and give it him lukewarm; then about an hour
after give him his Provender, with a pretty good Bundle of Hay, and so let him
rest till the next Morning.

The next Morning do all things as in his ordinary

Let him stand on Litter both Night and Day; but change it often, and keep the
Planks clean.

If you intend to Travel a Journey, in the Morning then give him no Hay, or but
little the Night before: If you take your Journey in the Afternoon, then give
no Hay, or but little in the Morning.

In your Journey ride moderately the first Water before you come to your Inn,
if possible; but if you cannot, then give warm Water in the Inn after he is
fully cooled.

Oil of Trotters is excellent, being applied very warm and well chafed in, for
the keeping of his Sinews and Limbs nimble, as also to help lameness and
stiffness.

Neither Wash your Horse, nor Walk him; for the first endangereth Foundring in
the Body or Surfeits, and the latter is the ground of all strong Colds, which
turn to Glanders and Rottenness: But if necessity compel you to either, as foul
Ways and long Stays, then rather wash his Legs with Pails of Water at the
Stable-Door, than to wash him in a Pond or River. And for Walking, rather sit
on his Back to keep his Spirits stirring, than to lead him in the hand.

This is sufficient Directions for clean and ordinary Keeping a Horse.

CHAP. XVII.
Of several Excellent Medicines for curing Maladies most frequent in Horses.
TO Treat at large of Medicines and Farriery would take up a Volume it self;
Markham, Snape, and others have done it already; and all Gentlemen that keep
good Horses have their particular Farriers, in the choosing of whom they ought
to be very cautious. This Chapter gives you some particular Medicines and
Directions for such Maladies and Mischances that very often happen, being such
as have been Approved of by Persons of Quality, and very good Horsemen. But for
as much as he is esteemed a better Horsman, that can keep his Horse in good
health (by preventing such like Maladies) than he that can cure them, I shall
begin with some Observations relating thereunto. And first,

Of Sickness in General.
Whenever you perceive your Horse to forsake his Meat, to Droop, or show any
Symptom of Sickness, if it be not great, forbear letting Blood, which is a
great weakening of the Spirits; but if the Signs be great and dangerous, then
let Blood immediately; and for three Mornings together (the Horse being
Fasting) give him half an Ounce of a Powder called Diabexaple, brewed either in
a Pint of fine Syrup of Sugar, or for want thereof the like quantity of
Molosses; also a Pint of Dragon-Water, or Carduus-Water, or a Quart of sweet
strong Alewort will do as well; This Drench give him in a Horn, and if he is of
ability of Body, Ride him after it in some warm place, suffering him to Fast
about two hours: At Noon give him a sweet Mash, Clothe him warm, and let him
not drink cold Water.

This Diahexaple Powder being not commonly known, and by consequence not
rightly prepared, I shall here give the Receipt to make it.

Take of the Grains of Ivory, Paradise and Myrrh, of the Roots Gentian, Enula
Campana and Turmerick, of each a like quantity; then beat and searce them into
a subtle Powder, and give him such a quantity thereof as before directed. This
comforts and strengthens the inward Parts, helps the Lungs, resists
putrefaction of Humors, opens Obstructions, and if taken in time, not only
recovers him, but prevents many Distempers.

Observations relating to Sickness.
IF you find in your Horse a shortness of Breath, loathing of his Meat, an
heaviness of Countenance, dull Eyes, staring Hair, a rotten or dry Cough, an
extreme Looseness, or costiveness, yellowness of the Eyes and Skin, no casting
his Loat, lean and hide-bound, to have a staggering Pace, a Frantic Behavior,
extraordinary lying down,

Observations from the Dung.
YOU ought to observe his Dung, which is a certain Rule to know the condition
of his Inward Parts; yet before he passes his Judgment, he ought to consider
what Feeding he has had, which is a great matter. For example, if Dung be of a
pale and whitish yellow Complexion, and clear, hanging together without
separation, more than as the weight breaks it in the falling, being neither too
Thick nor too Thin, these are Signs of his being clean, well fed, and free from
Maladies; if it be well colored, yet fall from him in round knots, then' its a
Sign of soul feeding, and he has either too much Hay, and too little Corn, or
Oats, too much Litter. If his Dung be redish and hard, then he has had Heats,
and Costiveness will follow; if it be pale and loose, it denotes inward
coldness of Body, or too much moist Feeding; if it be in round Pellets, and
blackish, or brown, it shows inward heat in the Body; if it be Greasy, it shows
foulness, and of that Grease is molten, but cannot come away; if he voids Grease
in Gross Substance with his Dung, if the Grease be white and clear, then it
comes away kindly, and there is no danger, but if it be yellow and putrified,
then the Grease

Concerning Feeding.
OBserve that if there be any Drink, or Meat that is good for the Horse, and if
he refuse to take it, do not force him to it, but use gentle Means, tempting
him when he is most Thirsty, or Hungry; also mix the Drink, or Meat he loves

Concerning the State of his Body.
YOU must observe that the Strongest State of Body, which is the Highest of
Flesh, provided it is good, hard and without inward foulness is the best; yet
you must take notice that his Shape and Fee^ing are to be considered: As
Feeding, some will Feed outwardly carrying a thick Rib, when inwardly they are
Clean, and without all manner of Foulness; and there be others (as the latter)
that appear clean to the Eye, showing nothing but Skin and Bone, when they are
full of inward Fatness; In this Case there are two helps, the one inward, and
the other outward: The Inward help is only sharp Exercise which dissolves and
Melts the Foulness, and strong Scourings, which will bring it away: The outward
Help is Handling and Feeling his Body, especially his Ribs toward his Flank,
and if his Flesh generally handle loose and soft, your Fingers sinking or
pitting in, it is a Sign of his Foulness; but if his Flesh be hard and firm,
only upon his hindmost Rib it handles soft and Downy, it is a Sign there is
Grease, and Foul Matter within, which must be removed, let him appear never so
lean. If he be Fat and Thick, and as it were closed up between the Chaps, or if
his Jaws handle full and Fleshy, it is a Sign of much Foulness, both in the Head
and Body; but if he handle Thin, Clean, and only with some Lumps, or small
Kirnels within his Chaps, in such case it is a Sign only of some cold newly
taken.

Concerning his Hair.
YOU must well observe your Horses Hair in General, but especially his Neck,
and those parts that are uncovered; for if they be sleek, smooth, and close,
then he is in good Case, but if his Hair be rough and stareing, then he is
inwardly cold at the Heart, wants Cloths and warm keeping, or else there is
some Sickness creeping upon him.

Concerning Lameness, or Stiffness.
TAke notice that if your Horse be subject to Lameness, or Stiffness of Joints
or Sinews, Subbating or tenderness of Feet, first give him his Heats upon soft
and smooth Ground, forbearing hard and Stony Highways or the like.

Observations from the Urine.
ALthough it is the General Opinion that the Urine is a deceiver, yet something
may be discovered thereby, viz. If the Urine be of an High and Ruddy color
like Blood, then he has been Over-ridden, or Ridden too early after
Winter-grass; if the Urine carry a white cream on the top, it shows a weak
Back, and a Consumption of Seed; if it be of a pale yellowish color, rather
thick than thin, and of a strong smell, it is an healthful, sound and good
Urine; if it be of an high Complexion, and clear like old Marchbeer, his Body
is inflamed, and he has taken some Surfeit; A green Urine shows a Consumption
of the Body; Urine with Bloody streaks, denotes an Ulcer in the Kidneys, and a
black thick cloudy Urine shows Death.

Concerning the Privy Parts.
IF your Horses Stones hang down, side or long from his Body, he is out of
Heart or Lust, and is either sick of Grease, or other foul Humors; but if they
be close couched up, then he is in good plight and health.

Having given you these Observations concerning the State and Condition of your
Horse, our next business shall be to proceed to Diseases, and their Cures.

Receipts of Julips, Glisters, and Potions a Horse, Overheated by violent
Exercise, approved of by the late Duke of New Castle. For a Cold.
TAke half a Pound of Honey, with as much Treakle mixed together, then take a
Pound of Cumminseed, an Ounce of Bay Berries, and an Annyseeds all beaten to
powder, which mix together, and put so much thereof into the Honey and Treakle,
as will make it thick like a Hasty-puddin: This give your Horse both before and
after his Riding.

To Comfort a Horse Over-ridden.
TAke a Pint of new Milk,, and put therein the Yolks of three new-laid Eggs
well beaten, Saffron, and two or three Spoonfulls of Sallet-Oyl, let them be
lukewarm, and given to him in a Drenching-horn.

Honey is a very sovereign thing for the Lungs, for a Cold, and to open all
obstructions; and if you put a good Spoonful thereof in his Oats for some time
together, it will work notable effects, and recover a very pursey Horse.

Horses of great Exercise, or such as are overheated must be often let Blood,
sometimes three

To let a Horse Blood in the Mouth, and then to rub it with Salt, and cause him
to drink his Blood, is an excellent thing; but you must purge him well, that
his Grease may come away, for Horses of great Exercise would else be always
foundred in the Body, and then they will never thrive, until that Melted Grease
be brought away.

The best Purge is an Ounce of Alloessicatrina lap't up in fresh Butter, and
made into Pills, which give him after he has rested a while. Then give him this
following Julip.

Take Mell Rosarum, Conserve of Damask Roses, and Burrage, with Syrup of
Violets, of each four Ounces, Burrage, Endive, Suckory, Bugloss, and
Plantain-Water of each about a Pint and a half, which said Water and Conserves
use thus. Put the Conserves into a Mortar, and beat them Lemmons it is very
good; of this Drink give him twice or thrice a week for about a Month, and let
him rest afterward, and it will be effectual.

All the time of this great Heat, feed him with Wheat-bran amongst his Oats
washed in strong Beer, or Ale if he likes it; for Bran is very good to get out
his Belly, and to moisten him, because it dries up all superfluous humors that
heat him. Likewise in his Water, when he drinks put some of the Bran, which is
very good to cool and moisten him; and to loosen his skin if he be Hidebound,
which Heats do occasion.

Lettuces, Succory Roots, and Endive Roots, are very good to cool him, being
boiled in the Water he drinks: And during the time of his Cure, let him have no
violent Exercise, only gentle walking.

To refresh a Horse, give him Carots with his Oats, and wash his Oats in small
Beer, which is very good.

A cooling Julip in a Fever.
TAke Barley-water a Quart, two Ounces of Syrup of Violets, and an Ounce of
Syrup of Lemons, mix these together, and give him to quench his thirst.

If he is loose of Body in his Fever, to bind him take one Ounce of Ivory, with
as much Hartshorn, rasp them, and put them in three Quarts of Water, which must
boil till about half is consumed, then strain it through a Cloth; and to this
Liquor put four Ounces of the Juice of Barberies, and one Ounce and a half of
Syrup of Pomegranates, and give it him in a Drenching-horn cold.

A cooling Potion.
TAke a Quart of Whey, four or five Ounces of Syrup of Violets, the like
quantity of Cassia, with a little Manna; and this will both cool and purge him
gently. This given in a Gl^ster is very cooling to the Bowels.

All these cooling things are very good for surfeited and overheated Horses:
But first give the Purge of Aloes to bring away the Grease.

For the Bots and all manner of Worms.
TAke a Quart of new Milk, and as much clarified Honey as will make it very
sweet; give it him in a Horn lukewarm early in the Morning, having fasted all
Night before; then bridle him up, and let him stand tied to the empty Rack for
about two hours Then take half a Pint of White Wind, and dissolve into it a
good Spoonful of Black-soap, and give it him, causing him to fast about two
hours after; and this will cause him to void the Worms in great abundance. Or
take Salt and Water and give it him in a Horn.

For a Looseness.
TAke a Quart of Red-wine, set it on the fire, put in it one Ounce and a half
of Bolealmony made in fine Powder, and two Ounces and a half of Conserve of
Sloes, then stir and mix them well together; then take it off the fire, and put
thereto one or two Spoonfuls of the Powder of Cinnamon; mix these together, and
give him to drink. Let him fast two Hours after, and let him eat no washed
Meat: Hay is wholesome, so is Bread and Oats, so as they be well mixed with Wheat
or Beans, but not otherwise.

An excellent Scowring when others will do no good.
TAke a quarter of a Pound of sweet Butter, half as much Castle-soap, beat them
well together; Hempseed bruised, of Anniseeds bruised a handful, one Ounce of
Sugar Candy, half a spoonful of Rosin finely bruised; work all these into a
Paste, and give it him made up in Pills after his Heat, or when you have warmed
him, and stirred up the Grease and Foulness within him.

For the Spleen.
MAke a Plaster of Oxicroceum, spread it upon Sheeps Leather, which lay on,
suffering it to lie until it come off it self.

A Glister to Expel Wind.
TAke Fennel Seeds and Anniseeds of each two Spoonfuls, bruise them, then put
thereto half a handful of Pellitory of the Wall, Camomile, Rosemary flowers,
and Pennyroyal.

For the Wind-Collick.
Boil a spoonful of Cummin seeds with a few Camomile flowers in Posset drink,
and give it him to drink; which is good to expel the Wind.

For a Horse that pisseth Blood.
TAke a spoonful of Taragon steep it in Whitewine, Poppy seeds beaten as will
lie upon a shilling, give this in White Wind, which will effect the Cure.

For a Cough.
TAke the Root of Gentian, slice, dry, and beat it to Powder, of which give him
fasting as much in half a Pint of his own Water, as will lie upon a shilling.
This must be given Cough or Heaving to be removed; and all the time of his Cure
let him stand in the Stable.

To cause a Horse to piss, that has the Wind-Collick.
TAke a quarter of a Pound of Castle-soap small, to which put two Ounces of
Dialth^^a, Mortar, make them up into pretty big Balls, and so keep them for
use, for they will continue good a year. Take one of the Balls, crumble it into
a Pint and a half of strong Beer scalding hot, to dissolve the Ball, then let
it stand till it is lukewarm, and so give it him in a Horn, and let him fast
about an hour; this will empty him of all his Piss.

To make a Horse Stale or Piss.
TAke the quantity of a Walnut of Castle-soap, boil it a little in a Pint of
strong Beer, and give it him in a Horn lukewarm, and it will cause him to Piss.

To cause a Horse to Vomit.
TAke two large Roots of Polipodium of the Oak, wash and scrape them very
clean, and tie it to his Snaffle or Bit, then let it be steeped in Oil of Spike
a whole Night, and in the Morning fasting put on his Bridle with the Roots tied
to the Bit, and ride him softly for about an hour, with it in his Mouth, and if
he be troubled with any Phlegmatic, or Rheumatick humors, or with any cold or
filthy Matter that clogs or anoys his Stomach, it will cause him to cast it
forth at his Mouth or Nose: It will also cause him to Sneeze and cough much,
purging forth filth and slimy Matter, so that it will soon cleanse his Body,
and purify his Blood. This you may give to a Horse newly taken from Grass, or
to one that has taken a Cold, or is foggy and pursie; this being done, give him
White Wind and Honey, as also a Cordial.

A Purge.
TAke a Quart of strong Ale-wort, a quarter of a Pint of Honey, two Ounces of
London Treacle, mix and brew them all together, and give it him lukewarm, then
keep him upon the Bit about Six hours warm clothed and littered; then give him
a sweet Mash, and White-water, Rack him with sweet Wheat-straw, Oats and Bran;
this both purges and comfort: And two or three days after give him this
following Drink.

Another Purge.
TAke a Pint of White Wind, put in it one Ounce of Sena to sleep all Night, in
the Morning early strain it, and put therein one Ounce of Powder of Aloes, half
an Ounce of Agarick, and a Spoonful of Liquorish Powder; mix these well
together, and give it him lukewarm in a Horn, then ride him gently about a
quarter of an hour after it, and so set him up warm, well clothed and littered;
let no Air come to him, nor suffer him to eat or drink for about six hours: At
Night give him a sweet Mash, and let his Meat be sweet Wheat-straw, Oats and
Bran: The next Day let him Blood, and prick him in the third Furrow of his
Mouth; and if his Blood be bad, take about two Quarts from him: But if good
about a Quart; keep him warm, and give him sweet Mashes or White-water, and put
into his Drink either the Powder of Brimstone or Elecampane, Fenugreek or
Turmerick, or one or more together, which being well mixed, put thereof into his
Drink a Spoonful at a time. This is very good to cool and purify the Blood, to
purge Choler and other peccant Humors. This Purge is not only good for Horses
newly taken from Grass, but for those that are sick or surfeited.

Glisters.
A Glister is a very good Preparative to a Purging Drink, cleansing the Guts,
and refreshes the Vital Parts; so that before he give a Drink, whether Purging
or otherwise, if the Horse be not soluble in Body, that after Blood-letting,
the next day he give a Glister.

A Dec^ction is a Broth made of diverse Herbs, Mall^ws, Marshmallows, Camomile,
Pellitory, and sometimes white Lilly Roots, which boil in Water till the third
part is consumed. Sometimes instead of Herbs and Water, fat Bees Broth, Milk or
Whey will serve.

The quantity of Broth, Milk or Whey, is according to the age, strength, and
bigness of the Horse; for if a strong, large, fat and lustly Horse, three Pints
is usual, otherwise a Quart is sufficient: It is usual to put in half a Pint of
Oil, two Salt, and sometimes Verjuce, or Honey, as occasion requires.

The usual Druggs are Sena, Cassia, Anniseeds, Agarick, also the Oils of
Camomile, Violets, and ^ill, S^gar-Candy and such like. As to the quantity of
Druggs, three ounces in a Glister is the most used, often less; and put in not
above four ounces of Butter, and when you give it, let it be lukewarm.

Your Horse should be empty when you give it, Tail close to his Fundament all
the while.

The length of the Glister-pipe should be about a Foot long in the Shank, and
put it home, and draw out the Pipe by Degrees.

For a Vein that swells upon letting Blood.
TAke black Pitch, white Pitch and R^sin, of Populeen, or with Soap and Brandy.

A Horse Burnt by a Mare.
THis is known by the Mattering of his Yard within; for Cure take a Pint of
White Wind, in which Boil a Quarter of a Pound of Roch-Allom, and when it is
cool, Squirt it with a Syring as far into his Yard as you can; and it will
effect the Cure.

The Staggers.
THis Disease proceeds from corrupt Blood, or Brain, from whence proceeds a
vaporous Spirit, dissolved by a weak heat, which afflicts the whole Head. For
Cure, first take a pretty long strait Stick well smoothed about the bigness of
a Tobacco-pipe, and at one end cut a Notch, this Stick put up to the top of his
Head, jobbing it a little hard, and turn the Stick, which will occasion him to
Bleed freely; then give him this following Drink, Take an Ounce of Anniseeds,
and as much Turme^ick beaten small, half a Quarter of a Pint of Aquavitae, a
Pint and a half of Mild Beer, a Pint of Verjuce, or for want thereof a quarter
of a Pint of White-wine-vinegar, and put it to the Beer, and the rest of the
Ingredients, which make lukewarm, and give it him in the Morning fasting; as
soon as he has took it, take a handful of Herb-grace beaten small in a Mortar,
a penny worth of Aquavitae, and put half the Aquavitae into one Ear, holding it
upright in the hollow of your hand, and put half the Herb-grace in after it;
then put in Wool or Tow, and tie up the Ear with a Garter, and the like do to
the other ^ar, and tie them both up together; after Twenty four Hours untye his
Ears, and take out the Wool, and Herb-grace; the next Day in the Morning let
him Blood on both sides of his Neck, and save about a Pint of the Blood, and
put thereto a handful of Salt, stir it well together, and give it him fasting:
four or five Hours after give him sweet H^y, and at Night, warm Water and Bran:
After you have given him the first drink, tie up one of his Forelegs, and strew
good store of Litter under him, and so let him take his rest, and he will
either recover in a Day or Two, or Dye; the Vinegar will make him piss, and the
Aquavitae cause him to sleep: If he comes not to his Stomach, then give him
Honey, and White Wind, and a Cordial; when you let him Blood in the Head with
your Cornet-Horn, let him Blood in the third Furrow of his Mouth, and let him
bleed well; also let him Blood in the Gristle of his Nose, with a long Bodkin,
or Shomakers Awl.

For a Broken-winded Horse.
TAke Boars Dung, dry it to Powder, put a Spoonful of it into a Quart of Milk
newly taken from the Cow, or else made luke warm, and give it him: If you see
that this quantity will not make him sick the first time you give it him, then
give him two Spoonfuls more of the Powder, and this in four or five times
taking will Cure him. This drink must be given every third day. A Spoonful of
the Powder of a H^dghog being given, does much add to the Cure.

To stop Bleeding.
LEt him Blood in both the Plate-veins, then wind a Thum-band of wet Hay about
his Neck, so long to come from his Ears to his Breast, and so keep it wet until
you find the Blood to Stanch.

Or take Bettony, and stamp it in a Mortar with Salt, put it into his Nose, or
apply it to the Wound, and it will stanch it.

For a Shoulder-strain.
FIrst tie up his sound Leg with a Garter or List, then walk or drive him on
his other three Legs, that he may lay the weight of his Body upon the lame Leg,
and so keep him until he begin to Sweat at the Cods and Ears with pain. The
reason of this is to see the Plait-Vein the plainer; then let down the lame Leg
and the Vein will appear plainer; but if it does not yet appear visible enough,
then heat a little Water, and bathe the place grieved therewith, which will
cause it to appear bigger; then let him Blood, and when you see the Blood is
come into the Plait-Vein, and that the Vein is plain Leg again, and bleed him
there on that side the bottom of his Chest his lame Leg is on. Let him bleed
about a Quart or two, and the greater the Lameness is, the more let him Bleed;
after he has bled about a Quart on the ground; put into a Bowl a good handful
of Salt, and let him bleed about another Quart, keeping the Blood and Salt
always stirring to prevent cloding; then stop the said Plait-Vein with a piece
of Lead to hinder more bleeding. Then having in a readiness about an Ounce and
an half of Oil of Turpentine, and as much Strong Beer; put them into a
Glass-Vial, shake them well together, bathe it well in with your hand all about
his Shoulder, his Breast, and down to his Knee; then take the Blood and Salt,
and bathe that as the former; then set him up to his Meat, and with a Garter or
List tie both his Forelegs together as close as you can; the next day untye
them, take Fore-Feet together, as before directed; but if he goes not well the
first day, do but walk him the second day; and the third day after his first
dressing, do not only tie his Legs, but flat a Stick on both sides, like a
Wedge, about the bigness of a Sixpence; this drive between the Toes of his
Shoes and the Toe of his Foot fast, so that it may not Stable tie his Legs
close, and peg him with a Wedge; and when you take him out to walk or ride,
untye his Legs and take out the Wedge. Do this every Night and Day until he is
cured, which will be in a few days, if it be newly taken. To let Blood once,
and to Anoint it once with Oil of Turpentine and Beer, and once with the Blood
and Salt, with the help of tying his Legs and wedging them, as aforesaid, is
sufficient.

Hog's Grease is very good for a Strain.

For a Sinew-sprung Horse.
TAke a Pint of Linseed Oil, boil it, then put in three pennyworth of
Aquavitae, stir them together and anoint his Legs therewith.

For a Back Sinew-Strain, or any Grief,
TAke a fat Sucking Mastive Whelp, Flay it and bowel it; then stop its Body
full of black Snails and gray Snails, Roast it at a reasonable good Fire, and
when it begins to warm bast it with six Ounces of Oil o^ Spike made yellow with
Saffron, and the like quantity of the Oil of Wax. The Dripping and Moisture
that falls from it, save, and keep in a Gally-Pot, with which anoint the
grieved place, working it in very hot, holding a hot Bar of Iron before it; And
thus do every Morning and Evening until it is cured.

For Grease fallen into the Legs, and the Scratches.
TAke of Nerve-Oyl, Train-Oyl, and Oil of Bays, of each half a Pint, with the
bigness of an Egg of Alom, boil these well together; then having cleansed the
Sores and opened the Pultis, if there be any, with Salve anoint the place
grieved.

Also for the Scratches; Take Verdigrease and Burnt Alom mixed together, and so
apply it, keeping him dry.

A Purgation for a Horse that is si^k of his Grease, or any Costiveness.
TAke a Pint of good old Whitewine, set it on the Fire and dissolve it in a
lump of Castle-Soap as big as a large Pigeons-Egg, then strain them well
together on the Fire; then take it off, and put into it two good handfuls of
Hempseed finely beaten, with an Ounce and an half of good Sugar Candy beaten to
fine powder, mix all these well together; then having warmed the Horse to stir
up the Grease and other foul Humors, give him this to drink, and walk him for a
little while after it to make the Potion work; then set him up warm, and after
a little stirring him in the Stable, if he grows sickish let him lie down; then
after two or three hours fasting give him a sweet Mash, and so feed him as at
other times.

For a Spavin, Splint, Curb, or Ring-bone.
FIrst, Clip away the Hair all about the Excretion, next take a piece of Alom'd
Leather just as big as the place where the Hair is cut away; then spread the
said Leather round the edge with a little Shoemakers-Wax; then take the Herb
Sparagus (which has the virtue to raise Blisters) bruise it in a Mortar, and
lay it on the Leather in the middle where the Wax is not, which ought to be the
bigness of the Knot or Excretion, and bind it fast thereon, and so let it lie
(if in the Spring or Summer, when the Sparagus is in its virtue) two or three
hours; but if in the Winter when it has not that virtue, then add to it a drop
or two of Origanum, and let it lie on a day, and be sure tie up the Horses Head
for about two hours, lest he bites it away. When you have taken off the
Plaster, anoint the place with Train-Oyl lukewarm, and you shall find no Knot.

To make the Hoofs grow quickly, and to be tough and strong.
TAke seven Ounces of Juice of Garlic, two Pound of old Hog's Grease, and one
handful of Asses or Cows-Dung, mix them and boil them all well together, and
with this both stop his feet and anoint the Crownets of his hoofs.

For any Founder, Surbait, or the like in the Feet.
FIrst, Pare thin, open his Heels wide, and take a good quantity of the Blood
from the Toes, then tack on a Shoe somewhat hollow; next take Frankincense, and
rouling it in a little fine Cotton Wool or Bombast, with an hot Iron melt it
into the Foot betwixt the Shoe and the Toe, Hog's Grease, melt it on the Fire,
and mix it with Wheat-Bran to make it thick like a Pultis; then stop up his
Foot therewith as hot as he can endure it, covering it with a p^ece of an old
Shoe, and splint it up, causing him to stand still for three or four days; and
if occasion requires, renew it till the Cure is perfected.

A general Salve for any Sore swelling.
TAke Turpentine, Black Soap, Hog's Grease and Pitch, of each a little quantity;
mix and boil them well together, and apply it warm to the Grief.

The Farcy.
TAke a handful of Rice and ten Cloves of Garlic, beat them together; then
take a pennyworth of Aquavitae, and strain them through a Cloth; then take a
little Black-Wool to drink up the Moisture, and put into each Ear half the
Wool, and sew up the Ears together; then cut his Forehead and put into the Hole
the inner Rind of an Elder-stick about an Inch long, and keep him in the House
that no Wet fall into his Ears the first day and night.

For any Farcy, Mang, Scab or Leprosy.
LET Blood, then take a Quart of Wine or Vinegar, put therein a quarter of a
Pound of good Tobacco; then set it on an Ember-fire to simper, and not boil,
for a whole Night; then strain it, and with this Water wash the infected place,
as often as occasion requires, until it is cured.

To help a Horse that Galls between the Legs, through Heat or ill Dressing.
TAke a raw Egg, crush it between his Legs, rubbing the galled place very well
therewith after the Sores are made dry.

For a Canker in a Horses Mouth.
TAke half a Pint of the best White Wind Vinegar, half a Pound of Roach Allom,
and a handful of Sage; boil these together, and therewith wash his Mouth and
Tongue.

For a Horse that has got an Overreach, or Tread of the Heel.
FIrst, Search it well to the bottom, take out all the Gravel and wash it with
Piss; then take a good handful of Nettles and a good handful of Salt, put them
in a Cloth and bind them to the Sore; this do two or three Mornings together,
then set on the Shoe with a Leather under it; which done, pour in some
Hog's Grease scalding hot, then some Rozia also scalding hot; and then after
that put in some Wheat-Bran.

To draw out a Nail or Thorn in any place.
TAke House-Snails and sees them in Butter, and apply it for use.

For a Stub, or other hurt in or about the Foot.
TAke Beeswax, Pitch, Hog's Grease, and Turpentine, boil them together in an
Earthen Pipkin; but put in the Turpentine a little before you take it off the
Fire, stirring it well together; then make the Wound clean and pour it in
scalding hot; then dip Tow in it, and stuff the Sore place full of it, and it
will heal in a short time.

To kill Lice.
TAke the Juice of Beets and Staveacre beaten together, and therewith anoint
his Body all over, and it will kill them.

Also to anoint him with Hog's Grease under the Mane, and upon the Ridge-bone of
the Back, will destroy them.

For a Prick in the Foot.
FIrst, Take off the Shoe, and pare his Hoof to find out the bottom of the
Wound; then take Turpentine, fresh Butter, and a little black Pitch boiled
together, and pour it into the Wound scalding hot; then dip some Tow in the
same, and stuff it well between the Shoe and the Foot, splintering and binding
it about with Sticks and Leather to keep it on; but if it be a long Nail that
struck into his Foot on the Road in a Journey; then pluck out the Nail, heat it
red hot, and put it into the Hole as far as it went in; and having thus seared
it with the Nail, to keep it from festring, melt fresh Butter and Turpentine
with a little black-Pitch, and pour into the Hole as aforesaid; then clap on
the Shoe, and stuff the Foot with Tow, as before directed.

A green Ointment to heal a Wound.
TAke Water-betony, Comfry, Red Sage, Jerusalem Sage, Mugwert, Rue,
Southernwood, and Rosemary, of each a handful, Boil them in a Pint of
May-Butter, with as much Mutton-Suet, and when it has Boiled a while, take it
off the Fire, Strain it through a Cloth, and so put it into a Pot for your
use. But before you

Take Half a Pound of Bole-Armoniack, a Quarter of a pound of White Copperas,
and two Ounces of R^ch-Allom, beat the Copperas and Allom, and put them into a
Pipkin to melt on the Fire; when it is cold, put it with the Bole-Armoniack
into a Mortar, and beat them together to a Powder; then take two Quarts of
Spring Water, set it over the Fire close covered till it be Scalding Pitcher,
to which put two Spoonfuls of the said Powder, and stir it well together before
you let it settle; then when it has stood two or three days settling, take off
the uppermost froth, and gently pour out the Water into another Pitcher clean
from the Dregs. And so it is fit for use, always useing it as warm as can be
endured; and when you wash the Wound, let the Cloth lie on a while, then wet a
double Cloth in the said Water, and lay it Ointment. This Water is very good
for any Wound old or new.

For a Sore Back, or Navell-Gall.
TAke a Quarter of a Pint of Train-Oyl, and Boil in it as much beaten
Verdigrease as the quantity of a Nutmeg, put it into a Pot, and

For a new Wound made by a Stake, or Stub.
WAsh the Wound well with Vinegar and Butter melted together, then take a Clout
tied to the end of a Stick, which dip in some Linseed-Oyl, and run it to the
bottom of the Wound, anointing it well; and in a short time it Populeon round
about the Swelling.

Train-Oyl, and Verdigrease melted together, will Heal and Skin any Wound in a
short time.

For Horses Yard that is foul and furred without, that he pisseth in the Cod.
TAke Fresh Butter and White-wine-vinegar, melt Yard, taking off the Filth, and
wash it with the Butter and Vinegar until it be clean, and eject some of it
with a Syring up into his Yard.

A help for a tired Horse.
IF your Horse is tired in your Journey, or in a Hunting Match, give him warm
Urin to Drink, and let him Blood in the Mouth, suffering him to swallow it; and
if you come where Nettles are, rub his Mouth, and Sheath well therewith, and
ride him gently; and when you come to your Inn or Journies end, let him be set
up warm, and before your going to Bed give him about six Spoonfuls of
Aquavitae, and as much Provender as he will eat; the next Morning rub his Legs
with Sheeps-feet-Oyl, and he will be recovered of his tiredness.

For the Glanders.
TAke a Quart of Red Vinegar, but not Wine-Vinegar, set it over the Fire, and
put therein two Spoonfuls of English Honey, and as much Elecampane, beaten to
Powder finely searsed, and as much Roch-Allom, as the bigness of an Egg, also
beaten to fine Powder; and when all these are well Boiled, put in half a Pint
of Sallet Oil, then take it off, and let it stand until it is luke warm; and of
this give your Horse six Spoonfuls in each Nostril, with a little Horn; then
ride him out two or three turns, and tie his Head down to his Foot, for about
four Hours, and let him fast as long. You must give this Drink at nine several
times, being three days betwixt every Drink; every second day after he has had
his Drink, give him Chickens Guts warm rolled in beaten Bay Salt, and put them
down his Throat, giving him warm Water, and wet Hay all the time you give him
this Drink, and this will amend the Glanders, and the Morning in the Chine.

For a Cold, that is not the Glanders.
TAke two Spoonfuls of Pepper well beaten, the like quantity of Mustard, four
Spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, four Onions roasted very soft and cut small; then take
two Spoonfuls of Elecampane beaten into fine Powder, mix all these together,
and make them into Balls with Fresh Butter, and give him them three at a time;
and nine Balls so given him at three times will Cure him, so that you may
Travel him upon it.

Another for a Cold.
TAke new Butter unwasht without Salt mixed in it, with brown Sugar Candy,
Anniseeds and Liquorice, but if the Horse rattles in the Head, put in two
Cloves of Garlic made in Balls, and this give him for three Mornings together.

Balls for the Glanders, that Cures also a Cold, prevents heavy Sickness,
purges away all Molten Grease, recovers a loose Stomach, keeps the Heart from
fainting with Exercise, and makes a lean Horse soon fat.
TAke Anniseeds, Cumminseeds, Fenugreek-Seeds, Elecampane-roots, of each two
Ounces finely beaten and searsed, then add to them two Ounces of
Brown-Sugar-Candy finely beaten, and the like quantity of the Flower of
Brimstone; then take an Ounce of the Juice of Liquorice, and dissolve it on the
Fire in half a Pint of White Wind, then take an Ounce of the best Chimical Oil
of Anniseeds, and three Ounces of Syrup of Coltsfoot; which done, take half a
Pint of Sallet Oil, the like quantity of pure Honey, and Syrup of Molosses; mix
all this with the former Powders, and with as much Fine Wheat Flour as will
bind them together, to work into a stiff Past; and so keep them for use in a
close Gally Pot, and when you have occasion for any, take some of the Past, and
make it into Balls, about the bigness of a small Egg.

For the use of these Balls they are excellent Glanders, or a Cold, take one of
these Balls, anoint it all over with sweet Butter, and so give it your Horse in
the Morning fasting; then ride him a little after, and feed and water him as
you are accustomed to do, and this observe for a Week together. If you use
these Balls to prevent Sickness, use them in the same manner for three or four
days. If you use them to fatten your Horse, then give them for about a
Fort-night Grease or Foulness, then after his Heat, and in his Heat you must
use them. Also if you dissolve the Ball in his usual Water made lukewarm, it
works the like effect, and fattens very much. If you give your Horse one of
these Balls before a Journey, it prevents tiring: To give it in the height of
Travel does refresh Weariness, and to give it after Travel prevents Surfeits
and inward Sickness.

A Water for Sore Eyes.
TAke a Pint of Snow Water, and dissolve it into three or four Drams of white
Vitriol, and wash his Eyes therewith, or oftener until cured.

For a Pin, Pearl, Web, or any Film in the
TAke a new-laid Egg, roast it very hard, cleave it in sunder long-ways and
take out the Yolk; then fill the empty Holes with white Vitriol finely beaten,
and so close the Egg again; then roast it the second time until the Vitriol is
melted; lastly beat the Egg-shell and all in a Dish, strain it, and with the
Moisture that comes from it dress the Eye.

For a Bite, or Stroke in the Eye.
TAke a little Honey with a little grated Ginger, mix them together, and put it
into his Eye with a Feather; do this three Mornings together.

To take a Film off the Eye.
TAke as much Dialthaea as the bigness of a Walnut, and put thereto the Powder
of Verdigrease as much as a Hazle-nut; mix them well together, and every day
put into his Eye as much of it as the bigness of a Pease, and this will take
off the Film.

For a Canker in the Tongue.
TAke as much Roach-Allom as the quantity of an Egg, boil it in three or four
Spoonfuls of Whitewine-Vinegar, with a Spoonful of Honey and an handful of
Columbine-Leaves cut small; with this wash his Tongue once a day until it be
cured, which will be in a few days. For the washing his Mouth tie a Rag about a
Stick.

To make a Star or any other Mark in a Horses Forehead, or any other part.
FIrst, With a pair of Scizars clip away the Hair close to the Skin, where you
would have the Mark to be; then take a piece of Brick, or a Pumice-Stone,
rubbing it hard all over until it is bare, and so wipe it clean. Then make a
Plaster of Burgundy-Pitch, which must be just the bigness of the Mark; and a
little before you put it on, lay a hot Iron upon the Pitch to soften it, to
make it stick on the better; and so clap it to the place as a Plaster fit for
the Mark, and lay a hot Iron on the back of the Plaster to heat it; then over
the first Plaster lay another Plaster a little broader, heating the second as
you did the first, and so let it stick on until it come off it self, which may
be in about a Month. When these Plasters come off, then to make the Hair come
White where the Mark must be, take a little Honey and Butter (but more H^ny) mix
them together, and anoint the place therewith once in three days; and this do
for about four or five times or days, and in about three Months the Mark will
be perfect, and the Hair grown.

Many more are the Diseases and Maladies of Horses, and for every Disease there
is abundance of Medicines, so that should I insert them all, it would take up a
Volume it self. I have here taken notice of the most frequent Distempers, with
Directions for their Cures, referring you to the many Books now extant, that
only treat thereof.

A TABLE of the Contents of the several Things treated of in the several
Chapters in this Treatise of Horsmanship.
Chap. I.
THE Introduction, showing the great use and nobleness of Horses and
Horsmanship. page 1
Chap. II.
Treats of the several sorts of Horses now most in use; their Shapes, Uses,
etc. ibid. The Barbary Horse, ib. The Spanish Horse, 2 The Dutch or Flanders
Horse, ib. The English Horse, ib.
Chap. III.
Of Stallions, how to choose and order them for Generation. ib.
Chap. IV.
Of Mares, how to choose and order them for Generation, 3
Chap. V.
Of a Soil fit to breed in, and of Pastures, ib.
Chap. VI.
Of the Time and Manner of Covering, ib.
Chap. VII.
Of Colts, and how to Order them, ib.
Chap. VIII.
The several Uses of Horses to men of Quality and Gentlemen, 4
Chap. IX.
Of Riding the Great or Managed Horse, with Rules for the same, ib.
Chap. X.
Of Hunting Horses, how to choose and order them, 7
Chap. XI.
Of Race Horses, and how to Diet and Order them, 8
Chap. XII.
Of the Pad, 9 To Marks of a good Horse, ib. To know the Age of a Horse, ib.
The true Shape of a Fine Horse, 10
Chap. XIII.
Of Horses for the Coach, Wagon, Burden, etc. ib.
Chap. XIV.
Of Riders, Keepers, Grooms, etc. their Office and Duty, 11
Chap. XV.
Of Keeping, Dyeting, and Ordering the Race-Horse, ib.
Chap. XVI.
Of Keeping any Horse for Pleasure, Hunting, Travel, etc. 16
Chap. XVII.
Of several excellent Medicines for Curing Maladies most frequent in Horses, 17
Of Sickness in General, ib. Observations relating to Sickness, 18 Observations
from the Dung, ib. Concerning Feeding, ib. Concerning the State of a Horses
Body, ib. Concerning his Hair, ib. Concerning Lameness or Stiffness, ib.
Observation from the Urine, ib. Concerning the Privy Parts, ib. Receipts of
Julips, Glysters, and Potions for Cooling ib. For a Cold, ib. To Comfort a
Horse over-Riden, ib. A cooling Julip in a Fever, ib. A Cooling Potion, ib. For
the Bots, and all manner of Worms, ib. For a Looseness, ib. A Scowring, 20 For
the Spleen, ib. A Glyster to expel Wind. ib. For the Wind Colic, ib. For a
Horse that Pisseth Blood, ib. For a Cough, ib. To cause a Horse to Piss that
has the Wind Colic, ib. To cause a Horse to Vomit, ib. A Purge, ib. Glysters,
ib. For a Vein that swells after letting Blood, 21 For a Horse Burnt by a Mare,
ib. The Staggers, ib. For a Broken-Winded Horse, ib. To stop Bleeding, ib. For
a Shoulder-Strain, ib. For a Sinew-Sprung Horse, 22 For a Back Sinew-strain, or
any Grief, Pain, Shrinking, or Numness of Sinews or Joints, ib. For Grease fallen
into the Legs, and the Scratches, ib. For a Spavin, Splint, Curb, or Ring-bone,
ib. To make the Hoofs grow quickly, and tough and strong, 23 For a Founder,
Surbait, etc. in the Feet, ib. A general Salve for any Sore swelling, ib. The
Farcy, ib. For a Farcy, Mange, Scab or Leprosy, ib. To help a Horse that Galls
between the Legs through Heat or ill Dressing, ib. For a Canker in a Horses
Mouth, ib. For an Horse that has got an Overreach, or Tread of the Heel, ib.
To draw out a Nail or Thorn, ib. For a Stub, or other hurt about the Foot, ib.
To kill Lice, ib. For a Prick in the Foot, ib. A Green Ointment to heal a
Wound, 24 For a Store-Back or Navel-Gall, ib. For a New Wound made by a Stake
or Stub, ib. For a Horses Yard that is foul and furred without, that he pisseth
Blood, ib. A Help for a Tired Horse, ib. For the Glanders, ib. For a Cold that
is not the Glanders, ib. Another Medicine for a Cold, ib. Balls for the
Glanders, that Cures also a Cold, prevents Sickness, purges Grease, recovers a
Stomach, and makes a Lean Horse Fat, 25 A Water for Sore Eyes, ib. For a Pin,
Pearl, Web or Film in the Eye, ib. For a Bite or Stroke in the Eye, ib. To take
a Film off the Eye, ib. For a Canker in the Tongue, ib. To make a Star or other
Mark in any part of a Horse, ib.
HAWKING, or FALCONRY.

To the R.c Worshipful S.r John Brograve of Hamells In Hartford shire Baronet.

This Plate is Humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.



HAWKING AND FAULCONRY.
PART II.
Wherein is treated of the several kinds of Hawks now in use, with their
Natures and Qualities. The manner of Reclaiming, Mewing, and Flying them for
the respective Game, proper for each Hawk, with directions for feeding and
ordering them. Their Diseases and Cures. With a short Discourse of the Spaniel,
showing his use in Faulconry; with Directions for the Breeding, Ordering and
Managing him for the Game: Together with Directions for the choosing, ordering,
and making a Setting Dog.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
ANcient Authors, such as Aristotle and Pliny, make no mention of this Noble
Art, from whence we may probably conjecture it was unknown unto them of that
Age, else without doubt we should have met Eagle is a Bird of Prey, but none of
them have observed that this fierce and courageous Prince of the Air was ever
reclaimed by the Art of Man.

In the Creation all Creatures were willingly subject to our first Parents; but
since, it is by constraint, if they obey us, and not without great trouble mixed
with frequent danger. Of this there Art of Hawking, by means whereof a Bird,
that by nature is wild, strong, swift, and cruel, is brought tame and
tractable, insomuch that when she is at her own liberty soaring in the Air, yet
such is her loyalty and obedience to her Master, that at his hollow, or signal
of the Lure, she descends and comes to his fist.

In our Age this Art is arrived to its Perfection, but hitherto what has been
treated of it has been very erroneous.

The Greeks and Latins finding the Faulcon of all other Birds of Prey, the most
adventurous, hardy, and yet tractable, did communicate her name to all others.
The one calling Hawks by the name of Jerax, and the others by that of
Accipiter. The French have imitated them, and we the French, and hence it comes
that this Art has its denomination of Faulconry.

CHAP. II.
Of the several sorts of Hawks.
THey who have wrote of this Art have divided the several sorts of Hawks after
a various manner; some assigning ten sorts, others eight or nine, and others
but seven. In this Treatise I shall speak of those in use amongst us in this
Kingdom, which are the best for any Game, either for River or Land.

These Hawks may be comprehended under these two general Heads, viz.
Long-winged Hawks, and Short-winged Hawks; and the rather for that all
Long-winged Hawks require much of the same reclaiming, manning, feeding and
mewing the one as the other; the like does those that art Short-winged, which
differs much from the Long-winged. The Long-winged Hawks are the Fa^lcon, or
Slight-Faulcon, the Gerfaulcon, Lanner, Bawrel, Merlin and Hobby.

The Short-winged are the Goshawk and the Sparrow-hawk.

And note that all Long-winged Hawks are brought to the Lure, and Short-winged
ones to the hand.

All these Hawks have their Males or Tassels, which are nothing near so strong,
large and fit for Service; yet are they of very good courage, and serviceable,
especially the Jerkin, Tassel Gentle, and Tassel of a Goshawk, and sometimes
surpasses the Females. And these Tassels have names appropriate to them; viz.
The Gerfaulcon, her Jerkin. Faulcon or Slight-Faulcon, her Tassel Gentle.
Lanner, her Lanneret. Merlin, her Jack Merlin. Hobby, her Jack Hobby. Bawrel,
her Bawret. Castrell, her Jack Castrell Goshawk, her Tassel of the Goshawk.
Sparrow-hawk, her Muslet.


All these Hawks have these Names, viz. Eyesses, or Soar-Hawks, Lentiners,
Haggards, and Entermewed Haggards.

She is called an Eyess, for being taken out of the Nest and bred up by hand in
a Room. There is another Eyess, and that is also taken out of the Nest, but
bred up at Hack, that is, by bringing her up, and to let her fly at pleasure,
observing a certain place to feed her at, making there a Nest for her; and this
sort so bred up is called a Tackler or Hack-Hawk, which generally proves

She is called a Brancher, being taken when she is but able to hop from Bough
to Bough: And this Term properly belongs to Short-winged Hawks.

When she can flee and prey for her self, then she is a Ramage or Soar-Hawk.

A Soar-Hawk taken about Lent following, is properly called a Lentiner, but
being taken in hot weather generally is short lived.

If taken after Lent, she is properly called a Haggard; and when she has
preyed for her self a year, and has mewed most of her Feathers, she is called
an Intermewed Haggard.

There are other names to be observed for Hawks, viz. the first year she is a
Soar or Ramage Hawk^ the second an Intermewer; the third a White Hawk, then a
Hawk of the first Coat, and every year a Hawk of such a Coat, as the second,
third, fourth, or the like, so long as she lives.

The Male of an Eyess, is an Eyess Tassel; of a Brancher, a Brancher Tassel; of
a Lentiner, a Lentiner Tassel; of the Soar or Ramage-Hawk, the Soar Tassel; and
of a Haggard, the Haggard Tassel.

According to these diversity of names and times a Hawk is to be esteemed; for
by how much the later you take her, by so much the more difficult will she be
to be reclaimed and manned, as being the more Haggardly, or wilder of Nature,
but being well manned, does make the best Hawk for the Field.

An Eyrie of Hawks consists of sometimes more, sometimes less, four or five
being a good Eyrie, and seldom more.

The Males of Hawks are to be observed; the first year they are of a reddish
Plume, after they have mewed they are bluish, and the older they are the
blewer and whiter is the Male; and it is observed, that the white Male proves
the best conditioned; the dark maled is brave metled, but subject to Crowing,
that is, to fly at Crows.

The earlier a Hawk is hatched in the year, the redder, brisker and livelier
will her eyes be, (which is her excellency, and shows a good Hawk) and one to
be in health; for when she is sick her eyes will be pale and wan.

Thus having given some general Heads of the several sorts of Hawks now in use
amongst us, in the next place I shall treat of each Hawk apart; and first with
Long-winged Hawks, and then the Gerfaulcon requires the first place.

CHAP. III.
The GERFAVLCON.
THis Hawk is much larger then any other Faulcon, and thence it is that they
have sometimes been esteemed a peculiar kind of Bird, not comprehended under
the general Name of a Faulcon; and for her largeness, some esteem her to be a
kind of Eagle. She is very fierce and hot, which causes her to be so hard to
be reclaimed, so that her Keeper had need be endowed with patience, and to
treat her gently; but being overcome she proves an excellent Hawk, and will
scarce refuse to fly at any Game, as the Hern and River Fowl; but her largeness
is such, that it frights the Fowl which are in these parts, which hinders her
killing her Game, and therefore is not esteemed so useful as the Haggard
Faulcon, or Ramage Faulcon.

She is a stately Bird to behold, and most fit for Princes and Persons of
Quality. Her Head and Eyes are like the Haggard Faulcons, with a large bending
Beak somewhat bluish, her Wings are shorter than the Slight Faulcon; she has
large Nares, and a Maile like a Lanners; her Feet are large, and strong armed,
and her Train is much like the Lanners.

In going up to her Gate she is much of the nature of the Merlin, not using the
same way as other Faulcons, for they climb up upon the Train when they find any
Fowl, and as soon as they have got above it, they make several throughs or
down-shoots till they have killed or bound it; and after she has killed her
Game, reward her as you do the Faulcon, which shall be next treated of.

Her Keeper had need have a great care how to make her at first (as indeed all
other Hawks) for being well made she will keep so; therefore be not too
overhasty in your manning and reclaiming her, but use a gentle and familiar
way.

If you intend her for the Brook, Lure her as you do the Faulcon, and also feed
her so, unless she be a slack metled Hawk, and then her meat must be washed,
and Stones often given her, and Tyrings constantly when she is empty, keeping

When you have brought her forward, give her often Castings to cleanse and
purge her, as also to prevent the growth of too much glut and fatness in her
inward Parts, which will endanger her life, which is but short at the best)
unless in very skilful hands, which, together with the great trouble and
charges in keeping her, makes it that she is in so little use amongst the
Gentry, and the rather for that the Haggard Faulcon does perform Hern or Kyte,
for which Flights the Gerfaulcon and Jerkin are only fit.

CHAP. IV.
Of the FAVLCON, or SLIGHT
THe Faulcon or Slight Faulcon, is of several shapes, viz. some large, some
small, others long shaped, and some round trust; so are they also of several
Mailes, as white, black, brown, and russet.

The principal sorts of Faulcons are by all agreed to be the Intermewed
Haggard, and the Lentiner Faulcon now much in use.

Those that are excellent are thus shaped, viz. broad shouldred, carrying her
breadth down to her Train wide and strong, with short Arms and a large Foot, a
short Beak and a large Nare, and close plumed, high Thighs with white on the
insides, great full black Eyes, a large breast, her Head plumed dark or black
with a white Wreath. In her Flight she is known from another Hawk by her nimble
and quick getting up to her Place, by her strong stirring, and by her skill in
her Game.

She is very bold and hardy, of a great strength and courage to endure both
wind and weather, gaining her Prey by main Wing, and into what place she comes
she is victor. By nature she is very hot, and consequently the better able to
endure cold weather, witness her high soaring in the Air; and likewise when
once she begins to cast her Feathers, she meweth with more expedition. Her
greatest fault is, she is more difficult to be reclaimed Hawk.

From this Bird the Faulconer is said to derive his Name, as well as the Art it
self; for that it seems the chief end of a Faulconer, and the Art of Faulconry
is rightly to reclaim and man the Faulcon; for she flees at all Games, both at
Field and River, but most proper for the River: So that he that thoroughly
understands how to bring the Faulcon to that Perfection that she is capable of,
may well deserve the Name of a Master of this Art.

This Hawk is a great pains taker, no Weather discouraging her from her Game,
if possible to be found; and although she has labored two or three days
together in ill weather, yet she will not be tired; and indeed every Hawk
requires exercise: But old staunch Hawks should have more rest.

There is a pretty way for the flying at the Kyte, which affords good
diversion; it is thus performed: Get an Owl, and tie a small Fox tail or some
such devise to one of her Legs, that she may not give you the Go by, and being
in the Field, the day being warm and clear, you will soon discover a Kyte
cooling her self in the A^r, then let your Owl fly, and the Kyte will not fail
to make near her to gaze upon her, and when the Kyte is descended pretty near
her, then let fly your Hawk, and the Kyte perceiving the surprise, does
endeavor to preserve her self by mounting up and winding the most she can. And
here the Combat begins, but oft-times none can see where it ends, both mounting
out of sight; but in the end the Hawk becomes Victor, and by main strength and
courage beats down the Kyte, yet not without many turns and wren^hes in the
Air, to the great pleasure of the Spectators.

CHAP. V.
The LANNER.
THis is a Hawk well known, and much used, being called a Kitchen Hawk, and
that not improperly, as being able to make more Flights in a day then any other
Hawk, except the Goshawk. She is both for the River and Field, but chiefly for
the last for Pheasant and Partridge.

If she is excellent she should have her Head small, her Beak short, her Feet
bluish with short Tallons, her Feathers before mixed with black and white, not
traversed as the Faulcons, but with strait spots amongst the Plumes, and her
Neck short and thick.

She is very easy to be manned, yet hard to be made a good Hawk, by reason of
the slackness of her mettle; and he only can make her a good Hawk that can keep
her stomach in good order.

She is thus known from other Hawks, she is of a more blackish color, is less
armed and pounced, and has a lesser Beak.

The Lanner is less inclining to the Crock than other Long-winged Hawks, and
therefore most fit for a young Faulconer. She holds her Perch without Baiting,
more constantly then any other Hawk.

If you flee with the Lanner, she must be kept very sharp.

She keeps her Castings long, therefore give her hard Castings made of Toe, and
sometimes knots of Wormwood, and often Stones.

After she has flowen to mark, she will sit, or fly according to her mettle
and nature; and for that reason she is very observant to the Dogs, giving great
attention to their questing, and all to give her self a labor, and that she
may kill at her ease and pleasure.

She is of a harsh and stubborn mettle, and wants neither courage nor strength
in the Field; being wild, and yet, when under our keeping; will stand in need
of all the Spurs that can be Keeper had need use all the care and gentleness he
can toward her, more then toward any Faulcon. The Eyesses are indifferent
gentle, but the Haggards surpass in wildness.

All the time of her Luring, the Lure should be garnish't with hard washed meat
only, and most of her Rewards should be Bits from her Keepers hands; and being
of a hard and strong constitution, you are to use hard washed meats, with
stones,

She is exceedingly addicted to carry, and therefore the greater care ought to
be had in restraining her from that vice, which may be thus prevented. When she
is brought to know the Lure, you must Lure her only one at a time, she being
subject to catch at another, and if you observe not this you hazard her
spoiling; for when once she begins to know the Lure, she will settle her love
on it with a greedy desire to hold it

You must be very careful of begetting a good acquaintance and familiarity
betwixt her and the Spaniels, for she has this coyness more then other Hawks,
and therefore at first accustom her to few Spaniels, and such that are staunch
and well beaten to the Field, and at good command; for should she at first take
any offense at them, reclaim her from it.

The Lanners may be made to flee the River, but it will require great care,
long training, and much skill and conduct; however she is capable of it; but
then you must neither feed too hard, nor flee too much, either drawing her down
from her wonted gate and high flying, although she were never so hard and able;
you must therefore be careful to feed her well, and not to set too sharp an
edge on her stomach when you design Keeper for a Reward, then to take pains for
it.

What has been said of the Lanner may be said of the Lanneret, observing to
keep her high and as fullof flesh as you can; to do which rightly, you must
give her due quantities of Stones and Casting, lest she be overcome with glut
and fat: But being well trained and made in ward to the man, she may be flown
to the River, and being quarred, proves a good Killer: But I hold she is best
for the Partridge if you can thoroughly reclaim her from her aversion to the
Spaniels.

In Summer the Weather being hot, you ought to feed so much the cleaner, and
wash the harder. In Winter being cold, feed the better; and by this means you
may hold an even hand over them.

CHAP. VI.
The MERLIN.
THis kind of Hawk is fit for Ladies, by reason of its smallness and fine
shape, as also for its good Conditions; yet is it of a bold courage, being in
all points like the Gerfaulcon, and must be kept after the same manner.

If she is well manned, lured, and attended, she will prove an excellent Hawk,
being of a quick flight, and very bold and eager at her Game, which is the
Thrush, Blackbird, Quail, Lark, and the like, also the Partridge, and will
attack those larger then her self; and although she has not the strength to
hold the Partridge, yet with her great strength in her Beak, she will kill
them, in which is her excellency.

Having made her to the Lure, and that she will patiently endure the Hood, then
make her a Train with a Partridge, if she foot and kill it, reward her well,
permitting her to take pleasure thereon; and being well entered this way, you
may flee her at the wild Partridge, and be sure to reward her with it if she
kill, cherishing her also with your voice, which is a great encouragement to
her. If she proves not hardy at the first Train, try her with a second or
third; and if she proves not good then, you may despair of her.

For the manning and reclaiming the Merlin, use the same ways and means as with
Faulcons. But some are of Opinion that Merlin's cannot be mewed, and if they
be, are seldom afterward good; but Experience declares the contrary: For if
they are hardy, and have flowen well in their Soarage, they have proved much
better after their mewing.

It is usual to fly a Cast at a time, which is very pleasant; for the Birds are
so terrified at the sight of them, that they choose rather to take shelter
under the Horses legs, then to rely on their wings. And a Cast of Merlins makes
excellent Sport for the Snipe in the Winter, being much like the flight of the
Hern and the Gerfaulcon.

To order this flight aright, do thus; When your Merlins are thoroughly manned
and made gentle, carry them into the Field, and having found a Lark or some
small Bird, make loose their Hoods, and go as near as you can into the wind to
the Bird, and as soon as the Bird rises unhood them, and cast them off to
flee, and when they have beaten down the Game, let them feed thereon for their
reward. At first you must flee them with the most advantage you can, that they
may not be over-wrought.

CHAP. VII.
The HOBBY.
THis Hawk next the Merlin is least of all Hawks, yet had in good esteem, being
observed to follow the Falconer and Dogs in Lark or other small Bird, she makes
at them with great Courage, few escaping her.

As to her Shape and Color, her Legs are yellow, her Beak blew, with the
Crinets or small Feathers under her Eyes black; the top of her Head is like the
Falcons, with two white Seams on her Neck, her Breast Feathers are for the most
part brown, yet poudred with white Spots, her Back, Train, and Wings are
blackish, her Stretchers P^urces are large, in respect of her short Legs, and
her Wings and Sayls are larger than any other Hawk of her bigness.

She is a Hawk of the Lure, and not of the Fist (as all Long Winged Hawks are)
and is a high Flyer, very Nimble, bold and daring, and will attack a Kite, or
Crow.

She affords very good diversion with Nets and Spaniels, which is thus done,
cause your Dogs to range and beat about the Field, to Spring the Larks; but the
poor Birds espying the Hawk Soaring aloft, dares not betake themselves to their
Wings, thinking to lie close; and so you draw the Nets over and take them.

The Hobby lies indifferent well on her Wings, and when she follows the
Spaniels as they range about, will make diverse turns on them, so that when the
Game is Sprung, she may the more advantageously stoop from her Wings; and being
well Manned, she serves for several sorts of Game.

The Hobby must be taught and trained in each particular like a Falcon; and
observe not to flee her in the Heat of the Day, for then she is apt to Soar and
be lost (although but for a time, being to be found again) but about two a
Clock in the Afternoon begin to flee her; and so hold on till near Sunset, and
longer is not good, for fear of losing her; and if you order her according to
the Directions given for the Falcon, she Hawk of great delight; for you may
flee her oftener, and when you cannot any other.

She is often made to Flee the Patridge at the first Season of the Year, also
the Quail, Wheat-Ear, and the like.

In plain Champain Fields, where great and tall Bushes grow, the Hobby will
make abundance of Stoopings (which resting sometimes) and if the Bushes s^and
at some reasonable Distance, the Birds will be so terrified at the sight of
her, as to suffer you almost to take them up with your Hand; but may easily
kill them with a Cross-Bow. And thus they will do Seven or Eight times, making
their Stoopings with Rest between, so that the Sport will last three or four
Hours.

The Eyess Hobby is best for the Mount; and I hold this way the best for
Reclaiming and preparing them. You must take her out of the Nest a little
before she is able to stand on the side thereof; then provide some other Nest
on any Tree in your Garden or Orchard about Seven or Eight Foot from the
Ground; and there at set times feed her with Bits from the Sharp end of a
Stick, and when she is able to stand stiff on her Legs, and to tug hard for her
Meat, then teach her to come from thence by your Art, in Lureing and Calling
her, though it be but a foot at first, and so by Degrees further and further
until she will come from the Nest to you as far as she can well hear you; and
there must she attend on her Wings, until you take her in: When she is full
Summed, she must have her Jesses, Bewits and Bells, with other usual Ornaments
and Dressings; then must she be made acquainted with the Hood, and carriage on
your Fist all day; She must be also accustomed to Men, Horses, and Dogs, and
she must be trained with Larks, which had need be let loose with a great deal
of Caution, that she perceive not they are let go from your Hand: Her first
Trains should be let loose in a Creance of Brown-thread, and Mounted forty or
fifty Foot High before you unhood her, three or four Trains thus killed will be
a sufficient Introduction. When she is thus thoroughly made, you may Flee her at
the Lark with Advantage of the Wind, and near approach, and afterward you need
not use so much care; for she will soon gain Strength, and understand her
Business. At such times when you do not use nor Flee her, you need to look
after her only at Feeding times, remembering to draw her by your Lure and Voice,
at least a Quarter, if not Half a Mile from home; and there Feed and leave her,
for when she has once Fed, Feaked, and Rejoiced, she will soon find the way
home, to the place where she was Bred, and Trained up. On Resting Days when she
is Gorged, you may find her in the Heat of the Day Flying and Soaring aloft,
whereby she becomes acquainted with the adjacent places, so that if you leave
her three or four Miles from home with her Prey in her Foot, you need not fear
her coming home after she has eaten it, and rejoiced, as aforesaid; but you
may not trust her thus longer than the beginning of September.

There are of the Haggard Hobbies, that are very cuning in their Flights, and
will desire to be High Flown on their Wings, that from thence they may Conquer
their Prey with Advantage, and will hardly be provoked to go from the Fist to
her place. When they fly not, their feeding should be clean washed Mutton, or
the like; they should also have Stones and Castings duly given; and you must be
careful of setting a right Edge on their Stomachs, when you Flee them; for they
are in all respects according to their Capacity, as Bold and Hardy as any other
Hawk whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII.
The BAWREL.
THis Hawk for Largness and Shape, is somewhat like the Lanner, but has a
longer Body and Sails. She is generally a fast goer aforehead, Field-Hawk; and
in Enclosures will kill a Pheasant, but being a Longwinged Hawk is unfit for
the Coverts.

CHAP. IX.
The CASTREL.
THis is a Sort of Hawk, which for Shape is is much like the Lanner, but for
Size like the Hobby, her Game is the Grouse, which is a Foul common in the
North of England, also in Windsor Forest, and diverse other places. She will
kill a Partridge, but it is a Hawk of a very cowardly

CHAP. X.
The GOSHAWK.
THis is a Short Winged Hawk, whose nature and properties require different
Management, that is, Manning, Reclaiming and Mewing from Falcons and other Long
Winged Hawks. And of all Hawks, she is doubtless the most Shie and Coy both
toward the Men and Dogs, requiring more the Courtship of a Mistress, than the
Authority of a Master, being apt to remember any unkind and rough usage; but
being gently handled, will become very tractable, and kind to her Keeper;
Spaniels.

There are diverse Sorts and Sizes of Goshawks, which are different in Goodness,
force and hardiness, according to the several Countries where they are Bred;
but no place affords so good as those of Moscovy, Norway, and the North of
Ireland, especially in the County of Tyrone.

The most weighty are by many esteemed the best, and for Color the White-Mail;
for generally Reclaimed; and those of this Color are for the most part
stronger than others, and may be well made to Flee the Hern, or any such strong
Bird.

As to the Proportion and Shape of a good Goshawk, she should be thus made; To
have a small long Head, a short Beak, a large Throat, her Nares, Back, and Feet
large, a long Neck, big Breast, short fleshly Thighs, short and sharp black
Pounces and Tallons, large Feathers, under her Train to be Engouted, that is to
have black Spots, the Train-Feathers to be short, and the Covert-Feathers of
the Train Spotted with Black Bars, and of these the fewer the better.

The Signs to know when she is in Health, is her Pounces, which will be Black,
and her Sear and Feet well Gilded.

The Goshawk by nature is very Hardy, and catching for Prey, and withal very
disdainful, so that a Nice Hand must be kept over her, with constant carrying
her Barefaced, with the Perch to be where People are frequent, and that she
take no Fright; so that they that desire to keep her long, must use her gently,
and be well advised when, and how to Flee her, lest if she miss her Prey she
take Pet, and so make you wait upon her.

The Goshawk is very apt to take stand on any Tree, and when they discover
their Prey, will quit the Tree with such fierceness and strength, that they
seldom miss their Game.

Your Goshawk being Manned, take her to the Field, and with a Train-Partridge
embolden her, and let her Plume thereon, which will make her more eager. If the
Partridge chance to Spring, let her flee, and if she kills it, Reward her: And
if it happen that the Spaniels should take it (as often times high metled Dogs
will do) then be sure to take it speedily from them, and cast it out to your
Hawk, crying Ware Hawk, ware, and let her feed thereon at pleasure. Thus using
her three or four times, if she have any Mettle she will doubtless become
excellent for this sport. But take notice that after you have thus Rewarded her
with such bloody Meat at fill, you must not fly her in at least a day or two
after; and at first enter her to the strongest Partridge you can, for if you
enter her on Young-ones it will make her lazy, and not care for long flights.
If she kill, Reward her therewith, and be sure have a great care to keep her in
good order; and if in case your Hawk (as being out of order) turn Tail, or give
off the flight and take a Tree, call in your Spaniels to the Retrieve that way
she flew the Partridge, and let the Faulconer also draw himself that way, and
being provided with a Partridge, let him cast it out to her (but so that she
see it not) which will make her believe it is the same she flew at, and when
you cast it out, cry Ware Hawk, ware; Then make her seize it, and let her feed
thereon; and by this means she will be encouraged to flee out her flight
another time. If the next time you flee her (which must be after a day or two)
she serve you so again, then observe the aforesaid Directions, and if she yet
retain her ill custom, she will not be worth the keeping.

PARTRIDG HAWKING

To the Worshipful John Bassett of Heanton-Punchardon In Devon-Shire Esq^

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome



Partridge Hawking.
THis Game affords great Diversion and Recreation, and attended with no small
profit; for I have been credibly informed by a Worthy Gentleman and an expert
Falconer, Sir Ralph Dutton, that he has killed in a Season with one Goshawk an
hundred Brace of Partridges.

For the taking them, your chief business is to be prepared with about four or
five Couple of Spaniels that are good Rangers, and such as will hunt at command
in compass; whose motion you are to follow on Horseback with your Hawk on your
Fist, so that you may be ready to cast her off upon their springing any. And
when she has killed it, for her Reward observe the aforesaid Directions.

It is now the Mode to go into the Field with Hawks, and about six or seven
Couple of good ranging Spaniels, and when a Covey is sprung, to cast them all
off at a time, which affords good diversion to the Spectators. But in the
Opinion of some, this way is not approved of, as being designed rather to go
out to kill what they can, than only for the Sport.

The Falcons and other long Winged Hawks being flown at the Field, if they kill
not their Game in the foot the first flight, are taught by Mark for their
advantage, and to the end they may kill at their stooping; some indeed will
trust to their own swiftness and master their Prey at the stretch: So also the
Goshawk through her swift flying does at her pleasure master her Prey, whereas
those others that are slugs and slow of flight do win what they get by Policy,
watching their advantages, wherein their Keeper ought to assist them.

The Goshawk in the time of her fullness and pride will not without very gentle
usage be brought conformable in any measure to her Keepers Will, but when she
comes to be Enseamed and made ready for the purpose is exceeding prone to Bate,
and consequently to throw her self into several Distempers which shortens her
days. To prevent this and many ilconveniencies, you ought by your utmost
diligence to make her Inwards and loving to

As for Cold Meat, it matters not much whether you wash it or not, for the
Blood being cold for a day or two has lost its vigor; but use not cold Meat
long, for that breeds many Diseases. When you go into the Fields to flee, take
a Meals Meat well washed and clean dried, and after she has Cast in the
Morning, give her a bit or two as she is hooded; and if you flee her not in
about an hour after give her another Hawks are subject.

When you set her to the Perch Hood her, and indeed your Fist for the most part
should be her Perch until she is thoroughly Reclaimed and well flown; for in her
making a little rest will cause her to return to her first Ramageness, and to
forget what you have taught her.

Whilst you are Making, Enseaming and Reclaiming her, feed her often, and but a
little at a time, and not with set Meals, and give her often Tiring upon a
sweet Rump of Beef, or the Pinions of the Wings of a Fowl, which will keep her
Head clear, and quicken her Stomach; for when once she is full, she has no
more love for you at that present; whereas if you keep her sharp she will be
regardful of you, listening for your coming with joy and delight when she hears
your voice, for then she expects something from your welcome hands.

When you Enter her, put her on the highest pitch of hunger to prevent the
worst, and then you shall discover both her Mettle and Love; besides you shall
thereby prevent many inconveniences of Frights and Sloth, which attend an
imperfect and dead Stomach.

Having showed how to make your Goshawk for the Land, it will not be amiss to
give some Instructions how to make her for the River, for the Hern, Wild-Goose,
Duck, Teal, etc. which is thus done. First, Make her to the Fist, as is already
prescribed; then carry her without Bells and enter her with a live Duck tied to
a Creance, and so draw near it with your Hawk on your Fist unhooded, and then
throw out the Duck and cast off your Hawk, and if she take it at the Souse, let
her be Rewarded and fed with a reasonable Gorge; then take her up to your Fist,
hooding her, and giving her a Leg or Wing thereof to plume upon.

After this manner do two or three times with about three days respit between,
and it will well enter her for the Game.

Directions for Keeping and Reclaiming a Goshawk; as also how to Mew and draw
her out of the Mew, and make her flying.
THE chiefest Skill of a Falconer is to make his Hawk delight in her Flight,
which is occasioned by kind usage; and therefore it happens that many Goshawks
(as indeed other sorts) that are good in their Soarage, become worse after
Mewing.

At the first entrance he should be provided with a Train-Partridge in his Bag
to Reward her on occasions, to gain her love, and be sure to keep her always in
good order; and to that end observe, that all Goshawks are naturally full of
all moist humors, especially in their Heads, and therefore he ought to ply them
with Tiring and Pluming Morning and Evening, to open their Heads, and occasion
them to cast out Water thereat. A Rump of Beef, a Pigeon, or the Leg of a
Chicken is very good to Plume them.

You should give her every Night Castings of Feathers, Cotton, Linen Thrums, a
Hares or Rabets-Foot; and observe it in the Morning whether it is wrapped round
or nor, whether dry or moist, and of what color the Water is that drops out of
the Casting; for by these signs he may know the condition of his Hawk, for the
cleaner the Water is, and the sweeter the Casting, the better she is in health;
for if her Castings are clammy, she is not fit to be flown that day.

Her Mewts must also be observed, to see if they be clean or not, and prescribe
Remedies accordingly. He must keep her clean, and her Feathers whole, and if
any happen to be broken Imp them, and if bruised to put them into Warm-Water to
straiten; but if they happen to be in such a place that you cannot put them into
Water (as toward the Plumage or Pinion) then heat the Stemb or Stalk of a
Cabage in Warm-Water, slit it and so lay it on the Bent-feathers, which will
soon draw them strait. And a good Falconer should always be provided with his
Imping-Needles, his Semond, and other Instruments. He should always keep her
high and

If she chance to Bath her self in Cold Weather, after a flight (which
sometimes she will do through the carelessness of the Falconer, in not letting
her Bath her self) set her in the Sun and she will soon dry her self; but if it
is Rainy or Frosty-Weather, then set her near a Fire with her Back toward it,
and not her Gorge.

Goshawks by nature are addicted to Poult; Poultrey; and to bring them from
that ill quality, set their Perch in some place where Poultrey comes to
acquaint them therewith, by which means they will not be apt to fly at them,
and the Perch should be lined with Cotton or Canvass; and in Warm-Weather she
may be set for an hour or two in the Morning in the Sunshine, and always
observe never to set her near a Wall, to the end she may not hurt her Feathers
when she Bateth.

It is requisite to fly the Goshawk the first Year to the Field, and not to the
Covert, by which means she will learn to hold out, and not to turn Tail in the
midst of her flight; For a Mewed Hawk is very tractable, and it is better for
her to be a little Ramage than over-Manned.

If you design her for great Fowl, then make her Trains thereof, and do not fly
her at less.

If you would have her to fly with Dogs, train Reward her with them to make her
acquainted with them; but of this more in the Chapter of Spaniels.

In case she is in flying, and a great Killer, you may give her bloody Rewards,
with Suppers of the same, or at least three times a Week; but not so in the
time of Rest.

Concerning Castings.
AS for the Castings to give your Goshawk, I Stomach before you proffer her
Castings, and let it be no more than what she can easily swallow; when once she
has taken it, give her a bit or two of Meat to please her at first putting on
her Hood, in which she must sit until you find she has put over her Casting
into her Panel. She will soon perceive what it is she is to do when you
afterward offer her any, if you Reward her kindly after her taking it. When
once she has put it into her Panel, give her a reasonable Supper. I hold it
not amiss to acquaint you with this Method at the beginning; but when once she
is truly Enseamed give her her Supper, and when you are going to Bed, give her
her Casting with a little bit of Meat. When she is in flying, give her Plumage
every Night when you feed her up; but when she Rests, feed her at Night with
very clean Meat without any Casting, and prepare a Thrum or Hares-Foot Casting
of a reasonable size, not too big, and early in the Morning she will Cast; and
then in half an hour you may give her a bit or two of Meat, and she will be fit
to flee in the Afternoon.

Your own observation of the difference between the Complexions of Castings
thus given, compared with those given upon a full Feeding, will soon convince
you that the latter way is safe, and not unpleasing to your Hawk, as the other
is. But if you will give Castings at Night, feed her not too full, and give her
a little Plumage with it. If she dislikes Castings of Thrum (as many do) then
give her those of a Hares-Foot, or Coneys-Foot, the Bones and Fur being well
broken together.

How a Goshawk ought to be called loose, and taught to draw, and in what places.
FOR calling your Goshawk loose, that is to teach her to follow you from place
to place, you must take her some distance from Home, and to such a place that
is remote from a Town or House where Poultrey are, being great temptations to
her; but the most convenient place is a young Wood or Grove solitarily seated,
and having prepared her Stomach fit for the purpose, put her up into some Tree,
walking some distance from her into the Wind, gently using your Voice as if you
had Spaniels with you, to the end she may be the better invited to follow you,
and if she does, let her not be too long, but call her to your Fist, Rewarding
her with a Bit or two of Meat, which you should have in a readiness in your
Bag; Then put her up into a Tree again, and with a gentle and low Voice call
her after you, as before directed, saying, Come, Come.

Pheasant Hawking; Giving Directions how to enter a Goshawk to the Covert for
Pheasants.
THere is none can order and manage the Goshawk to the Covert, but such as are
of a strong and able Body, with Spirit and Courage added thereto to follow her
up and down; and having one so qualified observe these Directions, for this
Flight is different from the Champain-Fields, To the Right Worshipful Sr: John
Thorold of Marston in the County of Sincolne Baronet

This plate is humbly dedicated (...)

where the Hawk and Game is always in sight: For you are to make her to the
Pheasant, and such like sort of Fowl that always frequent Woods, Coverts, and
the like obscure places, which hinder your sight that should be your guide in
the flight. And for the better effecting this, you must be very careful what
place you first enter her in, to the end she may be well guarded and kept from
taking any dislike or offense at the Dogs, which if she do at the first
entrance, it will be difficult to Field, where she might see them before they
came at her, and were prevented by the Falconers running hastily into her, to
occasion any such fright. Therefore to prevent any such ill quality at the
first, she must be better manned, followed, and governed than in the Field; so
that if you would have her made a perfect Hawk, and to be bold and venturous in
thick Woods with the Falconer, the Dogs and the Game, you must make good choice
of the Time, Place, and Dogs.

For the Time, it should be early in the Year, viz. about January, February, or
March, which is before the Approach of the Leaf; but the best Months for
Pheasant Hawking, are November, December, and January, after which time you
must be preparing her for the Mew, that she may be early Mewed, to Fly at the
Field the next Season for Partridge.

Having made good choice of the place to Fly your Hawk in, and that you have
let her go unto her Flight; you must be sure to command your Dogs behind you,
until you have found her; and if she has killed the Game, it is sufficient, if
not, but that you find her on the Ground out of an eagerness of the Sport (as
many will be at first entrance) if there be any Tree that she may well see from
it, set her thereon, otherwise Fist, and beat for it again; then if she Fly and
kill it, keep back the Dogs until you have found her; and suffer her to Plume,
and take her pleasure for a while, then call in your Dogs gently, and walk
about her, encouraging her with your Voice, that she may be acquainted with the
Noise; and when you see it convenient stoop to it on your Knees, and rending
the Chaps give her Blood in the Throat, which will much please her. Also pare
away the hard Brain-pan from the rest, and give her the Head in her Foot to
eat, the Ground hiding from her the Body, and having your Dogs close by (which
must be in great Command), when she has done, and begins to look about her,
then throw the Pheasant amongst them that she may (together with some words of
Rebuke from you) make them give way with fear unto her; but let them be in her
sight, and having sufficiently taken her Pleasure, take the Pheasant gently
from her, leaving Head in her Foot, and let her eat it on the Ground, where the
Quarry lay, only reserving a little to take her to your Fist withal; then put
on her Hood, and Reward her according to the former Directions, which will much
win her Love to you. And according to these Directions, with a good Keeper,
fair flying, and two or three staunch Spaniels, in a short time she will be
brought to good perfection.

For the emboldning your Hawk to make her take a Pheasant from the Perch with
courage observe these Directions: Before you flee her provide a dead Pheasant,
or one alive which is best, which take along with you into the Wood, and when
you are disposed to call your Hawk for her Supper, and as she is drawing and
attending after you for the same (having a convenient Pole ready for that
purpose) call your Spaniels about you to make them Bay, and suddenly breaking
the Neck of the Pheasant, lift it upon a Bough that the Hawk may have sight
thereof, and with your voice calling and encouraging her to come in to seize
it; and if she pulls it down, be sure that you so rebuke the Dogs, and keep
them at command, that at her descending they give her way; and that she may
plume, and take her pleasure thereon, which in a small time will so embolden
her, that when she sees a Pheasant take Perch, she will immediately seize it,
and pull it down; nor will she be fearful of the Dogs; for when they are once
managed and brought into good subjection, they will know their duty, and be
fearful of transgressing, so that you may venture them if you were absent: But
be sure you have no strange Dogs, for one may spoil your sport, drawing the
rest into Errors, and cause them to hunt after any thing: Nor is it convenient
to hunt with many Spaniels, for two or three Couple are enough to range and
beat about a large Wood, and to Perch a Pheasant.

For Reclaiming and Ordering an Eyess Hawk.
YOU must be provided with some convenient cool Room that is Airy, with two
wicker or glass Lights to let in the Air, and on the Floor for coolness strew
fresh Sand, and place in the Room two or three great Turfs or Sods for her to
set cool upon; you must also have two or three Perches lined, and one higher
than another. When she is full summed, so that she can flee, then set a Pan of
Water in the Room to bathe in, which must be shifted every two or three days;
being not only very wholesome, but it will cause her to Mew or be full summed the
sooner and better.

You must feed her with young Pigeons, Sheeps-hearts, and the like; and whilst
she is young, her Meat should be cut in small Pellets, and be fed two or three
times a day, according as you find her endew it, and put it over. When she is
full summed, and flies about, you may give her Pigeons, feeding her sometimes
on your Fist, permitting her to gripe and kill them in your hand. You may also
put a live Pigeon into the Room where she is kept, which will the better teach
her how to foot and kill them; and that she may be taken off from that ill
quality of hiding her Prey after she has seized it, which is customary to all
Eyesses, let her feed in your Presence; and to make her the more bold and
acquainted with you, go into the Room every Morning to call her to your F^st,
whistling and using some encouraging ways as is accustomary, and that you would
have her acquainted with.

When she is full summed, and has put forth all her Feathers, take her out of
the Room, and furnish her with a Rufter-hood, as also with Bells, Jesses and
Bewets: And to make her endure her Hood, put a Brayle, that is, a piece of
Leather slit upon one of her Wings to tie it up, and then spout Water out of
your mouth to wet her, and put her Hood on and off several times, which will
Hood at first, you must have a Rufterhood, with which often hood and unhood
her, stroaking her Head gently with your Hand, until she will abide it; then in
the Evening by Candlelight unseal her, giving her something to tire upon,
handling and stroaking her Feathers, as also hooding and unhooding her.

When your Eyess is well won to the Hood, and to the Fist, (which custom will
soon bring her to) Birds or Pigeons on your Fist; then for four or five days,
or longer, (as occasion requires) call her until she will come to you at some
distance; then take a live Pigeon tied by the foot with a Creance, which you
must stir until she Bates at it, and seizes it; but this must be at a small
distance, lest the Pigeons struggling should discourage her, until she is well
entered; therefore in such case you should assist her, and let her Plume and
foot it, suffering her to feed thereon, hood her, and let her plume and tire a
little. The day following call her to your Fist, showing her a live Pigeon so
near, that she may reach it; then cast it out before her, and let her flee and
seize it, giving her a Reward. Again, throw out a Chicken before her, and if
she seize it, reward her well; and by this means using her to great Trains, she
will get courage, and will not fly away with them and hide them as if trained
to small Birds. But this Sparrow-hawk; for a Goshawk must have no live thing
given her in her Foot, from the time of her first entering, until she has
killed something by her own strength: But if a Goshawk be so cowardly as not to
seize it, then take a live Partridge, make a hole in the Ground, and put the
Partridge therein, covering it with a Slat or thin Board, and tie a String to
it of about twenty Yards long, which you must hold in your hand to draw away as
occasion requires; then Spaniels to hunt, and put up the Game, and carry her
unhooded; and when you perceive that she looks toward the place where the
Train is, then draw off the Slat or Board, and cause the Train to spring as if
by the Spaniels; and if she take it, let her feed thereon her fill on the
Ground: And this course do several times to make her perfect therein.

CHAP. XI.
The SPARROW-HAWK.
THis Hawk is much of the nature and resemblance of the Goshawk, but not of the
bigness, and she requires the same feeding, and makes the same flights. It is
a Hawk common in these European Parts, and those are best esteemed that are
bred in cold, barren, and high places, where there is little or no Game, for
thereby they are taught to be more laborious and industrious. The only reason I
suppose why they are of so little esteem, is their commonness and cheapness,
for they are of great use and pleasure; and he that has once experienced a
well Reclaimed Sparrow-Hawk will hardly be without one.

Their Game is young Pratridges, but their excellency is for Magpies,
Black-Birds and the like small Birds.

There are several Sorts of Sparrow-Hawks, and of different Plumes, just as
there are of Goshawks, which is occasioned through the diversity of Regions,
and Countries where they Breed, the larger are in most esteem, and want nothing
but strength to match their Courage.

The Marks of a good and Beautiful Sparrow-Hawk are these, the Head little, the
Beak thick, the Legs short and Fattish, the Pounces sharp and long, and of a
sad Maile, the Eyes full, the Circle about the Ball of the Eyes of a color
betwixt white and green, and the Neck Long and Thick.

I would advise all young Beginners in Falconry, to begin their practice on
this Hawk, for thereby they may learn to manage others, especially the Goshawk.

The Sparrow-Hawk should not be Fled in the Morning, unless she be prepared
over Night with a short and clean Supper, and you should always have in a Box
about you Fresh Butter, mixed with a little Saffron and Sugar Candy to give her
now and then with her Meat, which she will eat with great delight; and this
will keep her Head always loose, and in good Temper; and it will also prevent
the Cray, and keep her proud and full of Spirit.

They Mew every year in April, May, and June.
SParrow-Hawks that are newly taken and will not Feed, rub their Feet with warm
Flesh, or with a live Bird, and put it to her Beak, and if she Seize it, it is a
sign she will Feed, and then tear off the Skin and Feathers, and put it to her
Beak.

It is best to enter the Sparrow-Hawk in some Champain Country, far from Woods;
and let her be unhooded when the Spaniels are uncoupled; then if the Patridge
Spring near you, and she Bate, let her go, and if she kill, Reward her on the
Ground with the Head, Brains, Neck, and Breast Maning Hawks.

To the Honorable Sr Richard Menman of Caswell in Oxfordshire Bart. Created (by
Letters Patents to comence, after the death of^ Rt. Honble. (Phillip now Ld.
Vis^ Menman) Baron Menman of Kilmainham in ye County of Dublin* in ye Kingdom
of Ireland* as also Vist Menman of Tuam. in ye County of Gallway, in the said
Kingdom. ^

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

F Barb^r de^in: A. Soly (...)

of the Partridge; then when she has ^ed take it away, and get on Horseback a
pretty distance from her, whistle and call her; and if she come, Reward her
well. And above all things have a great care that she fail not at her first
Flight, which should be at larg Partridges called Stabtayls; lest always after
she should turn Tail, when she Files at strong ones.

There are several names or distinctions of Partridges; the first, when newly
hatched are called White-heads, the second Names are Chiek-tayls, the third
Stubtayls, the fourth Ru^ntay^s, and then they are full summed and hard set.

When you enter your Sparrow-Hawk, hold your hand alost; that she may the
better watch both the Spaniels and Prey: you must give her some small Reward
after every Flight, especially if she kill; and if at first entering she miss,
be sure to have some young Partridge or Bird in your Bag, for her to kill;
after she is well entered and Fist, whereas formerly you held it up. You should
likewise be sure to let your Spaniels Range near together, and on your Right
Hand, that she may the better discern her Game, and Flee to the most advantage;
for which purpose you should be as near the Dogs as possible, and carry your
Hand low, that she may not bear at the Game before they Spring. He that is not
quick of sight, and nimble of Hand with his Sparrow Hawk, shall soon Hawks of
more pleasure, for you may Flee her at such times of the Year, as you cannot the
Goshawk: Her keeping ought to be delicate, and in regard she is so small and
weak, be sure to keep her High and Lusty; yet with due Regard to the
preparation of her Stomach, before you take the Field with her. She will kill
according to the several Seasons, Diversity of Game. She generally delights to
Flee close to the Ground, Lap-Wing, Ring-Dove, Jay, Mag-Pye, Blackbird, and
the like Game, and she may be made to hold out all the Summet.

You should Flee her from the Hood, and not to let her spend her little
strength, and disorder her self by unruly Bateing, which happens by being
carried Bare.

If you Flee her in the Morning, prepare her accordingly in her preceding
Supper, with weathering

To take Sparrow-Hawks.
IN regard of the use and and pleasure, together with the commonness of the
Sparrow-Hawk, I hold it not amiss to give these Directions for the taking them.
You should choose out some level Covert or Thicket near it, where you may be
concealed, there fix about half a Dozen Sticks, about the bigness of a Man's
Arm, and about six Foot long, on each side three, to these Sticks must be
fastened certain Nets, made of very Fine Green Thread, and to them a Cord, which
may reach to the Man that lies concealed in some Bush^ on the plain must be
set several small Birds, especially Chafinches, which sort of Bird: the
Sparrow-Hawks much delight to Feed upon, and she will not fail to Flee with
great Eagerness into the Net, thinking to Seize the Bird, and does become
ensnared. In Winter they are often found Pearching on some Tree in Hedg-rows
near Highways.

CHAP. XII.
Rules for Reclaiming the Haggard-Faulcon, with Instruction to enter her to the
Lure; which Directions will serve for all Long Winged Hawks, Except the Merlin.
HAving one of these Falcons, set her down and let her rest quietly the first
Night, in, some convenient place, in her Rufter-Hood; then the next Morning
Early, take her up easily on your Fist, and carry her all ^ay up and down
thereon, gently stroaking her with a Feather until you find her Gentle and
Bold, so as not to start when she is touched, and some times with your Hand;
and when you find her not Coy, take off her Hood being alone, putting it on
prefently again; and this do till she will Feed; giving her but a little at a
time, and do not pull her. Hood off, or put it on without giving her a bit or
two, useing your Voice, which will gain her love, for by this means when she
is* Reclaimed; she will know when she shall be Fed, and when she will Feed
Boldly. The next thing is to teach her to jump from the Perch to your Fist,
which is thus done: Let her stand on a Perch about Breast high, so that they
take no Offense, or Fright, until they are acquainted therewith (for the first
handling or using of a Hawk, is the making or marring her; and an ill Habit she
is not easily reclaimed of;) then unstrike her Hood, and Lure her, using your
voice, but be sure you do not affright or distaste her, that thereby she may
Bate from you; therefore be sure unstrike her Hood, and encourage her with some
Food to come to you. Now for the better bringing her to subjection, it is good
to keep her with a sharp Appetite, for unless that be rightly observed, all the
rest is to little purpose.

When you find by this means that she will freely come to your Fist, and be not
apt to take offense, you may let her set unhooded, keeping by her to hinder her
gazing about by your diverting her, and often feeding her with a Bit or two;
and when she is brought to this pass, and will boldly receive your Bits,
hearken to your voice, and jump to your Fist, then you may set her to the Lure.

When you find she will readily come to your Lure, which must be garnish't
with Meat in the Creance, put a young Pigeon to the Lure, and therevvith Lure
her; and when she has killed it, and eaten the Head, take her up gently with
a Bit of Meat, and put on her Hood; then unstrike her Hood and Lure her to the
Pelt, using this twice or thrice; but if you do it often, she will be very
unwilling to part with the Pelt, and by consequence provoke her to carry,
which fault is more accustomary, and worse in a Field than River Hawks. You
must have a great care that you Lure her not too far till her Stomach be
perfect, else she may find out something by the way more pleasing to her, which
will occasion her stay, and prove of ill Consequence in her obeying you.

Also observe that in the time of her Making (whilst she is on the Ground,
Pluming or Feeding) you walk about her, often Feeding her with your Hand, and
useing your Voice, which will Pigeon between the Falconer and the Lure, in a
long Creance, that she may kill it near you, and in such manner, that she may
truss it over your Head; and by this means, when you come to her from some
Distance, she will not be afraid, but delight to come to you; and the neglect
of this will make her timorous, so that sometimes she will not only leave her
Prey, but forsake you. And there are some Hawks, that will not be taken
striking or Rapeing in the Creance, which without such a Devise must be the
loss of the Hawk, so that the Falconer ought to be very careful to Reclaim her
from such Vices in her first Making.

To make your Falcon (or indeed any other Long Winged Hawk) a right and perfect
Flyer, these following Directions should be observed.

When you have Fed her on the Lure, so that she knows it, then begin to Lure
her in the Creance; and when she will come nimbly and readily thereto, then
Flee her loose; and when she will come nimbly loose, then give her Trayns
between the Man and Lure, which is thus to be done; Let your Falconer, or he
that holds the Hawk, go at some distance one from the other, (but he that Lures
her, must be up the Wind) and when he that carries the Hawk, has drawn her
Hood, then begin Lureing, and she (being acquainted with your Voice) will make
up to you. Pigeon ready sealed, or a Feather put through her Eyelids, to make
her look upwards; and by this means in three or four times you may venture to
stoop the Lure upon her, and let her fly a turn or two over your Head; and then
have a Pigeon ready sealed to give her, with a short pair of Creances to, the
Pigeons Leg, that if in case your Hawk should be shy, you may hold it, that she
cannot carry it away.

If your Hawk prove gidy Headed to go at Check, and carry her Game with an
unwillingness, to let you come in to her, then load her with heavy Bells, and
Cope her Beak above and below, to the very Quick; and Sear the Point of her
Beak, with a hot Iron till the Blood comes, and this will hinder her from
eating that which she gets her self; So that by Degrees she will be fond of
your coming in to help her, to meat which you must always show her, as you come
in unto her in your Hand; and in a little time this will Reclaim her of that
Roaveing Kytish-trick, of carrying away the Quarry, and make her as aforesaid
very fond of you, if duly observed; For when she finds she cannot kill of her
self through the weightiness of her Bells, nor carry it to eat by reason of her
Coping and Searing, she will be willing to come to you. Then having her Stomach
sharp set, after a due weathering of about three hours, she being sometime
without her Hood, and Water set in a large Pan to see if she will bathe; and if
so, then she must continue until she has dried her self; Then ride with her on
your Fist into the Field, and strike her Hood, whistling softly to provoke her
to fly, and doubtless she will make some motions either to Bate, flap with her
Flags and Sails, or advance her self on your Fist, which Motions suffer her to
use until she either rouse her self, or mute, and when she has done either of
them unhood her, and let her flee with her Head to the wind, that she may the
better get up on the Wing, and she will then naturally climb upwards, fleeing
round; and when she has made two or three turns, whoop to her, and when you
find her coming in and near you (but not before) cast out your Train into the
wind, and if she stoop to it, reward her well with some Bits of clean and sweet
Meat.

When your Hawk is perfectly Reclaimed, and thoroughly made by gentle and fair
usage, you may adventure to flee her every day, provided you feed her
accordingly: For if you flee upon Rest you shall never have a good Hawk, nor
make a good flight; for Rest fills them with glut, fat and ill humors, which
are purged and wrought out by Exercise. Whilst they continue wild they cease
not to get their Prey, come what Weather will, fair or foul, Winter or Summer;
and certainly it is most natural for them to be so used by us: Howbeit we must
observe a due regard to the state and condition in which they are, and that
much of their Natures are altered whilst they remain under subjection.

You must be careful to observe the Nature and Disposition of your Hawk at the
time of her Luring and Making, and be sure you give her no great scope to fly
high or be wild; but hold her down, and near you, in case you find her high
minded. Contrariwise some Hawks are so lazy, or fond of their Keeper, that they
care not much to stir from him were a Partridge sprung up near her: such Hawks
must be quickened by setting a good edge on their Stomach, and training them up
by little and little; for the dullest of them are capable of Preying for
themselves when Wild, and assuredly by Art and Observation they may be brought
to do at least as much for us; They want neither Mettle nor Strength, the only
thing is how to set them to work. Those that are dull and lazy ought to be
deprived of the assistance of other Hawks, which will be a good way to enforce
them to work for themselves; and if they do not yet give you content, do not
abridge them of their Reward, but try them further, and by degrees they may be
brought to know their own strength.

When your Falcon is become so familiar and gentle as to sit barefaced in an
Evening amongst Company, then and not before may you adventure to give her a
Stone or two over hand, which you may do every other Night until you find her
Stomach good, and then you may proffer her Castings, which she will not refuse;
but have a great care not to distaste her, but let her have it with her own Will
and liking, lest she take an Keepers Indiscretion, and by no means let her
Castings be too big.

If you should give her Castings before her Stomach is well prepared by the
Stones, it would signify nothing; for they are as it were the Key of the Work,
that the Grease and Glut may be stirred and dissolved, so as to be fitted to
pass away in her Mewts downwards, or in her Castings upwards.

The best time of giving Stones is doubtless at Night, until she be thoroughly
clean, and then in the Morning, but not until she has put away her Supper from
above; half a dozen at a time are sufficient, and to do well they should be
given above the Hand; but for that every one has not a ready skill, you may
Cast her, and give them so without danger, if it be carefully done. This course
must be continued until you give her Plumage in her Luring and Training; Wing,
being the short Feathers of the Pinion, with as much clean wa^ht Flannel as
will make a reasonable Casting: and remember in using Stones and Casting to
observe this old Rhyme, Washed Meat and Stones will c^use a Hawk to fly;
Long Fasting and great Casting will cause a Hawk to die.
But I shall forbear any more at present concerning Stones and Casting, it
being more proper in the Chapter relating to the Diseases and Cures of Hawks.

In Reclaiming the LANNER and LANNERET, be sure to make them well acquainted
with the Lure, which should be garnisht with hard washed Meat, and let her take
the greatest part of her Reward in Bits from your hand, and Hawk: For what else
relates to the Reclaiming and Manning of the Lanner, is the same as for the
Falcon.

When your Hawk is perfect at the Lure, then spring her up a live Pigeon as she
comes in unto you betwixt the Man and the Lure, remembering to tie a long
Creance at the Pigeons Feet that Hawk may Truss her if possible over your Head,
or very near you, lest if she kill it at a distance, and take some offense when
you come toward her, she forsake both the Prey and you; therefore be very
careful to prevent her getting any such ill quality at first; for preventing of
which be sure to gain her love by making her bold and acquainted with you, as
already treated of, and do not deceive her in her Rewards. But if you should
have such a Hawk, that notwithstanding all care (as some such there are) will
be apt upon the least scope of liberty to turn* Tail and leave you: In such
case you must somewhat abate her Pride, with respect to the Season of the Year
and the Weather; which done, get a Quarry Hawk (that is, an old Well-entred and
Reclaimed Hawk) and a couple of live Fowl, and let her see them flown once or
twice, and at length when your Quarry Hawk is coming to kill it, be sure to
stand under the Wind with her, and let her see the Fowl overthrown, and go into
the Quarry; and if* she go in with courage, and seize it greedily, make in
apace crossing the Fowls Wings, and suffer both the Hawks to take their
pleasure a little while together; then take up the Quarry-Hawk gently with
clean Meat, and let the young Hawk enjoy the Quarry to her self, keeping on
your Knees to assist and please her. You must be very careful that she swallow
no Pelf to glut her, but give her clean Meat for her Reward, and let her have
her Supper, as she sits on the Fowl, clean washed and well dressed.

If you cannot have the convenience of a Quarry-Hawk at first making your Young
one, then be sure to cast her off with the most advantage you can of Wind and
Stomach, and let her take not too much pains before you show her the Fowl; and
if she does not make her first nor second stooping right so as to kill, then
have in readiness a Tame Fowl as near the color of the Wild as you can, and
therewith take her down before she has too much toiled her self; for many Hawks
will take discontent when they find they miss killing their Prey, and so leave
their Master.

Further Rules for Reclaiming and Manning Hawks, and entering them to be
acquainted with the Spaniels.
IN Reclaiming and Manning your Hawk remember, that Haste makes Waste, and he
that boasts of his Art in making her ready to flee in a Month or sooner (as
some such there are) I hold him very indiscreet, and little understands the
nature and conditions of her; for it is impossible to bring her to perfection
but by degrees, as first he must abate her Flesh, and if then you offer to Flee
her before she is in her Pride and lusty again, she is for ever spoiled;
besides she must have some teaching to come as well go, and she must be
acquainted not only with the Dogs in general, but with those in particular that
are to be used about her.

He that offers to Flee her whilst she is poor and low, shall never have her
free from Diseases, nor can he receive any content in her, as being not able to
make a good flight; and to Flee her before she is acquainted with the Dogs, as
well as her Keeper, may go whistle after her, and not be Master of her in haste.

It has been already said, That whilst you endeavor to Reclaim your Hawk, you
should divide one Meals Meat into three parts, and to seed her the oftener; and
now when she is Reclaimed, you must increase her Meals somewhat every day. You
are to have a great care that during the time of Reclaiming she does not soar
up too high, and that she be thoroughly Enseamed before you Flee any Fowl with
her, be she Eyish, Brancher, Ramage, or Mewed-Hawk, lest soar out of sight and
be lost. Also observe, that during the time your Hawks Feet continue blackish
and rough, she is full of Grease and Glut; for as she Enseameth her Feet will
become yellow and smooth, and when they are very yellow and smooth, she is
perfectly Enseamed: But this is better known by her Castings and Stones,
especially after any laborious flight, when her Castings and Stones will be
greasy and slimy, and her Mewts will be soul and discolored.

In teaching your Hawk to Flee to the Field, it is good to have other Falconers
to assist you with their Hawks, and to do well the Hawks should be tied to the
ground to prevent their taking Wing before their time. Nor do not bring her
into the Field to Flee until she is well acquainted with the Spaniels, and the
better to effect the same observe these Directions. Feed her always in the
midst of the Dogs, and when she is bold Pigeon in a short Creance amongst the
thickest of the Dogs, suffering her to Quarry amongst them and to Plume for a
while; then take her up to your Fist with some Stump, and soon after cast out
the Pigeon again and again, until you find she is bold and ventures amongst
them, and with your Whip lash the Dogs, now and then crying, Ware Hawk, ware,
which will much encourage her; and when she is come to this pass you may
venture to Flee her. Hawks are subject unto, at first train her up well, and
for the effecting of which observe these Directions: Provide three or four hand
Partridges, if possible, or for want thereof live Pigeons, and have the
assistance of a Man or two, with one or two Couple of Staunch Spaniels, choose
a plain large Field in which there is not above two or three Bushes; let one of
the Men take the Dogs with him, and beat the Bush or Brake, making Dogs that
the Hawk may see, hear and observe it well; then let him dexterously throw off
the Partridge or Pigeon, so as she may suppose it to have sprung out of the
Bush, your self holding the Hawk to the most advantage; and at the time of
throwing off the Partridge or Pigeon, cry Gaze ho, which using frequently will
make her observe her Game and opportunity. By this Artifice there is no doubt
but that she will go off with Mettle, especially Stomach. You must be vigilant
and quick to make in after her, that she may receive no fright by the coming in
of the Dogs, or the like; and your Spaniels being got near about her, reach her
to break the Head in her Foot, and to eat it on the ground; and when she has
made an end thereof, and begins to look about her, be provided with the Wing of
a Pigeon, and let her jump to your Fist, and feed thereon.

For her Supper, you should prepare good fresh Meat of Pigeons or other
Feathered Fowl, which must be well and clean dressed. This course should be
observed with four or five Partridges in several Afternoons, with some
advantage to your Hawk in her going off; but every day less and less, that she
grows not lazy; for should you at the first hand use her to kill whatever she
flies at with ease, and at the Sowce, she will expect to be so treated, and
perhaps refuse to fly after any that are sprung at a distance from her, but
cast her Regards another way, as being lazy.

Some Hawks at first entrance, if they fly a Partridge hard to the Covert, and
take it not at the first flight, will set on the Ground losing the advantage of
getting upon some Stand, whereby she will never see the Partridge again at the
Retrieve. This for a short Winged Hawk; but if for a long Winged one, and that
she fall to the Ground, then let the Falconer show her the Pigeon and Lure to
make her take to her Wings, and then call the Spaniels to a Retrieve. Now to
prevent this Jadish trick, make into her with the Dogs, having first called
them off: And for a short winged Hawk show her some Meat, and take her to your
Fist, or make her take her stand in a Tree.

Rules to Reclaim Hawks brought from the Cage, and how to Hood them.
WHen you get any Hawk that is brought from the Cage, you must proceed with her
in a different way from the former; for she must be Reclaimed in this sort.
Give her at least three weeks carriage in her Rufter-hood, always stroaking and
playing with her, at first with a Feather, and then with your hand very gently.
You must feed her with clean washed Meat (which must be warm, and for the most
part feathered Meat) all the time, which will bring her the sooner to a good
Stomach, and to be well pleased and gentle, which you may discern by her
listining to your voice, by her chirping, her eager feeding, or the like, (this
to be done within three or four days after your first taking her to the Fist,
by which means she will thrive much the better, and come sooner to a Stomach;)
then wash her all over with water and pepper prepared for that purpose some
Evening, or which is better, smoke her with Tobacco when she is empty.

Having thus prepared her, and being provided with another Hood, take off her
Rufter-hood, and as she grows dry put on the Hood, and give her a Bit or two
of Meat to please and refresh her. And thus you may continue for some hours
hooding and unhooding her, Rewarding her with the best Meat you can get, until
she is thoroughly dry, and then set her down barefaced, permitting her to take
two or three hours rest in some warm place, and on a dry Perch, to prevent
colds and the cramp, which at such times they are subject unto: Then when you
come next unto her, let your voice give her notice of your approach, that she
be not surprised with fear or distaste, and let her see you come with Meat, but
give her none until she is hooded; and use her so for some time, that you may
bring her to a liking of her Hood, which she will soon do when she finds that
the putting it on ushers in Meat. All this while divide one meals Meat into
three, feeding her oftener; and be sure in this interval to observe her Nature
and Temper, and accordingly guide your etc. of every sort of Hawk. These which
are here laid down, with your own Reason and particular Experience, may suffice.

Now for as much as I am fallen on this Discourse of Hooding, I hold it not
amiss once for all to give you this Direction and Caveat; you ought to be
exceeding careful in Reclaiming her to take her Hood. You have already laid
down Hood of some light color, as Green, Red, or Yellow, which hang on your
little Finger of the same Hand whereon you carry your Hawk, and let it hang so
that it may be always in her sight, especially at such times as you seed her.
This do for about a Week, or until Hood for the Meat. If you interpose it when
she does this boldly, you may then sometimes essay to bear a little hard with
the Hood against her Head, by which means she will in about a Month come to
Hood and Vnhood her self, as often as you please. And whereas before you used
to restrain her from eating, let her now eat moderately when she is Hooded, and
never but then; nor should you take off her Hood until feeding time: And
remember you use not this course with any Hawk until her Stomach be perfectly
come to her, if it be a Hawk taken out of the Mew, And of all others, you ought
to be most careful, as to this point, in handling your Goshawk, for she is (as
already said) very nice and coy, and apt to take offense, and withal hard to be
reconciled and reclaimed, but by degrees and by gentle and soft usage you may
overcome the worst natured Hawk that is.

To help a Hawk that is coy and fearful.
IN case your Hawk is coy and fearful, so as not to endure the sight or noise
of Strangers, Passengers, Horses, or the like, you ought to consider from
whence this happens, which doubtless is from her Keepers not rightly Reclaiming
her: For although all Hawks do this by Nature, yet by Art they are brought to
leave it; and it is Reclaim two Casts of young wild Hawks than one manned Hawk
that has been ill handled in her first making.

Before you begin to practice on such a Hawk, carry her a day or two upon your
Fist, and when through watching and manning, she has a sharp Stomach, and
withal is somewhat gentle, repair to some place where there is a great resort
of People, as at a Bowling-Green, or the like; then put her into a pair of
Creances, set her on a Man's Fist, and let her jump to a Catch, and there pass
away the time in this manner with her every day as often as you can for some
Weeks, now and then practicing it at the end of some great Town on a Market Day
where People pass, permitting her to sport and play on the Catch: And by often
practicing this way, you may bring her off from that ill quality whereunto she
was addicted through the fault of her former Keeper.

There are some Hawks that will not flee with others, but draw backwards: There
are also others that Bind with every Hawk, and so flee for the purpose: And
others again do hate either to flee or set with any others, which is occasioned
either through fear, or for want of love to them. For the helping this ill
quality, get a gentle Lanner, being an old and true made Hawk, which set on the
same Perch with the other Hawk by day, but at a good distance, then give each a
bit of Meat as you pass by them, and so by degrees set them a little nearer
together, and when you find it convenient, put some Meat between them that both
may seed together. If your Hawk makes any motion to Crab with the Lanner, gorge
her up at Night with good Meat, and set her on a Perch abroad in the cold,
(provided she be in good plight, and able to endure it) and let her set their
three or four hours, and hold the Lanner near the Fire; then bring in the other
Hawk hooded, and hold her close to the Lanner, and when she finds the
comfortable heat received from her she will dravv nearer and nearer unto her.
Let them thus stand together until she seem very desirous to Jouk, then unhood
her gently, and let them both stand close together all Night, and in the
Morning set them on the Perch near together, but not to reach; and continue to
do in the Evening as aforesaid: And about the fourth or fifth Night you may
adventure to set them both out in the cold on the same Perch, so as they may
come to each other for vvarmness. And when she is thus brought to love
Company, you may unhood them, Feed, Perch, and Lure them together.

CHAP. XIII.
How to Enseame a Faulcon with her Castings and Scowrings.
WHen your Hawk is well in Blood, and well Quarred, let her flee with other
Hawks, but Reward her well at the beginning, suffering her to feed well on
the Quarry, which will so encourage her that she will have no mind to go to
the Check.

When you feed her, Call and Lure her (as if to the Lure) and proffer her Water
every Day and every Night; give her Castings according as she endeweth.

In the Evening by Candlelight, amongst Company take off her Hood; and set her
on the Perch with a Light by her.

You should make your Lure to imitate, or counterfeit the Game you design your
Hawk for; If for a Gerfalcon (whose Game is the Hern) then your Lure should be
Garnish't with a Herns Wings; if for a Falcon, a Lanner, or other long Winged
Hawks, then tie a Partridges Wings to the Lure; and if for a Goshawk, then
those of a Partridge, or Pheasant.

If you would make your Goshawk for the Pheasant, Feed her always on the
Ground, or in some thick place where she must encounter the Pheasant at Perch;
and first enter her at a young Pheasant, and every time call her from Tree to
Tree, that she may learn to take her Stands.

You should Reward her upon the Lure, with what Fowl she kills, to make her the
more in love with it.

If you would have your Hawk clean and sound, she should have Castings every
Night, until she is made clean; also Tireing or Plumage at Night is very good,
provided she has not been hard Flown.

You may Flee your Falcon twice a day at the River (if the Season be good) and
three or four Flights at the Field.

You should Feed your Hawk until it is fitting to give her Plumage; and for
your doing the Mewts are white, and the black thereof very black, and not mixed
with another Color; and if she be sharp set, and Plumes eagerly, you may give
her Castings, either of the small Feathers of a Hens Pinion, or for want of any
other of a Coneys or Hares Foot.

You should make the place under the Perch clean, to see if the Mewts be full
of Streaks, or Fellenders, or Slimy; for if so, the abovesaid Casting must be
used three or four Nights together; Feathers, or Casting sweet, or lapt round,
and the Water within it clean, like Spring Water; then give her Pigeons or such
like good washed Meat.

CHAP. XIV.
Rules for Bathing a Hawk.
FOr Bathing your Hawk it is good to offer her Water once a Week in the Winter,
and twice, or thrice a Week in the Summer; but use no force to provoke her to
Bath, for a young Hawk that is Sound and Strong, does not care for it, but
those that are Old and subject to infirmities delight therein, as being a great
refreshment washed Meat in the Days of Bathing, neither go abroad with her; and
after Bathing give her a Bit or two of hot Meat unwash't.

If the Weather be Fair and Temperate, let her dry her self abroad, otherwise
help Nature with Art, and never let her Bath in Forsty Weather. If she refuses
to Bath in a Basin (as some will) then carry her to some small Brook, and
suffer her to stand up to her Thighs; and in the time of her Bathing she must
be Vnhooded, to prune and pick her self.

CHAP. XV.
To make a Hawk Bold and Hardy, etc.
IF you would have your Hawk Bold and Hardy, keep her often times all Day on your
Fist, and feed her early in the Morning, with the Flesh of some Foul; then set
her abroad in the Sun, with Water before her, to Bath and Bowz her self as often
as she pleases, (for if a Hawk has any Infirmity, Bowzing will soon Cure, or
Kill her); and when you have so done, take her up and carry her on your Fist
all Day; and at Night set a lighted Candle before her, to burn till Day break,
and if you perceive she has been well Manned, and is fully Enseamed, you may
adventure to Flee her, observing the aforesaid Directions.

If she Kill, give her a good Gorge, and in case she miss, you must have some
sweet Pelt to encourage her; and thus must you Flee her daily, remembering to
observe not to bring her too low through overmuch Flying.

If you would have your Hawk love her Prey, and be very eager upon it, you need
only bring her with a good Sharp Stomach.

To make your Hawk Disgorge her self.
IN Case your Hawk be full Gorged, and yet on some occasion you have a desire
to Flee her, take three or four Corns of Wheat, which put into a small piece of
Flesh, and give her; and it will forthwith cause her to Disgorge, and be ready
provided with a little good Hot Meat to givether; and then you may Flee her
without Danger.

Or if you desire to Flee her in the Morning, Feed her the Night before with
good warm Meat, well washed in Urine, the Water being well wrung out, which
will set a sharp Edge on her Stomach, and raise her Courage.

To Remedy a Hawks ill Quality, of Fleeing to a Tree, and stand and Gorge.
IF your Hawk has got an ill Quality of Fleeing to a Tree, as soon as she has
killed her Prey, and there Gorge and eat it (as some will do.) To Remedy this,
let her be short Couped as before directed; then take a Leather of the Fashion
of a Bewet, which put on either of her Legs, upon one of her hinder Tallons,
and then button it on to her Bewet, whereon her Bell HERNE HAWKING

To the Rt. i: Honorable William Pierrepont Earl of Kingston upon Hull,
Viscount Newarke Upon Trent, Baron of Holme-Pierrepont Manvers and Herris etc:

The plate is humbly Didicated by Ric: Blome

hangs, which will so hold up her Tallon, as to hinder her gripeing; and
consequently she cannot sit on a Bough to hold a Bird, and to feed thereon,
which will force her to forsake the Tree; and thus doing five or six times, she
will leave this ill Quality.

CHAP. XVI.
Directions for Feeding your Hawks.
FEed not with two Sorts of Meat at one time, for that Breeds ill Humors, as
also Worms; it will also fill her with Wind, and make her very unhealthful.
Also forbear to Feed her with Old Stale Meat, being hard to Endew, breeding
Infirmities: Flesh of a Brood Hen is very naught, as also of all Fowl that live
on Frogs, Fish, or the like: so is the Flesh of Ravenous Birds, as the Kyte,
Pattock, Crow, Raven, etc. It is good to change her Meat, and sometimes to give
her the Flesh of Coneys or Hares (but not the Brains, nor any of the Hair, for
that breeds Worms.) Mutton is good Food for Gerfaulcons; but the Flesh of a
Lamb and Kid is good when your Hawk is low and poor. Dogs Flesh is very Food,
for all Hawks of a hot Nature; but not whilst they are Fleeing. Cats Flesh is
good in the Mew. The Flesh of small Birds, or indeed any that feed on Seeds is
very good; but do not give them much, nor often, unless at such times as your
Hawk has been abroad in the Cold all Night; for such Birds are by Nature very
hot, and will make your Hawk very stately, and hard to be Reclaimed from her
Pheasants, Partridges, Pigeons, and the like, is good, especially if she be
sick; but the Flesh of Chickens and Pullets is very good at all times, and
never out of season.

CHAP. XVII.
HERN HAWKING.
ABout the beginning of March Herns make their passage; and if you would have
your Hawk for this Game (which is a most noble Flight) let them not fly longer
at the River. For this Flight you ought to have a Cast of Hawks, and that they
may be the better acquainted Cast of them to the Lure at once; but be careful
that they Crab not together, which will endanger one another in their Flight.

Your Hawk being clean scoured, and sharp set, you may enter her for the Game,
by getting a live Hern, which tie in a Creance, or else disable its Wings that
it cannot fly, and setting her on the ground Vnhood her, and let her fly at the
Hern; and if she seize it, make in apace to her succor, and let her plume and
take blood thereon; then take the Heart and give it her on your Hawking-Glove;
then rip up her Breast, suffering her to plume thereon until she is well
gorged; then Hood her upon the Hern, suffering her to plume at pleasure; Then
take her on your Fist, and let her tire on the Foot or on the Pinion of the
Hern: Then let the Faulconer take the Hern, cast it about his Head, and Lure
her to come, not casting it out, but stay till she come to seize it in his Hand
as he Lureth with it, and let her feed thereon. Thus in three or four times so
doing, you will bring her to good perfection at this Flight.

For preserving your Hawk from the danger of the Herns Bill, place a Joint of a
hollow Cane on the upper part of their Bill.

Having well entered your Hawk, let loose a Hern in some fair Field without a
Creance, or without Arming her; when she is up at a reasonable height, cast off
your Hawk, and if she bind with the Hern and bring her down, then make in a
pace to her help, thrusting the Herns Bill into the ground, and breaking her
Wings and Legs, to the end the Hawk may with more pleasure plume and foot it,
then Reward her with the Brains, Heart; etc. as before directed.

Having showed you how to enter your Hawk as a Train-Hern, I shall now give
some Instructions how to Flee her at the Wild-Hern. When you have found one,
get in as nigh as you can unto her, going under the Wind with your Hawks, which
must be a Gerfaulcon or a Jerkin, with a Haggard slight Faulcon for your
Driver; and having their Hoods loose in a readiness, so soon as the Hern is put
up and got up upon her Wings, throw off your Driver, which does make in unto
the Hern, and causes her to work into the Wind; the let go your Hawks that are
to fly her, and when they have worked above the Hern, that they come through
her, and by often doing it does occasion her coming to Siege, then make all the
haste you can to assist her by breaking her Legs and Wings, and thrusting her
Bill into the ground: And for this flight you must always have a Dog that
should be trained up to the Sport, whose business is to come in and kill the
Hern.

But in case your Hawk does fail to beat down the Hern, or does give over the
flight, then give her a Train-Hern or two more before you show her another Wild
one; then fly her with the Quarry that is well entered, and in good flying; for
thereby she seeing the Quarry-Hawk flee at her, and bind with her, she will
take fresh courage and become bold, and when they have killed the Hern, Reward
them both together whilst the Quarry is hot.

CHAP. XVIII.
BROOK HAWKING.
HAWKS for this Sport are the Gerfalcon and Jerkin, the Haggard Falcon and the
Tassel Gentle.

In many places there are Ponds enclosed with Woods, Bushes, and the like
obscurities, so that they are concealed from Passengers, and such places Ducks
do much resort unto. Now for the Training up your Hawk to take them, observe
these Directions.

Your Hawk being in all points ready to fly, be provided with two or three live
Train-Ducks, and let there be a Man that must lie concealed in some Bush-by the
Pond with them, so that Hawk prepared for the sudden Flight, beat the Bush with
your Pole where the Man lies concealed with the Ducks, who must cast forth one
of them, to the end the Hawk may think it was put up by you, and if with a
Courage she takes it, Reward her well. And this is the way to train up up a
Goshawk to catch a Fowl at Sowce.

Having trained your Hawk to this, you may boldly go with her to the Ponds
where the Fowl Pole, and when any rise let go your Hawk from your Fist, and if
she seize it let her take pleasure thereon, and Reward her well.

It is very necessary to have a Spaniel with you; for if the Hawk is well
acquainted with the Sport, she will be so nimble at the Catch, that they will
fall into the Water together, and by that means the Fowl may go to Plung, so
that Spaniel will be ready to do good Service, and not displease the Hawk.

A Flight for a Falcon to the River.
WHen your Hawk will fly, jump, and come in at your Lure, then she is fit to go
to the River; and to manage your Flight observe these Directions: When you have
found where Fowl lies, then go about a quarter of a Mile up in the Wind to the
River side, and whistle off your Hawks, loosing their Hoods, and let them fly
with their Heads in the Wind, for there must be a Cast of Hawks for this
Flight. Then let the Falconers, or others that are at the sport, strike their
Poles in the Water to cause the Hawks to come in unto you and own the River;
and when they are got up into their places, then let one of the Falconers ride
down to show the Fowl, and when the Hawks have made their stooping, and have
ennued the Fowl, then go off from the River again; and when the Hawks have made
good their places, then let one of the Falconers go below the Fowl, that is,
down the sover; and the other that is above, let him come down and show the
Fowl again, and by that means the Fowl will be crossed over Land, that the Hawks
may make a fair stooping, and knocking the Fowl on the Land will occasion the
killing it, which will Quarry your Hawks.

But if they should miss their Stooping, so as the Fowl may get to the River
again, then your Hawks must go to their Wings to make good their flight; but if
the Fowl should go to plung, then take down your Hawks, lest you should fly
them too long, and the Faulconers with their Spears or Poles may endeavor to
Spear or kill the Fowl, which take to Quarry the Hawks with.

If they kill not the Fowl at first stooping, give them respit to recover their
place; and when they are at their place again and their Heads in, lay out the
Fowl as before directed, and Reward them well if they kill.

You should do well to have a live Duck in your Hawking-Bag, that if they kill
not the Fowl which is stooped (as oft-times it happens) than your Hawks being
at their pitch and their Heads in, you may throw to your Hawks and Reward them;
and by this means you shall always keep your Hawks in good life and blood, and
to be Inwards.

To make a Hawk Inward of the River, when she Raketh out.
IF your Hawk cannot recover the Fowl by reason of its breaking away at stretch,
and gives it over and comes in again, then cast her out a Seeled Duck; and if
she stoop it, or truss it, cross the Wings and let her plume and take her
pleasure thereon, and Reward her therewith, and by this means she will learn to
give over the Fowl that rakes out, and take back to the River again.

To keep a Hawk high flying.
YOur Hawk being well made to the River, you should not fly her above two
flights in the Evening, but feed her up although she kills not; and if she be a
slately high flying Hawk, one flight in an Evening is sufficient; for often
flying will bring her down, and make her fall of her stately pitch, and will
become greedy of the Quarry.

When a good flying Hawk does get up to a good place, you must continue her
therein, Fleeing with her upon narrow Waters and Rivulets, shuning broad Waters
and such places that lie near Coverts, where a Fowl can hardly be landed
without the assistance of Dogs, and where she cannot see the Water under her,
which are great Impediments, and will cause her to play the Kyte, and much
abate her Gate, and quite spoil her high flying; therefore always keep her as
high flying as possible; but be sure make her Inwards, that is, fond of the
Lure, and to be in such love with it, as upon tossing it up she will presently
come sowcing down upon it, which is no small honor to the Faulconer, to have
her at such command. And if she chance to play the Kyte Brook Hawking.

To the Worshipful Gilbert Gerard Cossine of Brafferton hall in the North
Rideing of york shire Esqr. Son and heir of S.r Gilbert Gerard Knight and
Baronet by Mary Daughter to the Right Reverend Father in God John Cossine late
Lord Bishop of Durham

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Ric. Blome.

and be lazy, then throw her our either some Train-Duck, or dead Quarry, and
Hood her up for about half an hour, then call her to the Lure and feed her.

Some are of Opinion that in such cases you should not Reward her at all, to
the end she should not be encouraged to use such ill Tricks; but the former way
is adjudged the best.

If your Hawk so soon as she has stooped and endewed a Fowl, will take stand
on a Tree or Stump by the Rivers side, Reclaim her from this ill quality, by
having in readiness two or three Men with live Trains, and that way which she
sits or most bends, let them cast forth the Train-Duck, and if she kill it
Reward her. And thus doing for three or four days, she will be broke of that
ill quality.

To make a Hawk fond of the Lure.
WHen your Hawk is well Quarred, and flees well to the River with a good pitch
and a great Gate, it is requisite to make her fond of the Lure, and to take her
down therewith, permitting her to kill a Duck or Pigeon tied thereto, after she
has made two or three stoopings.

The higher she flees, the more need there is to take her down.

If it happen that a Fowl (being often stooped) will not rise again, but fall
to diving (that is, plunging) contrive all the ways you can to kill it by Poles
or Spears, and take down your Hawk with the Lure, and let her feed on the
Train-Duck to please her self thereon, and this will make her become fond of
the Lure. But if you take her down to a sweet Pelt, and Reward her well with a
warm Pigeon, she will be as well pleased as if she had killed the Fowl.

In case she uses to rake out after Check, and lean out so far as not to come
in again to the flight, neither the Luring, Whooping, nor Casting the Glove
about your Head will do the business; for there is no remedy but following her,
and if perchance at length she comes in unto the Lure, take her gently up, feed
her with good Meat, and use her kindly as before directed, to the end she may
be encouraged, and become in love with your Voice and Usage against the like
occasion.

If you practice this diligently toward Soar-Hawks, or Hawks of the first
Coat, they will learn to hold in at Voice, or sight of the Lure, when ever you
perceive they are inclined to gad.

All Hawks should be set out in the Evening before Fleeing, to be well aired
and sharp set against their coming into the Field, and to stand Hooded as
before directed.

CHAP. XIX.
Rules for Ordering Hawks in the Mew.
AS to the Mewing your Hawks, In the first place it is necessary to know when
she ought to leave fleeing, and accordingly prepare her for it, which by most
is agreed to be about our Lady Day; so that about October she will be fair
Mewed, hard and home set.

Your Soar and Ramage-Falcon may be kept out longer, and flee her to May Day;
but your Haggard, of all sorts, ought to be put into the Mew by the first of
April: And the older the Hoggard is, the sooner she ought to be put therein;
for Nature will incline her sooner than younger Hawks.

It is necessary that immediately after you leave fleeing, and before you put
her into the Mew, you feed her up to be full of flesh and lusty, which is not
acquired by letting her have of the best, and her fill; for then out of a
greediness and the heat of her Stomach, she will take too much into her Gorge,
over-pressing her self, and consequently rather retard through indigestion,
than promote by due Concoction the end of your desire. My advice therefore is,
that you continue, as to quantity and times of seeding, the same Rules as in
the time of her fleeing for two or three days, only let her have then unwash't
Meat to scour and Enseame her; then afterward increase your hand a little by
degrees, and let her not glut her self too full, lest she thereby fill her
Stomach with tough raw Humors, and so fall into Distempers. About a Fortnights
observance of this course (if she be sound) will raise her Flesh to your
desire, and then you may be bold to feed her once a day; but with young
Pigeons, for three or four days; for they are moist and hot, of easier
digestion, and more nourishing than old ones: But for want of young, you may
use such as you can get, always remembering that her first Gorges are reasonable
as to quantity, because at that time of the year most old Feed is drier and
harder of digestion than at other times.

With these Observations you shall find your Hawk raised in her flesh, and
settled in her health, otherwise she must be put into the Mew: And without this
preparation she will soon be at a stand, which will give you cause to fear it
proceeds from some bruise or inward grief, whereas it is merely for want of
care in the preparing and feeding her in the Mew.

When you put her into the Mew, be sure let her be free from Mites and Lice,
for such like Vermin (which generally attend lean Hawks) will obstruct her
thriving. You should also put on her Legs, instead of her old Jesses, a pair of
strong new ones, that you may not be necessitated to put her on others at your
drawing her out, which cannot be done without heating and disturbing her, which
at that time should be prevented, as being in the prime of her Grace. And she
should also have Bells on, that if in case she break out of the Mew she may be
heard.

Keep the Mew clean swept, and let there be a large broad Pan of Water set
therein for her bathing, which must have fresh Water every other day. She must
have Stones also lying by her in Gravel; for by her taking and casting of these
Stones you may know the condition of her Body; and they may be carefully
gathered up, clean

If whilst she continues in the Mew you give her any Fowl killed by a Gun, be
sure to take away all the Shot and bruised Flesh, both being very hurtful and
offensive to the Natures of all Hawks.

As to the situation of the Mew (which should be a pretty large ground Room) it
should be so disposed that no Vermin, as Weesels, Polecats, Rats, or the like,
annoy it; nor should it be nigh any Highway, or where there is great resort of
People: And the Perches should be lined to keep their Feet from hurting. Whilst
she is in the Mew none should come near her but her Feeder or Keeper: And it
were not amiss if you had a Feeding-stock in the Room, with a String fixed
thereto to make fast her Meat in it, to prevent her dragging it up and down in
the dust or filth, which renders it unfit for her feeding: But if you eat, this
Rule is not to be observed.

Stale Meat is very hurtful, nor should you come into the Mew but when you
bring something to feed her.

It is convenient that the Air have a free passage into the Mew, and that it
have the benefit of the Sun, therefore I hold that broad Lettice Windows are
very good: And you must not let any Rain drop upon your Hawk whilst she is in
Mew.

As for her Meats whilst she is in the Mew, all small Birds are very good; also
Chickens and Kid, and Eels cut in pieces, and dipped in warm Sheeps blood; and
indeed most sorts of Flesh, provided it is fresh and sweet. And as to the
quantity, let it be rather too much than too little.

Let her bathe once in two or three days if she will.

A Hawk is not full and firm drawn out of the Mew until her Sarsels be full
grown and hard penned; and when you intend to draw her out, do it with all
expedition you can, putting on her Rufter-^ood very gently, and immediately set
her on the Perch, that she may rest quietly for that Night, until her first
heat and fury is allayed, which will be by the next Morning; for should you at
that time use much striving with her, it would endanger the over-heating her,
which will occasion many Diseases.

When she is on the Perch let some Company be discoursing or walking near at
hand, that she may observe them, yet not ^o as to disturb her: And when you
perceive her pretty quiet, take her gently to you^ Fist, stroaking her with a
Feather. If she be troublesome and very coy, set her down again, and take her
up a second time about an hour after, and so continue until you have gained her
love, then proffer her a bit of Meat, afterward accustom her to more carriage;
but endeavor with all your Art to prevent her from Bating.

After she is taken out of the Mew, hood her until she has a good Stomach;
feed her barefaced, and suffer her Hood to be put on gently; and then in an
Evening by Candle light you may unhood her, and the next Day show her the
Glove, and your Fist, suffering her to tire and plume Morning and Evening. And
sometimes in the Morning when her Gorge is empty, if you give her Sugar Candy
it will help her to endew.

When by her eager feeding you think she is Enseamed, and that you may flee
her, carry her into the Field, and if empty, she will Bate and fly of her own
accord, and if she kill Reward her.

There is more danger in heating a Hawk taken out of the Mew, than one newly
taken being a Ramager; for the latter comes from her Exercise, and although she
is fat, yet peradventure her fat and flesh is firm, and so made from her daily
Exercise.

There is also more danger in a Mewed Hawk than in one taken out of the Cage;
for though they are fat, yet their long Carriage by Sea and Land makes them
less apt to Bate, and overheat themselves.

Those that are taken from the Mew get their Fat by ease and rest, so that when
they are brought to eat they must be fed twice a day with good new Meat well
washed and clean dressed, that all the Blood may be well wrought out. As to the
quantity you may use your discretion, giving her enough.

For the first ten days after your Hawk begins to feed, give her neither Stones
nor Castings, but afterward give her every Night about half a dozen Stones
after she has put away her Supper from her Gorge, and you will find that she
will have rendered them all again in the Morning.

The third Week begin to give her Castings, and so continue the same course for
diet and feeding as before directed, until she be fleeing: And all the time of
her feeding add to her Meals, and forbear to wash altogether so hard, for it is
careful and due feeding that makes her serviceable: Nor is there any Hawk but
what will flee as she is taught; and if her Stomach be right, will flee with
courage and attention to her Keeper.

After a long, tedious, and laborious flight, if you mistrust any Grease or
uncleanness in her, give her Plumage, and Blood to content her, but not much
Meat, half her usual Gorge being sufficient: Then when her Meat is put over,
give her Stones, and set her up warm, and you shall find the Stones preserve
her in a due proportion of heat for the present, which is very necessary for
her, rendering her cool and temperate for the future.

To conclude; Concerning the giving Stones, you must use the Stones and Casting
with discretion: The latter without the former in a Hawk (supposed to be clean)
will work no effect, and thereby deceive you. For Example: Give such a Hawk as
you suppose to be very clean, Casting for a week together, and she will render
it fair and white; and do but then give her some Stones, and then Casting, and
you shall soon find some filth and glut which the Stones had made fit to remove
by the Casting, and which without these Stones the Casting could not have
wrought off.

Some times it happens that a Hawk may break out of the Mew, to regain, or find
out the place where she Percheth in the Night, then Lanthorn, and at your
approach hold the light to her, that she may not see your Face, but be employed
in looking altogether on the light, which is accustomary to all Birds; then
having espied her, climb up the Tree with as little noise as possible, ringing
a Low-Bell at the bottom of the Tree, and holding the light toward her, until
she is taken, which you may easily do; for she will hardly stir.

About a Fortnight or three Weeks before you intend to draw your Hawk out of
the Mew, let her be fed twice a Day with clean dressed, and washed Meat; and you
will find her thereby well advanced toward her Enseaming; She will likewise
thereby have scowred out of her Panel and Gut, much of that Glut and Grease
which has there engendered, which will prevent many Dangers, that might have
befallen her through Heat, occasioned by the least stirring, or Bating in the
Mew.

Of Mewing at the Stock.
THe place for this purpose, should be a Ground Room, free from Noise; and
there must be as many Turfs or Sods placed therein upon the Ground, as you
intend to Mew Hawks; and let the Distances be so wide, as not to reach Sand;
and your Turfs must be raised so high one upon another, that your Hawks Trains
may not touch the Ground.

For the fastening her to the Turf, put a Stick through the middle of the Turf,
so that about two Inches of the Stick is beyond the Turf at each end; then
fasten your Hawks Lease to the one end, and draw it over the top of the Turf,
with a Swivel fixed in the middle of the Turf, and drawing it hard, fasten it
to the other end of the Stick; then fasten your Hawk by the Jesses, to the
upper part of the Swivel, which will give her leave to bate round about the
Turf, but not to get off; and as often as your upper Turf grows dry, supply it
with fresh.

Note that all Gerfalcons and Jerkins are to be Mewed this way, and not loose,
as also all Haggards are unquiet in the loose Mew.

Every Morning when the Falconer comes to feed Hawks thus Mewed, as he enters
the Room, he must give them his Voice, that they may know of his Approach; then
with a Broom sweep away all their Mewtings; and then Feed each Hawk, as
usually. The Sand thus swept away must be renewed to keep all sweet and clean.

All Hawks Mewed this way, should have Cophoods, which are large and easy,
which must be taken off about once a Fortnight, that nothing may hurt their
Eyes.

Having Treated of the several sorts of Hawks, together with instructions for
their Feeding, Reclaiming, and Mewing; the next business shall be to Treat of
some Necessary things, fit for a Falconer to understand and observe.

CHAP. XX.
Necessary Rules for a Falconer to observe.
WHosoever intends to apply himself to this Art, and to become Master, must for
some time bestow all his Care and endeavors therein; he must be diligent to
learn, and observe the Natures, Inclinations, Strength, Mettle, and Conditions
of his Hawks; he must Treat them with a Gentle and Loving Hand, and pass by
their Faults with Patience: He must not be addicted to Tables, Cards, or
playing of good fellow, for many an excellent Hawk has been lost, through the
intemperance of her Keeper, nor can he be termed a good Falconer, that is apt
to be led away by these or the like Disorders; I grant he may be expert in
Reclaiming, Enseaming, and Fleeing his Hawk, Nay, he may attain to great Skill
in the Ordering and Managing her in her Flights, and whilst she is in the
Field, but if then he betakes himself to the Pot and Pipe, when he is returned
home, and peradventure to let his poor Tired Hawk to hang by the Heels, such a
one cannot deserve the Name of a good Falconer. He that is a Smoaker, must not
chew the Hawks Meat in his Mouth, for some good time after; For it will make
her cast her Gorge, or stand upon her Meat, which will occasion a disorder unto
her, if not kill her.

It is not enough that a Falconer knows how to Cure his Hawk, of any Disease,
or Distemper, nor what Remedies he ought to use in such and such accidents; but
his Care must be to preserve her from Diseases and ill Accidents, which he may
in a great Measure perform, by Care and Diligence; for that Physician which
prevents a Disease, is of more Esteem than he that Cures it.

He must be careful to keep his Hawk clean, and free from Li^e, Mites, and the
like Vermin, the first being in the Body* and the latter about the Eyes and
Nares; and she must be in good Case as to State of Body, for a lean Hawk is
subject to more Diseases than a Fat one, especially, Lice, and Mites; and yet a
Measure ought to be observed in her Feeding, for if overfat, it hinders her
Flight.

The place under the Perch should be often Gravelled, the better to discern by
her Casting, when she has need of Scowring, Stones, or the like.

Every Morning tie your Hawk out to weather her; and those Mornings that she
Baths, when she is thoroughly dry, give her some Plumage, or Tyreing, to prevent
her catching Cold, and then she will be fit for Flying.

After you come from your Sport, set a Candle lighted by her, which will
occasion her to Rouse, please and Oil her self, where she sits unhooded.

Every Morning that you intend to Flee her, set her out Early to Air, or
Weather, pulling off her Hood, for so long a time as she sits quiet, and then
Hood her up again; and so let her sit till you go to the Field: And when you
set her out to Weather, place her on a Block or Stump, about a Foot High, and
tied at half length of the Lease; and if there be more Hawks than one in a
Room, place them so, that they reach not one another, as before directed.

Every Night after Fleeing, give them Castings, sometimes Plumage, and
sometimes knots of Flanel, Feather Castings, and sometimes Physic, as you see
occasion by their Castings, and Mewts.

Be Careful not to tie your Hawk too high from the Ground, for fear of Bateing,
hanging by the Heels, or the like ill accidents, but set her low; and if there
be more Hawks than one in the same Yard or Garden, place them so as not to
reach one another.

The Falconer must be provided with Copeing Irons to cope the Hawks Beak, when
it is overgrown, also Cauterizeing Irons, Scissers, Bodkin, and such like
necessary Tools.

CHAP. XXI.
Terms of Art in Falconry.
THe First and Principal Term to be practiced is, Hold Fast; and that at all
times, especially when she Bateth or Striveth to Flee away.

Say Feed your Hawk, and not give her Meat; and when she has Fed, say she
Feaketh her Beak, and not wipeth it.

She is full Gorged, not Cropped; and if her Gorge be void, and her Bowels any
thing stiff, Embowelled, and has not fully Endued, and so long as you find any
thing in her Bowels, it is Dangerous to give her Meat.

You shall say she Jouketh, and not Sleeps, she Prun^^h, not Picketh her
self; nor can she properly (...) said to Prune her self, but when she begins at
her Legs, and fetches out Moisture at her Rump, wherewith she Oyleth her Feet,
and strikes the Feathers of her Wings through her Beak, which she does after
she has been wet in R^iny Flight* and when she Pruneth her self, do not
disturb her^ for then she shows her self to be Lusty, and of good Courage.
When she has done Pruning, she will exceedingly rouse her self.

When she Picketh her self, say she Pruneth her self.

When she stretches one Wing and a Leg, she Mantleth, and when she lifts up her
Wings, she Towreth.

To Brayle the Hawks Wing, is to put a piece of Leather over the Pinion of one
of her Wings, to keep it close.

Say she Rouzeth, and not Shakes her self.

If a Long Winged Hawk, say she Mewteth, and if a short Winged, she Sliceth.

Say, set your Hawk to the Perch.

Say she is a Fair, Long, Short, or Thick Hawk, and not a great Hawk; and she
has a Large, or Short Beak, and not a Bill.

Say she is full Gorged, and not Cropped.

Say she puts over, and endeweth, but both in a diverse Sense; for she puts
over when she removes her Meat from her Gorge into her Panel, by traversing
with her Body, but chiefly with her Neck: She never Endeweth, so long as her
Gorge is full at her Feeding; but as soon as she has Fed and Rested, then she
Endeweth by little and little.

When a Long Winged Hawk is Flown from the Fist at her Game, it is said she
goes well Aforehead; and after she has laid in her Game, and betakes her self
to her Wings, it is called Flying.

For a Short Winged Hawk, say She goes well from the Fist, and when she has
laid in her Game, and taken her Stand, it is said she goes well or nimbly at
the Retrieve.

Hawks have proper Names to their Feathers. Their Principal Feathers are six in
each Wing, and Twelve in her Train; all the small Feathers (except her Flag
Feathers under her Wings, which are Thin and Broad) are her Plumage; the first
Feather in the Wings are the Sarcel Feathers, which she always casts last, when
she is in the Mew; and then, and not before is the proper time to Feed her with
Washed Meat; and begin to E^seam her, that is, to take away her Grease, for
Washed Meat purges her. There are other Feathers that close up the Sarcels,
and those are termed the Covering Feathers, as are all the Feathers, which are
next over the long Beam, and Flag Feathers.

When she Picketh her self, say she reformeth her Feathers.

Say she Collieth, and not Breaks; She Straineth, not Clitcheth, or Snatcheth.

When she waits at the place, where she lays the Partridge, or other Game,
until she be retrieved, say she keeps her Mark.

A Hern that stands by the Water Side, watching for her Prey, is said to stand
at Seidge.

When a Hawk goes forth at Check, it is termed she makes out.

When she Grows Fat, say she is Raised in Flesh.

CHAP. XXII.
Concerning the Diseases of Hawks, with proper Cures for the same.
DIseases are easier prevented than cured; every Hawks should be well advised
in the first place how to preserve them from Sickness and Maladies, which is of
greater concern than to cure them when distempered.

In the next place, ^f any Hawk has any Sickness or Malady, provide timely
Remedies, not permitting them to run on too far: And in the last place you must
be furnished with Medicines proper for the Distemper.

Accidents will unavoidably happen, and then your Art and Care will be required
to cure them with the greatest ease, safety, and quickness.

Diseases and inward Infirmities do send forth certain previous Symptoms, whose
progressions may be impeded by a timely application of necessary Remedies.

I shall give you some Instructions how to cure those Distempers that Hawks are
most subject unto, especially at the time of their drawing out of Mew, being
then very fat and full of Grease, unless you order them accordingly: And
withal, being full of courage and wild, they are apt to over-heat themselves by
Stirring, Bating, Resisting, etc. and if you do not prevent the ensuing Evils
your Hawk is utterly lost; for it is impossible to cure her of these
Infirmities whilst she is in her Grease. If therefore your Hawk be of great
Mettle and Coy, wash her with cold Water, which will much refresh and cool her
before she begins Bate; for after she has heat her self, then too sudden
excess of Cold will clog her up. The Heat will melt her Grease, but the Cold
will congeal it, which of the two Evils is the greatest.

Also it is not good to make too much haste in the E^seaming her, nor to
disperse her Grease too soon, for that takes away her St^mach, and causes her
to cast disorderly: Likewise it is the occasion of abating her Flesh, which
brings weakness of Body, from whence proceeds the C^o^k and many other
Diseases difficult to cure.

The wild Hawk preserves her self at all Times and Seasons in a moderate state
by her continual Exercise and good Feeding. She lives longer than the
Reclaimed ones, and takes greater pains for her living, being her own Caterer;
and if at any time she ^inds her self oppressed with tough and ill Humors,
Glu^, Grease, Fat, or the like, Nature has taught her (as indee^ all Creatures)
to be her own Physicion, and to make choice of her Medicines, which are no
other than (...) Water and Stones or Gravel. It were well if all Men would
observe such a course when their Hawks are out of order; for certain it is, i^
these things will not cure and prevent Diseases, if timely taken, whereunto
your Hawks Stomach is naturally inclined, then ^e confident that no Drugs or
Medicines will effect the Cure. I hold therefore that all Sophisticated
Scowrings are not only unnatural, but insignificant to the end for which they
are intended. I must confess in appearance they may seem to remove some inward
Diseases, but they do it not effectually, for they return again. But for such
that will be persuaded thereunto, I shall lay down some Scowrings or purging
Medicines, with the true manner how to administer them, and how to prepare your
Hawk for receiving them, that they may be the more effectual.

Of Scowring and Purging Medicines.
A Strong and full Hawk shall be exercised with Courage, clean fed, Stones and
Casting, at least eight days, to stir the Humors in her Body, and make them
fit to be wrought upon. You must then feed her in the Morning, only upon that
day that you intend to scowr her, that she may be empty at Night; then give her
Scowring, and set her up warm; early the next Morning give her Stones in this
following comfortable Water.

Take a Pint of clean Water, put therein six bruised Cloves, as many thin slices
of Liquorice, with some brown Sugar Candy dissolved; when she has cast her
Stones, give her a little good Meat to her Breakfast. The said Water is very
pleasing and grateful to the Hawk, and withal strengthening, and exceeding good
for any Hawk that is poor and low.

For your strong and full Hawks this is a most excellent Scowring; Take a
quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, and four Spoonfuls of Whitewine Vinegar,
boil them gently together, scum and clarify it well, and then add to it three
or four bruised Cloves, a branch of Rue, and one of Wormwood, a blade or two of
Saffron, and a piece of Sugar Candy; let all these boil a little together, then
take the Saffron, Cloves, Rue, and Wormwood, when the remainder is cold, drain
off the Vinegar, and make up the Substance into small Pellets, and being rolled
up in Sugar Candy, give to ^ach Hawk two of them; and as to the bigness, you
may proportion them to the size of your Hawk.

If it be not strong enough at the first giving, at the second time convey into
one of the Pellets the quantity of a Tare of clean unwash't Aloes, which will
work very kindly. This Scowring is good for a Surfeit, and for one that has
long continued in a foul and disorderly Feeding; It purges the Stomach,
kills Worms, tesi^teth Rottenness, strengthens the Heart, and comfort
the Head.

If your Hawk be but in a reasonable state of Body, and you mistrust some
inward Infirmity, then take a quarter of a ^ound of sweet fresh Butter, let it
boil by it self, scumming it well, then put into it three or four small
branches of Rosemary, two or three bruised ^loves, a little M^^e, a little
S^ffron in Powder, and a pretty piece of brown Sugar Candy^, and boil all these
together very well: In the cooling put in a little Powder of Rue, and mi^ them
altogether very well; then take out the Cloves, M^^e, and Rosemary. You must
give the same in quantity and manner, both for Time, Preparation, Diet, etc. as
before directed: And if you find it not strong enough, put into one of the
Pellets a small quantity of washed Aloes. This Scowring gently purges,
strengthens the Heart, preserves the Lights, and removes Stoppings and
Obstructions.

A Hawk in a low estate and weak, must be ordered in another manner: For
whereas you gave your strong Hawks scowring at Night, you Morning, and feed her
the Night before with good Meat, that she may put it kindly away, and be empty
betimes in the Morning; then give her the Scowring you intend, and set her on a
warm Brick wrapped up in a double Woollen cloth, and there let her stand about
three hours, until she is fit to Feed, and then give her a little that is good,
feeding her by degrees, not all at once; and be sure to give her of the Water
already prescribed.

If you Order and Diet her in this manner, that is, with good food, moderate
warmth, and due care, no doubt but that she will regain her former health.

I shall add this compound Scowring, which is very good for any Hawk in what
state and condition soever.

Take a good quantity of fresh Butter well boiled, clarified and washed in
Rose Water, then make it up with the Powders of six Cloves, two blades of
Saffron, the quantity of a small Nutmeg of Rue in Powder, with good store of
Sugar Candy. Being kept close stopped or covered in a Box, it will keep a long
time, and you may give it your Hawk as occasion requires.

You may Feed within about an hour after it, and it will make her very fond of
you, full, haughty, and proud: It prevents the Wind, opens Obstructions,
purges the Head, warmeth the Body, comfort the inward Parts; is good
against Breath, and is a present Remedy for the Cray and Pantas.

I shall now give you an excellent Scowring for a full bodied Hawk after she
has been Lured, and her Grease and Heat stirred in her before she be thoroughly
Enseamed. Take some sweet Butter, clarify it well, and put thereto the Powder
of Box-leaves and Rosemary, of each a like quantity, a little Powder of
Horehound; mix all these very well together, and make them up into small
Pellets with brown Sugar Candy: Give your Hawk two of these Pellets at Night,
as before directed, and it will purge and scowr the Panel, and other inward
Parts of Grease, and the like Humors, and will cause her to Enseame very well.

I shall now add something concerning simple Scowrings, amongst which that
which we call Casting is one. For a short winged Hawk, the soft Feathers of
small Birds, with some part of the Skin, is very good and natural. And for a
long winged One, fine Flannel cut into pieces about an Inch square, rolled up,
and given in a bit of Meat.

By these you shall know in what state your Hawk is in; for when she has
returned them, if you find them hard, white, and round, not stinking or very
moist, and if upon pressing or squeezing it betwixt your Fingers, you find
clear water come forth, it is a sure sign she is well and lusty: But if it be
long, with contrary properties, as black, green, yellowship, slimy, greasy, or
stinking, it denotes her diseased. The former Casting is remedied by hot Meats;
the latter by feeding her well, and washing her Meat in cool Water, as of
Endive, or the like; and give her one or two Castings of Cotton, or Flannel
mixed with Incense and Mummy.

There is another gentle simple Scowring, and that is the Root of Sellandine,
of which four or five small Pellets, give out of the Water early in the Morning
(your Hawk being fasting) will finely cleanse her; but it must be given to a
strong Hawk, as being a strong Medicine.

Before you give any Scowring to a Hawk, know the state of her Body, and
accordingly make and order it, observing the Time and Season.

Casting of Plumage is to be observed as the former Casting, that is, if in the
Morning you find them round and not stinking, it shows health and soundness:
But if long, slimy, with undigested Flesh sticking to it and stinking, it
denotes Diseases and Vnsoundness.

Mewts as well as Castings must be observed, being of such importance for the
knowing the state and condition of your Hawk, that they ought to be regarded
every Morning.

If the Mewt be white without black spots, and not very thick, it is a sign of
health; but if white and very thick in the middle, it signifies that she is
gross and full of Grease: And this may be remedied by giving her moist Meats,
as Lambs, Sheeps, or Calves Hearts, and the like: And for two Mornings after
(being empty) give her Sugar Candy, and this will scowr her.

If the Mewt be more yellow than white, it is a sign she abounds in Choler,
occasioned from great Flights in hot weather, as also from much Bating. This is
cured by washing and wringing her Meat in Bugloss, Endive, Borage, or the like
cool Waters, and to wring it in a Linen cloth after it is washed.

The green Mewt denotes an infected Liver: For cure, feed her with Meat powdered
with Mummy; if she will not take it so, give it her in a Scowring or Casting:
And if this will not soon effect the cure, then give her a Scowring of Agarick,
and then another of Iucense to comfort her.

The Mewt full of several Colors is very bad, and a speedy course must be
taken by giving her purified Mummy beaten to Powder, wrapped up in Cotton.

The black Mewt proceeds from an infected Liver, and is very dangerous, so that
it will kill her in a few days if it continue: For cure, give her good warm
Meat, and Cotton Casting, with the Powder of Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger, or
Mummy alone.

The dark sanguine Mewt with black in it, is the most dangerous and hardly
curable.

Concerning the choice of Stones, the number, and the bigness of them, use your
own discretion with due regard to your Hawk; for seeing you shall seldom see
two of one kind exactly to agree in proportion and nature, therefore regulate
your self according to discretion.

The Stones most proper are a sort of fine white Pibbles, commonly found in the
Sands and Gravelly Rivers, the rougher they are the better, provided they are
not gritty.

To a Falcon Gentle give about seven Stones, and seldom above nine. To a Merlin
and Hobby not above five or six; and so to other sorts proportionable to these,
and be sure to give them Stones always clean washed and free from filth.

If your Hawk cast her Stones disorderly, keeping all or some of them longer
than she should, be then well advised how to proceed with her. This ill
property is occasioned through sudden Colds after Heats, before they are
perfectly Enseamed. For Cure do not use striving with her, lest you bring her
down from her flesh; but give her Stones out of Fair-water at due Morning, for
by that means you will often be constrained to keep her often Fasting the whole
day in expectation of them, as being pleasing to her; but at Night, which is
the best time for quietness, and then she will have time to receive the true
operation of them.

You must not give Stones to a sick Hawk, which is not of strength to return
them; but to a strong one at Night, and you will not fail to Reclaim her to
cast them duly.

Of Worms, and how to destroy them.
HAWKS are often troubled with Worms, and there is a sort called the Back-Worm of
about Bowels, occasioned through ill Digestion and want of Natural heat.

This Back-worm is rarely quite killed; but a careful Falconer by giving her
Cloves of Garlic steeped in Wormwood once a Month, and once a Fortnight
against his putting her into the Mew, will qualify the Worm so as not much to
hinder

This Distemper is easily discerned by these Symptoms, viz. by her stinking
Breath, her Casting her Gorge, her Croaking in the Night, her trembling and
writling her Train, her Mewting, which is small and unclean, and also by her
keeping at a stay in a low state of Flesh.

This Distemper may be cured these three ways; first, Take Pressure made of a
Lamb that Dove, or the like Fowl, and feed your Hawk therewith at such times as
she is empty, and keep her fasting about two hours after. Secondly, Provide a
Glass full of the Juice of Wormwood when it is green, and in its greatest
strength, and put therein twenty or thirty Cloves of Garlic, as many as the
Juice will cover, being first clean peeled and pierced through; keep them close
stopped, and when you have use for any, give her one at a time for three or four
days at Night for her Supper, having first made them clean and dry on the
outside, and let her have Water offered her every Morning afterward; and when
you give her her Supper, roll up two or three Bits of Meat in Mustard Seed
unbruised, and let her eat it: Her Casting at this time should be Plumage.
Thirdly, Your Hawk may be cured by a Scouring of washed Aloes, Hepatick,
Mustard Seed and Agarick, of each an equal quantity; and with these Medicines
you need not fear the destroying of them at any time. And if she vold Worms,
take fine Filings of Iron and strew it upon her Meat for two or three days, and
it will cure her.

Of the Filander, or Back-Worm.
THis is a Distemper about the Reins, being very small Worms, which lie wrapped
up in a thin Skin near that part; this Disease makes her poor, and if not
timely prevented will kill her. The Signs of this Disease are her Poverty, her
ruffling her Train, and her Croaking in the Night. This Disease is cured as
before directed for the Worms, and feed her not in about two hours after; let
it be warm and not much; and be sure too keep her warm all that day, lest she
take cold. And it were not amiss if you gave her a Clove of Garlic so steeped
in the Juice of Wormwood once a Month, being a great preserver of health, and
prevents diverse Distempers that Hawks are subject unto.

There is another sort of Filander that lies in the Gut or Panel, being long,
small, white and red Worms; For Cure, take Aloes, Epatick, Filings of Iron,
Nutmeg, and so much Honey as will serve to make them into a Pill, which give her
in the Morning so soon as she has Cast, and after she has Mewted it clean
away give her good hot Meat.

Certain Rules to be observed to keep all Hawks in good health.
FIrst, Never give them a great Gorge, especially of gross Meat that is hard to
be Endewed and put over, as Beef, and the like; but if in case you are
constrained thereunto, then let it be first soaked, well in clean Water and
well wrung out; and observe if it be in Summer the Water must be cold, but if
in Winter then lukewarm.

Secondly, Do not feed them with the Flesh of any Beast lately gone to Rut,
being dangerous.

Thirdly, Though washed Meat keeps them in health, yet it is not so hearty as
that of Fowls newly killed, nor is it so grateful to them.

To preserve a Hawk in the time of her Flying, and to keep her in health.
GIve her every Fortnight in the Morning, and after her Casting,
Aloessiccatrine about an Horse-Bean wrapped up in a little piece of Flesh, or in
the Skin of a Hen, that she may not taste it, and carry her on your Fist, the
better to keep Casting it too soon; then set her in the Sun, or by the Fire
hooded, and about two hours after give her a reasonable Gorge of some live
Bird, or Fowl.

To help a Hawk that Endeweth not, nor puts over as she ought.
THis is occasioned by a Surfeit, from being foul within, or else being over-
Gorged Faulconers.

To Cure this Disease, feed her with light Meats, and a little at a time; also
if you feed her with Flesh of Fowl, first steep it well in the Blood thereof,
which will cause her to mount her Flesh apace. And it were not amiss if you
gave her a scouring of Pills made of Beef-Marrow, Saffron, Sugar and Lard mixed
together three or four Gorge about two hours after.

Directions to preserve a Goshawk in the time of her Fleeing, especially in hot
Weather.
TAke a Pint of Red Rose Water, put it into a Bottle, bruise a Stick or two of
Liquorice, Mace, with the quantity of a Walnut of Sugar Candy. In this Water
draw her Meat through two or three times a Week, as you find occasion. It
prevents the Pantas, and several other Diseases they are subject unto; besides
it gives a great Breath, and gently Scours them.

To raise a Hawk that is poor and low.
THis is occasioned by an ill Faulconer, in not feeding and ordering her well
to prevent Distempers, or else by Soaring away, and being left for some time to
seek her own Prey she becomes Poor and Low.

To raise her up, feed her but a little at a time and often, with good Meat of
a light Digestion.

If she has lost her Stomach, either by taking Gorge in the Evening that she
cannot well Endew, or by being foul in the Panel, or having taken a Cold; Take
Aloessiccatrine, boiled Sugar, and Beef-Marrow, of each a like quantity, mix
them and make them into Pills, which give her, holding her in the Sun, or by
the Fire in Cold Weather, until she has cast up the filth and slime within
her, and feed her not until Noon; and then give her Pigeons, small Birds, or
the like Meat.

Of the Frownce.
IF your Hawk has the Frownce, it proceeds from moist and cold Humors, either
from the Throat, Stomach, or Liver, and thereby lose their Appetite, and cannot
close their Clap. It is called the Eagles Bane, as being commonly the cause of
her death. The usual Signs of it are, her Mouth will be continually furred and
frothed with white, and her Tongue swollen; and if it proceed from the Throat, it
may be seen and dressed: And then do thus; Take a Sawcer of good
Whitewine-Vinegar, put therein three or four Red Sage-leaves, and boil them
pretty well; then take a little Powder of Burnt-Allom, which put into it,
suffering it to boil a walm or two, and so put it into a Vial, and keep it for
your use.

If you find the Frownce to be Rank, Take the Flower of Brimstone a small
quantity, tie it close in a Linen Cloth, and let it infuse in Vinegar four and
twenty hours; then strain into the Vinegar as much of the Juice as you can get
out. Having thus made the Medicine, cut or pare off with a sharp Knife, or a
Pair of Scissers, which you find most convenient, the Scale of the Frownce to
the quick, and with the tip of the Feather lay thereon two or three drops of
the Vinegar made lukewarm in a Spoon. Do the like the second day, and
afterward but once in three days. Keep your Hawks Mouth open with your Finger
for some time, after you have touched the Sore place with the Vinegar, that she
swallow it not down.

If the Frownce be very foul, so that it is as big as a Nut; then it must be
slit with your Incision Knife, and afterward cut all out, cleansing the Blood
away with a clean Cloth; then anoint the Sore with Balm, and afterward with
Popelion.

If the Frownce proceed from the Stomach, Stones and Casting will soon discover
that, and recover her.

If it lie in the Liver, there is no way more certain than to give her Stones
out of Sorrel-Water, and some of the Water with them; give it also with the
Meat you feed her with, which must be such as is easy of Digestion. Her Gorges
should also be easy and often.

If you infuse into the Sorrel-Water a thin slice or two of Rhubarb, it is
excellent to cool all the Inflammations of the Liver in a short time, and to set
her sound and right; but not without due care and ordering, for a Neglect will
endanger her, and create new Troubles.

Of the Pin.
THis Disease troubles Hawks as it does Chickens, and proceeds from cold and
moistness in the Head, or from feeding on gross Meats, not well washed in cold
Water in the Summer and warm in the Winter.

For Cure, First give her a Scouring-Pill made of Agarick and Hierapitca, for
two or three days together, with her Casting at Night, which will cleanse her
Head; then wash her Tongue with Rose water, and anoint it three or four days
with Oil of sweet Almonds. When you see the Pin to be white and soft, being
then thoroughly ripe; slit it and take it off with the end of a sharp Awl or
Bodkin; then anoint the place two or three times a day with the said Oil, until
it be

Of the Pantas.
THis is a dangerous Disease, and esteemed not curable, if not timely taken: It
is easy at first to be found out, for after a little Bating she will begin to
fetch her Breath thick, with panting; and as it increases she will show it
more by laboring in her Panel, even as she Perch; and will be forced to Gape
for Breath; but when it is come to this height it is incurable.

This Disease proceeds when the Lungs are over dried with heat, so that the
Heart wants the refreshing that the Lungs give it, which are the Bellows to
draw in the Air; and this Disease is the same with a Broken Winded Horse.

The Pantas does proceed from two Causes, viz. from Heat and Drought of the
Lungs, which Grease or tough matter settled in the Panel.

For Cure, Take a Quarter of a Pound of sweet Butter, put it into Damask
Rosewater, in a Viol close covered; and when you use it, which must be very
often, take a little thereof, and put thereto a little Powder of Rue, and the
Powder of Saffron mixed well together, and made into Pellets rolled in Broken
Sugar Candy, and give her two of the Pellets every Morning for a Week

If you give her a Scouring of Sellandine steeped in Oil of Roses, and wash her
Meat in Coltsfoot-Water, it is very good, for the first coming.

Of the Crock, and the Cramp.
THere are some Hawks that are apt to have the Crock, and Cramp; and although
they are of two Names, yet they are of one and the Bat^ing, the former though
well Enseamed, the latter before it; By this you may know how to prevent it. Be
sure then to keep your new drawn Hawk from overheating her self by striving,
and if she does not, wash her suddenly, but keep her moderately warm. And as
for your Enseamed and Fleeing Hawk, set her not carelessly down on any cold
place, after Hawk gets both these distempers, so as to lose the use of her
Joints; and in this Case expect no Cure.

The Cramp most commonly comes after the Crock, and is a General Convulsion of
the Nerves and Sinews of the Feet, Legs, and Thighs; and is Cured by Warmth,
and inward Gentle Scourings. This Disease seizes on the Limbs, and is easily
to be discerned by the Contracting and Extending of them. For Cure, there is
required Rest, Heat, and these following Directions; Fill a larg Brass Pot or
Kettle with clean Water, into which put three handfulls of Red and White
Sage-leaves, with as much Polipody of the Oak, and let them Boil together, then
cover the Pot with good store of Cloths, and set your Hawk thereon. She must
not be Overheated, but moderately warmed, neither must you suffer her to be
suddenly cooled: You should also give her every Morning a Clove of Garlic,
for Seven or Eight days together, to expel the inward Cold, and open her Pipes.
You should also shred very small, a little Rue and Wormwood mixed with sweet
fresh Butter and Sugar Candy, and make it up into Pellets, and give her one or
two for three Mornings in a Week; likewise now and then take out of the Pot
some of the Sage and Polipody very hot, to lay before her Nares, that she may
be fumed therewith; some for the Cramp will only let Blood, that Leg or Foot
which she holds up or rests upon the other; and if she does but
intermissively, then both, which has often proved effectual.

For the Crock you may easily discern it, both by your Eye and Ear. It is so
termed from her Croaking, or making a hoars Noise with her Wind from her
Throat; and if it be after she is Enseamed, give her Rest, and this following
Medicine: Take a Pint of Claret, put therein a little Sugar Candy, three Slices
of Ginger, and as much bruised Cloves; and let this stew or infuse over a
gentle Fire, close covered with another Dish of an equal Bigness; this upper
Dish must be often taken off to wipe away the moisture with a Feather, and
therewith give her some with her Meat, as often as you Feed her, and be sure to
keep her warm. If it be taken before she is Enseamed, it is so much the worse,
yet curable, if the Cramp is not also in her.

For Cure, Diet and order her for quantity and continuance with the Scouring
mentioned aforesaid, wherein the Wormwood and Rue are mixed together; and you
need not fear her recovery, with due care in the observance thereof.

Of the Rye.
THis Disease proceeds from sudden Cold, after Heat and labor, like as the
two former, it produces a continual stopping in the Head, which in a little
time causes the Frownce, or a perpetual moist, dropping Humor very hard to be
Cured.

For preventing this Disease, do not set her on any cold place, as the Ground,
or in any low Damp Room; but on a Warm Dry Perch, which at such times should be
a little higher than usual.

The Cure, if timely taken, is by giving Rest, and keeping her warm, by orderly
Feeding with these Directions. Her Food should be opening and easy of
Digestion, hot and moist; and if you sometimes gave her at her Meals two or
three bruised Blades of Mace, it would do very well. You must also give her
constantly with her Meat some of the Confection a little before prescribed,
viz. clarified Butter, with Rue, Saffron, and Sugar Candy in Powder, finely
made up in Pellets; also give her good store of Plumage, and keep her warm.
They will loosen and open her, and cause her to throw with her Head, and when
once she Dazy Roots, with a Quill or Straw into her Nares an hour before you
feed her; and thrice a week in the Mornings blow the Juice of Sage into her
Nares: These are both good to purge away tough, slimy, and corrupted congealed
filth, the Body being predisposed to evacuate it.

Of the Cray.
THe Cray with the Cure is almost the same Pantas, and proceeds from cold, but
it is through ill Diet and long feeding with cold stale Meat. The Symptoms are
these: Her Mewtings will not be plentiful, nor will they come freely and with
ease from her, she will drop some part thereof short and dispersed, and her
body will be bound, and as it were dried up and clung. It is soon discovered,
and as soon recovered, if timely taken. You must first remove the cause, Diet
must be high, easy of digestion, and cooling Meat, such as young Rabets,
Chickens, Sheeps hearts, and the like: Also use her to your Confection of fresh
sweet Butter made up with Rue, Cloves and Mace, and anoint her Meat therewith.
These things will cure the Distemper; for it opens her Body, and cleanses
her of those indigestions and burning heats which afflict her, and which in a
little time will kill her.

It were not amiss to give her with her Meat Sorel, Woodbine, Horehound, and
the like cooling, cleansing, and opening things.

Diseases of the Liver and Stomach.
IF you think your Hawk has any obstruction in her Liver or Stomach, or that
she has any inward Disease which you know not how to remove, you must be quick
with her; for if for all feeding and keeping her she continues at a stand, or
rather falls back; or if she sits broody and crowching with her Feathers
displayed, does sometimes start and jerk out with her Leg, and the like usual
Motions, questionless she has some Distemper that lies lurking in her. Now to
try if it lie in her Stomach only, give her this ensuing Purge. Take some
clarified Butter that is kept in Rosewater, then mince a little Rue and
Wormwood very small, which mix in the Butter Sugar Candy together, with a a
little Myrrh finely beaten: These Ingredients make up into Pellets, and give
your Hawk once in a Morning, and it will finely cleanse her, and is excellent
for any Stomach Disease.

If the Distemper lie deeper, then wash her Meat in Whitewine, in which infuse
a small slice of Agaric, and the like of white Ginger: You may make it stronger
or milder, as you see occasion; and you may also give her a small quantity of
Agaric in Powder.

If still you perceive the Disease to lie further in, you may conclude it is in
the Liver, and that occasioned throw ill Diet, Heats, Colds, Surfeits, and the
like; therefore forbear to give her any dry and hot Meat, I do not mean warm
Meat, for that you must give her and none else; but I mean such Meat as is hot
and dry in its nature and operation, and such as are old and hard of digestion.
You must alter her food every day, sometimes one thing and sometimes another,
and not two different sorts at a time; and give her Castings and Stones with
moderation. In case you find her Mewts and Castings to be greenish in some
places, and yellowish in others, it is a complication of Distempers in her Gall
and Liver. Now all Hawks are subject to the overflowing of the Gall, which
being discernable at first, is easily cured, if you wash her Meat in distilled
Water of Liverwort sweetened with Sugar Candy; and now and then, either at
Morning or Evening, convey the Powder of three or four Cloves into a bit of
Meat, and give her; it will allay and cool all Inflammations proceeding from the
Liver.

If you infuse a little slice of Rhubarb in the distilled Water of Endive and
Succory, or one of them, it will cool the heat of the Liver, and cleanse all
Distempers of the Gall; the weight of two Grains of Wheat of Rhubarb in Powder
given to a Falcon, and so proportionable to other Hawks, is an excellent Purge
for all ill Humors proceeding from the Gall: But then you must afterward in
three or four days give her a gentle Scowring of some one of these prescribed
in the beginning of this Chapter of the Cures of Hawks.

I shall only add this Water, which is approved excellent for any inward
Sickness, proceeding from heat and drought, the Symptoms of which are very
apparent; for her Countenance will be heavy, she will have a rattling in her
Throat, and her whole Body will be inflamed, as if it were in a Fever; for
which there is no better Remedy than this following Receipt. Take two Ounces of
French Barley, wash it well, and put it into a Pipkin with about a Pint of
clean Water; let it boil a little, then draw away that Water, and put more to
the Barley, which must also boil four or five walms; draw that also off, and
pour in some more fresh Water, as before; but this last time you are to put in
about a quart, which must be boiled until about half be consumed; then strain
out the Water, and mix some Sugar Candy with it, and boil both together a
little. It will not hold good above four days, so that make it as occasion
serves; and when you feed her, wash the Meat in this Water. It is also very
good to wash her Meat in the Waters of Horebound, Woodbine, Woodsorel, or the
like.

To comfort and preserve the Heart from any infirmity proceeding from heat.
TAke the distilled Water of Burrage and Bugloss mixed together, into which put
half a dozen sliced Cloves to infuse, and in this Water wash her Meat that you
give her once a day, and let her be quiet and at rest; her feed must be Gorges
thereof, for a great Gorge ruins her.

If the Head is stuffed with a Cold.
TAke Rosemary Leaves, dry them, and beat them to fine Powder, which mix with
the Powder of about twelve Cloves in clarified and preserved Butter, so made
out of the Rosewater Sugar Candy, and give it her in Pellets in the Morning,
one or two at a time, and be sure to keep her very warm until she is recovered,
which will not be long.

To scowr a Hawk before she is cast into the Mew.
IN Luring and Flying time, through foul feeding, Hawks engender Filanders and
many other Distempers, so that they must be scowred and cleansed before they
are cast into the Mew; for which observe these Directions: First scowr her well
according to the former Directions; also Cope her, and set her well in Flesh,
and as near as you can let her be free from Diseases.

Observe that a Haggard Hawk must be cast into the Mew loose, unless she be one
that will not be quiet, and then darken the Room so that she may only see to
feed, and come at Water and Stones; and if that will not do, Mew her upon the
Stock, as before directed.

When she begins to Mew, begin to tie her to the Perch or Block, as you do the
rest; and after she has mewed and comes to flee, let her stand on a Block or
Billet cased.

In the same manner Mew Goshhawks and Sparrow Hawks, only they are not to be
born on the Fist, but be at liberty in the Mew.

About fifteen or twenty days before you Hawk out of the Mew, abate her Diet,
the sooner and better to Enseam her; and she must be fed with washed Meat, to
prevent many Diseases that may ensue.

Diseases and Infirmities incident to the Legs and Feet.
HAWKS are often troubled with outward Feet and Legs, which proceeds as well from
their Keepers negligence, as otherwise; and that occasioned by setting them on
the cold Ground, or in moist and damp places when they are heated by flying, or
by feeding them with cold Meat which creates Diseases; also by Pricks of Bushes
and Thorns as they fly after their Game, or for not rolling or lining the Perch
with soft warm Cloth; for prevention of which be sure, that after her flying to
quiet her on your Fist, and not on the Ground; for if you use her not to the
Ground, she will not expect it.

When you find she has the Cramp in her Legs, take some Piony-Roots, dry them,
and hang them in a little Bag all Night about her Neck, and by Day let it be
held often to her Nares to smell unto.

If any Knots or Knobs hard or soft do rise on her Feet or Legs, stay not till
they are ripe, but forthwith open them to the bottom with a sharp Knife the
long way of the Leg, and not cross the Sinews, neither too deep, but enough to
take away the corrupt Flesh or Skin, which is of a spungy, hollow substance:
Then take some of the Water prescribed for the Frownce, and wash it therewith
until it is cured. Some are of Opinion, not to open the Knots or Knobs at all,
but only to anoint them with some mollifying Ointment, and bind it over with a
fine Rag.

If your Hawk has got the Pin in her Feet, cast her gently and cut out the
Core or Corn which arises in the Balls of the Feet of unquiet Hawks, whilst
they are in the Mew; then have in a readiness a Plaster to apply thereto made
of Galbonon, white-Pitch, and Venice-Turpentine spread on soft Leather, and so
tied as not to be removed; yet not so strait as to hurt her. She must stand on
a Perch soft lined, must be kept warm, and dressed three or four times a Week
until cured; and for Cure some will set them on Salt; but this is found an
utter Enemy to it.

If by Accident your Hawk gets a Sprain in her Feet or Legs, it is soon
discerned by its heat and burning: For Cure, anoint and rub the place Morning
and Evening with Oil of Exeter, binding about it a fine Cloth dipped in the said
Oil, and keep it warm and supple.

If the Sprain happen to be in any of the Tallons or Pounce-Joynts, take a
Copeing-Iron, cut the Tallon to the quick, and let out a good quantity of the
enflamed corrupt Blood, which otherwise would endanger the loss of her Foot.

You must stay the Blood by Searing the place with some Iron heated in the
Fire, and then anoint it with the Oil of Exeter, tying a Linen Cloth dipped in
the said Oil about the Sore, and over all the Finger of a Glove, with a Hole
for the Tallon to come out; which Finger must be made fast with a drawing
Thread, that you may open it every Morning, to convey three or four drops of
the Oil into it; and not to be forced to take it quite off.

If she has got a Swelling through a Blow, Bruise, or other Accident on her
Legs or Feet, Anoint the place with Oil of Bays and Brandy mixed together, and
for want of Oil of Bays only with Brandy; then tie over it a Cloth dipped in the
same, and over all a Leather to keep it warm. In all these cases give rest and
due feeding, or all will be to little purpose.

Hawks are apt to have the Gout, especially such that are free metled and
strong Strikers: waisted, put therein the quantity of a Walnut of Alom, and a
spoonful of Honey; let all boil a little, and put it up for your use. With this
Water lukewarm anoint with a Feather the parts afflicted, and it will
strengthen any Feather, though never so bruised.

Diseases in the Head.
THese Diseases do commonly come by giving them too great Gorges, and by foul
feeding; for when she has too full a Gorge she cannot well put it over, and
endew it, and by lying there too long does corrupt and stink, especially in
those that are low and poor; and by reason of its so lying in the Panel, Fumes
ascend up into the Head, and so close and shut up her Ears, and the passages of
her Pipes and Head that occasions swellings there.

Of the Apoplex, or Falling-Evil, in the Head.
THis Disease commonly befalls Hawks, by reason of too much Grease and store of
Blood, or for that they have been set too long in the heat of the Sun, or have
made too long a flight in the Heat of the Day, and forasmuch as Grease in the
Mew. Therefore it is very good to give them, when they are empty above, a
little Lard or sweet Butter soaked in Rose Water, with a little Sugar Candy
beaten; but above all, it is good to draw their Meat through Black-Cherry-Water.

Of Apostumes in the Head.
HAWKS are troubled with Swellings in their Head, which is an ill Disease, and
occasioned by diverse ill Humors and the heat of the Head. It is discerned by
the swelling of the Eyes, by the moisture that comes from their Ears, and by
their slothfulness. For Cure give them three or four Mornings (when they have
no Meat to put over) a Pill of Butter as big as a Nut, well washed in
Rose Water, and mixed with Honey of Roses and fine Sugar. They must be Fist until
they have made one or two Mewts; Then take four Drams of Rue-seed, two Drams of
Aloes-Epatick, and one Scruple of Saffron; all which beat to fine Powder, and
mix with the Honey of Roses to make a Pill, which give them, and it will purge
and scour their Heads, and about two hours after give them some good hot Meat.

When the Nares of your Hawk are stuffed up with filth, after a convenient
Scouring, take Pepper and Mustard Seed beaten to fine Powder, and put it into a
clean Linen Cloth, and steep it a good space in strong White Wind Vinegar, and
put some drops thereof upon her Nares, that they may pierce in, which will much
scour her Head.

Of the Giddiness of the Head.
THis Disease proceeds from foulness of the Panel, or from a corrupt and
naughty Liver; For Cure, give her a Casting of Cotton, in which wrap up a
Scruple of Aloes-Epatick, and two Grains of Cloves; and two hours after her
taking it, give her a young Pigeon, or some good Meat.

Of the Haw in the Eye.
THis Disease comes from a Blow, but most commonly by the streightness of the
Hood; it is discerned by a Film growing up from the bending of the Break, and
covering the Eye by little and little. For Cure, take a small Needle sharp
pointed, and being finely Threaded take up the Haw, and neatly cut it with a
sharp Knife, but cut it not too much; then wash it with Rose Water for three or
four days together.

Of Cauterizing Instruments to Sear Hawks in desperate Cures, being the last
refuge.
THe Cauterizing Instruments are made after the fashion of these Figures: That
Marked A is to Cauterize the Hawks Head, being round and plain at the top. That
Marked B is to Cauterize the Nares, being also round and hollow at the top.
That Marked C is a Cauterizing Button to burn and sear the Head; and with that
other device on the Backside, to cut the Skin under the Nares, if need
require. That Marked D is to Cauterize and enlarge the Nares, and is therefore
made so small and sharp at the point, the better to enter the Nares: And that
Marked E is the Cauterizing Knife, useful for diverse occasions.

These Instruments should be larger or smaller, according to the proportion of
the Hawk. Also besides these Tools a Falconer should have a Pair of Scissers, a
Splatter, and Cooping-Irons.

Of the Canker that breeds in the Throat, and Tongue of a Hawk.
THis Disease is bred through foul Feeding, and not washing their Meat in cold
Water in the Summer, and in warm in the Winter, engendring Guts a gross slimy
Matter, and being moved fumes up into the Head, and so distilling again
engenders heat of the Liver, which breaks out in the Throat and Tongue, of
which proceeds the Canker: It is easily discerned, for she has much ado to
swallow her Meat, and often lets it fall. For Cure, take the Oil of Almonds, or
Olives, and anoint the Throat therewith two or three times a day; then give her
Sugar, Lard, and Beef-Marrow for three days together, and Mutton, Pullets, or
such like Flesh, dipped in the said Oil. After this, when you find the Canker
white, take a very sharp Knife, and slit or open it along the side of the
Tongue, and softly scrape away the Whiteness; then take a little Cotton or Lint
to dry up the Blood of her Tongue, and wash her Meat in the said Oil until she
is cured.

Of Broken Wings, Legs and Thighs.
IF a Hawk breaks her Wing, take Sanguis Draconis, Bole-Almoniack, Gum-Arabick,
white Frankincense, Mastick, and Aloessiccatrine, of each a like quantity, with
some fine Meal; of these make a Powder, and temper it with the White of an Egg,
and make thereof a Plaster, and when it is right Set, lay on the said Plaster
gently, and cross her Wings one over another, Plaster in seven or eight days,
nor stir the Wing when you lay on a fresh Plaster, and in about fifteen or
twenty days it will be healed.

This Medicine serves for her Wing, if out of Joint, having first Set it,
Splinter it up, and apply the Plaster as aforesaid. The like for the Leg, or
any other Limb of her, always observing with great care to keep the place
firmly

Of Ymping Feathers.
IT often falls out, that a Hawk breaks her Wing, and Train-Feathers, so that
others must be set in their steads, which is Termed Ymping them; and this is to
be done several vvays.

For large Hawks, if the Feather is broak within a Fingers Breadth of the
Quill, then Shear it off with a pair Scissers, that it may not cleave further;
then having a Feather like it, cut the Quill off, and force it together, to
enter the broaken Quill, anointing it with the Yolk of an Egg, before you
thrust it in, or some kind of Semond made for that purpose, so that it may be
as it were Grafted into it; and that it may have the better hold, fasten them
together, by putting through them the point of a small Feather, as it were a
Pin; which hole may be made through them by a Needle.

If a Sarcel, a Flag, or Train-Feather be broken or slived, so as an Ymped
Feather can take no hold; then take a Juniper Stick, or the like Wood, and make
a small Peg thereof, so as to enter the Quill; then dip one end thereof in
Glue, or Semond, and thrust it into the broken Quill, and place it so, as it
may be without the Quill, and of a just Size to answer the length of the
Feather before broken; then put the other end also in the Glue, or Semond,
forcing it into the Quill of the Feather, that you have gotten so close, as the
one Quill touch the other directly; then fasten and clint both the Quills to
the Juniper Peg, with a small Feather as aforesaid.

If the Feathers are broken above the Quill, toward the Point of the Feather,
two or three Fingers Breadth, cut it off with a sharp Penknife slopewise, and
cut it in the like manner as you did the other, so as to fit well and close
together.

By these Directions joined with Experience, you may not only prevent, but Cure
such Infirmities as your Hawk is Subject unto by Nature, or wherewith she is
troubled by Accident.

I shall therefore Conclude this Chapter, with advise of useing preventing
Medicines, that is Care, Diligence, Circumspection, Fair and Gentle Usage, due
Feeding, and right giving Stones, and C^sting, according to the Directions
aforesaid; and then you will have little occasion to use any of the Medicines
here laid down, although very good in their kind, whereby you will avoid much
Trouble and Charge, besides the preserving your Hawks love, and your own
Recreation.

CHAP. XXIII.
Concerning the Choice and Use of Spaniels, their Qualities, Diseases, etc.
with their Cures.
THough you should have Reclaimed and Mewed your Hawk in all other Points to
perfection, and be defective in that of the making her thoroughly acquainted
with your Spaniels, you have bestowed your pains to little or no purpose;
forasmuch as Spaniels are the chief Instruments which you are to use in this
Recreation, as well for the Springing and Retrieving of Fowl, as otherwise; for
until you have reconciled that natural aversion that Hawks have to Dogs, and
brought them to have boldness and confident familiarity to them, as well whilst
they are in the midst of them loose, as when on the Fist, you may be said to
have a Hawk and no Hawk. Now for the better effecting the same, at every
Feeding time after your Hawk is a little acquainted with you, and that she
begins to be at command, to understand the Lure and your Voice; then draw your
Dogs together (at least three Couple) to the end that afterward she may not
take offense; for should you let her see only one or two, she Staunch and well
commanded Dogs, such as have formerly been bred with Hawks; and you must feed
your Hawk with these Dogs about you, and now and then at Feeding times have a
dead Pelt of some Hen, Pigeon, or the like, in a short Creance; which throw
amongst the Dogs, to the intent your Hawk may flee from Fist, and chop in
amongst them and seize thereon, suffering her to plume for some time; then take
her to your Fist with some Stump, and soon after throw out the Pelt a second
and third time, and continue this practice until she find she may boldly
venture on it, and that she perceive the Dogs are in more fear of her, than she
of them, and it will not be long ere she understands she has got the Mastery
of them.

Should you have Flown your Hawk without making her thus familiar, and
acquainted with the Dogs, it is possible, you might have made her go well, and
kill well; but could not expect her coming again, if there were but one Dog in
the Field, for next to a Man, she fears nothing so much as a Dog; and of all
Hawks, a Goshawk is the most Coy; therefore when you make her to the Covert at
first entrance, use but few Dogs, and and those at good command.

When you have let her go, call in your Dogs Ground, and with the Prey in her
Feet; if so, make in unto her, and let her enjoy it in some open smooth place,
where she may Plume thereon; then call your Dogs, and let them rustle in and
out amongst the Bushes, that she may be acquainted with the Noise and Motion of
them. You may then rend the Chaps of the Fowl, to give her Blood in the Throat
of the Prey, also open the Brain pan, and give her Head in her Feet, as before
directed; and be sure let no strange Dogs be amongst them.

If in Case your Hawk has hard Flown a Pheasant, yet mist, whereupon the Dogs
Hunting to retrieve it, find it unable to rise, your best Course is to rebuke
away your Dogs, to throw up the Pheasant a loft, useing your Voice, and let
your Hawk truss it; and then call in your Dogs as aforesaid.

Spaniels by Nature are very loveing, surpassing Heat and Cold, Wet and Dry,
Day and Night, they will not forsake their Master. There are many Prodigious
Relations made in several Grave and Credible Authors, of the strange Affections
which Dogs have had, as well to their Dead as living Masters; but it is not my
Business to take notice of them here, but to apply my self to the Subject in
Hand.

The Diseases of Spaniels, and their Cures Of the Mange.
SPaniels, through too much Fat and Rest, or too much Labor and Lea^ess, are
often Subject to the Mange, especially if they have not Fresh Water; Now since
you know the Cause, it is not hard to prevent it, but being once infected, lose
no time to Cure them, for which use this following Direction. Take one pound of
Lord of a Barrow-Hog, four Ounces of Flower of Brimstone well pulverized, two
Ounces of Salt well beaten, the like quantity of Ashes well sifted, three
Ounces of common Oil, Boil all these together in a Kettle very well; and with
this Ointment anoint the Dogs Body, all over before a good Fire, two or three
times a Day, then wash him over with good strong Lie, and Shift his Kenel often.

There is also a Bread to be made, that is very good to Cure the Mange; and
that is of Wheaten Bran, mingled with the Roots, Leaves, and Flowers of
Agrimonie, beathen or shred very small, and baked; this give the Dog to eat,
and let him eat no Meat without it, nor give him any other Bread.

If their Hair comes off, as often it does, then Bath them in the Water of
Lupines, or Hops; and anoint them with Stale Barrows Lard.

If these Medicines will not do, then use this that is more strong, take two
Quarts of strong Whitevvine Vinegar, six Ounces of common Oil, three Ounces of
Brimstone, six Ounces of Soot, and two Handfuls of beaten Salt; Boil all these
together in the Vinegar, and Bath the Dog therewith, as before directed.

Of the Formica, and the Cure.
IN Summer time Dogs are troubled with sore Ears, occasioned by Files, and
their own scraping and scratching them with their Feet; For Cure, take four
Ounces of Gum Dragaganth, which infuse in strong Wine Vinegar for a Week, then
Bruise it well, and put thereto Roch Allom and Galls beaten to Powder, of each
two Ounces. These Ingredients being well mixed, apply to the place grieved.

Of Swelling in their Throat and Neck.
SOmetimes there falls, or distilleth down a sharp, salt, thim Rhume from
their Brain, by which means their Throats and Necks do much swell; for Cure,
anoint the place with Oil of Camomile, and wash the Throat with weak Vinegar
and Salt.

Of Worms Breeding in the Heart, and Mangy places of Dogs.
IF your Spaniel receive hurt, if he can but lick the place, it will be whole
without any Medicine, but if he cannot, he must be assisted, by strevving on
the place some Powder of Matresilva, dried in an Oven, or in the Sun.

Sometimes there will engender little Worms in Wounds, which does much retard
their Recovery, nay, rather render them worse and worse; To Remedy this Evil,
put into the Wound a little Gum of Ivy, and let it continue therein a Day or
more, then vvash the place with Whitewine, and so dress it with an Ointment
made of Bacons Grease, Oil of Earthworms, and Rue.

If they are Bit with a Mad Dog, let them three or four times eat of the Broth
of Germander, also eating thereof it self. It must be Sodden Salt and Oil, and
so given in little Pellets.

If Worms be within the Body, give them fasting the Yolk of an Egg, with about
two Scruples of Saffron, keeping him fasting till the next Morning.

All Spaniels have a certain String under their Tongues, by most called a Worm;
this must be taken out when they are about two Months Old, with the help of a
sharp Knife to slit it, and a Shomakers Aul to raise it up. Be careful to take
Worm, or String will grow Foul and Troublesome, and hinder his Rest and Eating.

To Recover a Spaniels Smelling.
IT often falls out, that Spaniels through too much Grease and Rest, do lose
their Smelling, so Game. In this Case prepare this following Purge. Take two
Drams of Agaric, one Scruple of Sal Gemma, beat them to Powder, and mix them
with Oxymel, and give a Pill about the bigness of a small Nut; and that it may
the better slip down, wrap it up in Fresh Butter; for he will hardly take it
but by force.

Several things to be observed in Spaniels.
THe best way to breed Spaniels is to let their Dams be about two years old,
and that they may Litter about March; and kill all the Puppies but four or
five. Your Dog should be about six or seven years old. The first Litter is to
be esteemed the best; yet some prefer the second and third for the best. The
Names of your Spaniels should be short, and Monosillables, that they may be the
better and quicker understood. It Dogs gelt, or the Bitches spaid: But if in
case you do so, let it be done whilst they are young; for such are not apt to
be lost by straggling away.

For diverse Reasons it is necessary to cut off the top of the Spaniel's Stern
or Tail whilst he is a Whelp, for it hinders the breeding of Worms there: Also
if it is taken off he will be more forward to press into the Covert after the
Game; besides he is more graceful with a short Stern, as Greyhounds and Hounds
are with theirs long.

Instead of cutting off the Stern, it is better to twist it off, which must be
done whilst they are sucking: And if thus pulled off, there is a string that
comes out with it which does much hinder their madness.

Thus much concerning Land Spaniels; I shall only add a few Lines of Advice,
and so end this Chapter.

Every Gentleman, whose Genius leads him to this delightful Recreation, should
apply and enure himself as well to look into the ordering and right managing
his Hawk, as into their ^^ying. He should as well observe them in the House as
in the Field: For a Gentleman to have but one Hawk, is to have as it were none;
and to have a great many is to be a Falconer, and not a Gentleman. He that
keeps one, and no more, must be forced to leave all other Affairs to see her
flee at such time that she is in a condition to flee, and that peradventure may
not be above twice a Week, in regard of such Accidents that oft-times
intervene. I should therefore advise you to keep a Cast; for the same Charge
that keeps one will keep two; and five or six couple of Spaniels are enough,
which should be of a middle size, rather fat than lean, which are better for
use, and more creditable: Besides, the lean ones are subject to many Diseases.

With this Equipage a Gentleman may so manage his Pleasure, as to render it
rather profitable than chargeable unto him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Certain Terms of Art used in Falconry, with an Explanation thereof,
Alphabetically set down.
ARms, are the Legs from the Foot to the Thigh.

Bate, or Bateth, is a Term when a Hawk fluttereth with her Wings from the
Perch or Fist, endeavoring to fly away.

Bathing, is when she washes her self.

Beak, is the upper crooked part of the Bill.

The Beam Feathers, are the long Feathers in the Wings.

Beavy, of Quails, that is a Brood of young ones.

Bewits, are the Leathers with Bells buttoned about her Legs.

Bowet, is when a young Hawk draws any thing out of her Nest, and endeavors to
get on the Bows.

Bowsing, is when she often drink, and yet desires more.

Brayle, is a piece of Leather slit to put upon her Wing to tie it up.

Brancher is a young Hawk newly taken out of the Nest, and can hop from bough
to bough.

Cage is that on which the Hawks are carried, when they are exposed to sale.

Cancellaring, that is stooping.

Carry is a Term when the Hawk flees away with the Quarry.

A Cast of Hawks are two.

Casting is when you give her any thing to purge or cleanse her Gorge.

Cateract is a Disease in the Eyes of a Hawk.

Cauterizing Irons are used to sear with.

Cawking time, that is Treading or Coupling time.

Check is when she forsakes her proper Game, and flies at Crows, Pyes, or the
like, that crosses her in her flight.

Clap is the neither part of the Beak.

Coping is paring.

Coping Irons are used for coping or paring her Beak, Pounces, or Tallons when
overgrown.

Cowring is when they quiver and shake their Wings in testimony of obedience
toward the old ones.

Covey of Partridges, that is, a Brood that always accompany together with the
old ones until paring time.

Crabing is when Hawks standing near one another, fight.

Cray is a Disease in a Hawk.

Creance is a long Line of small fine even Packthread that is fastened to the
Hawks Lease when she is first Lured.

Crivets are the small black Feathers like hairs about the Sear or Eyelids.

Crock is a Disease in a Hawk.

Disclosed is when the young ones just peep through the Shells.

Dropping is when she Mewteth downwards in several drops, and not yerking it
strait forwards.

Endew is when she digesteth her Meat, not only discharging her Gorge thereof,
but also cleanses her Panel.

Engouteth, that is, the Feathers to have black spots.

Enseame is the purging her of her Glut and Grease.

Enter a Hawk is a Term used when she begins first to kill.

Eyess is a young Hawk newly taken out of the Nest.

Eyrie is the place where they build and hatch their young.

Feaking is wiping her Beak after feeding.

Filander is a Disease in a Hawk so called.

Flags are the Feathers next the principal Feathers in her Wings.

Flyon Head, that is, missing her Quarry, and betaking her self to the next
Check, as Crows, Pyes, etc.

Formale is the Female Hawk.

Formica is a Disease so called.

Frownce is a Disease so called.

Gleam is a Term used after a Hawk has Cast, and Gleamish, or throws up
filth from her Gorge.

Glut is the slimy substance that lies in the Panel.

Gorge is the Craw or Crop of other Fowl.

Gurgiping is when she is stuffed up.

Hack is a place where her Meat is put.

Hack Hawk, that is, a Tackler.

Haggard is a Hawk that has preyed for her self, and taken after Lent.

Jack is the Male Hawk.

Jesses are the short straps of Leather that are fastened to her Legs, and so to
the Lease by the Varvils.

Imp is to put in a Feather into the Wing in the place of one broken.

Juke is the Neck from the Head to the Body of any Bird that she preyeth upon.

Inter-Mewing is from the first exchange of her Coat till she turn white.

Jouketh is when she sleeps.

Lean is when she holds in to you.

Lease or Leach is the small long Leather thong fastened to the Jesses by which
she is held fast on the Fist, as being wrapped about the Fingers.

Lure is that which the Falconers cast up to bring down the Hawk.

A Make Hawk or Quarry Hawk, is an old Staunch Hawk that is made use of to
enter young ones.

Mailes are the Breast Feathers.

Manning is making a Hawk endure Company.

Mantleth is when she stretches one Wing after her Legs, and so the other.

Mew is the place where she is set down during the time she raises her
Feathers.

Mewting is the dung of long winged Hawks.

The Nares are little holes in her Beak.

Panel is the Pipe next the Fundament where she digesteth her Meat from her
Body.

Pantas is a Disease so called.

Perch is where she is set to rest on.

Pelt is the dead Body of any Fowl she has killed.

The Pendant Feathers are those behind the Thighs.

Petty Singles are the Toes of the Hawk.

Pill or Pelf, is that which she leaves of her prey after she is relieved.

The Pin is a Disease so called.

Plume is the general mixture of Colors and Feathers, by which the
constitution of a Hawk is known.

Plumage are the small Feathers given the Hawk to make her Cast.

Pluming is after she has seized her prey, and dismantles it of her Feathers.

Pounces are her Claws.

Poult, that is, killing Poultrey.

Pride, that is, to be in good flesh and heart.

Pruneth is when she picketh her self.

Putover is a Term used when she removes her Meat from her Gorge into her
Bowels, by traversing with her Body, but chiefly with her Neck.

Quarry is the Fowl she flies at, either dead or alive.

Quarry Hawk is an old entered and reclaimed Hawk.

Rake is a Term when she flies out too far from the Game.

Ramage or Soar is when she can flee, having preyed for her self.

Rangle is when she has Gravel given her to bring her to a Stomach.

Reclaim is to make her gentle and familiar.

Retrieve is when Patridges, having been sprung, are to find again.

Rouse is when she lifts her self up, and shakes her self.

Ruff is when she hits the prey, and does not truss it.

Rufter-hood is a large, wide, and easy Hood, open

Rye is a Disease so called.

Sails are the Wings of a Hawk.

Sear is the yellow betwixt the Beak and the Eyes.

Seeling is when she is first taken, is blinded with a Thread run through the
Eyelids, that she sees but little, or not at all, that she may the better
endure the Hood.

Seizing is when she gripes the prey with her Tallons.

Setting down is when she is put into the Mew.

Slice is when she Mewteth a good distance from her.

Sliceth is the dung of a short winged Hawk.

Slimeth is when she Mewteth without droping.

Staunch Hawk is one well entered for the Game.

Stooping is when she is aloft upon the Wing, and descends to strike the Game.

Summed is when she is in all her Plumes.

Swivel is that which keeps a Hawk from twisting.

Tassel is the Male Hawk.

Tiring is when you give her the Leg or Pinion of a Pigeon, or the like, to
pluck at.

Towreth is when she lifts up her Wings.

Train is the Tail of the Hawk.

A Train is something live or dead tied to the Lure, to entice her to it.

Trussing is when she raises a Fowl aloft, and

Vervels are little silver Rings at the end of Jesses, on which the Owners
Name is engraven.

Vnreclaimed is when she is vvild.

Vnstrike the Hood is to dravv the strings, that it may be in readiness to pull
off.

Vnsumed is when the Feathers are not fully grown.

Vrives are Nets to Catch Hawks with

Weathering, is the Airing your Hawk.

CHAP. XXV.
An Abstract of the Statutes relating to Hawking.
STat. 11. Hen. 7. Chap. 17. It is enacted, that none shall take out of the
Nest any Eggs of a Hawk, or Swan, on pain of a Year and a Days Imprisonment,
besides to incur a Fine at the Kings pleasure, to be divided betwixt the King,
and the owner of the Ground, where such Eggs are so taken.

None shall take away any Hawk of English Breed called an Eyess, on pain of the
like Forfeiture to the King.

He that brings an Eyess from beyond Sea, shall bring a Certificate under the
Customers Seal where he Lands, or if out of Scotland, then under the Seal of
the Lord Warden, or his Lieutenant, to Testify* she is a Foreign Hawk, upon
pain of forfeiture of the said Hawk.

None shall take away any Hawk from their Coverts, where they use to Breed, on
pain of 10 l. to be divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutors, by the
Justices of the Peace.

Stat. 34. Edw. 3. Chap. 22. A Hawk that is found, shall be delivered to the
Sheriff of the Country, where it is found; and shall make Proclamation at the
Market Towns, that the owner may come to have notice thereof; and if a Poor Man
comes to find her, and she be not challenged in four Months, the Sheriff shall
detain her, paying the Party for taking her up. And if any take away or Conceal
a Hawk, he shall answer the value to the owner when claimed, and suffer two
Years Imprisonment; and if he is not able to satisfy the value, he shall
remain in Prison a longer time.

Stat. 37. Edw. 3. Chap. 19. He that Steals and carries away a Hawk, not
observing the Ordinance of 34 Edw. 3. Chap. 22. as aforesaid, shall be deemed a
Felon.

A TABLE of the Heads of Things treated of in the respective Chapters in this
Treatise of Hawking.
Chap. I.
THe Introduction, showing the Nobleness and Antiquity of the Art. Page 27
Chap. II.
The several sorts of Hawks in general. ib.
Chap. III.
The Gerfalcon, her Nature, Shape, etc. 28
Chap. IV.
The Falcon, or Slight Falcon, her Nature, Shape, etc. ib.
Chap. V.
The Lanner, her Shape, Nature, etc. ib.
Chap. VI.
The Merlyn, her Nature, Shape, etc. 30
Chap. VII.
The Hobby, her Nature, Shape, etc. 31
Chap. VIII.
The Bawrel, her Shape, Nature, etc. 32
Chap. IX.
The Castrel, her Nature, Shape, etc. ib.
Chap. X.
The Goshawk, her Nature, Shape, etc. with such things as relate to the
ordering and fleeing her, ib. Partridge Hawking. 33 Directions for keeping and
reclaiming her, as also how to Mew and draw her out of the Mew, and make her
flying. ib. Concerning Castings. 34 How she ought to be called Loose, and
taught to ib. Pheasant Hawking, with Directions how to enter her to the Covert
for Pheasants. ib. How to reclaim and order an Eyess Hawk. 35
Chap. XI.
The Sparrow Hawk, its Nature, Shape, etc. with Rules to order, feed, and make
her. 36
Chap. XII.
Rules to be observed for reclaiming the Haggard Falcon, with Instructions to
enter her to the Lure; Merlin. 37 Further Rules for Reclaiming and Manning a
Hawk, and entering her to be acquainted with the Spaniels. 39 Rules to Reclaim
Hawks brought from the Cage, and how to Hood them. 40 To help a Hawk that is
coy and fearful. 41
Chap. XIII.
How to Enseame a Falcon with her Castings and ib.
Chap. XIV.
Rules for bathing a Hawk. 42
Chap. XV.
To make a Hawk bold and hardy, etc. ib. To make her Disgorge her self. ib. To
remedy a Hawks ill quality of fleeing to a Tree, and stand and Gorge. ib.
Chap. XVI.
Directions for feeding Hawks. 43
Chap. XVII.
Hern Hawking. ib.
Chap. XVIII.
Brook Hawking. 44 A Flight for a Falcon to the River. ib. To make a Hawk
inward of the River, when she raketh out. ib. To keep a Hawk high Flying. ib.
To make a Hawk fond of the Lure. 45
Chap. XIX.
Rules for Ordering Hawks in the Mew. ib. Of Mewing at the Stock. 47
Chap. XX.
Necessary Rules for a Falconer to observe. ib.
Chap. XXI.
Terms of Art in Falconry. 48
Chap. XXII.
Diseases of Hawks, with proper Medicines for their Cares. ib. Scowring and
Purging Medicines, with Instructions to judge thereof, by their Castings and
Mewts. ib. Of Worms. 51 Of the Filander, or Back-worm. ib. Rules to keep a Hawk
in Health. ib. To preserve a Hawk in the time of her Flying, and to keep her in
Health. 52 To help a Hawk that endueth not, nor puts over as she ought. ib.
Directions to preserve a Goshawk, in the time of her Fleeing; especially in hot
Weather. ib. To raise a Hawk that is poor and low. ib. Of the Frownce. ib. Of
the Pin. ib. Of the Pantas. 53 Of the Crock and the Cramp. ib. Of the Rye. ib.
Of the Cray. 54 Diseases of the Liver and Stomach. ib. To comfort and preserve
the Heart from any Infirmity proceeding from Heat. 55 If the Head be stuffed with
a Cold. ib. To Scowr a Hawk before she is cast into the Mew. ib. Diseases and
Infirmities of the Feet and Legs. ib. Diseases in the Eyes. 56 Concerning the
Gorge. ib. Biting by a mad Dog. ib. Of the Falling Sickness. 57 Of Lice, etc.
ib. Of Mewting. ib. Of the Formica. ib. Of Fistula' s and Ulcers. ib. Of
Itching and salt Humors. ib. Diseases in the Head. 58 Of the Apoplexy, or
Falling-Evil in the Head. ib. Of Apostumes in the Head. ib. Of Gidiness in the
Head. ib. Of the Haw in the Eye. ib. Of Cauterizing Instruments. ib. Of the
Canker in their Throat and Tongue. 59 Of broken Wings, Legs and Thighs. ib. Of
Ymping Feathers. ib.
Chap. XXIII.
Concerning the choice and use of Spaniels. ib. The Diseases of Spaniels and
their Cures: The Mange. 60 Of the Formica, and the Cure. ib. Of Swellings in
their Throat and Neck. ib. Of Worms breeding in the hurt and Mangy places of
Dogs. 61 To Recover a Spaniels Smelling. ib. Several things to be observed in
Spaniels. ib.
Chap. XXIV.
Certain Terms of Art used in Falconry Alphabetically set down, with an
Explanation thereof. ib.
Chap. XXV.
An Abstract of the Penal Statutes relating to Hawking. 63
To the Rt. Worshipful Sr. Henry Pickering of Whaddon in Cambridgeshire
Baronet* This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.



HUNTING.
PART III.
Treats of the several Sorts of Hounds; with Directions to Breed, Manage and
Enter them for the several Games. The Disposal of a Dog-Kennel, for the most
Commodiousness; with Directions to Feed and Order them. The Diseases incident
to Hounds, with Instructions how to Cure them. The several Sorts of Deer, with
the proper Terms and Ways used in Hunting them; with the Use of the
Blood-Hound. Of the Hunting the Fox, Badger, Otter, Wild-Bore, etc. Of the
Hare, and how to Hunt or Course her with Hounds or Greyhounds, according to
the Season of the Year. How to Take the Fox, Otter, Badger, Hare, Coney; as
also the Polecat, Fitchet, etc. with Nets, Traps, Snares, Engines, and the
like. Illustrated with variety of Figures.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
MANY have written of this Subject, as well the Ancient as the Modern, yet but
few of our Countrymen to any Authors on this Subject (as indeed on any other)
there would be more trouble to pass by than to retain, most Books being fuller
of Words than Matter, and that which is for the most part very erroneous. I
shall endeavor to treat of such things as are experimentally found necessary
by the most expert Sports-Men in this Age, and with what brevity is convenient,
applying my self to the Age, as well as to the Place we live in; not Reader
with the Hunting of the Ancients, or of other Countries much different from
ours; (except of the Wild-Boar, which being so Noble a Chase in Germany, and
some other Parts, although we have none amongst us; yet I shall give you a
brief Account of the Hunting him.)

The Intent therefore of this Treatise shall be, to set forth the several ways
of taking Four-footed Beasts, as well those that are hurtful, as such as serve
for our nourishment; and that not only by Dogs, but by Nets, Traps, Engines,
Snares, and the like, not hitherto treated of by any, especially in our Native
Tongue.

To tell you that Hunting is a commendable Recreation, and has always been
practiced and highly prized by all Degrees and Qualities of Men, even by Kings
and Princes; that it is a great preserver of Health, a Manly Exercise, and an
increaser of Activity; that it recreates the Mind, strengthens the Limbs, and
whets the Stomach; and that no Music is more charming to the Ears of Man, than
a Pack of Hounds in full Cry is to him that delights in Hunting, is to tell you
that which experimentally is known, and what has been sufficiently treated of
by others; so that these and the like Encomiums I shall here omit, and proceed
to that which is more material.

I shall first treat of Dogs, so far forth as they are used in this Exercise,
laying down Rules how to Train them up; to Breed, Nourish, Heal, Keep and
Instruct them, together with many other Particulars: In all which the Table of
the several Chapters at the latter end, may serve for a Thread to guide you
through the many Intricacies, Windings and Turnings, which are in this
Treatise; and indeed it cannot otherwise be, if the Subject whereon it treats is
considered: However, I shall endeavor to lay down every thing for the greatest
advantage for your ready apprehension, and yet without circumlocution; a^ short
Chase being the most profitable and pleasant.

CHAP. II.
Of DOGS or HOVNDS.
THey who undertake to distinguish Hounds by their Colors, do but trifle away
their Proportions, Sizes, and Features are to be enquired after.

Your large, tall and big Hounds, called and known by the name of the
Deep-mouthed, or Southern-mouthed Hound, are heavy and slow, and sit for
Woodlands and Hilly-Countreys; they are of deep Mouths and swift Spenders; they
are generally higher behind than before, with thick Legs, and are generally
great of Body and Head, and are most proper for such as delight to follow them
on Foot, as Stop-Hunting, as some call it; but by most it is termed Hunting
under the Pole; that is, they are brought to that exactness of Command, that in
their hottest Scent and fullest Chase, if one but step before them or hollow,
or but hold up or throw before them the Hunting-Pole, they will stop at an
instant, and Hunt in Full Cry after you at your Hunters, so that a Course
oft-times lasts five or six hours.

Opposite to the Deep-mouthed or Southern-Hound, are the long and slender
Hounds, called the Fleet or Northern-Hound, which are very swift, as not being
of so heavy a Body, nor has such large Ears. These will exercise your Horses
and try their strength; they are proper for open, level and Champain Countries,
where they may run in view and full Speed; for they Hunt more by the Eye than
the Nose, and will run down the Game in an hour, and sometimes in less; that
is, a Hare; but the Fox will exercise them better and longer.

Between these two Extremes, there are a middle sort of Dogs which partakes of
both their qualities, as to strength and swiftness, in a reasonable Strains,
and are excellent in such Countries as are mixed; viz. Some Mountains, some
Enclosures, some Plains, and some Wood-lands; for they will through thick and
thin, neither need you help them over Hedges, as you are often forced to do by
others.

A true right shaped Deep-mouthed Hound should have a round thick Head, wide
Nostrils, open and rising upwards, his Ears large and thin, hanging lower than
his Chaps; the flews of his Upper Lips should be longer than those of his
Neither Chaps; the Chine of his Back great and thick, strait and strong, and
rather bending out than inclining in; his Thighs well trussed; his Haunches
large; his Fillets round and large; his Tail or Stern strong set on, waxing
Taperwise toward the top; his Hair under his Belly rough and long; his Legs
large and lean; his Feet dry and hard, with strong Claws and high Knuckles. In
the whole, he ought to be of so just a Symetry, that when he stands level you
may not discern which is highest, his Fore or Hinder parts.

For the Northern or Fleet-Hound, his Head and Nose ought to be slenderer and
longer, his Back broad, his Belly gaunt, his Joints long, and his Ears thicker
and shorter: in a word, he is in all parts slighter made, and framed after the
Mould of a Greyhound.

By crossing these Breeds, as aforsaid, you may bring your Kenel to such a
composure as you think fit, every Man's fancy being to be preferred; and you
know the Old saying.

So many Men, so many Minds;
So many Hounds, so many Kinds.
The Blood-Hound is of all Colors; but for the generality of a black Brown,
and Reddish in several places, especially on the Breast and on the Cheeks; they
have long and thin hanging-down Ears, and differ from other Dogs only in their
Cry and Barking. Being set on by the Voice or Words of their Keeper, to seek
about for Game; and having found it, will never leave off the pursuit until it
be tired; nor will he change it for any other fresh Game that he should meet
with; and they are observed to be very obedient to their Masters.

These Hounds are of that property, that they do not only keep to their Game
whilst living, but being by any accident wounded or dead, will find it out; and
that by the Scent of the Blood sprinkled here and there upon the Ground, which
was shed in its pursuit, by which means Deer-Stealers are oft-times found out.

Not much unlike these Bloodhounds, is the Sluth or Suit Hound in Scotland,
which Hunts only by the scent of the Footing; and these sort of Hounds are made
use of for the finding out Thieves, being of a very quick Scent, and eager in
their pursuit, no River obstructing them. And these sorts make the best and
surest Blood Hounds.

BEAGLES.
THere are several sorts of Beagles; viz. the Southern-Beagle, which is
something less than the Deep-mouthed Hound, and something thicker and shorter.

The Fleet, Northern or Cat-Beagle is smaller, of a finer shape than the
Southern-Beagle, and are hard Runners.

These two Beagles by crossing the Strains, breeds an excellent sort, which are
great Killers.

There is also a very small sort of Beagle, not exceeding the bigness of a
Ladies Lap-Dog, which makes pretty diversion for the Coney, as also for the
Hare, if the Weather be dry; but the smallness of these makes them not
serviceable.

The TERRIER or HARRIER.
THis is a very small Dog, and used for the Hunting the Fox or Badger, his
business being to go into their Earths, and to Bay them; that is, to keep them
in an Angle (a Foxes Earth having diverse) whilst they are dug out; for by their
Baying or Barking it is known whereabouts the Fox is, that he may be the better
dug out. And for this use the Terrier is very serviceable, being of an
admirable Scent to find

They commonly have a Couple of Terriers, to the end that they may put in a
fresh one to relieve the first.

A Dog bred out of a Beagle, and a Mungril-Mastiff generally proves a good
Terrier, having a thick Skin and a good Courage, as partaking of the Mastiff,
and is well Mouthed from the Beagle.

The TVMBLER and LIRCHER.
THe Tumbler is a small sized Dog, generally White, with some black Spots, has
one Eye bigger than the other, and is a well trust Dog. He is a Creature of
great craft and subtilty; for in the Hunting his Game, which is the Coney, he
uses great Policy; being called Tumblers from their nature and quality of
Tumbling, Game.

When this Dog is sent or cast off into a Warren by his Master, who has fixed
his Station in some convenient and private place, which the Dog must be privy
to; he seemingly Hunts not after them, but as it were not regarding them,
observing their Burrows; and when he meets with a place where there are
Coneys, he coucheth down close with his Belly to the ground, and so Coneys do
not discover him, by which means he gets the Scent of them, and gets betwixt
them and their Burrows, and so they soon become his Prey; and so soon as
caught, being so well educated that he carries it to his Master, and returns
again to his business, as aforesaid; and using such like Subtilties, in a short
time will catch a sufficient quantity, provided there be Game.

The Lircher is a sort of Dog much like a Mungril Greyhound, with prick Ears,
has generally a shagged Coat, and is of a yellowish white Color. They are
very Nimble Runners, for if they get but betwixt the Burrows and the Coneys,
they seldom miss; and this is their usual way of Hunting, yet they use some
other Subtilties as the Tumbler; some of these Dogs will bring their Game as
the Tumblers, and those are the best. The Lircher will Run down the Hare at
Stretch.

The GREYHOVND.
THis Sort of Dog of all others, is for swiftness of Foot and Neatness of Shape
to be preferred before all others. But there being a Chapter relating only to
Greyhounds, I shall not say more of him here, referring you to the said
Chapter, where he is Treated of, with Rules for Coursing with him.

Thus having given you a Brief Account of the several sorts of Hounds, and Dogs
used in Hunting, I shall add a word or two to tell you, that Lancashire with
other Woodland and Mountainous Conntries Breed the Large, tall and heavy
Hounds; that Bedfordshire, and many other Countries that have a well mixed Soil,
both of Champain and Covert Breed a Middle-Sized Hound, and of a more nimble
Foot; and that the Northern parts Breed the Fleet, and Slender Hound.

The next thing to be be Treated of, shall be the Breeding of Hounds, the
Disposal of the Kennel, with Rules for Feeding and Entering them*

CHAP. III.
Of Breeding of Hounds, the disposal of the Kennel, with Directions for the
Feeding and Entering Hounds, and how they ought to be Ordered.
THose that would have Fair Hounds, must choose Fair Bitches, and such as are
strong, and well proportioned in all Parts, with great and large Ribs and
Flanks.

The best Season to let your Hounds Couple in, is in January, February, and
March, for then they will Litter in a good time of the Year, (that is, in the
Spring) so that they will be fit to enter in due Course, without loss of time,
or loss of the Season; for if they Litter in the Winter, it is very Troublesome
to bring up their Whelps, and not without a great deal of Difficulty to
preserve them from dying, especially of Diseases; for the Cold is a great Enemy
to all young Creatures. Let not your Dogs exceed the Age of five Years, for if
they are old (according to the Opinion of many) the Whelps that they get, will
prove dull and heavy. And you should be very careful to get good Dogs, for your
Bitches at their first growing Proud; for some have observed, that if it be a
Mastiff, Greyhound, or Hound that first Lineth her, in all her Litters, that
she shall afterward have, she is said to have one of her Whelps to Resemble
the Dog, that first Lined her. And although the first Litter of Whelps is not
of so much esteem, as the second or third, as being more weak and small, yet be
sure to have a good fair Hound to Line her at first.

When a Bitch is Proud, it is not good to cool her in the Water, for that does
congeal the Blood within her Veins and Arteries, and cause Manginess, also
Gripes in the Belly, with other Diseases.

When your Bitches begin to be pretty big with Whelp, let them not Hunt, or use
violent Exercise, whereby to occasion the casting her Whelps, but Feed them
well, preparing clean and private places for them, and keep them therein for a
few days, to the end they may be accustomed thereunto.

Your Bitches having Littered, it is good to choose those that you intend to
keep, and to drown the rest; and in making choice of the best, there Whelp that
sees last, is the best; and others are of Opinion, that to remove the Whelps,
and lay them in several places, and watch the Bitch, and that which she
carries to her Kennel first, is the best.

Be sure to give good fresh Straw to them, which must be often changed; let
them not lie Sunshine, or where Rain may wet them, and it is good to anoint
their Skins once or twice a Week with Nut-Oyl mixed with saffron beaten, which
will kill all sorts of Worms, and keep them from the biting of Flies. When the
Whelps are about fifteen days Old, Worm them, and about a Week after, cut or
wind off one joint of their Sterns, when they can see give them Milk to lap;
and about two Months Old, it is time to Wean them, keeping them from their Dam;
and Bellies, put Cumminseed now and then in their Bread.

If you would have your Bitches grow Proud, take half a Castors Stone, two
Heads of Garlic, the Juice of Cressies, and a little Cantharadice, boil these
together with Mutton in Water, and the Broth made thereof being given twice or
thrice, will work the effect, the like it will do being given Dogs, to make
them desirous of Bitches.

If you would spay a Bitch, it is good to do it after she has had Whelps, or
when she is Proud, but not before; and in spaying her, be sure take not away
all the Strings or Roots of the Veins, for that will much prejudice her as to
her strength and swiftness.

Of the Disposal of a Kennel, and how it ought to be situated for the
convenience
TO the making a complete Kennel, these three Conveniences ought to be
considered, viz. sweet Air, fresh Water, and the Morning Sun. I shall lay down
some Rules for your Instruction therein: Your Court should be large, for the
more spacious it is, the better it will be for the Hounds to refresh them in;
and it should be well walled or fenced about to prevent their getting out, but
not so high to keep out the Sun or Wind. The Water, if possible, should run
through some part of the Court or Yard; or for want thereof a Well with a large
Stone Trough about a Foot and a half high, always kept with fresh Water, to the
end your Hounds may drink when they please: And at one end of the Trough there
must be a hole to let out the Water for the cleansing it. In the highest part
of the Court let the Kennel be built, in which should be two Rooms, one of
which should be larger than the other, with a large Chimney to make a fire when
need requires: This Room should be raised about three Foot from the Ground, and
in the Floor should be two Gutters for the conveyance of the Piss: There must
be dispersed up and down small Bedsteads raised about a Foot from the Floor,
with holes pierced through the Planks for the drayning away their Piss. The
other Room must be for the Huntsman to keep his Poles, Whips, Liams, Salves,
and the like necessaries. There should also be a Copper for the boiling,
dressing, and ordering of their Food when they come home wet and weary; for at
such times they should be cherish't as Instruments of your Recreation, that
they may delight in your Service, and taste of your Bounty, and then doubt not
but to have credit of them in the Field.

Be careful not to give them any thing to drink in Vessels of Copper: And as to
the proportion and quality of your Allowance for food, it must be ordered with
relation to the Natures of the Hounds, and their sizes. Three Bushels of Oats,
with a Bushel and a half of wheat Bran, will keep ten Couple of middle sized
Hounds a Week, giving them sometimes Beef-broth, Whey, Flit-milk, Chippings of
Bread, Bones, and sometimes a little Horsflesh, for change of Food creates a
good Appetite, and causes health. The Oats and Wheatbran must be boiled and
thickened with Milk or Butter-milk, with some Chippings or broken Meat boiled
therein.

As concerning Horsflesh, I approve thereof, provided it be given with
discretion; and of all sorts Horsflesh is the best and hottest, but be sure to
flea or skin them, lest your Dogs discerning the Hair may fall on them when
living in the Field. Such Dogs that are accustomed to Hunt the Hare, it is not
good to give them any Flesh, because it is said to withdraw their Scents or
Affections from the Chase, by reason their Flesh is not very sweet, not their
Scents very strong.

If your Huntsman perceives that through toylsome, long, and frequent Chases,
the Hounds fall away, he must be the more careful in feeding and cherishing
them up with some good Broth, boiled Oxes or Sheeps hearts, etc.

On such days as your Hounds do not Hunt, the best times to feed them are early
in the Morning before Sunrise, and late in the Evening after Sunset: And on
the days they hunt they ought to be Rewarded so soon as they come home, be it
when it will, especially at Night with a good Supper; The Ancient Hunting Notes
of England, with many Folio. (...) new additions together with all their
several names.

Tone; Ton; Tavon; Tontavon; Tontontavon; Tontontontontavon;

To call the Company in the morneing.

The seven strokes to the Field.

When the Hounds are uncupled and seek.

When the Hounds hunt a game unknown.

The Single Recheat.

The Double Recheat.

The Treble Recheat.

The Stroke of eight to draw from ye Covert.

The Earthing of a Fox If recoverable.

If not Recoverable to call away.

The Death of a Hare. TD.

The Death of a Buck. TD.

The Death of a Heart Royal. TD.

The call for a Keeper in park, chase, or fforrest.

The Death of a Fox in Field, or covert. T^

The pryze of a Heart Royal.

The stroke of nine to draw home the company.

The stroke of five for the Terriens.

The mount is from party to party every note thryce.

The Running Recheat.

Another w^^bling Recheat.

Another Recheat with ye. tongue very hard.

Another Smoother Recheat.

Another w^^bling Recheat.

The Death of an Otter. TD.

The Death of Roe Buck. TD.

The Death of the Wyld Bore. TD.

The good night, or farewell at parting.

for nothing is a greater discouragement to a Hound, than to go to sleep with
an empty Belly after hard labor.

If your Huntsman has more dead Flesh than he has present occasion for, he
may preserve it sweet a Week or ten days, by sinking it under Ground.

As concerning the entering your Hounds, it is not enough to have them
well-bred, with promising Marks and handsome Proportions; but they are to be
well instructed how to hunt.

When your Whelps are about Seventeen or Eighteen Months old, teach them to
take the Water and swim: Also lead them abroad in the Fields in the heat of the
day, the better to endure exercise: Also lead them through Flocks of Sheep and
Warrens, to bring them to command. They must be also brought to know the
Huntsman's voice, their Names, to understand the Horn, and to use their own
voices.

HVNTERS Notes.
FOr your better assistance I have inserted the several Sounds that you are to
Wind upon occasion, which are according to the Plate here annexed.

Rules for the Entering your Hounds.
NOw for the very day and time of Entering Hounds, let it be about Noon in a
fair warm Day; for if you enter them in the Morning, when the Heat comes on,
they will give out; and take the most advantage you can that your Game may not
long stand before them, but that your Hounds may be Rewarded: And thus must you
do at least once a Week for about two Months, by which means they will be so
fleshed and seasoned with that Game at which you first enter them, that they
will not leave off the pursuit. Hounds you can procure, and let there not be so
much as one barking Curr in the Field.

The Hare is esteemed the best Game to Enter young Hounds at; for whatsoever
Chase you design them for, they will thereby learn all Turns and Doubles, and
how to come to the Hollow: They will also come to have a perfect Scent and hard
Feet, by being used to Highways, beaten Paths, Hills. At first give them all
the advantages that may be; and when you start the Hare from her Form, let the
Scent cool a little, observing which way she takes; and then lay on your Hounds
with the most advantage and help you can, either of Wind, View, Hollow, or the
Pricking in her Passage: Nor were it amiss if they had the advantage of a Hare
that had been tired the same Morning by a Course. You must also take care that
they hunt fair and even, without lagging Pack, and forced to take the Scent
with the rest: The like must be done if they refuse to strike upon a Default,
but run on babbling and yelping without the Scent, whereby they draw away the
rest of the Dogs, until some of the elder Dogs take it; then cherish them with
Horn and Hollow.

In case any of your young Whelps, who trusting more to their own Scents than
to the rest of the Pack, and consequently are cast behind, working out the
Defaults by their own Noses, and that they Hunt just and true; in such cases
give them all manner of encouragement and assistance, and let them work it out
of themselves at their own pace; for such Dogs can never prove ill, if not
spoiled by your own hastiness and indiscretion: For a little of your Patience
and their Experience, will bring them to be your chief Leaders.

When you have killed the Hare, permit not the Dogs to break her up, but beat
them off; then Skin her and cut her in pieces, and Reward your young Hounds
therewith; and by this means in a short time you will find a great improvement
in your Whelps.

Some are of Opinion, that the best way to Enter young Hounds, is to take a
live Hare, and Trail her after you upon the Earth, now one way and then
another; and having drawn it a convenient distance off, hide it, and the Dog
taking the Wind thereof, runs to and fro until he finds it.

The Huntsman must well understand the nature and disposition of his Hounds in
the finding out the Game; for some are of that nature, that when they have
found the Footsteps, do go forwards without any Voice, or show of Tail;
likewise others when they have found Head will show the Game; some again having
found the Footings of the Beast, will prick up their Ears a little, and either
Bark, or wag their Stern or Ears; others there are that cannot keep the Scent,
but wander up and down and hunt Counter, taking up any false Scent; and others
there are that cannot Hunt by the Foot, but only by the sight of their Game.

For the Entering your Hound at the Heart or Buck, let him be in Prime of Grease,
for then he cannot stand up, or hold out the Chase so long. The Forest which
you choose should have all the Relays of equal proportion, as near as may be;
then place your young Hounds, with five or six old Staunch ones to enter them,
and lead them to the furthest or last Relay, and cause the Heart or Buck to be
hunted unto them; being come up, uncouple your old Hounds, and having found the
Heart, being well entered in Cry, uncouple your Young Ones, and if you find any
of them lag behind, whip or beat them forwards. But for your more ready Entering
them, take these few Instructions. You may bring them to Quarry by taking five
or six nimble Huntsmen, and each to have two Couple of your Dogs, to lead in
Liams; and having unlodged the Heart, pursue him fair and softly without tyring
your Hounds; and after two or three hours Chase, and that you find him begin to
sink, then cast off your Young Ones.

Another way is, by taking a Buck or Stag in a Toil or Net, and having disabled
him by cutting one of his Feet, let him go; then about half an hour after,
gather your young Hounds together, and having found out the View or Slot of the
Buck or Heart by your Blood-Hound, uncouple your young Dogs, and let them Hunt;
and when they have killed their Game, let them be Rewarded therewith whilst it
is hot; the most usual part being the Neck flayed.

Some Enter their young Hounds within a Toil, but that is not so good; for the
Heart or Buck does then nothing but turn and cast about, because Chase being out
of sight, your Dogs will soon give over.

How the Huntsman ought to Dress, Govern and Attend his Hounds.
A Good Huntsman ought to be loving to Hounds, especially after hard labor.
His first business every Morning should be, to cause their Kennels to be
cleansed; then he should take his Horn and Sound three or four times the Call,
to encourage them and call them to him; and being all about him, let them be
Coupled, putting such together, that as near as you can will not sight with one
another; and let the young Dogs be Coupled with the old Bitches, to teach them
to follow. Then the Keeper must be Bones or Fragments of Meat to carry with him
in a Wallet, and so cause the Hounds to follow him through green Cornfieldsd,
Meadows, and the like places, as well to Air them, as to make them know his
Voice, and train them up for Service; and if any Dog does happen to run at a
Sheep, or other Tame Beast, correct him well, that he may be afraid to commit
the like Offense another time. And having thus spent good part of the
Fore-Noon, go into some Meadow, Reward them with some of the Bones out of the
Wallet, using encouraging words; then let some of the Company (being at a
distance) call them to him by hollowing and winding his Horn; and being about
him, let them be Rewarded with the rest; then Couple them, and so lead them
home to their Kennel.

Sometimes it happens, that young Whelps will not take the Water; To help this,
choose a hot Noon Couple up your Hounds, and lead them to the Riverside, and
so cause them to Swim, gently putting them in the Water; and by three or four
times so doing they will not fear the Water.

CHAP. IV.
The Common Diseases incident to Hounds, with Directions for their Cure.
BEfore I shall enter upon the Diseases, it will be necessary to teach you how
to prevent them, seeing that thereby you may save your Purse, Labor, and
Credit, and keep up your Pack of Dogs for Service. Therefore when your Hunt,
Feed better than when they Rest, and let them be neither too Fat nor too Lean,
but in an indifferent State; but of the two rather Fat than Lean, by which
means they will preserve themselves from the Mange, Scabs, Madness, and the
like, unto which they will be addicted: Which Diseases they will be subject
unto, if they want Air, Water, or Exercise. And if you have but the knack to
keep them thus in an even temper, they may live long and continue sound. As for
their Water, they should be their own Carvers, as before noted, and as to
Exercise and Diet, order it according to discretion, observing a Medium.

If notwithstanding these Directions you find them troubled with the Itch, take
some Quicksilver, and beat it in Nerve-Oyl until it be killed, and that the
Composition become thick like a Salve, and of a pale yellow; with this anoint
the affected place before the Fire, rubbing and chasing it well in.

Of the Mange, Tetters, Ring-Worms, and Scabs in Dogs.
There Is said to be four sorts of Mange; viz. The Red Mange, which causes the
Dogs Legs to swell; the Skaly Mange, which grows in Patches as broad as a man's
Hand, and takes away the Skin where it comes; the Common Mange; and the Black
Mange, which lies unde the Skin, and causes the Hair to shed. Of these
Manges, the Red Mange is the worst, and hardest to be cured.

This Disease is occasioned by a Dogs foundring or over-heating in the Winter,
and by taking cold in Swiming over Rivers when hot; also by lying in cold and
moist places before he is well dried.

For Cure, give him a Purge thus made; Take an Ounce and an half of
Cassia-Fistularis, well cleansed, two Drachms and an half of Stavesacre in
Powder, the like quantity of Scamony prepared in Whitewine-Vineger, and four
Ounces of Oil of Olives; temper all these together, and warm them a little over
the Fire, and give it your Dog toward night, not suffering him to eat any
thing till the next Morning; then let him Blood upon a Vein that is between the
Hough-string and the Bone of the Leg, and within two days after Anoint him with
this following Ointment.

Take three Pound of Nut-Oyl, one Pound and an half of Oil of Cade, two Pound
of Oil of Worms, three Pound of Honey, and one Pound and an half of Vinegar;
boil all these together until half consumed; then put to it Rozin, and Pitch or
Tar, of each two Pound and an half, and half a Pound of new Wax unwrought, melt
them together; and then put thereto one Pound and an half of Brimstone, two
Pound of Copporas well tried, and twelve Ounces of Verdigrease;

This Medicine will kill and heal all manner of Mange and Itch, be it never so
strong; but before you Anoint your Dog therewith, vvash and rub him with Water
and Salt to cleanse his Skin; then bring him to a good Fire, and tie him there
that he may Sweat. Let his Diet be vvarm Broth, in which put some Brimstone to
vvarm him within; and this method being taken for about a Week, will cure him.

The Common Mange oft-times is occasioned by reason of the Dogs wanting fair
Water to drink; as also for not keeping their Kennels clean.

This Mange is easily cured by a Decoction made of these Herbs following; Take
two handfuls of wild Cresseys, as much of Elicampane, of the Leaves or Roots of
wild Sorrel, and the Roots of Frodyls two Pound; put all these into Vinegar and
Lie, and let them boil well; then having strained the Decoction, put Gray
Soap, which being dissolved and lukewarm, bathe the Dog therewith in the
infected places, and in about a Week he will be recovered.

For Cure of this Distemper you may also use this Medicine; Take two Ounces of
the strongest Gunpowder, and mix it with very strong Whitewine-Vineger until
it become like a thick Salve, and with it anoint the places infected until it
bleed, and it is a certain Cure.

Some will cast their Dogs into a Tan-Pit, but Eyesight.

To kill Fleas, Lice, Ticks, and such like Vermin, that Dogs are subject unto.
THese Vermin are engendered through want of clean Lodging, good Keeping and
Airing. For their Cure, take about five handfuls of Rue chopped small, and boil
it in a Gallon of Water until half be consumed, and strain it through a Cloth;
then put to your Water two Ounces of Stavesacre in Powder, and being
Blood-vvarm bathe your Dog therewith. But if you use all the Art you can, and
remove not the Causes, they will still be diseased; therefore to prevent this,
and many other Maladies that perplex your Hounds, it is good to have always in
readiness this following Ointment; Take three Pound of Walnuts. Honey, of Oil
of Cedar, Vinegar, Rosin, Pitch, and Brimstone, of each one Pound and an half,
of Hog's Grease and Copporas, of each two Pound, of Verdigrease twelve Ounces,
and of new Wax half a Pound. Make all these into an Ointment; but before you
anoint your Dogs, vvash them in Water boiled with Salt.

Of Madness.
THis Distemper is very common amongst all sorts of Dogs; It is easy to
prevent, but hard to Cure. There are seven sorts of Madness, amongst which some
are esteemed incurable. I shall Treat of each sort; but first 'twill be
necessary to show how it comes, and what are its first Symptoms.

The first Cause proceeds from High Feeding, want of Exercise, fullness of
Blood, and Costiveness; for the two first, something has already been said;
and for the latter give them once a week, especially in the heat of the Year,
five or six Spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, which will cleanse them. If you give them
at other times the quantity of a Hazel Nut of Mithridate, it is an excellent
thing to prevent Diseases, and it is very good to Bleed them under the Tongues,
and behind the Ears. But if this Disease have seized them before you perceived
it, you must speedily remove them from the rest, for fear of an Infection, and
go to work with the rest.

The Symptoms of this Disease are many, and easily discerned. When you see any
Dog, separate himself contrary to his former use, to become Malancholy, or
Droop with his Head, to forbear Eating, and as he runs to snatch and away at
every thing he meets with, if he often looks upward, and that his Stern at the
setting on be a little erect, and the rest hanging down, if his Eyes be red,
his Breath strong, his Voice Hoarse, and that he driveleth and foameth at the
Mouth, you may assure your self he has this Distemper.

The seven sorts of Madness are as follows, of which the two first that I
shall Name are incurable, viz.

Hot Burning Madness, and Running Madness; these two are very Dangerous, for all
things they bite and draw Blood from, will have the same Distemper, they
generally seize on all they meet with, but chiefly on Dogs; their pain is so
great, that it soon kills them. The five curable Madnesses are.

Sleeping Madness, so called from the Dogs great Drowsiness, and almost
continual Sleeping; and this is caused by little Worms that breed in the Mouth
of the Stomach, from Corrupt Humors, Vapors and Fumes which ascend from the
Head; for Cure take five Ounces of the Juice of Wormwood, two Ounces of the
Powder of Hartshorn burnt, and two Drams of Agaric, mix all these together with
a little Whitewine, and give it the Dog to Drink in a Drenching-horn.

Dum Madness lies also in the Blood, and causes the Dog not to Feed, but to
hold his Mouth always wide open, frequently putting his Feet to his Mouth, as
if he had a Bone in his Throat. For Cure take the Juice of black Hellebore, the
Juice of Spathula putrida, and the Juice of Rue, of each four Ounces; and
having well strained them, put thereto two Drams of unprepared Scamony, and
being well mixed together, put it down the Dogs Throat, in a Drenchinghorn,
keeping his Head up for some time, lest he cast it out again; then Bleed him in
the Mouth, by cutting two or three of the Veins in his Gumbs.

It is said that about eight Drams of the Juice of an Herb called Hartshorn, or
Dogtooth, being given the Dog, cures all sorts of Madness curable, but whether
so or not, I leave to trial.

Lank Madness is so called, by reason of their leaness and pining away; for
Cure give them a Purge, as before directed, and also Bleed them.

Rhumatick or Slavering Madness, does occasion his Head to swell, his Eyes to
look yellow, and always slavering, or drivilling at his Mouth. For Cure take
four Ounces of the Powder of the Roots of Polipodie of the Oak, six Ounces of
the Juice of Fennel Roots, with the like quantity of the Roots of Misletoe, and
four Ounces of the Juice of Ivy, boil all these in Whitewine, and give it your
Dog in a Drenching-horn, as hot as he can take it.

Falling Madness is so called, because it lies in their Heads, making them
Reel as they go, and to fall down. For Cure take four Ounces of the Juice of
Briony, and the like quantity of the Juice of Piony, with four Drams of
Stavesaker pulverized, mix these together, and give it your Dog in a
Drenching-horn; also let him Bleed in the Ears, and in the two Veins that come
down his Shoulders, and inindeed Bleeding must be used for all sorts of
Madness.

To prevent Dogs from being mad, that are Bitten of mad Dogs, by Bathing them.
FIll a Barrel or Bucking-Tub full of Water, and put therein about a Bushel and
a half of Salt, which stir well, that it may be dissolved; then put in the Dog
that is Bitten, and plunge him over Head and Ears seven or eight times therein;
Mad, but he should be also Blooded

Gauls, Tetters, Ringworms, Cankers and Dry Sores, with Directions to kill them.
FOr these Distempers, the aforesaid Ointment is excellent good; Also this
Medicine is very effectual: Take two Drams of Sublimate Mercury Mortar with the
Juice, or inward substance of a Cittron without the Rind, put thereto a little
Water and Vinegar, then take one Ounce of Allom, and as much Soap, all which
mingle together, and let them boil until a third part be consumd, and with this
wash the Sores.

To kill the Canker in a Dogs Ears.
TAke Soap, Oil of Tartar, Sal Armoniack, Brimstone, and Verdigrease, of each
one Ounce, mix them well together with strong Vinegar, and rub the Sore
therewith.

Of Dogs bitten by a mad Dog.
IF your Dogs are bitten by one that is mad, there is nothing better than the
licking it with their own Tongues, if they can reach the place; if not, then
wash it with Butter and Vinegar made lukewarm, and anoint it afterward with
Venice Turpentine. It is also good to piss often into the Wound; but above all,
the Juice of the Stalks of strong Tobacco boiled in Water, and bathe the place
therewith: Also wash him either in Seawater, or in Water artificially made
Salt: Also give him inwardly a little Mithridate in two or three Spoonfuls of
Sack, and so keep him apart; and if you find him after some time still to
droop, without hopes of Recovery, the best way is to hang him.

Of Worms.
HOunds are apt to have Worms within them, especially when young: It is good to
give them about a Pint of warm Milk early in the Morning, with about half an
Ounce of Flower of Brimstone in it, and let them fast at least two hours after
it. This will warm and scowr them, causing them to be free of all inward filth;
or if you think good, make Pills of Aloes, Hartshorn, the Juice of Wormwood,
with some Flower of Brimstone; of this give them the quantity of a Hasel Nut
wrapped up in sweet Butter, forcing it down his Throat by pulling out his Tongue
and so putting it down, and when he draws in his Tongue it will slip in of it
self.

Concerning Dogs that are surbaited in their Feet.
DOgs are often surbaited in their Feet, occasioned by running long in hot
Weather upon hard, dry, uneven ways, amongst rocky and sharp Gravels: For
preventing this; If your Huntsman be careful, he will have their Feet looked
after as aforesaid: But if through carelessness their Feet become sore, then
cause them to be washed with broken Beer and fresh Butter lukewarm, and then
to bind to the Soles of their Feet a Salve made of young red Nettles small
chopped, or beaten into an Ointment: Soot finely powdered and beaten with the
yolks of Eggs, and applied to their Feet is also very good: Also the Juice of
the Herb Mouse-ear is very good for the like occasion.

Of Bruises.
IF your Dogs chance to receive a Bruise through any fall, or the push of a
Stag or Buck; if it appear outwardly anoint the swelling with a Decoction of
Chickweed and Groundsel boiled in strong Ale, and that will assuage the
swelling: But if it be a Wound, lay a Plaster thereon of the Roots of great
Cumfrey, Mellilot, and Oil of Roses, of each a like quantity, and cut away the
hair near the Wound for the sticking of the Plaster. If you suspect the Bruise
to be inward, give them a drench of a Pint of new Milk, and put therein a
quarter of an Ounce of Irish Slate or Sperma Caeti, or for want of these two,
take half an Ounce of Stone Pitch finely powdered.

To cure the biting or stinging of Venomous Creatures.
IT sometimes happens that Dogs are bit and stung by Venomous Creatures, as
Snakes, Adders, Toads, and the like. For Cure, Presently squeez out the clotted
Blood, and wash the place with Salt and Urine; then lay a Plaster to it made
of Callimint beaten in a Mortar with Turpentine and yellow Wax, until it become
a Salve. If you give him some of the Juice of Callimint to drink with Milk, it
were not amiss; or one Ounce of Treacle dissolved in some sweet Wine.

Obstructions in the Bladder.
SOmetimes Dogs are troubled with Impediments in the Bladder, and cannot piss:
To Cure which, give them a Decoction of Mallows, or March-Mallows, Brambles,
the Roots of Fennel, and the Leaves or Seeds of Archangel that commonly grows
by Vines, of each an equal quantity; and let them boil until a third part be
consumed; Dog in a Drenching-horn, and it will cause him to piss.

Cankers and Sores in Dogs Ears.
FOr the Cure, take Verjuice and Cheveril Water mixed together, and wash the
Ears.

To keep Bitches from being Proud.
BEfore a Bitch has had Whelps, give her every Morning for about a Fortnight,
eight or nine Corns of Pepper in her Meat, and she will not become Proud.

To heal Wounds on a Dog.
TAke the Juice of red Colewort, and squeez into the Wound, and it will cure it
in a few times dressing.

CHAP. V.
Hunters Terms of Venery.
IN Hunting observe that there are Beasts of Forest, which are Beasts of
Venery, Beasts of Chase, and Beasts of the Warren. Beasts of Venery are the
Heart and Hind, the Hare, Boar, and the Wolf. And here note, That with the Heart
or Stag is included all other Red Deer of Antlier. Beasts of Chase are the Buck
and Do, the Fox, Martern, and the Roe, And Beasts of the Warren is the Coney.

Betwixt Beasts of Venery and Chase there are great differences. Those of
Venery make their abode all day in great Coverts and secret Places in Woods,
and in the Night season seek for Food in Meadows, Lawns, and pleasant feeding
places; whereas those of Chase reside in the day in the Fields and open places,
the better to avoid danger of surprising; and in the Night season feed as the
rest in the Meadows. But to proceed to the Terms of Art used in Venery.

The HEART is called the first year a Calf, or a Hind-Calf, the second year a
Knobler, the third a Brocket, the fourth a Staggard, the fifth a Stag, and the
sixth a Heart. If hunted by the King or Queen, and he escape, for ever after he
is called a Hart-Royal: And if the King or Queen think fit to make Proclamation
for his safe Return, as was formerly the Custom, he is then called a Hart-Royal
proclaimed.

The HIND is called the first year a Calf, the second a Hearse, and sometimes
we say a Brocket's Sister, and the third year a Hind, and so she continues.

The HARE is called the first year a Leveret, the second a Hare, and the third
a great Hare.

The WILD-BOAR is called the first year a Pig of the Sounder, the second a Hog,
the third a Hogs-steer, and the fourth a Boar, at which Age, if not before, he
leaves the Sounder.

The BVCK is called the first year a Fawn, the second a Pricket, the third a
Sorel, the fourth a Soar, the fifth a Buck of the first Head, and the sixth a
Buck, or great Buck.

The DO is called the first year a Fawn, the second a Teg, and the third a Do.

The BADGER is called the first year a Whelp or Pig, and afterward a Badger.

The ROE is called the first year a Kid, the second a Girl, the third a
Hemuse, the fourth a Roe-Buck of the first Head, and the fifth a fair Roe-Buck.

The FOX is called the first year a Cub, the second a Fox, and afterward an
old Fox.

The OTTER is called the first year a Whelp, and afterward an Otter.

The MARTERN is called the first year a Cub, and the second a Martern.

The CONEY is called the first year a Rabbet, and afterward an old Coney.

Terms of Art used for Beasts of Venery and Chase, as they are in Company one
with another.
A Heard of Hearts, as also of all other sorts of Deer, is at least Twenty, but
six Roes make a Heard.

A Bevy of Roes, a Sounder of Swine, and a Rout of Wolves, are at least Twelve
in number.

A Brace or Leese of Bucks, the like of Foxes and Hates. A Riches of Marterns,
and a Couple of Coneys.

Terms for Copulation.
A Heart or Buck goes to Rut; the Roe to Tourn, the Boar to Brim, the Fox to
Clickitting, the Wolf to Match or to Make; the Otter hunteth for his kind; and
the Hare and Coney goes to Buck.

Terms for their Noise at Rutting time.
A Heart Belloweth, a Buck Groaneth or Twateth, a Roe also Belloweth, a Boar
Freameth, a Fox Barketh, a Badger Shrickets, an Otter Whineth, a Wolf Howleth,
and a Hare and Coney Beats or Tappeth.

Terms for their Ordure.
THe Ordure or Excrement of every Beast of Chase or Venery has his proper
Terms, for thereby their place of Feeding and Estate is known, and therefore
necessary to be understood. The Ordure of a Heart, and of all Deer, is called
Fewmets or Fewmishings, and all Beasts that live of Browse shall have the same
Term in that respect; but in Beasts of Prey, as the Boar and the like, they
shall be called the Lesses. Of Vermin and stinking Chases, as the Fox, Badger,
and the like, they are called the Fuants; of an Otter the Spraynts, and of the
Hare and Coney the Crotiles or Crotisings.

Terms for the footing and treading of Beasts of Chase and Venery.
FOr a Heart the Slot; for a Buck, and all Fallow Deer, the View. Of all Deer,
if on the Grass, or where it is scarce visible, it is called Foiling; for a Fox
the Print; for other Vermin Footing; for an Otter the Marks; for a Boar the
Tract or the Treading; and for a Hare diversely; for when she winds or casts
about to deceive the Hounds, she doubleth; when she is in the open Field, she
soreth; and when she beats on the hard Highways, and her footing can be
perceived, then she pricketh; and in Snow it is called the Trace of a Hare.

Terms for Lodging of Beasts.
A Heart Harbors, a Buck Lodges, a Roe Beddeth, a Fox Kennelleth, a Badger
Eartheth, an Otter Watches, a Boar Coucheth, a Hare Seateth or Forms, a
Coney Sits, and a Martern Treeth.

Terms for Lodging and Dislodging of Beasts.
YOu shall say Harbor and Vnharbour a Heart, and he lies in his Layre; Lodge
and Roaze a Buck, and he lies in his Layre; Seek and Find the Roe-Buck, and he
Beddeth; Form and Start a Hare; Bolt and Burrow a Coney; and both the Hare and
Coney do sit and squat. Kennel and Vnkennel the Fox; Earth and Dig out the
Badger; Watch and Vent the Otter; Couch and Rear the Boar; Tree and Bay the
Martern; and Train and Raise the Wolf.

Terms for the Tails of Beasts of Chase.
THe Tail of a Heart, Buck, Roe, or any other Deer is called the Single; that of
a Boar the Wreath; that of a Coney or Hare the Scut, that of a Fox his Bush,
and that of a Wolf his Stern.

Terms for the Attire of Deer.
OF a Stag or Heart if perfect, the Burr is next the Head; the Pearls are the
little knobs about it; the Beam is that whereon the Antliers, and the Sur
Antliers are; and all the rest until you come to the Crown, Palm, or Croche,
which is the top, are Royals and Sur-Royals, and the little Streaks in the Beam
are Gutters.

Of a Buck, you may say the Burr, the Beam, the Brown-Antlier, the
Black-Antlier, the Aduancer, Palm and Spellers.

If the Croches grow in form of a Man's Hand, it is called a Palmed Head. Heads
not bearing above three or four, the Croches being placed above, and all at one
height, are called Crowned Heads. And Heads having Doubling Croches, are called
Fored Heads, because the Croches are on the Top of the Beam like Forks.

When you speak of a Hearts or Bucks Horns, call them the Head; and not the
Horns.

The Head or Horns of a Deer when it first comes out, has a Russet Pill upon
it, which is called Velvet, and his Head is called a Velvet Head; and when it
is grown out to the full Bigness, he rubbeth off that Pill; and that is called
the Fraying of his Head; and afterward he burnisheth the same, and then his
Head is said to be full Summed.

I shall here give you the Figures of a Hearts Head, or Horns.

A is called the Burr, and that which is about the Burr, is called Pearls.

B Is called the Brow Antlier.

C Those which are the second third and fourth, are called the Sur-Antliers, or
Beam-Antliers; And all that grow from the Brow-Antlier, until you come to the
Crown, Palm, or Croche are called Royals and Sur-Royals.

D The little Buds or Broches that are about the top, are called Croches, or
generally Croches of so

Fig. I.

Fig. II.



Fig. I. This Head is called a Palmed Top, because Croches which grow in the
Top, are formed like a Man's Hand.

Fig. II. All Heads that bear not above three or Croches being placed aloft,
and all of one height in form of a Cluster of Pears or Nuts, are called Heads
of so many Croches.

All Heads which bear two in the Top, or having their Croches doubling in
manner as these are here described, are to be called Forked Heads, because the
Croches are planted on the Top of the Beams like Forks.

All Heads, that have double Burs, or the Antliers, Royals and Croches turned
downwards, contrary to the fashion of other Heads, according to these Figures,
are to be called Heads only.

Terms of Flearing, Stripping and Casing of Beasts.
THe Heart of all sorts of Beasts is flean; and you must say, Take off the Deers
Skin; Strip or Case the Hare: The Fox, Badger, and all manner of Vermin are
also Cased; and you must begin at the Snout or Nose of the Beast, and so turn
his Skin over his Ears all along his Body, until you come to his Tail, and that
must hang out to show what Beast it was.

The Seasons for Beasts of Chase.
THe Heart or Buck begins at the end of Fence-Mouth, which is Fifteen days
after Midsummer, and holds till Holy-rood-day. The Hind and Do begin at
Holy-rood-day and last till Twelfth-day or Candlemass. The Roe from Michaelmass
to Candlemass. The Fox and Wolf from Christmas to our Lady Day; the Hare from
Michaelmas to the beginning of March; the Otter from Shrovetide to Midsummer;
and the Boar from Christmas to Shrovetide. Coneys are always in season, either
young or old; but their Skins are best in Season from Alholantide, to
Shrovetide.

The Fat of all sorts of Deer, is called Suet; and yet you must say, This Deer
was a high Deer of Grease.

The Fat of a Boar, Fox, and Badger, is called Grease; and the Fat of a Roe is
called Bevygrease.

Proper Terms for the Noises of Hounds.
WHen Hounds are first cast off, and find some Game, say they Challenge or Call
on; but if they are too busy before they find the Scent good, then say they
Bawl; If too busy after they have found good Scent, then they Babble; and if
they run it end-ways orderly, making it good, and then hold it merrily
together, say they Full cry. When they have either Earthed a Vermin, or brought
a Deer, Boar, or the like, to turn Head, then they say they Bay; when Hounds
hang behind and beat too much upon the Scent or Place, say they Plod; when they
are earnest in the Chase, or in the Earth, they Yearn; and when they open in
the String (or a Greyhound is in Course) then they Lapise.

Other Terms to be taken notice of.
WHen Hounds or Beagles take fresh Scent, hunting another Chase until they hit
it again, then they hunt change.

When Hounds hit the Scent of their Chase contrary, as to hit it up the Wind
when they should do it down, then say they draw amiss.

When they hunt by the Heel, then they hunt Counter.

When the Chase goes off, and comes on again, traversing the same Ground
thereby to deceive the Hounds, then they hunt the Foil.

The feeding Hounds after they have killed their Chase, is called Rewarding
them.

When Hounds are in readiness, where the Game is expected to pass by, and are
then cast off at the coming of the other Hounds, that is accounted a Relay.

When Deer have lately passed into Thickets, Dogs thereto for the View, such
places are said to be Entries.

When any Deer is hard hunted, and then takes any River passing through it, say
he Takes Soil; when he comes out, say he Breaks water; and when he leapeth into
the water, and comes out again the same way, then say he Proffereth.

When Hounds or Beagles run long without opening, or making any Cry, it is
termed Running Mute.

When Hounds run at a whole Heard of Deer, then they run Riot.

When at first finding the Scent of the Game they presently open and cry, it is
said they Challenge: And when they draw on the Scent till they rouse the Chase,
then they draw on the Slot.

When a Roe Crosses and Doubles, it is called Trajoning.

There are different Terms betwixt Hounds and Greyhounds: as, Two makes a Brace
of Greyhounds, Couple of Hounds: Three a Leese of Greyhounds, and a Couple and
a half of Hounds. You must say, Let slip your Greyhound, and Cast off your
Hound. The String used to lead a Greyhound, is called a Leese, and for a Hound
a Lyame. The Greyhound has his Collar, and the Hound his Couples.

When Huntsmen go drawing in their Springs at Hart-hunting, they usually make
Dew-rounds, which are called Ring-walks.

When Deer rub and push their Heads against Trees; to cause the Pills or Velvet
of their new Horns to come off, it is said they Fray.

When Deer cast their Horns, they Mew.

When the Huntsman endeavors to find a Heart by the Slot; and then mind his
Step to know whether he is great or long, then say, He is known by his Gate.

When Beagles break and cry at their Prey, then they Yearn.

A Rain Deer resembles a Heart, but has his Head full of Antliers.

When Hounds find where the Chase has been, and made a proffer to enter, but
returned, then say, there is a Blemish; and when Hounds in readiness expecting
the Chase to pass by, and then to cast them off before the rest comes in, this
is termed a Vaunt lay.

When a Hare takes the Ground like a Coney, which is but rarely seen, then say
she goes to the Vault, and when she is Coursed on Rotten Ground, or in Frosty
Weather, so that it sticks to her Feet, then say she Carries.

To beat the Bushes after a Fox is termed Drawing.

A Pricker is a Huntsman on Horsback.

When you see about Twenty Deer of what sort soever together, it is a small
Heard; about forty is a Middle Heard, and sixty or eighty a great Heard, be
they Male or Female.

Upon View of a Heart, if he be a goodly Deer, do not call him fair but great;
and so a great Hind, and a great Buck, but a fair and comely Do.

When a Deer eats in Corn, or Grass-field, he is said to Feed, otherwise to
Browze; and if he stays to look on any thing, he is said to stand at Gaze;
when he forces by, upon force he Trippeth, and when he runs a pace he
Streineth. When he is hunted and leaves the Heard, then he Singleth; when he
Foams at Mouth he is Embossed; when he Smells, or Venteth any thing, then say
he has this or that in the Wind; when he holds out his Neck, at full length
inclining, then say he is spent; and being Dead, say he is done.

The Reward to the Hounds, is called the Reward or Quarry.

When a Huntsman beats a Wood to find a Chase, it is called Drawing the Covert,
and when he sees where any Deer has been, say here he breaks.

When some few Hounds are set in readiness, by any place where it is supposed,
the Chase will pass, it is termed A Vaunt Lay; and when they tarry until the
rest of the Hounds come in, it is called An Allay; but if they hold till the
Kennel be past, then it is called A Relay.

When a Heart enters a River, or Pool which is termed the Soil, say he
descends; when you see him ready to enter the Water, say he proffereth, and
if he does it the second time, then he Reproffereth; and after he has once
descended, and you see where he has trod the Water, filling his The Dear
Fraying their Heads

SEMPER VIBESCENS

To the Right Honorable Claudius Hamilton (...) Earl of Abercor^e, Lord
Pasly. Kilpatrick, Mountcastle, Lord Hamilton and Baron of Strabane, first and
Legal issue Male from James Duke of Chastleherault, Earl of Arran, Chief of
the most noble family of Hamilton, whose family is by Act of Parliament (signed
by all the three Estates) declared next Queen Mary and her issue ye. Rightful
heir of the Crown of Scotland^ he being Son and hair to the only Sister of
King James the Fourth.

This Plate^^ humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

Footsteps, then say here the Heart Defouleth, and the Slot or View that is
found of such a Deer, on the other side of the Water is to be termed as of a
Deer Defoulant the Soil. The Heart, Buck and Boar, do often times take Soil
without enforcing; and all other Beasts are only said to take Water except the
Otter, and he is said to beat the Stream.

When they Cast about a Grove or Wood, with the Blood-Hound; they make a Ring,
when they Deer has passed, and break or plash any Bough downwards for a Mark,
then say, They Blemish, or make Blemishes. When they hang up any Paper, Clout
or Mark, it is called Sewelling, or setting of Sewels. When a Hound meets a
Chase, and goes away with it far before the rest, then say, he Foreloyneth.
When a Hound Hunts backward the same way that the Chase is come, then he hunts
Counter; and if he hunts any other Chase than that which hunts Change. When any
Deer or other Chase uses any Subtilties to deceive the Hounds, then say, they
Cross or Double.

When a Heart or Stag breaks Herd, and draws to the Covert, say, he goes to
Harbor, or takes his Hold, or he Covers; and when he comes out again, then
he discovers himself.

There is great difference betwixt the Feet of Preying Beasts and those of a
Deer; for in those of Prey they are called Traces; but the Tract, or Footing of
a Deer, is called the Slot or View.

There is also a difference betwixt the Frith and the Fell, the Fells being
taken for the Valleys, green Compastures, and Mountains; and the Friths for
Springs and Coppices.

There is also a difference betwixt the word Ways and Trenches; for by the
first is meant the High and Beaten Ways on the Outside of a Forest or Wood;
and by the word Trench, is every small Way not so commonly used.

There is likewise a difference betwixt a Trench and a Path, which is a place
where a Deer has only left Slot or View.

Blemishes are the Marks left to know where a Deer has gone in or out, and
they are little Boughs plashed or broken, to hang downwards; for any thing that
is to hang up, is called a Sewel.

Thus having treated of the several Terms of Art most used in Hunting; the next
business shall be, to treat of the several sorts of Beasts of Venery and Chase;
and first of the Heart or Stag.

CHAP. VI.
Of the HEART or STAG.
IT is observed, that this Creature of all other Deer, has the most ingenuity,
and yet the most fearful; and by his Windings, Turnings, and other Subtilties,
as running into Herds, forcing others into his Footings, and taking refuge
amongst Herds of Cattle, does often deceive the Huntsman, and put a Foyl upon the
Dogs; for in his Chase (which often proves long) neither Hedge, Ditch, or River
does stay him, but takes all with great fierceness: Notwithstanding all which
he is ensnared; for the Dogs, who pursue him by his Scent, being animated and
encouraged by the Huntsmen, he becomes their Prey.

The Heart, as also the Hind, are very long lived, being said to live about One
hundred years. They are bred in most Countries, but England is said to breed
the best.

This Creature does excel all others in the Beauty of his Horns, which are very
high and large; yet do they not grow to their Scalps or Bones, but to their
Skin, branching forth into many Speers, being solid throughout, and as hard as
Stones; every Year in the Spring (as all other sorts of Deer) they lose or shed
their Horns, and during the time they are without, do abscond all the Day in
Solitary places, and only feed out in the Nights. Their new Horns at the first
come out like Bunches, and by degrees grow and become hard, being covered with
a rough Skin, which is called a Velvet-Head; and as the said Skin dries, they
fray or rub them against Trees, to scrape off the said roughness; and when they
find, that in thus rubing them they feel no pain, it is a Rule to them, that
their Horns are their sufficient guard, and so they leave those Retiring places.

At One year old they have no Horns, but only Bunches; at the Age of Two years
they appear more perfect, but Strait and Simple; at Three years they grow into
two Speers; at Four, into three, and so increasing every Year in their Branches
until they be Six; and above that time their Age is not known by their Heads.

In what Season the Stage or Hearts Mew, and betake themselves to the Thickets
and Solitary places.
IN February and March they Mew, or Cast their Heads, that is, their Horns; and
generally the old Ones sooner than the Young, and such that have some Distemper
upon them, especially such as have been hurt at Rut, having lost their Pissel
or Stones, do never Mew; for if you geld one before he has an Head, he will
never bear Head; and also, if you Geld him when he has his Head, or Antlier,
he will never Cast it; and if you Geld him when he has a Velvet Head, it will
always remain so.

When Hearts have Mewed, they betake themselves to the Thickets, as aforesaid;
but Young Ones do never, until they have born their Third Head, which is in the
Fourth year of their Age.

In March and April they begin to thrust forth their Buds, about Mid June their
Heads will be Somed, and about the latter end of July, when they find them to
dry, they go to the Trees to Fray their Heads, and to rub off the Velvet, as
aforesaid.

Of Fraying their Heads.
HAving Frayed their Heads, then they burnish them in the Clay, and other
commodious places they can meet with fit for that purpose.

Some bear Red Heads, some Black, and some White; all which do proceed from
Nature only. The Red Heads are commonly greater and fairer than the rest, and
are lighter than the Black; and the White are the worst of all.

Rules to know an Old Heart by the Slot, Fewmets, Carriage, Fraying, Posts; and
by his Gate, Head, and Branches.
IF when you would take his Slot or Treadings* on the Ground, you find he has
a large Foot, a deep Printing, an open Cleft, and a long Space, you may be sure
he is Old; if you find the Treadings of two, the one long and the other round,
and both of one bigness; yet the long Slot was of the largest Heart; also the
hinder Feet of the old Heart do never reach their former in their going, but the
Young Ones Hearts are low Joynted, and do never tread double, or falsely; because
the Sinews, that hold the Joints of their Feet and Claws, are better reinforced
than the young Hearts, who are not so well able to sustain the weight of their
Body, so that their Feet and Claws are sometimes forced to turn away and
double, by which they may be judged young.

There is a great difference between the Slot of Stag or Heart, and the Hind;
for there is no Heart of the Second Head so young, that leaves not a greater
and wider Slot than the Hind; and the Bones will also appear greater; but when
Hinds are with Calf, they open their Claws wide like a Heart.

You may also know an Old Heart by its Fewmishings, or Fewmets, though they are
not at all times alike. In April and May they Cast their Fewments, or
Excrements, as it were in Cakes; and if they be long and thick, it is a sign of
an Old Heart. In June and July they Cast them forth in great Croteys, but soft;
and from thence to the end of August they hold the same form and dimension, but
are very hard and knotty. But although these are the general Marks to know an
Old Heart by, yet sometimes it falls out contrary; For when they have been
disturbed, or received some hurt, then they make their Fewments oft-times dry,
and sharp at one Fray their Heads. There is also a difference betwixt the
Fewments of the Morning, and that in the Evening; for those that he makes when
he goes to Relief at Night, are better digested, and moister than those that
he makes in the Morning, because he has taken his rest all Day, and so does
make a perfect digestion; whereas in the Night he is forced to seek his Feed.

The Age of a Stag or Heart may also be judged by his Carriage, or Bearings;
that is to say, when he passes through any Branched Wood, and with his Head
bruiseth the under Boughs, and that indifferent high, and of a good distance,
it is a sign he is well Spread, and Old. This Judgment may be given all the
Year, except in the Months of March, April, May, and June; at which times they
Mew their Heads, and bear their Velvet and Bloody-heads. His Greatness is also
known by the height of his Entries into a Wood; for the Young ones creep, but
the Old Ones, are stiff and stately.

All Stags or Hearts, as they are burnished, beat or rub their Heads against
some Tree or other, which is termed their Fraying-Post, as before taken notice
of; and the Elder the Heart, is, the sooner does he go to Fray, and the greater
is the Tree that he seeks to Fray upon, and such as he cannot bend with his
Head. The Younger make use of weaker and lower Trees, by which their Age may be
also known, as also the nearest to their Harbor; this being the last Ceremony
used by them before they enter it.

The Plate of Fraying their Heads, shows their Age.

By the Gate or Going of an Heart, his Age may be judged, for the Elder he is,
the longer will his Pace be, and the longer will he run or stand up before the
Dogs, as being more swifter, lighter, and better breathed. Also the Stag or
Heart that leaves a great Slot of his Fore-feet, does never stand up long when
he is Chased; and a Heart that has a long Foot, has a greater Body than those
that are round Footed. His Age is likewise guessed by the height and bigness of
his Legs.

In April, May, and June, there is no Judgment to be had from the Horns, by
reason they Cast them in February or March (as before noted,) and are not well
furnished with their whole Carriage till the beginning of July; and sometimes
later, if the Soil be not good, and the Season fair.

By the Branches of a Stags-Horns his Age may be known; for the First Year they
have no Head, that is, Horns; the Second they have Prickets: the Third they
bear four, six, or eight Branches; the Fourth, eight or ten; the Fifth, ten or
twelve; the Sixth, twelve or fourteen; and at Seven Years old they leave their
Heads Beamed, Branched and Somed, with as many as ever they will bear; for
after that Year they increase in bigness, but not in number; and yet after they
are seven, eight, ten, twenty, thirty, or forty Years Old they may be guessed
at, though not with certainty; for they have their Cabage large and thick, they
are strong Breasted and Burred, and their Heads are very open.

Of Rutting of Hearts.
THe time of their Rutting or Vaulting, is about Mid September; and during that
Season they are such great lovers of the Sport, The ^arborer with ye. Blood
Hound for harboring the Stogg.

To the Right Worship^full S.t Thomas Bludworth of Leather head in the County
of Surrey Kinght^

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Ric. Blome

that they mind nothing else, and with a greedy desire seek out the Hinds,
following them by their Scent; and during the time of their Rut, they eat very
little. They are exceeding hot and burning with Lust, insomuch that where they
find any Water, they lie and tumble in it to cool their Heat; and in this
lustful raging Season they have a peculiar Noise: But the Hinds are more Chaste,
not desiring Copulation so often, if they were not constrained to it by the
Hearts; so that one Male Females: And the older they are, the better they are,
and therefore go to Rut before the young ones. Nor will they suffer the young
ones to come near the Hinds until their Venery is over, or pretty well spent,
which when they perceive, they run upon them, forcing them away, and so become
Masters in their Rooms.

Their Lust being over, and having spent some time in their Solitary
Retirements, they return to their Pastures, and live in Herds as before.

The Hinds being thus filled, never keep Company with the Hearts until delivered
of their young, which is in eight Months; during which time they lodge in some
Covert, taking care of their young, until fit to shift for themselves.

During the time of their Rut they are very easy to be killed; for they follow
the Paths and Ways where the Hinds have gone, putting their Noses to the Ground
to follow them by the Scent, not regarding the danger they are in of being
taken,

Of the Coats and Colors of Hearts.
THere are three several sorts of Hearts or Stags, viz. the Red, Brown, and
Fallow; and of every one of these Coats there proceeds two sorts of Hearts, the
one great, and the other small. Of brown Hearts, some are great, long, and
hairy, bearing a high Head of a reddish color, which is Chase, being swifter
of foot, and longer of breath, than those of a shorter Stature, which are well
set, are fatter and esteemed better Venison, as being in young Springs and
Coppices, rather than in high Woods. They are very subtle, especially when in
their Grease, Nature teaching them to be then more cautious, as being sensible
they cannot hold out a Chase.

If they are old, and feed in good Pastures, Heads are black, fair, well
branched, and generally palmed at the top.

Those that are of a lively red Fallow, having a black or brown List down the
ridge of their Backs, and their Legs of the same color, are strong, and have
fair and high Heads, which are well furnished and beamed.

The Fallow-Hart or Stag does bear his Head high, is of a whitish color, has
small Beams, with long, slender, and ill grown Antliers, and has neither
courage nor force.

The Hearts or Stags of a lively red are commonly young ones; and such do stand
up long, maintaining a good Chase.

Their changing their Food according to the Seasons of the Year.
STags or Hearts are said to change their manner of Food according to the
several Seasons of the Year, which is necessary to be known by every expert
Woodman. I will begin at the end of their Rutting, which is about the end of
October.

In November, when they cease to Rut, they frequent broomy and heathy Fields
and Places, where they may crop off the tops of those Shrubs, which are very
strengthening unto them, after their works of Nature has exhausted them: And
sometimes they lie in such like heathy and broomy Places in the hot Months of
the year.

In December they herd together, and withdraw into the Forests to have harbor
from the cold Frosts, Snows, Wind and Rains, and do then feed or browse on
Elder Trees, Brambles, Briars, Hawthorns, Holmes, and such like things that
they can find green; and in the time of Snows they feed on the Rinds or Barks
of Trees.

In January they leave herding with the rascally Deer, and keep together in
small herds near the skirts of the Forests, where they may find green Corn, or
good Winter Pasture.

In February and March they mew or cast their Heads, and then seek out good
fresh Pasture and green Corn for their Night food, lying close in the Woods all
the day until their Heads are grown again.

In April and May they rest in the Thickets, and such like retiring places,
seldom stirring out of their Harbors, but for food in the Nights, much
coveting green Corn: And in these Months they go not to Soil, by reason of the
moisture of the Spring, and of the Dew that is on the Grass or Corn.

In June, July, and August they visit the Copices and Spring Woods during the
heat of the Day; and in the Nights frequent Corn Fields, no Grain coming amiss;
but they most delight to feed on Wheat, Oats, and Pease.

In September and October they begin to leave the Thickets and go to Rut; and
in these Months they have no certain harbor or food, but follow the Tract of
the Hinds, as before noted, not regarding who sees them, pursuing the Hinds
with such rage and heat of Lust, that they never mind eating any thing but what
accidentally they meet with, which for the most part are Mushrooms, which is a
great Provocative to Venery: And they are in this Season easy to be killed,
were their Flesh good and wholesome, as it is not.

Directions how to use the Bloodhound or Suithound, for the finding out or
Harboring the Heart, or Stag.
THe next thing to be Treated of, shall be to find out the Heart, or Stag where
his Harbor or Lare is; for the effecting of which get up early in the Morning;
and be sure not to go with the Wind, for the Heart is very quick of Scent, and
will make away upon the least fault; and if you go not betimes, Cattle will be
let out, and stiring up and down may chance to tread out the Slot where he has
passed. You must be provided with a Bloodhound, Draughthound or Suithound,
which must be led in a Liam, according as in the Plate is represented, and for
the quickening his Scent it is good to rub his Nose with Vinegar.

When his harbor or resting place is found, Hunting him the next Morning; For
in those Months that he is in the Pride of his Grease, he retires from Feeding
back to his Layre, about Sunrising; and for the most part, if not always, to
one and the same place, unless he meet with some notable disturbance in the
interim.

Hearts do go to their Layre, commonly in the Springs; and although they were
drawn into some strong hold, or Thicket, yet if they be old crafty Deer, they
will return sometimes to the sides of the Coppices, to hearken or spy if there
be any thing to anoy them; and if they chance to vent the Huntsman or his
Hound, they will immediately dislodge from thence, and go to some other place.

When the Huntsman, or Harbinger does perceive that it is time to beat, let him
put his Hound before Springs or Thickets, and if he find a Heart, or Deer, let
him see if the Slot be fresh or not, and he may also know by the drawing of his
Hound, although sometimes one may be deceived by them, when the Mist or Dew is
great, which takes off the Scent; But if the Hound stick well upon the Scent,
then let him hold him short for fear lest he Lapist (that is open,) for in the
Morning a Hound will draw better when he is held short, than if Liam; and let
him draw till he come to the Covert where he is, and if possible, harbor him,
marking all the Signs, as the Slot, his Entries and the like, to know what
manner of Deer he is.

Then let him plash, or bruise down some small Twigs, some above, and some
below, and whilst his Hound is hot in the pursuit, let him beat the outsides,
and mark his Ringwalks twice or thrice about the Wood, one while by the great
and open Eye; another while through the Covert, for fear lest the Hound should
overshoot him, for he will have better Scent in the Covert, than in the
Highways. And if he find that the Deer be not gone out of the Ringwalk, or that
he has drawn amiss, then let him go to his Marks, which he has p^ashed or
bruised, and draw Counter until he may take up the Fewmet, as well made in the
evening Relief, as in the Morning; and let the place

If the Huntsman find two or three places where he has entered, and as many
where he has come out, in this case the freshest entry must be taken notice
of; for a Heart does often times go in and out of his harbor in the Night,
especially if he be an Old Crafty Deer, and will use great Subtilties, beating
one place too and fro diverse times. In this case the Huntsman must take his
Compass and Ring-walk the greater about the Covert, thereby to encompass all
his Entries and Goings out, and let him suffer his Hound to draw almost to the
Hearts Layre or Harbor, and being near it, then draw with more care, checking
your Hound that he spends not when he comes so near as to have him in the Wind;
and having discovered that you ought to draw him, retire some distance back;
and if you perceive him not disturbed, make your second round a little nearer
which will secure him in his harbor; so that having broken a Bough, or plashed
some Twigs, as aforesaid, for your Directions, leave him till the next Morning
when you intend your Chase.

For the finding out a Heart by the Eye in the Springs, observe over Night in
what part the Deer goes to feed, and if it be in a Spring, observe which way to
come in the Morning upon a clear Wind, and choose a standing in some Tree on
the border of the Spring, from which all things may be discerned that feed
therein. In the Morning be at the Covert before Day, and being near the Deers
harbor, leave your Hound with some one that goes with you, that you may
quickly have him on occasion, and then get up the Tree to espy him, and there
stay until he is gone to harbor, observing well the place where he entered;
then descend the Tree and fetch the Hound; but do not begin to harbor him for
an hour at least after his going to Layre, for fear of his discovering you, and
thereby lose him. And if in casting about the Covert any Pyes or Jayes make a
chattering, then withdraw and stand close, for that is a sign he is yet on
foot; so that stay about half an hour before you make your Ring-walk.

Oft-times those that are crafty, as being chased with Hounds, and escape, do
afterward betake themselves for a long time to close Thickets, and feed in
small Groves or Coppices, that have been lately felled, within large Coverts;
and this they do most commonly in May and June, more than in any other Season
of the Year, by reason they go not much to the Water, but content themselves
with the Dew and moisture of the Earth; but in July and August the drought and
heat is such that forces them out for Water, and when they go out they retire
into their Holds two or three hours before day.

For the finding out such crafty Deer, observe this method. When you find the
Slot of a Heart in a thick Covert, that is two or three days old, and that the
Ground is broken with such old Tracts, then cast about and beat all the
outsides; and if you find that he has not gone out or in, then conclude he
keeps within: In such case get under the Wind, and enter the Covert, holding
your Hound short, and if he has any thing in the Wind, and that you find you
are not far from the Heart, then withdraw for fear of rouzing him, and go into
the Covert at some other side that is not so thick, and take up what
Fewmishings you find; but go not into such places until about Nine of the Clock
in the Morning, because such Hearts do often take harbor within those little
Coppices to enjoy the comfort of the YE WHARBOVRING Y STAGG

To the Worship-full Henry Wallop of Farligh in the County of Southampton Esquire

This plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

Sun, and after Nine a Clock do withdraw to the shady Places. Nor must you be
too overhasty in entering the Thickets, because that the Hearts do sometimes
take Layre near those privy Coppices: Therefore let it suffice to have seen the
Slot fresh, and to have taken up the Fewmishing, and so retire as privately as
you can.

The Huntsman or Harbourer must be stirring early to seek the Heart in such
places, because that they withdraw into their Coverts before Day, Cattle or
People, who oft-times break the Slot, and render it undiscernable.

But to proceed to the Chase of the Heart. The Horsemen, Huntsmen and Hounds,
being all ready prepared in the Field by Daybreak, having their Harbenger,
Bloodhound or Draughthound, in readiness, they begin the Chase.

The Chase of the Heart or Stag; and first
THe Huntsmen must disperse themselves about the sides of the Wood, according
to the best advantage, to espy, if it be a Deer, according to the Harbengers
description, and when he breaks Covert, to give notice thereof to the Company
by blowing a Recheat; and if the Hounds run Riot (that is, Chase some Deer)
then they must be rated; that is, stop them by words of correction, or the like.

But your Hounds should not all be uncoupled until the Heart is unharboured by
the Harbourer, and cast off the Staunch Hounds first, which having undertaken
the Chase, cast off the rest; and the Hounds being in full cry, the Horsemen
should second and encourage them with Voice and* Horn as aforesaid, to the end
Game goes. But now adays few hunt the Heart as they ought, for they give not
their Hounds leisure to hunt, so that it is more properly to be said the Horses
hunt than the Hounds; and there is so many on Horsback that can neither blow,
hollow, or do any thing belonging to Hunting as they ought, and which mingle
themselves amongst the Hounds; crossing them, and breaking their Course, that
Hounds to hunt true.

As soon as you can get sight of the Deer, to see if it was the same that was
Vnharboured, or a fresh one, (for by his subtilties; if possible, he will put
such a Sham upon the Hounds;) if it be a fresh one, then rate them back, and
bring them to the Default.

The Horsemen ought all along to second and encourage the Hounds, and to keep
them to Hunt Close, assisting them at every Default, if Slot or follow not the
right. They must also be careful to watch his Windings and Doublings; for when
he finds himself closely pursued, he will use many shifts and endeavors to
give them the change, to preserve himself; And being put to his last extremity,
it is almost incredible to believe what strange contrivances he will use to
shun the fury of his pursuing Enemies; for sometimes he will hide himself close
to the Earth, permitting the Dogs to come up to him, whilst in the mean time he
puts his Feet close under his Belly, and draws his Breath close by the fresh
Earth; Nature having taught him to know that the Scent of his Feet and his
Breath are the chief discoverers of his doublings and changes. Sometimes when he
is close hunted, he will run from Covert to Covert, to find out some others,
and put himself in their company. If he find himself not safe, he will directly
return by his first Path to break his Traces, and then shoot out into some
great Road or Highway, the light Dust keeping neither Scent nor Impression; and
in such case the Huntsmen both horse and foot, must be diligent to look about
to encourage the Hounds, and to search for his Slot, and to bring up the Dogs
in fresh cry, some times the Stag being close hunted, will run with the Wind,
thereby to leave no Scent of his Breath, and but little of his Feet behind him:
Some Hearts, when they are hunted, will on a sudden make themselves as if quite
tired, and cast themselves on the Ground until the Hounds are within
Twelve-score of them, and then they will start up, and run more nimble than
before, trusting in their force. Sometimes he will take Soil, that is, the
Water, covering himself all under it, except his Nose; sometimes swim down the
Stream, and sometimes cross the River; In such case the Huntsmen must have a
special regard to the old staunch Hounds, who will hunt leasurely and
carefully, whereas the young ones will over-shoot their Game. In all these
Accidents, the Horsemen and Huntsmen must be diligent to look out, and cherish
the Hounds, blowing them a Recheat.

The Stag may better be discovered at a distance, when he is Spent, than when
he is nigh and hollowed at; for when he sees no man, he bears down his Head,
which denotes his weariness; whereas when he sees any one, he raises up his
Head that they should think him strong, stout, and not tired.

When he is toward his fall, the Hounds will hold in close together, and come
on strongly, by reason that when he is almost Embossed, he casts out of his
mouth a white Froth or Flaver, which is very sweet and delightful to the
Hounds: Besides, the Swet of his Body running down his Legs, leaves a strong
Scent on the Ground, which is a sure sign to the Dogs that he is sinking: And
hence it is that they are always so lusty and jocund toward the end of the
Chase.

If the Heart takes into any dry Champain Ground, and that it is very hot, and
little or no Wind stirring, so that there is no Scent to be had, and that the
Hounds are almost spent for want of breath, and through extremity of labor
give out; in such case the Huntsman must blemish in the last Slot, and cast off
the Dogs to some convenient place to refresh them with bread and water until
the heat be past, and then return back to the same Blemish, putting the
Bloodhound on it, and draw before the Hounds until they have found the Heart
again, and so follow the Chase as before.

The Stags taking Soil.
WHen he is quite spent, one of his last Succors is to take Soil, and when he
once descends he swims down Stream to leave no Scent Boughs or other things
that hang in the Water. In this case the Huntsmen must have an eye to the
Blemishes where first he took Soil; for it is easy to discover by the breaking
of the Water, that is the place where he took Soil, and there you may soon
perceive which way he makes head by the breaking down the Grass and Weeds,
better than by the Slot, which at the first forsaking of the Soil is generally
spoiled and defaced Water that runs down his Legs. Sometimes he will not only
descend, but continue in the Soil, hiding himself all except the tip of his
Nose, as before taken notice of; and peradventure at a time, and in such a
place, when and where you are unwilling to hazard your Dogs: In such Case
procure a Boat, or else some of the Huntsmen must unstrip, and see to wound him
with a Sword; or else to throw over a Rope about his Horns to noose him. But
this is a desperate Heart is out of his reach of Ground, otherwise he will
endanger his life, or spoiling. Nor is there less skill required at the last,
when he is spent, and the Dogs are at Bay on Land, for then he endangers Horse
and Man: You must therefore wisely go to work, for the chief glory in a Victory
is to be without loss or hurt.

The Heart or Stag at Bay.
AS to the Land Bay, if the Heart be frayed, and burnished, then the place is
well to be considered of; for if it be in a Hedge side, or Thicket, then whilst
he is stareing on the Hounds, you may come covertly amongst the Bushes behind
him, and so kill him; but if you miss, and he turn Head upon you, it is
convenient to take refuge behind some Tree; or when he is at Bay, Hounds; and
when you see him turn head to fly, Gallop in roundly and kill him with your
Sword or Gun, before he can have time to turn head upon you; But if he be at
Bay in a plain and open place, where there is no Wood, Tree, nor Covert, it is
dangerous and difficult to come to him.

The Death of the Stag, with the Ceremonies
HE that gives the falling blow, ought of right to sound the Recheat, to
assemble together the rest of the Company, as also the Dogs; also at the Death
of a Stag, there are several Ceremonies that should be observed.

When the Huntsmen come in to the Death of the Heart, they should cry Ware
Haunch, that the Hounds may not break in to the Deer, which being secured, the
next business is to cut his Throat, and to Reward the young Hounds with the
Blood, to make them in love with a Deer, and learn to keep at the Throat; then
having sounded the Mot, or Morts, he that is to break him up (that is, to take
say,) first, slits the Skin from the cutting of the Throat downwards, making
the Arber, so that the Ordure may not break forth; then he is to be Paunched,
and the Hounds to be rewarded therewith. Another Ceremony is, the Huntsman
presents the Person that took the Essay with a drawn Hanger, to have a Chop at
his Head, and after him, every one has a Chop if it is not cut off; and
generally the Huntsman, or Keeper is provided with such a Hanger, that is not
over Sharp, that there may be the more Chops for the gaining more Fees, every
one giving him a Shilling at least: which done, the Huntsman takes up the Head,
and shows it to the Hounds for their Encouragement, Rewarding the Young ones
with the Blood. And the concluding Ceremony, is to blow a Treble Mot by one,
and then a whole Recheat in Consort by all that have Horns Bare-headed, with a
general Ho-up: Upon which they depart Home; the Heart is carried away in a Cart,
together with the Head, and the Hounds coupled up, and carried Home by the
Keeper.

And you must observe that the Bloodhound must be first Rewarded, for that
Honor belongs to him; and when he has done, then Reward the rest, especially
the young; and as near as you can let your Rewards be given them Hot, which is
much better than cold, which is the ill Custom of many Huntsmen.

But it happens very often, that through some accident or other the Heart
escapes; now for the recovering the Chase the next day, let there be some
Marks set, where the Chase is left off; and go to that place with your
Bloodhound, together with the Kennel of Hounds behind them, and let him that
has the best Hound, and most tender Nosed, undertake to draw endways in the
Tracts and ways that the Heart most probably went (for they do most commonly run
endways, as far as they have force) and then if they find any Water or Soil,
they continue sometimes therein, which does so stiffen their Joints at their
coming out, that they cannot go far, nor stand up long; so that they are
constrained to take Harbor in any place they can find, that is Covert where
they may feed as they lie, and let some others draw to you out of the Coverts,
by the most comodious places for them to mark, and for the Hounds to vent in;
and if any chance to find where any has leapt, or gone, he shall put the Hound
to it, Hooping twice, or blowing two Mots with his Horn, to call in his
Company, and the rest of the Kennel to come in; and if it be the Heart which
they seek, let the best Hound be put thereunto, and let the Company separate
themselves, and go several ways to the outsides of the Covert, and if they find
where he has gone into some likely Covert or Grove, then let the Hounds be
drawn near unto them, and beat cross through STAGG TAKING S^Y^^ To the Right
Honorable George Lord Nevill* Baron of Bergevenny andtc

This Plate is Humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome

The Stagg at B^y

To the Right Honorable Trancis Viscount Newport of Bradford, Treasurer of his
Majestyes Household, and Lord Leiutenant of the County of Salop etc.

This Plate is Humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

The Death of the Heart

To ye Rt. Hoble Henry Duke of Beaufort, Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Baron
Herbert of Chipstow, Raglan, and Gower^ Ld. President, and Ld. Leivtenant of
Wales, and ye Marches; Ld. Leivtenant of ye Counties of Gloucester, Hereford,
and Monmouth, and of ye City and County of Bristoll: Ld. Warden of his Majtys:
forest of Dean, and Constable of ye Castle of Sd. Briavells, Knight. of the most
noble order of the Garter, and one of ye Ld^. of his Majtys. most Hon^ble Privy
Council andct. This Plate is humbly dedicated by R. Blome.

Taking Say of ye Stagg

Stagg Hunting. Viz Choping at his head.

To the Rt. Honble William Stanley Earl of Derby Lord Stanley and Strange of
Knocking Vicount Kinton Bart of Weeton Ld. Mohun. Burnet Basset and Lacy (...)
Ld Leivtenant of Lancashire and Cheshire and Admiral of the seas thereto
belonging Chamberlain of Chester and Lord of Man and of the I^les

This Plate is humble dedicated by R. Blome

The End of ye Chase of ye Stagg

To The Honorable Sr. Arthur Randon of Randon Hall in the West Rid^ing of York
Shire Baronet.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

it; and if they renew their Slot, they must consider whether it be the right
or not; and if he that draws perceives it to be the right, let him blow two
Mots, to call in the Company; and if he chance to find five or six Layres one
after another together, do not take it for a Herd of Deer as many think; for
when a Heart has been long run and spent, he will make many Layres together,
because he cannot well stand up to Feed, but Feeds lying.

For the Hunting the Heart or Stag. I shall not descend to every Particular; for
it is an Exercise that requires both your Wit, Patience, and Policy, with
relation to the variations of the Ground, Situations, Woods, Rivers, and an
hundred more Accidents that may intervene; this Chase seldom or never being
after one and the same manner, but different according to the Weather, the
condition of the Dogs, and the strength of the Heart, with many other
Considerations that require Heart by default, which amongst Wood-men is a
disgrace. He should be therefore wise and bold, good at both fore and after
Game; neither ought he to be discouraged at every little ilconveniency; for
being put off from his Chase through any accident of violent Storm, the Nights
approach, or the like, he ought to Blemish on the last View or Slot, and to it
again in the Morning with the Draught or Bloodhound, Heart, when he is close run
and almost spent, to make forth on Head, and to descend at the first Soil, to
cool and refresh himself, where he uses to continue (if not pursued) so long,
that his Limbs become stiff, and almost disabled from running, and therefore
betakes himself to the next shelter he meets with, and consequently becomes an
easy Chase the next Morning, if the Huntsmen understand

The Profits and Advantages of the Stag.
I Shall conclude this Chapter of the Princely Heart, with letting you know the
Profits and Advantages, which are generally reputed to accompany this goodly
Creature; and first for his Skin, which being dressed is excellent for Coats,
Belts, Gloves, and the like. His Flesh surpasses all other Venison, if in the
pride of his Grease; otherwise it is reputed hard, dry, and melancholy: The
Calves and Hinds, are esteemed better food than the Hearts. The Marrow and Sewet
are excellent for all such Ointments, Plasters, and Cataplasms, as are
designed for cold Gouts and hard Tumors. The Horns are said to be Antidotes
against Poison, being little inferior to Unicorn, if there be any such Beast;
they are great Restoratives, and an excellent Cordial in Fevers and all
Pestilential Diseases; and of Hartshorn there is made a most excellent Jelly,
which is esteemed very good for Elderly Men, especially if married to young
Buxsom Women: The Horns of a young Heart, whilst they are tender, being cut into
little pieces, and put into an Earthen Pot with some Pepper and Myrrh, and so
set into an Oven until they be dry (the Pot being close stopped) makes a singular
Powder for the Colic, being mixed with Wine, and so drank.

The next is the Blood, which has many excellent Virtues for all kind of
Fluxes and Poisons; besides, it is effectually good to make the Skin smooth,
and clear from all Roughness and Spots; and that makes so many Gentlemen wash
their Hands and Faces in the Blood of the Stag after it is newly opened, being
hot.

In the Heart is found a Bone, no way inferior to the Bezoar, being good
against all Swoundings, Faintings, Tremblings, and other Symptoms which ^ffect
the Heart and Brain; and is approved to be most excellent for Women in Labor,
even beyond that of the Eagle.

In the last place, his Pizzle, or Genital Member washed in Water, and that
Water being drank, does immediately ease and cure the Colic, stoppage of the
Urine, and several Maladies incident to the Reins, Kidneys, and Vriters: It is
a notable Aphrodisiae, and used for that purpose. It Is also most excellent for
all manner of Fluxes, for the Plurisie, and Bitings of Venomous Creatures.

I shall not descend to give you Instructions, for the applying the aforesaid
Parts of the Stag to use, it being a Discourse not so proper for the Subject in
hand; but refer you to Books of Physic.

CHAP. VII.
BVCK HVNTING.
HAving said so much of the Heart or Stag, as to his Nature, and the ways of
Hunting him, there will remain so much the less touching the Buck, and the
Rules for taking him, seeing that he that can hunt a Stag or Heart well, cannot
Hunt a Buck ill: Besides Fallow-Deer being common amongst us, and those usually
in Parks and Enclosures of diverse Scituations, and several Statures different
from one another, it is a hard task to give Instructions for every particular;
for in truth it is the proper Art of the respective Keeper of those Parks or
Places, to understand the Nature and Craft of his Deer in hunting; all which
are to be acquired by Experience more than Reading, yet the Theorick is very
good for the better attaining the Practick; however I shall in brief tell you
what relates to Buck-hunting, as now adays used.

The great Skill required in hunting the Buck is to keep the Hounds from
hunting Counter, or Change, in regard of the plenty of Fallow-Deer, which are
usually in the same Ground; nor is there required that Skill in Lodging a Buck,
as Harboring a Stag; neither need you draw so much after a Buck, but you may
judge by the View, and observe what Grove or Coppice he enters; for he will not
wander up and down as the Heart, nor change his Layer so often, neither use so
many Crossings, Doublings, Shifts and Devices; nor does he flee so far before
the Hounds, and avoideth the Highways and open Plains, as much as he can: He is
not so crafty and strong to beat a River, or to stay so long at Soil; neither
are they so free to take a great River, but being close hunted, they flee into
such Coverts as they are accustomed unto; and it has been observed, that some
Bucks that have leaped over a Park-Pale, after a Ring or two, have returned of
themselves, choosing rather to dye where they are acquainted, than in a strange
place.

The Buck leapeth lighter at the Rut, than the Stag; and groaneth as the Heart
belloweth, but with a worse noise, and rattling in the Throat.

The Buck and Heart are not at amity together, shuning each others Layers; and
being of a sweeter Scent, are more coveted by the Hounds.

The Does begin to Fawn about the end of May, and continue till Midsummer.

The Bucks Mew or shed their Horns, or Heads, every year, about or in April,
and part of May; and their new Ones are burnisht about the end of August.

The Buck makes his Fewmishings in diverse Heart, according to the diversity of
his food, and the time of the Day, Morning and Evening; but most commonly they
are round.

The Buck comes in Season the Eighth of July, and goes out at Holy-Rood, which
is the Fourteenth of September.

The Do comes in Season when the Buck goes out, and goes out at Twelve-Tide.

As to this delightful Sport of Buck-hunting, the same Hounds are used which
run the Stag. In Forests and Chases, as they lie at Layer, so they are hunted.

In Parks where they are enclosed, the Sport is not so good, by reason of the
greater Change and Foyl, unless they break out and run the Country, which they
seldom do: But Deer that lie out, though near the Park, make generally better
Chases than Forest Deer.

The Keeper Shooting a Buck to be Run down.
FOr facilitating the Chase, the Keeper commonly selects a fat Buck out of the
Herd, which he Shoots to Maim him; and then he is Run down by the Hounds.

As to the way of hunting them, the Company Deer ready Lodged, if not, the
Coverts are drawn until one is rouzed; or sometimes in a Park a Deer is pitched
upon, and forced from the Herd, then more Hounds are laid on to run the Chase;
if you come to be at a fault, the Old Staunch Hounds are only to be relied upon
until you recover him again; if he be Sunk, and the Hounds thrust him up, it is
called an Imprime, and the Company all Sound a Recheat; when he is Run down,
every one strives to get in, to prevent his being torn with the Hounds.
Fallow-Deer seldom or never standing at Bay.

He that first gets in, cries Hoo-up, to give Notice that he is down, and Blows
a Death. When the Company are all come in, they Paunch him and Reward the
Hounds; and generally the chief Person of Quality amongst them Takes Say; that
is, Cuts his Belly open, to see how Fat he is: This done, every one has a Chop
at his Neck, and the Head being cut off is showed to the Hounds, to encourage
them to run only at Male-Deer, which they see by the Horns, and also to teach
them to bite only at the Head: Then the Company all standing in a Ring, one
Blows a single Death; which done, all Blow a double Recheat, and so conclude
the Chase with a general Hollow of Hoo-up, and depart the Field to their
several Homes, or to the place of Meeting; and the Huntsman, or some other,
has the Deer cast cross the Buttocks of his Horse; and so carries him Home.

CHAP. VIII.
Hunting the ROE-BVCK and DO.
THe Roe, is a Deer well known in Germany in the Helvetial Alps, and in diverse
parts of Africa, where there is plenty of them, although not so amongst us.

This Beast is said to be of an exceeding quick sight: They differ not much
from the common Deer but in their Horns, which are set with six or seven
Branches, not Palmed, but Branchy, and shorter than the Fallow Deer: And
whereas the Horns of others are hollow toward the Root, whereunto enters a
certain long Substance, the Horns of these, as also of the Fallow Deer and the
Elk are solid, yet full of Pores. They much frequent the Mountains and Rocky
places, and are very swift of foot; and when they take Soil swim stoutly, like
the Heart.

In October they go to Rut, or to their Tourn, and continue therein about
fifteen days, and never accompany with any other besides his own Do; nor do
they part until she is ready to Fawn, and then she withdraws a good distance,
where he cannot find her, it being his nature to kill the Young Ones.

The Do generally brings forth Two, which commonly prove Buck and Do, and she
keeps them out of the Bucks sight until they are fit to shift for themselves;
and those two being bred up together, do seldom part.

The Fawn the First Year is called a Kid; the Second, a Girl; the Third, a
Hemuse; the A Keeper Choseing out of the Heard a fatt Buck to be Shot and run
down.

To ye. Rt. Honble. Richard Butler Baron of Weston in England, Earl of Arran,
Vist. Tolough and Baron of Clougrenan in Ireland, 2d. Son to his Grace James
Duke of Ormond, and one of ye. Lords of his Maty^. most Honorable Privy
Council for Ireland andct

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Ric. Blome

Showing ye Bucks head to ye Hounds and Rewarding them

To the Right Honorable James Earl of Perth Lord Drummond and Stobhall,
Stewart of Strathern and Baluhidder by Inheritance: Lord Justice General of
the Kingdom of Scotland, one of the Extraordinary Lords of the Session Anno
Domin 1682. and now Lord High Chancellor of ye. said Kingdom of Scotland andca.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

Fox Hunting, Viz: Oncoupling, and casting of ye Hounds

To the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ailisbury and Elgin Discount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Wharlton, Skeleton and Kinloss, Hereditary High-Steward
of ye Honor of Ampthill, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Lord
Leiutenant and Custos Rotolorum of ye Countys of Bedford, and Huntington,
Recorder and High-steward of Bedford and Huntington etcac.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Ric: Blome

FOX HUNTING

To the Right Honorable John Drummond, second Son to James Earl of Perth Lord
Drummond etca. By right of Marriage Baron of Lundin, and chief of that Ancient
Family (which is Descended from Robert Bastard Son of William Surnamed the Lion
King of Scotland) Lord Treasurer Depute, and one of his Matys. most Honorable
privy Council in Scotland etca.

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

Fourth, a Roe-Buck of the first Head; and the Fifth, a Roe-Buck.

As soon as the Buck comes from his Tourn he Casts his Horns, and few of them
after Two Years old fail to Mew about Alhallontide: Their Heads quickly grow
out again, for that in March they Fray them. The Buck is always in Season
(except in Rutting time,) but never very Fat.

You should be careful of hunting the Do while she is big with Young, or
indeed so long Beasts; besides, their and our Creator has inhibited the
Seething of a Kid in the Dams Milk, whereby all such Cruelty is supposed to be
forbidden, which Nature abhors.

They make an exceeding good Chase, hold out long, and flee far End-ways; they
cover to run against the Wind for coolness of the Air; and therefore those that
hunt them, use to place the Hounds with the Wind. They are most easily taken in
the Woods, the Mountains, and Rocky Places being their safest Holds. They are
hardly known by their Feet, or Fewmots; being hunted, they take their first
Ring large, and afterward hunt the Hounds; that is, do often come back on the
Dogs, and being almost down, or can hold out no longer, they take Soil and beat
it like the Heart, keeping all their Body under Water, except their Nose to draw
Air; nor will Huntsmen, or the Hounds, coming just upon them. The Crossings and
Doublings before the Hounds are termed Trasenings; and you must call him a
Fair, and not a great Roe-Buck. The Herd is called a Bevy, of which Six is a
small one, between Six and Ten a middle one, and Twelve a great Bevy. The Roe,
as before noted, is seldom Fat, so that unless you find Bevy-grease on his Tail
upon his breaking up, he is not Venison, and Hounds.

The Bowels, Blood, and Feet, are the Reward due to the Hounds, and it is
termed the Dole, and the dressing him is termed the Herdlenge.

As for the Hunting the Roe, I shall not give any further Instructions, it
being not a Chase amongst us.

CHAP. IX.
Hunting the RAIN-DEER.
THis Country produces few or none of this sort, so that I shall have the less
to say of hunting him.

He is like the Heart, though not so tall, and his head is fuller of Antliers,
which are much bigger and wider in compass; he bears Twenty four Branches, or
more, according to his Age, having a great Palm on the top, and his fore
Antliers are also Palmed.

When he is hunted he flies End-ways, by reason of the heavy Attire on his
head, which is his only defense, and chief ornament. He Feeds like the Heart,
and makes his Fewmets sometimes flat, sometimes round, and some say long. He is
said to be long-lived, and when he is in his Pride of Grease is excellent
Venison.

In those Countries where they are common, they are seldom hunted at force, but
taken with Nets and Shot, for being assailed by Dogs and Men unarmed, he will
endanger the killing or spoiling them; his custom being (that after he has
stood up a great while, doubled, crossed, and used what Subtilties he can to
shun the Dogs) to betake himself to a Tree for his last refuge, and so planteth
himself with his Buttocks against it, that nothing can assault him but just
before, and hangs down his Head to the ground, whereby all his Body is
covered until he find his advantage of ripping up the Bellies of his Pursuers,
or otherwise spoiling them; seeming very dreadful to the Hounds, so that they
will hardly venture on him.

For the finding out the Rain-Deer, you must use a Bloodhound, as before
treated of.

CHAP. X.
Hunting the FOX.
AMongst the Divertisements used by the Gentry of this Kingdom, Fox-hunting is
of no small esteem: What has been Wrote on this Subject, and what has likewise
gone by Tradition, was that which was practiced when the Land was much more
Woody, and when they abounded so much to be a general Nuisance, as Wolves were
(especially in the Mountainous parts) before they were destroyed; and Wales was
freed from them by an Imposition of Skins, to be paid to the Crown of England,
which at large is taken notice of in our British History: But Foxes, the
Subject of this Discourse, being then less considerable for the mischief they
did, were the less taken notice of; but the Country People receiving great
Damages by their destruction of Poultry, Rabbets, Lambs, etc. on which they
preyed, were not wanting in their endeavors to destroy them: And the ways by
them then used (by what I can understand) was by a great Company of People,
with Dogs of all kinds, assembled together, to go to such Woods and Coverts
where they thought they were, and so to beset the place, whilst others went in
to beat and force them out with some of the Dogs, and to be either Coursed by
the rest of the Dogs, or taken in Nets or Hays, set on the outsides for that
purpose. But of late years (by Experience; the Mother of Invention) the
knowledge of this (as indeed all other Chases) is arrived to far greater
perfection, being now become a very healthful Recreation to such that delight
therein; so that I shall in a brief and clear Method give you a Modern Account
of Fox-hunting, as it is at this day used by the most Expert in this Chase.

Although this Chase affords great Recreation, yet it is not so full of
diversity as that of the Hare, for it leaves a hotter Scent, so that there are
but few Dogs but will hunt the Fox with all imaginable eagerness; but as his
Scent is hottest at hand, so it dies soonest.

The Fox does not much trust to his Strength of Body, or swiftness of Legs, but
endeavors to preserve himself by policy in Coverts and Thickets; and being
hard run when he can stand up no Hounds, will draw toward those places where he
uses to Earth, and then he makes his Caves his places of Defense; nor can he
be got out, unless the Ground be soft; but generally his Kennel is betwixt the
Clifts of Rocks, in Stony or Craggy places, or amongst the Roots of strong
Trees, very deep, and of a difficult access, having commonly but one Hole for
entrance, which goes very deep before it comes to his Kennel. But he seldom
takes the pains to make Badger, his business being but to find it out, and take
up his Quarters therein, which he soon has to himself; for his Stink is so
offensive to the Badger, that he quits it, and makes another.

As to the Nature of the Fox, he is a Beast of great Subtilty, as well in his
Preying, and places of Sanctuary, as in his Chase; to give you a particular
account thereof, would be too tedious for this Discourse, nor are they unknown
to Chase.

In many respects he is of the Nature of the Wolf. When a Bitch-Fox is Bragged,
and with Cub, she is hardly to be taken; for then she lies near the Earth, and
upon hearing the least Noise, she betakes her self to her place of Sanctuary.
When a Bitch-Fox goes a Clicketing, seeking for a Dog-Fox, she cries with a
hollow Voice, not much unlike the howling of a Mad-Dog; And in the same manner
she cries when she misses any of Cubs; but when they are killed she cries not,
defending her self to the last Gasp. When she is Salt, her biting is Venomous.
A Fox being pinched with Hunger, will prey on Vermin or Carrion, for want of
other Food; But his usual Food is Poultery, Rabets, and the like, being found a
great Enemy to Warrens and Henhouses; and there be some that are so Crafty, as
to lie lurking all day in Ditches, and under Hedges near Houses, to espy
Poultrey for their prey at Night.

The Fat of a Fox is termed Grease, which is esteemed good for Shrunk Sinews,
being Bathed therewith. The Print of his Claws on the Ground is called his
Footing. That which for a Heart is termed Harboring, for a Fox is termed
Kennelling.

The Fox though esteemed by all the craftiest Beast that is, yet is taken
several ways, as by Hounds, Greyhounds, Nets, and Gins: For the taking him with
the two last, I shall Treat elsewhere, Greyhounds the Case is not often; so
that my business will be only for the Hounds and Terriers, their Assistants,
when he takes Earth, of which more anon.

The best Season to hunt the Fox, is in the Months of November, December,
January, February and March; for before it is disadvantageous to the Scent, and
the two first Months are the best, the Leaves then being rotten upon the
Ground, which before obstruct the Scent; also the Hounds are best seen to Hunt,
and the Earthings are sooner found; again in cold weather the Hounds hunt best,
the Fox then having the strongest Scent, but it sooner dies than in a hotter
Season. But Frosty and Snowy Weather are altogether unfit.

For the Hunting the Fox, the Hounds or Beagles, generally made use of, are
such that have good Mettle, are stout and well Quartered. But they should
differ according to the Country where they are hunted (as indeed in all other
Chases); for those proper for the open Champain Countries, are the Northern
Hounds, which are Fleet of Foot, and being thin Skinned, are not so proper for
Thick Coverts and Bushy Enclosures, as the Southern Hounds which are Thick
Skinn'd, and slow Footed, are not good for long Chases that the Champain
Countries afford. Also the Northern Hound, and the Southern Beagle, makes a
good strain for this Sport.

As to the Method now observed in hunting the Fox: Having found a Foxes Earth,
about Midnight before you design to Hunt, the next Morning for preventing his
Earthing, cause all his Holes to be stopped that you can find, except the main
Hole or Eye, that is most beaten, which stop not until about Daybreak, for
fear of stoping him in; which done, let the Huntsman have all the Dogs in
Couples, and being come to the Wood that you first design to try, first throw
off your sure Finders, or Staunch Hounds, being such that will undertake no
other Scent, but that of the Fox (for Woods and Coverts are full of change) and
when one or more of them opens, it is a sure sign that he is upon the Scent,
that is, where the Fox has passed that Night; which is called a Drag, or
Trail. If you find the rest of the Hounds that were cast off, to improve upon
it, and that the Cry mends, it is most probable they are right; and as the Drag
mends, cast off more that you can confide in. But if the Scent fails, then it is
supposed they run it Counter, and in such Case they must be taken off; and try
them the other way.

Upon the Hounds improving the Scent, whether the one way or the other; the
Huntsman on Foot (that has the charge of the coupled Hounds, and before that
must have Hardled them, that is, with a Slip, for the purpose ready secured
three or four Couple together, that they may not break in from him, to run into
the Cry of the Finders) is called upon to throw in two or three Couple more of
his Staunchest Hounds; during this while they are encouraged by the Huntsman,
until they make it out to the place where the Fox is, which is called
Kennelled, and is soon discovered by the Hunsters from the increase of their
Cry; then the most opportune time is watched, to throw off the major part of
the Coupled Hounds.

The Fox when finding himself so hotly pursued, that he cannot secure himself in
those Coverts and Places he is acquainted with; and that when one great Slight
fails him, which is to hunt the Hounds just as they do him, whereby they are
Earthing the Fox.

To the Rt Worshipful Sr Thomas Barnardiston of Kediton in Suffolk Baronet*

This Plate is humbly dedicated by R Blome.

Death of the Fox

To the Worshipful Alan Bellingham of Leaven in the County of Westmore land
Esquire:

This plate is humbly Dedicated by Ric: Blome

many times at a loss, or great fault (which is chiefly prevented by their
quartering of the Hounds) then is unwillingly forced to forsake them, and trust
wholly to his Feet, leading them from Wood to Wood, a Ring of four, six, or ten
Miles and sometimes endways about twenty miles, trying all the Earths he knows,
which as near as possible should be stopped the Night before the Hunting, as
aforesaid.

The Huntsman on Foot must cross (with what Hounds he has in reserve) from
Wood to Wood, to be as much as possible in the way, to throw them off when
called upon, as an encouragement to the rest (they being Fresh) and at the same
time must endeavor as much as he can, to encourage the Finders or Staunch
Hounds, that begin to run lag, that as occasion may offer to have them ready
for a dead Scent, or as is thought fit for the latter end of the Day.

Many times they kill the Fox upon the Turf; Earth, and enters it, they cry
Ho-up, as at the Death, supposing the Chase ended; and blow a Horn to call in
the Company.

Earthing the FOX.
HAving Earthed the Fox, the next business is to get Countrymen with Shovels,
Spades, Mattocks, Pickaxes, etc. to dig him out, if they Earth not too great;
and for their facilitating the same, the Huntsman must be provided with one or
two good Terriers, to put into the Earth after him, to lay him up; that is to
fix him into an Angle, (which may be sooner done, according to the Opinion of
some, by putting a Collar of Bells on the Terriers Neck) for the Earth often
times consists of diverse Angles; and the use of the Terrier is to know where
the Fox lies, for as soon as he finds him, he continues Baying or Barking, so
that which way the Noise is heard, that way dig unto him; and when he is dug
up, sometimes he is thrown amongst the Hounds to Blood and encourage them; and
this will make them lie at an Earth, when they come to a strange Wood, and to
an unknown Earth; and sometimes he is reserved alive, and hunted another Day,
which is called a Bag-Fox.

The Death of the FOX.
FOr Rewarding your Dogs, when the Fox is killed, hollow in all the Pack to Bay
him, but do not Reward them therewith, as being not good for them; but follow
the former Directions for the Rewarding them.

If the Earth proves so Deep and Rocky, that there is no possibility of diging
him out, usually Steel (...) the Mouth of the Earth, or else a Hay is pitched
round it; and so watch to take him at his going off, which will be in the Night
following, and often times sooner; for his heat, and the coolness of the Earth,
will not suffer him to stay in long: So that when he apprehends all things are
quiet above, he comes out.

Of Terriers.
AS concerning Terriers, every one that is a Fox-Hunter is of Opinion, that he
has a good Breed; and some will say, that the Terrier is of a peculiar Species
of it self; I shall not say any thing as to the Affirmative, or Negative part;
only give me leave to say that such Terriers that are Bred out of a Beagle and
a Mungril Mastiff generally prove good; and indeed any small thick Skinn'd Dog
that has Courage, and that will run into the Holes, and lie Baying at the Fox,
is one for the purpose, which this sort will do, for he has Courage, and a
thick Skin, as participating of the Cur, and is Mouthed from the Beagle, as
before taken notice of.

The Season for Entering these Terriers is at ten or twelve Months Old, for if
you Enter them not within the year, you will hardly bring them to take Earth;
neither must they be bafled or over-mastered at first making, for then they
will hardly return to it any more; Therefore be careful not to enter them upon
old Foxes, or Badgers, but take such a time when they have their young, and are
gone abroad to seek Prey. You must also encourage them, by putting in an old
Staunch Terrier to lead the way, that if it happen that an old Fox should be
there, he might be worried by him for their further Encouragement.

When Foxes have young Cubs, take an old Terrier, and put them into their
Earth; and when they begin to Bay (which is called Yearning) hold the young
Terrier at the Mouth of the Earth, to the end they may hear the old one Yearn.

If you take any young Cub with young Terriers, let them kill it; and take
their pleasure thereon.

CHAP. XI.
Hunting the BADGER.
THere are two sorts of Badgers, Dog-Badgers, as resembling a Dog in his Feet;
and a Hog-Badger, as resembling a Hog in his cloven hoofs; these latter differ
from the former being whiter and bigger, and have their Heads and Snouts
thicker, and do also differ in their Food, the one eating Flesh and Carrion like
a Dog, and the other Roots and Fruits like a Hog; And these sort of Badgers
where they have their Earths, use to cast their Fiants or Dung in a small hole,
and cover it, whereas the Dog-Badgers make their Fiants at a good distance from
their Burrows, which are deep, with variety of Chambers, Holes and Angles. The
Hog-Badger being fat and lazy, Earths in open, easy and light grounds, whereas
the other sor^ frequents Thickets, Rocks and mountainous places, making their
Retreats deeper and narrower.

A Badger is known by several other Names, as a Gray, a Brock, and a Boreson or
a Bauson; the young ones are called Pigs, the Male is called the Boar, and the
Female the Sow.

The Badger is naturally a very sleepy Creature, and seldom stirs out but in
the Night season to seek his Prey; and above all other food Hog-flesh is most
grateful to his palate, in so much Pork and train it over the Badgers Burrow he
will soon make his approach out: They live to a great Age, and when their sight
fails by old age they keep to their Burrows, and receive their Food from the
younger.

By nature they are very chill and cold, and when it snoweth they go not forth;
Their Flesh is of a sweet rankish taste, but is eaten in many Countries; the
best season is in September. Teeth; their Legs are longer on their right side
than on their left, so that when they run they choose a side of a Hill, Bank,
Furrow, or Cartroot.

The Dog-Badgers Ears, Snout, and Throat are yellowish, and are longer Legged
than the Hog-Badger. They accompany not together yet they both prey on all
manner of Fowl, young Pigs, Rabets and the like food, doing great hurt in
Warrens. They are stout and hardy in Nose and Snout is so tender that a little
blow thereon will kill them.

Although the Badger and the Fox are much alike in several qualities, yet do
they often make War with one another, especially on the Account of Food, so
that it is good sport to see the contest betwixt them. The hunting and pursuing
them however is much at one toward the conclusion, for the Badger runs to
Earth or Burrow much sooner than the Fox, and being Earthed maks good and
defends his ^astle much longer, and to say truth, the pleasure of this Chase
does chiefly consist in the Vnkennelling and Vnearthing of them, which requires
skill and labor.

You are to take notice, that although all Hounds will eagerly pursue and hunt
both the Fox and Badger, yet there is none of them that will endure to feed on
their flesh; and Dogs more proper for this Chase than others, and those are the
Terriers already spoken of in the Chapter of Fox Hunting.

The labor and ingenuity of the Badgers in making their Burrows is worth
observation; when they Earth, after they have entered a good depth, for the
clearing the Earth out, one lies on his Back, and another lays Earth on his
Belly, and so taking his hinder Feet in his Burrow, and having unladen himself
of the Earth goes to the same work, and this they do till their Chambers or
places of Retreat are finished; then they proceed to gather in their Furniture,
that is, the materials for their Couch or Lodging, as Straw, Leaves, Moss and
the like, which with their Feet and Head they wrap up so close together, that
they will get to their Burrows a pretty good Bundle, some Burrows have 7 or 8
distinct Chambers.

In hunting the Badger you must seek the Earths, and Burrows where he lies,
and in a clear Moonshine Night go and stop all the Burrows except one or two,
and therein place some Sacks fastened with drawing strings, which may shut him
in as soon as he straineth the Bag. Some use no more than to set a Hoop in the
mouth of the Sack, and so put it into the Hole, and as soon as the Badger is in
the Sack and straineth it, the Sack slippeth off the Hoop and follows him into
the Earth, so he lies tumbling therein till he is taken. These Sacks or Bags
being thus set, cast off the Hounds, beating about all the Woods, Coppices,
Hedges and Tufts round about for the compass of a Mile or two, and what Badgers
are abroad, being alarmed by the Hounds, will soon betake themselves to their
Burrows; and observe that he that is placed to watch the Sacks, must stand
close and upon a clear wind; otherwise the Badger will discover him, and will
immediately fly some other way into his Burrow. But if the Hounds can encounter
him before he can take his Sanctuary, he will then stand at Bay like a Boar,
and make good sport, grievously biting and clawing the Dogs, for the manner of
their fighting is on their Backs using both Teeth and Nayls, and by blowing up
their skins defend themseves against all Bites of the Dogs, and Blows of Men,
except on their Noses, as aforesaid. And for the better preservation of your
Dogs it is good to put broad Collers about their Necks made of Grays Skins.

When the Badger perceives the Terriers begin to Yearn him in his Burrow, he
will stop the Hole betwixt him and the Terriers, and if they still continue
Baying, he will remove his Couch into another Chamber or part of the Burrow,
and so from one to another, Barrocading the way before them as they retreat,
until they can go no further.

If you intend to dig the Badger out of his Burrow, you must be provided with
those Tools already treated of for the diging out the Fox; besides which you
should have a Pail of water to refress the Terriers when they come out of the
Earth to take breath and cool themselves; It will also be necessary to put
about your Terriers Necks Collers of Bells, which making a noise, may occasion
the Badgers bolting out.

These Tools thus used for the diging out of the Badger, being troublesome to
be carried on Men's Backs, may be brought in a small Cart.

In diging you must consider the situation of the ground, by which you may
judge where the chief Angles are; for else in stead of advancing the work you
will hinder it.

In this order you may besiege them in their strongest Holds or Castles, and
may break their Plot forms, Parapets, Casmats, and work to them with Mines, and
Counter-Mines, until you have overcome them.

HUNTING ye HARE with deep mouthed hounds

To ye. Rt: Honble: John Lord Robarts Baron of Truro Viscount Bodmyn Earl of
Radnor and Lord President of his Ma:^ies most Honorable Privy Council. andtc

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome

Having taken a live and lusty Badger, if you would make sport, carry him home
in a Sack and turn him out in your Courtyard, or some other enclosed place,
and there let him be hunted, and worried to Death by your Hounds.

I shall conclude this Chapter with some short Account of the profits and
advantages that accrue by killing this Creature; Their Flesh, Blood and Grease,
though not good Food, yet Physicians and Appothecaries for Oils, Ointments,
Salves, and Powders; for shortness of Breath, the Cough of the Lungs; for the
Stone, Sprained-Sinews, cold Aches, etc. and the Skin being well dressed, is very
warm and good for Ancient people that are troubled with Paralitick Distempers.

CHAP. XII.
Hunting the HARE.
THis Chase affords Delight and Recreation to every Man; for none but Persons
of Estate and Quality have the Privileges and Conveniences of Forests, Chases,
and Parks; but Men Hare.

Now although Hares are common, and that the hunting them is every man's Sport;
yet does it not cease to be an Art full of Subtilty and Craft, requiring labor
and vigilance to carry it on to the designed purpose or end; nor is it without
diverse delights and varieties, that other Chases do not afford.

There are said to be Four sorts of Hares, so viz. Some live in the Mountains,
some have their habitation in Coverts and Fields, others in Marshes and Moorish
Grounds, and others are Ramblers, as having no constant abode, seeking their
sood where they can find it best and securest.

Those of the Mountains are the most swift of Foot, and that by their often
exercising themselves in the Valleys and Plains; so that when they are Fields
or Valleys such is their craft, as well knowing the nearest ways to their Forms
or places of Abode, that they will fool the Huntsmen by seeming almost taken;
but on a sudden will give them the Go-by, and take the nearest way to the
Mountains and inaccessible places, where neither Dogs nor Horses can ascend.

Those Hares that frequent the Fields and Coppices, being often chased, are
lean of Body, and taken with difficulty; when she begins her Dogs at pleasure.
When she is some distance from them, she usually gets to some little Hill, or
Rising-ground, raising her self on her Hinder-feet to espy the Dogs, thereby
the better to avoid them.

Those Hares that frequent Marshy or Moorish places, are the slowest on foot,
and least able to endure labor; and being hunted, will seldom or never use
Highways, or Beaten-paths, but use their Slights and Subtilties by the sides
of Rivers and Watery places; nor are they able to run long before the Hounds
for want of Breath, as being so Fat and Foggy through their gross food.

The younger Hares, by reason of their weak Members, tread heavier than the
elder, and therefore leave the stronger Scent behind them. They run very swift
at a Year old, and their Scent is stronger in the Woods, than in the plain
Fields.

In the Winter Season their Footsteps are more apparent than in the Summer;
for as the Nights grow longer, so they Travel further; neither do they Scent in
the Winter Mornings, until the Frost is somewhat thawed; likewise their
Footsteps are uncertain at the Full of the Moon, for then they play together.

Every Limb of a Hare is made for celerity, and therefore she never travelleth,
but jumpeth; her Ears lead her the way in her Chase, for with one of them she
hearkneth to the Cry of the Dogs, and the other she stretches forth like a
Sail, to hasten her Course.

In the hunting the Hare, you are principally to observe the Season of the
Year, and the Situation of the Ground where you hunt. In the beginning of the
Year, that is, about September, (for then the Year begins as to this Sport)
Hares repair to Shrubs, Bushes, and the like Shelters, that are near adjoining
to some Coppice, or the like. About December in Fallow-Grounds; and in March in
the Green Winter-Corn. In every of these places, or wherever else you find the
Form of a Hare, observe if it be new or old, and order your self accordingly.
If it be smooth and plain within, the Path before it new and warm, so that you
may discern the Pricks and perceive the Earth to be late broken, and that the
Hounds call merrily on it, then endeavor to recover the Hare upon the Trail,
and with good success. But if you find reason to judge it an old Form, proceed
not on it, though the Dogs call on it, but rate them back, for it will be lost
labor.

Hares are very Melancholy, and consequently very Fearful and Crafty, insomuch
that when they go out of their Form, they endeavor the most they can to get
dry and clean into it, to the end they may rest warm; and in that they partake
of the nature of the Cat, that loves Fish, but hates Water; yet some Hares,
being close hunted, will take the Water, crossing and doubling about twenty
times over and over in about the space of half a Mile.

They are distinguished by the names of Bucks and Does, and some call the Males
Jack Hares. They go to Buck in January, February and March, and sometimes in
all the warm Months.

An expert Huntsman may distinguish Hares, as to their Sex, Strength, Age and
Craftiness, by these and other signs. If when a Hare rises out of her Form,
she sets up her Ears, and runs a little slowly at first, with her Skut cast
over her Back, it is a sure sign she is an old crafty beaten Hare. When you hunt
a Hare to her Form, if you find she has beaten the hard Highways, that she
feeds at a good distance out into the Plains; and that her Doublings and
Crossing; are wide and large, you may conclude it is a Jack Hare; for the
Females usually keep close to the side of some Grove or Coppice, and Coney in
the Bushes; and when she goes to Relief in the Cornfieldsd, does seldom cross
over the Furrows, but follow them, feeding on the thick Tufts of Corn; and when
she is hunted, will use many Doublings and Turnings, but seldom makes out
End-ways, or Foreright.

But the Jacks, after two or three Turns about his Form takes his leave, and
gives the Hounds a breathing of four or five Miles, and sometimes Head, and
then will squat in some place where ('it is probably) he has formerly preserved
himself. You may also know a Jack Hare at his rising out of his Form by his
Hinder parts, which are more whitish; also his Head is shorter, and better
trussed; his Ears are shorter and more gray; his Shoulders are redder, and the
Hair on his Lips are longer than the Females; for the Do has her Ears long,
her Head long and strait, the Hair on her Back of a dark Gray, inclining to a
Black, and is larger in Body than the Buck. The Croteys, or Excrements of a
Buck, are lesser, dryer and sharper at the end, than the Does.

The Hare is said to know the change of the Weather, from twenty four hours to
twenty four. Some Hares by haunting the low Watery places, do become foul and
measled; and such Hares do never follow the hard Ways, nor make such paths to
their Forms, but use all their Rivers, and other Waters. And by the way you
must know, that the Females are not so commonly foul and measled as the Males;
so that a Huntsman may judge by the relief and feed of the Hare what she is,
and which way she forms. A Jack Hare will abide the approach of the Hounds
nearer him, when he sits, than the Female; because he feels his Body
better disposed, more hardy and quicker.

The Huntsman, when he perceives by his Hounds that the Hare has passed by him
at Relief, upon the Highways side, and that she has crossed and doubled much
on dry places, and yet not much broken out, nor Relieved in the Corn; he may be
confident, that it is a Passenger or Stranger in those parts: The nature and
use of such Hares is this; They get them to some high Rising-ground, and take a
view where they may secure themselves; and when Form they double, winding about
to their Forms, as unwilling to forsake them; but when they find the Hounds
hold in with them, then they may chance to lead them a Dance of seven or eight
Miles cross the Country.

The Subtilties of the Hare, when she is hunted.
OF all Chases, the Hare makes the best diversion, and shows the most cuning
in hunting, and is of greatest use, for that they may be found at all times,
and hunted in most Seasons of the year with a small charge; and to add to the
pleasure of this Chase, the Game is usually in sight (especially if hunted with
your Fleet or Northern Hounds) so that her Subtilties and cuning Shifts to
avoid the Hounds, are for the most part seen. I shall here take notice of some
of them.

If a Hare chance to run before a Pack of Hounds, either in, or presently after
any Rain, she will hardly take into the Woods; by reason of the Dew and Wet
that hangs on the small low Boughs, but will often squat under a Hedge-side;
and when the Dogs have over-shot her, will return to her Form. To prevent
which, the Huntsman ought to hang back a good distance from the Wood or Grove,
which she seems to enter, to the intent he may hallow off his Dogs before the
Hare be too far gone.

Whosoever has hunted one and the same Hare twice, and does not kill her the
third time, deserves not the name of an Huntsman; for generally they use the
same slights, doublings, and crossings, so that they may easily be prevented in
any one, which defeats them of all the rest: And if it be Rainy-weather, she
will hold the Highways more than at any other time.

The Huntsman must mark in what place the Hare sits, and upon what Wind she
makes her Form; for if either upon the North or South Wind, she will not
willingly run into the Wind, but upon a Side-wind, or else down the Wind. Also
if a Hare Forms on the Waterside, it is a sign she is foul and measled;
therefore in hunting such a Hare, good care must be taken all the day unto the
Brook-sides, for at such places she will make all her Doublings and Crossings.
Some again will swim over great Pools and Rivers; others will put an exchange
upon you, by starting up a fresh Hare out of her Form, and sit in it her self:
Sometimes they will double twenty or thirty times in about forty Yards forwards
and backwards over a Brook; and sometimes they will rest themselves in the
midst of the Water upon Weeds, or Bulrushes. A Huntsman must likewise observe
whether it be a Buck or a Do, and whether she be acquainted with the place, or
a Stranger; for doubtless a Hare that is wonted to a certain place, especially
a Female, will all the day that she is hunted hold the same ways, cast about
the same Coasts, and pass by the same Muses until her death, or escape; unless
she be hard run, so that she is forced to make out End-ways before the Hounds;
but at first she will do nothing but Turn, Cross, and Double, passing several
times one way, and in the same Path. Some Hares are so cuning, that upon
hearing the noise of the Huntsmans Horn (although at a good distance) will
leave The Death of ye Hoar with. Fleet Hound.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Robert Dashwood of Norbrook and Wickham in Oxford
shire Knight.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome.

their Form, and take Sanctuary on some Weeds or Bulrushes in a River. Sometimes
when they are hard hunted they will go to Vault, that is, take the ground like
a Coney; others, if an opportunity offers, will go up one side of a Hedge, and
come down the other side; and some will run on the very top of a close Hedge,
about an hundred Yards together; also some are said to be so subtle as to get
into the Windows of an old decayed House, for shelter from the Hounds: Flock of
Sheep, and will continue in the midst of them like unto the Fox. Sometimes she
will leap, and make heading; otherwhiles will tread softly, to leave the less
Impression behind her; and sometimes she will lie down, and ever and anon leap,
or jump out and into her Form; all which does much perplex the Dogs to find her
Scent: For all which Causes, it is good to help the Hounds as much as possible
with Voice, Horn, and Hand. To conclude, They use many Subtilties and Shifts to
preserve their poor lives; so that the Huntsman had need be very circumspect
and industrious, otherwise he may soon spoil his Dogs; for as in all Chases the
Hare makes the greatest diversion, so it is a great delight to see the many
Stratagems they have to save their lives.

For a Hound that is a perfect Haryer, may be bold to hunt any Chase; but the
Hare of all Games leaves the least Scent behind her; but when once your Dogs
have been accustomed to the Stag or Buck, it is not easy to bring them in love
with the Hare again.

When Hares feed on Green Corn they have the greatest Scent, and are then more
eagerly pursued by the Hounds; and there are some that naturally give a greater
Scent than others, as the great Wood Hares, and such as keep the Marshes and
moist Grounds, being foul and measled.

Young Hares that have not been hunted are foolish, not using the Crafts,
Subtilties, Doublings, and Crossings, as Old ones do; but hold on Endways
before the Hounds, often squatting and starting, which does much encourage the
young Hounds at their first Entering.

The Females are observed to be more crafty than the Males, making their
Doublings and Turnings shorter, which is no ways pleasing to the Hounds, who
delight more at an End-way Chase; for such Hares that cross and double so
often, it is necessary at default to cast the greater compass about when you
beat to make it out; by which means you will find out all her Subtilties, and
you need not stick upon any of them, but where she went on forwards; and
thereby you will abate her force, and compel her to leave her Doublings and
Crossings.

How to Enter young Hounds to the
FOr Entering young Hounds, be they Northern or Southern Hounds, or Beagles, two
or three Huntsmen is sufficient; of which let one serve to rate and beat on
such Hounds as keep plodding behind, and the other two may be employed to make
the Hounds seek and cast about; for if there be many Huntsmen, they will foyl
the Traces and Footings of the Hare, or at leastwise amaze the Hounds with
their several Voices, when they are at default; whereas they should receive
assistance at such time from them by encouragement, or otherwise; for above all
things it is necessary, that the Hounds know their Masters or Huntsmans Voice,
and his Horn, for then when it comes to the hallow, they will sooner come in
to his Voice than to any others; therefore he must never hallow them without
good cause; and it were not amiss, if he gave them a bit or two of Bread when
they come in, for their encouragement.

It is not good to Enter your young Hounds in the Mornings, because of the Dew
and Moisture of the Earth, for then when you bring them to hunt in the heat of
the Day, especially in hot Weather, or at some time when the Wind has dried up
the Moisture of the Earth, they will neither hunt, nor Call on merrily, but
will run to the shady places to rest and sleep; therefore the best time to
enter young Hounds is in the Heat of the Day, and about October and November,
the Weather being then temperate, and young Hares that have not been hunted are
then foolish and easier to be taken, which does much encourage them.

It is observed, that a Hare has greater Scent, and is more easily hunted by
the Hounds when she feeds upon green Corn, as aforesaid, than at any other
time of the Year; and yet also you have some Hares which are naturally
stronger Scented than others, and are much more eagerly hunted by the Hounds,
and such are those great Wood Hares, and such as keep in Marshy, Watery
Grounds, being foul and measled; but the little red Hare is neither of so
strong a Scent, nor is so eagerly hunted by the Hounds.

Also remember, that at the Entering your young Hounds, you never help them to
kill the Hare with your Greyhounds; for if you accustom them to have Greyhounds
to Course before them, they will never take pains, nor put their Noses to the
Ground, nor beat about or hunt for the Scent of the Hare; but the best Entering
them is with old Staunch Hounds, that understand how to make out a default, and
that have good Noses for the Scent.

The best Season of the Year for hunting the Hare, with Directions how to seek
her, start her, and hunt her.
THe Season for hunting the Hare, is from September to the beginning of April;
for afterward the sweet Herbs and Flowers that grow about, as also the heat
takes away the Scent, together with this, that during the Summer they breed
their Leverts and are feeble and weak; but the best Season to enter your young
Dogs is at the first hand of the year before they are great and strong.

Your Hounds after two years old, may be exercised three times a Week, for
which they will be better, provided they Feed well, and keep them out the
greatest part of the day, to try their Stoutness, and to make them bold.

It is observed that a Hare leaves a better Scent when she goes to Relief,
than when she comes from her Form, by reason that when she feeds, she
coucheth low, and passes often times over one plot to seek good Feeding, and
thus Scent; for when she goes to her Form, she commonly takes the Highways,
doubling and Crossing, as lightly as she can; and yet she will often times Squat
by the sides of Highways. Now having found where a Hare has Relieved, the
Season of the Year and the Weather must be considered; for if it be Spring, or
Summer, a Hare will not sit-in the Bushes, but in Cornfieldsd and open places,
whereas in Winter they delight to sit near Towns and Villages, in Brambles, and
Tufts Thorns, especially when the Wind is Southernly or Northernly.

According to the Season and Nature of the place where the Hare is accustomed
to sit, there beat with your Hounds to start her, which is much better sport
than Trailing of her from her Relief to her Form; and having hollowed in your
Hounds, and all of them in full Cry, then Recheat to them with your Horn,
following fair and softly at first, for fear of their over-shooting Dogs: And
above all things, be sure to observe well her first Doublings, which must be
your Directions for the whole Days Chase; and if the Hounds fall at Default,
it is a sign that the Hare has made some Doublings, or Crossings, or that she
has gone and come back again the same way, in such case do not over-shoot it,
but make a stay, and let the Hounds beat about Reward the Hounds and to
encourage them.

And if you chance to find an old Form, let the Huntsman be provided with a
piece of Bacon, and therewith anoint the end of his Hunting-Pole, and
whenever he would point his Hounds to a Muse, or to any place, let him but
strike his Pole on the Ground, and the Hounds will go through the Muse, or come
into any place where Huntsman when he has cast about, find that the Hare is
gone out beyond the compass he casts, then let him call back his Hounds to
the place where they first came at Default, and there beat with the Hounds,
still outward on both sides of the way; for often times the Hare follows the
Highways very far to Double, Cross, and use her Policies, and will not go out
of the way for about a Mile together; and in such places the Hounds can have no
Scent, by reason of Dust, and other Impediments; and yet they will Squat upon,
or near the outsides of the ways; and therefore let the Huntsman beat the
sides of the ways very well.

There are some Lands in which a Dog can never make any Scent, and such are
those that are of a low, fat, glutinous, and greasy shining Mould, and those
give more Scent than they receive; therefore the Huntsman must help out the
Dogs by pricking, for generally those Soils are moist, and apt to receive
impressions. In Plains and Downs there is very short Grass, and few or no
Shrubs or Bushes; so that the Scent dries immediately, and in such places the
Eye must help the Nose.

Beware how to hunt in Frosty weather, for then Hares run best, and Dogs worst;
for the Hare has his Feet furred, as it were for the same purpose; but the
Dogs are all bear, and besides the cutting or bruising their Feet, does
endanger the losing their Claws, and consequently the spoiling the Dogs.
Likewise in Frosty weather the Scent freezeth with the Earth, so that there is
no certainty until it thaw, or that the Sun shines to soften the Earth. It is
likewise found not good to hunt if it Rains, for the drops disperse the Scent
of the Hare, so that it is best to leave off until it be fair. Likewise the
Summer Season is not good to hunt in, for the heat loses the Scent; and the
Nights being but short, the Hare goes not far, and only Feeds in the
Evenings and Mornings.

Some are of Opinion, that according to the places where you first Enter your
young Hounds, and the Nature of the Quarry given them, they will accordingly
prove for the future; as if Entered in the plain Champain Countries, they will
always take greater delight to hunt there, than in Coverts, Mountains, Marshy
Grounds or the like places; therefore it is good to use them to all sorts of
Grounds, it being easy to bring them to enjoy a Scent, from a Bleak Down to a
fresh Pasture, for good Hounds will soon be Masters of any sort of Ground.

It is an old saying and a true, The more Hares you hunt, the more you may; for
when once a Jack and a Do have accompanied together in any place for some
time, they will not permit any other Hare to frequent or use their Territories,
but force them away, except their own young; nor will they permit them to stay
long after they are able to shift for themselves, so that the more you kill,
the more room you make for fresh ones.

There is great exactness required in the first Entering your young Hounds,
never use to uncouple them in the same kind of Ground; for if you uncouple them
three or four times at first in a plain Field, and so hunt to the Form, they
will not know what to do, when you turn them loose in a Covert, but let them
have diversity of Hunting, that so they may be perfect at all. But to return to
the Hare: When any Hound has accidentlly found the Trail of a Hare, where she
has relieved that Night, the Huntsman must not be too hasty to encourage him,
until he has found her out.

The Huntsman ought to observe how the Winds are, for when North or East, the
Hares will be sure to keep close in the Bushes, Tufts, Brambles, and the like
places; especially in the Winter; but in Summer the Snakes, and such like
things that frequent such places do anoy them, so that they make use of
Cornfieldsd, and other places.

Coursing with grayhounds

To the Right Honorable Thomas Savage, Earl Rivers, Viscount Colihester and
Rock-Savage, Lord Darcy and Baron of Chich etc.a

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

There are some that in Hunting never hollow before the Hare, neither help the
Hounds by Pricking, or Laying them on in full fresh Scent, or the like, neither
assist them at a default, but suffer them to work it out of themselves: This is
confessed to be a sure way to try the goodness of your Hounds, but it is tedious
and laborious; others there are that take all the advantages they can to help
them, by marking which way the Hare bends at first, and then they will Coast
before

How to Reward the Hounds when they have killed the Hare.
WHen your Hounds have killed the Hare, and that you intend to give over the
sport for that time, let the Huntsman if on Horsback Horn, to call in the
Company; then let him lay down the Hare in some clean place, upon the Grass or
the like, and let the Hounds Bay about it, but suffer them not to touch it; and
let them be encouraged, and made much of, claping and stroaking them on the
sides, showing them the Hare. Then take up the Hare, and hulk her, and strip
off her skin before the Hounds; and being thus ordered, and the Gall and Lights
taken away, Huntsman must be provided in his Wallet with Bread cut in small
pieces, and dipped in the Blood; which distribute to the Hounds, together with
the Inwards, except the Lights; and sometimes the whole Hare except the Lights,
if you are provided with a Brace or Leesh; and if there are any young Hound
that is fearful to come in among the rest, give him the Hares Head by himself,
which will much embolden him; but fail not to give your Hounds Art, for you
must understand that the Flesh of a Hare will make a Dog Heartsick, and cause
him to vomit; but it is otherwise with the Flesh of a Stag, or any other Deer,
for that agrees very well with them; and to say truth, the Flesh of a Hare is
not very good for Man, being dry, and hard of Disgestion, breeding Melancholy
Blood; but Leverets or young Hares are good and nourishing.

There are some parts of the Hare that are found good Medicines for some
Diseases; for Instance, The Brains are good for young Children in Breeding
Teeth, the Flesh well roasted is good for Fluxes of the Belly. For stopping of
the Urine, take a Hares Skin being made clean, and put it whole into an Earthen
pot passed over on the top; and let it stand in two or three hot Ovens, until
Rhenish or Whitewine, and drink it every Morning fasting two hours after; and
in a short time it is said to break the Stone both in the Vrin and Bladder; but
the Body must first be prepared with some gentle Purge; and whilst you use it,
keep plates of Lead on the Patients Reyns about four Fingers broad, sowed
between two or three Linen Cloths; the Gall is said to be for good Eyes that
are Filme grown. It Is said that their Dung hinders a Woman's conception; but
though this cannot be confirmed for truth, yet this may be said, that it being
made into a Suppositorie, and put up the Matrix, restrains the too immoderate
Defluxion of the Courses, and dries up the moist Humors, and slipperiness of
those parts. The Blood is a great Dryer, and very good to kill all Tetters,
Ringworms, Scabs, Mor^ues, etc. and makes the Skin smooth and white, and the
downy Fur or Wool being burnt to Powder, (...) very good to stop Bleeding.

Warreners have a very crafty way to Fatten Hares, which is to stop their Ears
with Wax, to the end they may not hear Noise, for being freed from the fear of
sound for want of hearing, they soon become Fat.

CHAP. XIII.
Of GREYHOVNDS, and Coursing with them.
THe Greyhound of all Dogs is for Swiftness of Foot, and neatness of Shape to
be preferred before all others.

In choosing a Whelp, that which weighs lightest, generally proves the best
and nimblest; also those that are raw-boned, lean, loose made, and for the most
part unlike in every Joint, do make excellent and well-shaped Dogs; whereas
those that after three or four Months appear round, close, trust, fat, and well
knit in every part are scarce worth the rearing, seldom proving good, swift or
comely, and it is observed that the Bitches are commonly more swift and nimble
than the Dogs.

At two Years old your Greyhound will be at his full growth, and for the
choosing one of an excellent Shape, he should have a fine thin Skin, with soft
thin Hair, a long, lean Head, with a sharp Nose, from the Eyes downwards; a
full clear Eye, with large Eyelids, little Ears, a long Neck bending like a
Drake, with a loose hanging Weezand, broad Breasted, his Body indifferent long,
and reasonable great, with a Back straight and Square, having a rising in the
middle, a small Belly, broad Shoulders, round Ribs, with a long space between
his Hips, a strong Stern, a round Foot with large Clefts, and his Forelegs
strait and shorter than his hinder.

How to Breed, and order Greyhounds to the best Advantage.
BE sure to Breed on a right tried Bitch; for an indifferent Dog, may get on
such a Bitch very good Whelps: But the best and surest way is to have both the
Dog and Bitch good, and then there will be no fear of your Whelps proving
excellent; and to be exact, both Dog and Bitch should be of an equal Age, and
not exceeding four years, but the Bitch will breed much longer, so that a young
Dog Line her.

But although a Geryhound have all the aforesaid good shapes in perfection, and
be also excellent in his kind, yet through disorderly keeping he may be
spoiled: You must therefore understand the Art both of well feeding, and right
entering him.

How to feed and order Greyhounds.
Your feeding and dieting a Greyhound does not altogether consist in the meat
you give him, but also in his exercise, airing, and kennelling; If he be in a
full state the chippings of Bread, or crust steeped in fresh Broth is very
good; the like is Milk and Bread, or Butter-milk, soft Bones, with such like
good Diet Mornings and Evenings which

If he be sick, or low in state, then take Sheeps-heads, or Feet with the Wool
on, chop them in small pieces, boil them with sweet Herbs and Oatmeal, and make
Broth thereof, which is very comfortable, and feed him therewith Morning and
Evenings until he is recovered.

Their Kennels must be made airy, and the Door into the yard should be toward
the South for warmness; and let the Benches on which they Holes bored in the
Boards for their Piss to fall away; and on the Benches must be Straw which
should be always fresh, and be sure to let their Kennels be kept clean.

When any of your Dogs are to run a wager, then give them Dyet-Bread thus made;
Take half a Peck of dried Oatmeal, and twice as much Wheat, let them be both
ground, and bolted through a fine Sieve; then scatter amongst it Anniseeds and
Liquorice, and knead it up with the whites of Eggs and new Ale into small
Loaves, which bake pretty hard; and this Bread give them soaked in Broth, as
aforesaid, Morning and Evening after you have aired and walked them; and this
will bring them to strength of wind and body.

The Exercise of your Greyhound consists in airing and coursing him; you must
Course him at least twice a week, if your Courses be long and Coursing Reward
and encourage him with the Blood, that he may delight in his Course.

At the first Entering him, for once or twice let him have an advantage of the
Game, which is best to be a young Hare, and not giving her Law; but afterward
you may let him labor for it; yet not so much as to baffle him by giving the
Hare too great Law. And thus you may discern the uttermost ability and strength
of your Dog.

After a hard Course it were not amiss to wash his Feet with Water and Salt
(which is far better than broaken Beer and Butter made lukewarm, being the
usal way) and so put him to his Kennel, and about half an hour after feed him.

If he kills his Game he must be Rewarded by giving him the Heart, Liver and
Lights; but suffer him not to break the Hare, but take her from him, otherwise
he will be brought to an ill custom many times in tearing those he kills,
before you can come in to him.

Upon Coursing days give him in the Morning before you air him a Toast and
Butter, or Toast and Oil, and nothing else.

Your Airing must be thus; first rub him with a hair cloth in his Kennel; then
take him into your Leach about half an hour after Sunrising, and walk him out
into some place where no Sheep or Cattle are, suffering him to play with you,
and to frisk about to empty himself; then take him into your Leach and lead him
home to his Kennel; the same method must be used in the Evening; and in the
Winter permit him once a day to enjoy the benefit of the Fire: And it were not
amiss if you keep him always in his Kennel, where he may neither do nor receive
hurt; And it is observed to breed in them Lust, Spirit and Nimbleness, and keep
the Pores from Spending until time of necessity.

Greyhounds that are bred in low fat Grounds and deep Vales, are said to
outrun those that are bred in smooth Downs.

COVRSING.
COursing with Greyhounds is a Recreation in great esteem with many of the
Gentry; it affords greater pleasure than Hunting in some respect; as First, In
regard it is sooner ended. Secondly, It requires less toil. Thirdly, The Game
is for the most part always in sight. And lastly, In respect of the delicate
shape, and qualities of a Greyhound.

There are three several Courses with Greyhounds, viz. At the Deer, at the
Hare, and at the Fox.

For the Deer there are two sorts of Courses; the one the Paddock, and the
other either in a Forest or Purlieu. For the Paddock there must be the
Greyhounds and the Teazer, which is a kind of a Mungril Greyhound, whose
business is to drive away the Deer before the Greyhounds are slipped; and most
usually there is let slip a Brace, or a Leesh, seldom exceeding two Brace.

The PADDOCK COURSE, with the description of a Paddock.
A Paddock is a peace of ground encompassed with Pales or a Wall, and most
commonly taken out of a Park; It must be a Mile long, and about a quarter of a
Mile broad; but the further end must be somewhat broader than the near; and the
reason is, because most people desire to see the end of the Course, and who
wins the Wager At the hither end must be the Dog-house: where the Dogs are kept
that are to run the Course, which must be attended by two Men, and one of them
to stand at the Door to slip the Dogs, and the other must be a little without
the Door to let slip the Teazer, to drive away the Deer, as aforesaid. On the
other side must be made three Pens, for as many Deer as is designed for the
Course; and there must be also a Keeper or two to turn out the Deer for the
Course. The Deer are to run all along by the Pale, and on the other side at
some distance stand the Spectators. There must also be placed along the Course
these Posts; The First, which is next the Dog-house and Pens is the Law post,
which is distant from them 160 Yards. The Second, is the quarter of a Mile
post. The Third the Half-mile Post: The fourth the Pinching-post; And the Fifth
is the Ditch which is in lieu of a Post, being a place so made to receive the
Deer, and keep them from being further pursued by the Dogs; near to this place
are made Seats for the Judges to sit, who are chosen to decide the Wager.

As soon as the Greyhounds that are to run for the Plate, or Money, are led in
to the Dog-house, they are delivered to the Keepers, who by the Articles of all
Courses are to see them fairly slipped; to which purpose there is put about each
Dog a falling Collar which they slip through the Rings: After the owners of the
Dogs have drawn Cuts Wall, by reason that there shall be no advantage more to
the one than the other. Then the Dog-house Doors are shut, and the Keeper
ordered to turn out of the Pens the breathed Deer; and so soon as the Deer is
turned out, and gone about 20 Yards, then he that holds the Teazer slips him to
force forward the Deer: Then when the Deer is come to the Law post the
Dog-house Door must be opened, and the Dogs led out and slipped: If the Deer
swarve before he comes to the pinching Post so much that his Head be judge to
be nearer the Dog-house than the Ditch, then it is judged no Match, and in such
case it must be run again three days after. But if there be no such swarve, but
that the Deer runs straight until he comes beyond the Pinching Post, then that
Dog that is the nearest the Deer when he swarves or is blanched by any
accident, wins the Match: But if no such swarve happens, then that Dog that
leaps the Dich first, wins the Match; all Judges who sit as Spectators, as
aforesid; and if other disputes arise about the Course it is referred to the
Articles of the Course.

The Course of the Deer in the Forest or Purlieu.
THere are two ways used, the one is Coursing Wood to Wood, and the other upon
the Lawns by the Keepers Lodge.

If you Course from Wood to Wood, first throw in some young Hounds into the
Wood to bring out the Deer and if any Deer come out that is not weighty, or a
Deer of Antlier, which is Buck, Sore or Sorell, then do not slip your
Greyhounds that are held at the end of the Wood where the Deer is expected to
come forth, which the Keepers have good judgment to know. And if you mistrust
Greyhounds will not kill him, then you may Way-lay him with a Brace of Fresh
Greyhounds.

For the Coursing upon the Lawn, when you have given the Keeper notice he will
lodge a Deer fit for your Course; then by coming under the Wind you may come
near enough to slip your Greyhounds for a fair Course.

COVRSING the HARE.
FOr Coursing the Hare, the best way is to go and find out one setting, which
is easily done, by walking cross the Lands, either Stubble, Fallow, or Corn,
and casting your Eye up and down, for during the Summer season they frequent
such places for fear of Ticks that are common in Woods; also the Rain and the
Fall of the Leaf does offend them; the rest of the year beat up and down with
your Poles to start them out of their Forms and Retreats, and some Hares will
not stir until they are almost touched, and it is a sure sign that such Hares
make an excellent Course.

If a Hare set near any Close or Covert, and have her Head toward the same,
which a fair Field behind her, you may ride with as much Compayn as you have
between her and the Covert before she be put up, and then she is likely to make
her Course toward the Champain, for she seldom takes the same way that her
Heads is of when she sits in her Form.

When a Hare is first started you give her Ground or Law, commonly is 12 score
Yards, or more, according to the ground where she sits; or else you lose much
of your Sport by putting too soon, an end unto it, and it is very pleasing to
see the Turns and windings that the Hare will make to save her self, which
sometimes prove effectual unto her.

COVRSING the FOX.
IN Coursing the Fox there is required no other Art than to stand close, and on
a clear Wind, on the outside of some Grove where you expect his coming out,
and then give him head enough, otherwise he will turn back to the Covert; for
the slowest Greyhound will be swift enough to overtake him; and all the hazard
of this Course is the Spoiling your Dog by the Fox, which often times happens;
and therefore you should not run any that are worth much at this chase, but
such that are hard bitten Dogs that will seize any thing.

The Laws observed in Coursing.
I shall conclude this Chapter with the Laws of Coursing as they were
established by the Duke of Norfolk, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, which were
subscribed unto by the chief Gentry, and so held Authentic.

That he that is chosen Fewterer, or that lets loose the Greyhounds, shall
receive the Greyhounds match'ed to run together into his Leesh as soon as he
comes into the field, and follow next to the Hare-finder, or he that is to
start the Hare until he come unto the Form, and no Horsman or Footman are to go
before, or on any side, but directly behind for the space of about 40 Yards.

You ought not to Course a Hare with above a brace of Greyhounds.

The Hare-finder ought to give the Hare three, So-hoes before he put her from
her Form, or Seat, to the end the Dogs may Gaze about, and attend her starting.

They ought to have Twelvescore Yards Law before the Dogs are loosed, unless
there be danger of losing her.

That Dog that gives the first Turn, and if after that there be neither Cote,
Slip, or Wrench, then he wins the Wager that gives the first Turn.

If one Dog give the first Turn, and the other bears the Hare, he that bears
the Hare shall win.

A Go-by or Bearing the Hare, is reputed equivalent to two Turns.

If neither Dog turn the Hare, he that leads last to the Covert wins.

If one Dog Turns the Hare, serves himself, and Turns her again, it is as much
as a Cote; for a Cote is esteemed two Turns.

If all the Course be equal, he that bears the Hare shall win; and if she be
not born, the Course shall be adjudged dead.

If a Dog take a Fall in a Course, and yet perform his part, he may challenge
the advantage of a Turn more than he gave.

If a Dog Turn the Hare, serve himself, and give diverse Cotes, and yet in the
end stand still in the Field; the other Dog, if he Turns home to the Covert,
although he gives no Turn, shall be adjudged to win the Wager.

If by Misfortune a Dog be rid over in his Course, the Course is void; and to
say truth, he

If a Dog give the first and last Turn, and there be no other advantage betwixt
them, he that gave the odd Turn shall win.

A Cote is, when the Greyhound goes End-ways by his Fellow, and gives the Hare
a Turn.

A Cote serve for two Turns, and two Trippings or Jerkins for a Cote; and if
she turns not quite about she only wrencheth.

If there be no Cotes given between a Brace of Greyhounds, but that one of them
serves the other at Turning; then he that gives the Hare the most Turns wins
the Wager: And if one gives as many Turns as the other, then he that bears
the Hare wins the Wager.

Sometimes the Hare does not Turn, but Wrench; for she is not properly said to
Turn, except she Turn as it were round, and two Wrenches stand for a Turn.

He that comes in first to the Death of the Hare, takes her up, and saves her
from breaking, cherishes the Dogs, and cleanses their Mouths from the Wool,
is adjudged to have the Hare for his pains.

Those which are Judges of the Leesh, must give their Judgment presently,
before they depart out of the Field.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Taking and Hunting the CONEY or RABET, with Dogs, Nets and Ferrets, and how
to Order a Warren; with Directions for the Breeding and keeping Tame Rabets.
THe CONEY, although it yield not so great pleasure in hunting as the Hare, as
being endowed with none of those slights and cunnings; yet it is of greater
profit, both in regard of their Flesh, and their Skins, which excel those of
the Hare.

The Does go with Young a Month, and then they Kindle; and if she takes not
Buck presently she loses her Month, or at least a Fortnight, and often kills
her Young, eating them, especially the Bucks. They begin to breed at about half
a year old, commonly breeding two, three, or four times a Year, and about five,
six or seven at a Litter. When the Buck goes to the Do, he bears and stamps
with his Feet very hard, which (as it is said) causes heat in him; and having
struck or buckt her, falls down backwards, so lying for some time as it were in
a Trance, until he has recovered himself, at which time it is easy to take
him. The Bucks will kill the Young Ones, if they can come at them; and
therefore Nature has so decreed it, that the Does prevent them by stopping or
covering their Stocks or Nests with Earth or Gravel, which they close up so
artificially with their Breeches, that it is hardly to be discerned; and they
never Suckle them but early in the Mornings, and late at Nights, closing the
Holes every time after their coming out for eight or ten Days; after which time
they begin to leave it a little open, and by degrees as they grow big, which is
at about three Weeks old, they leave it quite open for them to come out, they
being then fit to eat Grass.

In such places in the Warrens where the ground is Rocky and Stony, it were not
amiss to have Artificial Burrows made; and if your Warren were enclosed with a
Brick-Wall (whose Foundation should be deep) it would be of great advantage,
for then it would obstruct the Rabets from straggling out to be lost; also it
would prevent their being stole by Idle Fellows; and likewise it would hinder
Foxes, Badgers, Pole-Cats, and the like Vermin from geetting in, being great
Enemies to Warrens by destroying them; therefore those Warrens that have not
such Conveniences and Secure places, must be the more diligent to hunt and beat
them in three or four times a Week, or Daily, to prevent their straggling out
for fresh Pasture; as also to destroy those Vermin by Traps, Snares, and
Engines, as hereafter shall be treated of, for otherwise your Warrens will
never be well stockt.

The best and surest way to store a Warren, is to provide near your Lodge (for
though Coneys require neither food nor water, but what they can get, except in
exceeding hard Weather, and of a long continuance; and at such times they must
be relieved with Hay, the Boughs of Trees and Bark to browz upon, yet you
should have a Warrener to attend them, to preserve them from being destroyed by
Thieves and Vermin) a handsome enclosed place, with a Penthouse, under Hutches
for the keeping Tame Rabets, for they are large and great Breeders: It Is true,
their Flesh is something more rank of the Old Ones that are kept up, occasioned
through want of Exercise, but the Young Ones are esteemed better; but when once
you turn them out to become wild, they soon lose that Rankness, and become free
Denizens of the Soil where you put them. When the Young Ones are big enough to
shift for Warren, with a little respect to the Season of the Year in regard of
the Cold; for those Young Ones at a Month old are less able to endure Cold, as
being never accustomed to it, than those of a few Days, that have their Dams to
cherish them.

The Hutches wherein you keep your Breeders must have diverse Cells or Nests,
and they must be kept neat and clean, otherwise Diseases will Bucks must be
kept apart from the Does until they have just Kindled, and then they must be
taken from the Young and put to the Buck; and you may easily know when she is
struck enough, for then she will avoid the Buck. Tame Rabets breed seven or
eight times in a Year, and eight or nine at a Litter. For the choosing of Tame
Rabets, take the biggest and fairest you can get, and if you can, let them be
Black, or Silver-haired; for those Skins do exceed the other in price.

Their food, as before noted, may be Coleworts, Cabage-Leaves, Carots,
Parsnips, Clivers, Apples, green Corn and Fetches in time of Year, with such
like most Food; but you must always observe to give them a proportionable
quantity of dry Meat, as Bran, Bread, Hay, Oats, and the like, otherwise they
will be Pot-bellyed, and so dye. You may also give them Bran and Grains mixed
together, which is very good Food.

One Buck may very well serve nine or ten Does, and no more.

If your Warren be very barren, you may sow about an Acre or two of Summer Corn
for their Food, which will turn to good profit.

The ways to take Coneys.
FOr the taking of Coneys there are diverse ways to be used, some of which I
shall Beast of no great skill or subtilty. You may hunt such as straggle from
their Burrows with small Greyhounds or Mungrels, bred up for that purpose; and
the places for hunting them are amongst Bushes, Hedges, Cornfieldsd, or fresh
Pastures; and though you miss killing them, yet thereby you drive them back to
their Retreats, and preserve them from being a Prey to others.

You may also drive them into their Burrows, and spread Purs-nets upon the
Holes, so that when they come out they will be entangled in them, and so become
taken. Now to force them out it is good to have a Feret, or two whose Mouths
must be couped or musled up, and so put into the Holes, which will cause them
to bolt out into your Purs-nets; for the Coneys do easily smell the Ferets, and
at their approach (being of a fearful Nature) dare not stay to see them. And
for the more surer taking them, it were good to have in readiness a Hay or two,
which should be pitched up at a small distance against the Burrows you intend
to hunt, according to the Figure represented in the Plate for taking Coneys.

Of the FERET.
THe Feret is a little Creature, but of a bold and audacious Spirit, and an
Enemy to all others but her own kind, delighting to suck the Rabets Blood,
rather than to eat their Flesh; but being tamed are useful to the Warrener for
the forcing the Coneys out, as before noted. It is unnecessary to give you a
description of it, being sufficiently well known; only let me tell you, that
they go with young six Weeks, and usually bring forth six or seven at a time;
their Young are blind a Month, and that after two Months more they are fit for
Service. The food that is given them is Milk, Sheep-Hearts, Livers, Raw-flesh,
and the like; they ought to be kept in Tubs, or other convenient places where
they cannot get out, and to have fresh Straw, for they are very nasty and of an
ill savor. Before you go to Hunt with them, do not feed them; for when their
Bellies are full they will be idle, and not hunt, lying sleeping in the Burrows
two or three hours together before they come forth, and sometimes much longer.
When you have done hunting with them, uncoup them, and Reward them with the
Rabets Liver, which they much delight in; and so put them up into your Bag, and
carry them home.

I should here speak of the Lircher or Tumbler, a Dog so called by reason of
his Wiles and circumventing Tricks to take them; but having treated of him
already in the Second Chapter, that treats of the several sorts of Dogs, I
shall forbear to speak any thing here.

I should also treat of the taking the Coney with Engines, Traps, Snares, Nets,
etc. but being intended to speak thereof in the Chapters that treat of the
taking the Fox, Otter, Badger, Hare, etc. as also of the Polecat, Fitchet, and
the like Vermin, I shall not say any thing here, but refer you to the same for
further satisfaction.

CHAP. XV.
Hunting the OTTER.
THe OTTER is an Amphibious Creature, having his habitation as well in the
Water Land, and resembles the Beaver were it not for his Tail; and although
the Otter has much of his abode in the Water, yet he does not breath like Fish
through the benefit of the Water, but like other Four-footed Beasts, and will
remain under the Water for a good while without respiration.

The Otter always resides near great Ponds or Rivers, and preyeth on all manner
of Fish, of which he is a great destroyer, and if not obstrcted Pond, and for
want of prey in the Water will make his incursions within Land, and if all fail
will feed on Roots, Herbs, or what not to fill his Belly; nor will he take less
pains in the Water to satisfy his hunger, being said to swim above a Mile
against the stream to get his Prey, which according to observation he smells a
good distance; and when he has filled his Belly, he is carried down the
Current at ease to his Couch, Hough, or Lodging, Stump, or Root of a Tree, very
Artificially built with Boughs, Sprigs, and Sticks, wherein he sits; and when
he lifts up his Nose above Water for Air, it is Termed Venting; nor will he
remain long in a place, for fear of a Surprise, or for some better Convenience,
having an excellent Ear for hearing, and as good a Nose for Smelling, being
esteemed a very subtle Creature, and very Nimble in taking his Prey; and for
greediness, Navel, leaving the Tail part, diving deep under the Water, so that
no Fish can hardly escape him, unless those that are very large, and swift of
Swiming.

The Otter when Reclaimed, is of great use and pleasure, by reason of the great
quantities of Fish they take, which as being so taught, they bring to their
Master or Keeper.

They go to Sault at such times as Ferets, do, Goose, with a Web between their
Claws, having no Heel, but only a round Ball under the Sole of their Feet, the
Impression of which is Termed the Mark or Seal of an Otter; Their Excrements
are termed Spraits, their Stones are reported to be good against the
Falling Sickness; and the Skin of a well grown Otter, is worth twelve or
fifteen Shillings, and sometimes more, if it be of a shining Black, Skins are
made excellent Muffs; Their Flesh is not over wholesome, yet eaten in Germany.

There is much subtilty to be used in the Hunting the Otter, yet by cunning and
pains, they may be ensnared under Water, and by the River sides.

If you would Hunt, or Train an Otter, you must be provided with Otter-Hounds,
and Spears, and be sure to have a Draught Hound or two that will hunt in the
Lyame; and set on each side of the River one of them, with about two Couple of
Hounds, and a Man or two to attend; and observe his Vents, that you may strike
him with your Otter-Spear; or if you miss, then to pursue him with your Hounds;
and if they are good and well entered for the Sport, they will come Trailing
along by the River side, beating every Tree Root, Osier-Bed, or Tuft of
Bull-rushes, and sometimes will take the Water like Spaniels; and if any of the
Hounds finds him out, then look in the moist places to see which way he bent
his Head; for if the Marks make no Discovery, you may partly find it by the
Spraits, and so follow the Hounds, and Lodge him as you do a Deer. You may
uncouple some of the Hounds, and walk beating up and down the sides of the
River, under the Bushes, Stubs of Trees, and in the Holes; and you should
rather beat up against the Stream than down it, by reason the Otter uses to
Fish against the Stream, the better to get Scent of the Fish.

If you find him not quickly, you may judge he is gone to Couch somewhere
further off from the River, for every Night he seeks his Prey on the Land, and
makes his Spraits so, that if there be an Otter in the Quarter, you may soon
find it out, either by the Hounds, or by his Spraits.

The Huntsman having carefully beaten the moist places as aforesaid, and found
which way he bent his Head, which may often be discovered by its Marks, he may
then lodge him any Evening; But if he do not quickly make him out, he may be
sure he is gone to Couch farther off from the River side; and when the Huntsman
has lodged him in his Couch, he must not uncouple the Hounds until he be
within about a Bow-shoot or two of the place, for he will presently make away
upon the first Noise, and draw toward the River, where some fresh Dogs must be
laid ready to intercept him.

The Huntsman must also have Otter Spears to dart at him, and wound him in the
Water when he Vents, for when they find themselves wounded with the Spear, they
presently make to Land, where they furiously encounter the Hounds. After the
Dogs are once well Entered, they will eagerly follow the Chase, leaving no place
unsearched that is fit for their reception, as Holes, Osier Beds, or the like
moist places.

CHAP. XVI.
Hunting the BEAVER.
THe Beaver as before noted, differs not much from the Otter, but only in his
Tail; there are great quantities of them in Virginia, New England, New York,
and those parts, and their Skins are found a good Commodity here in HUNTING ye
OTTER

To ye Rt. Worshipful Sr. John Hobart of Blinkling in Norfolk Bart. heir male
to Sr Hen Hobart Knight. and Bar. Chief Justice of ye. Common Pleas, who descended
from ye 2^. son of S. James Robart, of Hales in ye ^. County Attourny General
to K. Henry the 7th.

This Plate of Hunting ye Otter is humbly dedicated by Ric Bloome

Hunting ye Wild Bore

To his Royal Highness George Prince of Denmark etca:

This plate is most humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome*

England, for making of Beaver Hats. They are an Amphibious Creature, as the
Otter living on Land and Water, both Fresh and Salt; and without Water they
cannot subsist, much participating of the Nature of Fish, which may be concluded
from their hinder Legs, and Tails. They are much about the bigness of Mungril
Curs, their Forefeet are like those of a Dog, and their hinder like that of a
Goose, having a Web to assist them in their Swiming; their Head is short, with
small Ears; their Teeth are very long, broad and strong, standing out above
their Lips about three Fingers broad; and their Teeth being their only Weapon
to defend themselves against other Beasts; and with their Teeth they will soon
gnaw down a small Tree; their Tail is very strange, being without Hair, and
covered over with a Skin, like the Scales of Fish, and is about half a Foot
long, and for the most part six Fingers broad.

They are taken for their Skins and Cods, which Caves, in which are several
Chambers, or places of Retreat, built by the Water side, to ascend or descend
according as the Water rises or falls; and the building of them is almost
wonderful to behold, being made of Sticks, and plaistered with Dirt very
artificially, in form of a Bee-Hive, but for largness, to a good big Oven.

Their Caves or places of abode being found, a Dog, which when the Beaver
perceives, immediately gets to the end of her Cave, and there defends her self
with her Teeth, until all the building is destroyed, and she laid open to her
Enemies, so that soon she becomes their Prey.

The Dogs used for killing them, are such as for the Otter.

The Beaver cannot dive long under Water, but Head for Breath; and then they
shoot him, or strike him with their Spears, which are such as used for the
Otter.

In Virginia, New England, etc. there are great store of them, and one that
dwelt in those parts gave this Account of them, That they dwell, or inhabit in
low moorish boggy places, through which runs a Rill of Water, and this Rill at
some convenient place they stop, by making a Dam cross it, to raise the Water
Breast high; and by Earth and Sticks, they make their Caves, and to which
belongs commonly two or three hundred Beavers, resembling as it were a Town. If
this Dam at any time is broken by any to take them, or otherwise becomes
decayed, the Water being their chief refuge, it is immediately repaired by
them. And that by Observation they have a chief, or King over them, who takes
care thereof, and the rest are observant to him, to work when he assembleth
Tail in the Water, making a Noise.

CHAP. XVII.
Hunting the WILD-BOAR.
ALthough England affords no Wild-Boars, yet being so plentiful in Germany and
other Countries, and affords so Noble a Chase, which is so much used by the
Nobility and Gentry in those parts, it is thought necessary to add this Discourse
following.

The Boar being a Beast of such great force, and so slow of Foot, by reason of
his heaviness, that he is not properly Termed a Beast of Venery, for he chiefly
trusts in his Strength and Tusks to be his Defense, and not to his Feet; so
that he is more properly to be hunted by Stout Mastiffs, than by Hounds, who
cannot defend themselves so well from his fury: Also it spoils them from Hunting
other flying Chases, by reason he leaves so strong a Scent, so that they hunt
with the greater ease than at light Chases, which are more painful unto them to
find, and to hold the Scent.

The Nature and Subtilties of the Boar.
THe Boar is of this Nature, that when he is Farrowed has all his Teeth,
amongst which he has four Tusks, on each side two, and with those on the lower
Jaw he defends himself, as being greater and longer than the rest.

The common Age of a Boar is twenty five or thirty years; they go to Rut about
December, and their great heat endures about three Weeks; and although the Sows
become cold of Constitution, not coveting the Company of the Boar, yet they do
not separate until January; and then they withdraw themselves unto their holds,
wherein they keep close three or four days, not stiring thence, especially if
they meet with such places where Fern grows, whose Roots are sweet and pleasing
to them.

It is easier to bring a Boar into a Soil in April or May, than in any other
Season, by reason they sleep at that time more soundly, which is occasioned by
their eating of strong Herbs, and Buds of Trees, which moistens their Brains,
and causes Sleep. Also the Spring time occasions their Sleeping.

Their Food is on Corn, Fruits, Acorns, Chestnuts, Beach-Masts, and all sorts of
Roots; when they are in the Marshy and Watery places, they Feed on
Watercresses, and such like things as they can find; and when they are near
the Seacoast, they Feed on Cockles, Muskles, Oyster and such like Fish.

A Boar most commonly lies in the strongest holds of Thorns and thick Bushes,
and will abide the Bay, before he forsake his Den. If you hunt him from a
strong thick Covert, he will be sure to go back the same way he came, if
possible; and when he is roused, he never stays until he comes to the place
where he thinks himself most secure. If it so happen, that there is a Sounder
of them together, then if any break Sounder, the rest will run that way; and if
he be hunted in a Hold, or Forest where he was bred, he will hardly be forced
to quit it, but sometimes he will take head, and seem to go out, drawing to the
outsides of the Covert, but it is only to hearken to the Noise of the Dogs, for
he will return again, from whence he will hardly be compelled till Night; but
having broken out, and taken head endways, will not be put out of his way Man
or Beast.

A Boar will not cry when he is killed, especially a great Boar, but the Sows
and young ones will. In Fleeing before the Dogs, he neither doubleth nor
crosses, nor uses such Subtilties as other Beasts of Chase do, as being heavy
and slow, so that the Dogs are still in with him.

Terms of Art used in Hunting the Boar.
A Boar of three years old is called a young Boar, that has lately left the
Sounder, and an old Boar is called a Sanglier, that has left the Sounder four
or five years.

A Boar is said to Feed in the Corn, but if in the Meadows or Fallow Fields
then he Routeth or W^rmeth; but when he Feeds in a Close and Routeth not, then
he Graiseth.

How to know a great Boar by his Foot, by
TO know an old or great Boar by the Foot, the form or print thereof ought to
be great and large, the Toes round and Thick, the edge of the Hoof worn and
blunt, without cuting or paring the Ground so much as the younger does; and the
Gards which are his hinder Claws, or Dew-Claws, should be great and open one
from the other; the treading of his Foot should be Body, and his Steps should
be great and long.

By the Largness and depth of his routing, his greatness may be known; his
greatness is also known by the length and largness of the Soil, when he
wallovveth in the Mire: Also when he comes out of the Soil, he will rub himself
against a Tree, by which his height appears.

How to hunt the Boar at force with Dogs.
THe Season for hunting the Boar begins about mid- September, and ends in
December, at which time they go a Briming.

It is not convenient to hunt a young Boar, of three years old at force; for he
will stand up as long (if not longer) than a light young Deer, Heart of ten, and
will stand up as long. Therefore if a Huntsman goes too near a Boar of four
years old, he ought to mark well whether he went timely to his Den or Couch, or
not; for commonly those Boars which tarry till it be daylight go into their
Dens, following their paths or ways a long time, especially where they find
Fern, or Bed-masts, whereupon they feed; they are very hardy, and the Huntsman
needs not be afraid to come near unto such a Boar, for he will not easily be
reared; But if he find a Boar which Soileth often times, and which routeth
sometimes here and sometimes there not staying long in a place, it is a sign that
he has been scared and withdraws himself to some resting place, and such
Boars most commonly come to their Dens or holds two or three hours before day,
and then the Huntsman must be careful not to come too near them, for if they
once find him in the Wind, or have the Wind of his Dogs, they will soon be gone.

If a Boar designs to tarry in his Couch, he makes some* doublings or crossings
at the entry thereof, and then lies down to rest, and being early in the Wood
you may judge of his subtilty, and accordingly prepare to hunt him with Dogs
that are either hot spirited, or temperate; for if it be a great Boar, and one
that has lain long at rest, he must be hunted with Dogs that will stick to
him, and let the Huntsmen on Horsback be amongst them, charging the Boar, and
forcing him as much as possible, to discourage him; for if you hunt such a Boar
with four or five Couple of Dogs he will not regard them, and when they have a
little chafed him he will take courage and keep them at Bay, still running upon
any thing that he sees before him; but if he perceive himself charged, and
hard laid unto with Dogs and Huntsmen, then he abateth his courage, and flees
to some other place for Refuge. You must also set Relays, which should be of
the best old Staunchest Hounds of the Kennel; for if you should make your
Relays with young Hounds and such that are swift and rash to seize him before
the rest come up, they will be Spoiled or killed by him: But if he be a Boar
that is accustomed to flee end-ways before the Dogs, and to take the Champain
Country, then cast off four or five Cople of Dogs at the first, and set all
the rest at Relays, about the entry of the Fields where you think he is likely
to flee; for such a Boar will seldom keep the Hounds at a Bay, unless he be
forced, and if he do stand at Bay then the Huntsmen must ride in unto him as
secretly, and with as little noise as possible, and being near him, let them
cast round about the place where he stands, and run upon him all at once, and
it will be hard if they do not give him his deaths Wound with their Spears or
Swords, provided they strike not too low, for then he will defend the strokes
with his Snout, and be sure keep not long in a place using a quick motion. And
it is observed, that if you put Collers of Bells about your Dogs necks, a Boar
will not so soon strike at them but flee end-ways before them, and seldom stand
at Bay.

If a Boar make head against the Huntsman he must not fly, but meet him with
his Spear, having great regard to the motion of his Head, for his nature is
such, to snatch the Spear out of his hands, if he can by any subtilty, by which
means he endangers his life; therefore when any such thing should happen, there
is no way to save his life, but for another of the company to charge him home
with his Spear, upon which he leaves his first Man, and rusheth upon the
second, who must be very dexterous in the ordering his Weapon for fear of
danger.

If you strike at him with your Spear or Sword, strike not low, as aforesaid,
to hit him on the Snout, for that he regards not, making it his great care to
receive blows upon his Tusks, but strike down right, and in thus assaulting
him, they must be very careful, for he will run or rush

The Hunting-Spears must be very sharp, and broad, branching forth into certain
Forks, so that the Boar may not break through them upon the Huntsmen; and the
best places to wound him therewith are upon his Shoulders, or on his Forhead
betwixt his Eyes.

When you first raise him out of the Wood (which is best to be in the Morning
early, before he has made Water) he uses to sunff in the Wind, to Teeth are
at such time so hot that it causes the Wound to be inflamed.

In the Chase of the Boar you are to observe the same diligence and devices,
that is used in Huntting the Heart; for a Boar of three years old will Dogs as a
light young Deer, which bears but three in the top, as before taken notice of.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the POLECAT, FITCHET
POlecats, Fitchets, and Marterns, are a sort of Vermin very destructive to
Warrens, and Hen-houses; they have a strong Scent; they are not Chases to be
sought or pursued after, yet when by accident they are discovered, they afford
very good diversion, and a Hound Crossing on them hunt them as merrily as any
other Chase, and make a full Cry for the time they stand before them, which is
not long; for they quickly betake themselves to some Tree, and trust to that
policy sooner than to their strength; and yet it is much to see the strength of
nature of these Creatures, and how stoutly they will make their party good
against the Hounds, scratching, clawing, and biting so, that most of them come
off with Bloody Noses; at last they betake themselves to Trees, leaping from
Bough to Bough; and Tree to Tree; in the mean time the Dogs baying at them on
the ground, and the Huntsmen pelting them with Stones, Sticks, and the like;
also a Cross-Bow or Bow with Bolts does good execution, and soon puts an end to
the Hunt.

The Hunt being ended, the Dogs expect their Reward, but it must not be the
Flesh of the Vermin, that being not good, neither will they meddle with it;
therefore you should hang them up on the end of the Hunting Pole, calling the
Dogs together, that they may see it for their encouragment, but Reward them
with pieces of Bread, or the like.

A MARTERN is about the bigness of a Cat, having a longer Body, and shorter
Legs, with a Head and Tail like a Fox. This is the Polecat or Wild-Cat, a sort
of Vermin well known in England for their destructiveness to Hens and Tame Fowl.

Their Skin is a good Fur, nor is that of the Polecat without its virtues,
being reputed very useful and comfortable for cold Aches in the Bones and
Joints, and the Grease is good for extending Shrunck Sinews.

CHAP XIX.
Hunting the SQVIRIL.
HVnting the Squiril affords excellent pastime, and not without some profit;
for both the Flesh and Skin is useful, the former being good Meat, and the
latter an excellent Fur; it is a very thrifty provident Creature, providing in
the Summer-season Nuts and such like food in their Nests, to keep them in the
Winter, for they do not much care to stir abroad in cold Weather, especially
when the North and East Winds blow. They build their Nests, (which by some are
called Drays) in the Summer on the top of the Trees very artificially with
Sticks and Moss of an oval Form, like an Egg, with a hole in the midst, that
the Rain may not anoy them.

The way of Hunting them is with Dogs, which are to bay at them on the ground,
which with the Huntsmen hollowing does much affright them; and if one or two of
the Company had small Drums to beat, it would the more amaze them, and
facilitate the Sport.

Then the Men pelt them with Stones, or Cubitsticks, as at the Polecat,
coursing them from Tree to Tree. The Cross-Bow, or the Bow and Bolt, as
likewise the Gun makes a quick dispatch of them.

The best Season to Hunt them is in Autumn, when the Leaves are off the Trees;
and indeed it is very pretty Sport to see them skip and jump from Tree to Tree
with such nimbleness to save themselves, but all to little purpose, for in the
end either the Men or Dogs seize them.

If they be driven to the ground from the Trees, and creep into the Hedges,
it is a sign of their weariness; for during their strength they have such lofty
Minds, that they will keep the Trees with all the dexterity and subtilty they
can.

CHAP. XX.
To know by the Impression of the Foot, or by the Dung, any Forest Beast.
HAd I only regarded Hunting in the common acceptance, only managed with Men
and Dogs. I might have put an end to this Discourse: But forasmuch as there are
other ways to attain the end, and those peradventure more useful and
commendable, I shall here treat of such as are most approved of for the taking
them.

But first, the skilful Wood-man ought to know Impressions of the Feet of every
Beast of the Forest, which they leave imprinted in soft and moist places: And
you must know that the Females make smaller Impressions than the Males: Nor
should the Wood-man be ignorant of the several Excrements of Forest Beasts, and
how to make use of every one for the taking their Fellows; for the Dung of all
ravenous Creatures is of great use to draw them on into those Snares and
Devices wherewith you intend Cord, Wood, or Iron, which is not anointed over
therewith, these Creatuees have that subtilty and good Scent, that they would
avoid it; you should therefore in making of Trains use Cords made of Hay and
Straw, and not use Ropes; and when you set any Engines, if you cannot get any of
their Dung, be sure get some Carrion, and with that rub them over.

Now for the having some of their Dung upon Beasts are stirring in any place by
their Tracts, observe these following Directions.

In some fair Evening, on the sides of the Thickets or Forests, and by the
Highways, where in all probability those Beasts use to pass, dig up the Earth
with a Hoe or Mattock, bruising it small or fine about four foot square in a
place, and so do in all likely Passes, to the end that whatsoever Beast comes
over them it may leave his Impression.

For Beasts of Prey, as the Wolf, Fox, Badger, Polecat, etc. make a Train, and
when you come to any of the places which you have so prepared, throw four or
five bits of your Train-Carrion upon it, and of Chickens Guts for smaller
Beasts, and you need not doubt but such Beasts as eat of the Train, will leave
some of his Dung behind him, as well as the Impression of his Foot, and
accordingly you may prepare for him against the next day; wild Beasts are for
the most part very subtle, of quick Scents, timorous, and jealous of every
thing; only being pressed with Hunger, or attracted by the provocations of
Lust, they are not so scrupulous.

Now forasmuch as the destroying Wolves, and such like ravenous Creatures
(which make War sometimes with Man himself) has ever been esteemed a
commendable Exercise, and has at all times been encouraged, I shall bestow a
Chapter or two in the discourse thereof; notwithstanding at present England is
not anoyed with any of those strong and great Devourers, which heretofore
inhabited our Woods and Forests; but however Ireland is yet infected therewith
in several parts, so that it will not be lost labor to treat thereof, but a
benefit to that Kingdom, as also to many of our American Plantations, where
they frequent.

CHAP. XXI.
Concerning the Taking Wolves, Foxes, Badgers, Otters, etc. by Traps, Engines,
etc.
WOLVES are a kind of wild Dogs, strong and fierce; their Young are whelpt
blind, and continue so for some time. When they have their Young they are very
bold, and venture much for Prey for them; and when they are Proud they are the
most fierce, insomuch that they will most furiously fight with one another, and
at such times they are easily pursued and found out in their Retreats, and so
may be shot.

There are some Hounds, and especially the large Irish Greyhounds, which will
run at them; but they should always be laid on a clear Wind in diverse places to
assist each other, and the Men ought to be ready with half Pikes to assist
them, and to kill the Wolf when he is stayed; for a Wolfs Biting is mortal to
the Dogs.

If you run at the Wolf with Dogs, it must be by Day; for in the Night their
Eyes are so flaming and dreadful, that no Dog will venture on them.

A Bloodhound will draw after them very courageously, but not all Hounds; and
there ought to be particular care in the Entering your Dogs, at the first Season
in August and September, whilst they are young, to the end they may be brought
on by degrees to encounter with Old ones.

There ought to be no Law given to such Beasts of Rapine, so that you may use
Guns, Bows, or the like, to destroy them, taking all advantages of Age, Sex, or
Conditions.

I forbear to give you any further Observations of the nature and quality of
the Wolf, referring you to Aristotle, Pliny, Gesner, and others, that have
written very strange and fabulous things of them; but proceed to show you some
ways (besides hunting them at force,) how to take them by Gins, Nets, Traps,
and the like.

I shall present you with a kind of Pit-fall, which will require little or no
explanation, it is so easy to be understood; this following Figure will
describe it unto you.

Be sure your Pit be large and deep enough, Hurdle be covered with Turfs or
Earth; the Hinges on which it hangs, to be of a just balance, that the Hurdle
may turn and return upon the least Motion; the Artificial Hedge, which you see
made up of Hurdles, such as are used for Sheep-Pens, may be broad at the Wolf,
Fox, or Badger may not pass by the sides; and on the other end of the Trap
place a Goose, a young Pig, or the like: Make a Train of some Carrion to direct
and draw the Beasts to the said Trap; and it may sometimes so fall out, that
you may take two or three in a Night in the same Pit. Be sure therefore, that
the Trap do exactly cover the Hole, to the end they may not discover one
another.

Having once taken a live Wolf, you may disable him from hurting the Dogs by
breaking his lower Jaws, and then enter them at him, suffering them to kill
him, and so Reward them.

The best way to Bait the Trap, is to lay a live Lamb tied by the four Feet
just on the middle of the Trap-Door, and next to that a Goose nailed, with a
Lath over her Feet; for these two Creatures being alone, do always call out for
their Companions, and consequently do Wolf or Fox coming to jump on them is the
more surely taken, than if you should place your Bait at one end of the Trap
upon the ground.

Now if you know where a Wolf, Badger, or the like, uses to pass, you may
boldly use this Device with good success: But a Fox will be too cuning, for it
is in his nature to return whenever he meets with any new contrivances in his
Roads,

The two former ways for Baiting your Trap are very good, but I shall show you
one more that excels them; viz. Make your Trains, and always draw your Train
over the Trap, and then hang the said Train-Carrion on some Bough, which
butteth just over the Trap, so that nothing may come to reach it but by first
standing on the Trap, and so you will be sure of them.

These kind of Traps ought not to stand covered by Day, for fear of Cattle
falling into them.

I shall next describe unto you an Iron Engine for the taking them, very easy
to be made. This Figure shows its form.

The use and explanation of this Engine is as follows; and for the better
comprehension thereof, the several pieces are set down apart that go to the
composure of the whole, with the several Numbers over them.

First, Get two pieces of Iron as No. 1. each two Inches and an half long, one
broad, and a quarter of an Inch thick; these two pieces must have Supporters at
each end, as you see B. and pierced through to receive an Iron-Peg. You must
place athwart over one another, as No. 2. riveted in the middle with a piece of
Iron, as E, an Inch long, with a Ring in the end of it as R in No. 3.

In the next place, you must have two other pieces of Iron, as No. 4. six
Inches long, one Inch broad, and the sixth part of an Inch thick, which must be
a little hollowed under, and at each end LO there must be an opening like a
M^rtice an Inch long, and about a third part of an Inch broad. These two Pieces
fasten in the middle thwart each other, as No. 5. with an Iron-Pin, as MI in
No. 6. four or five Inches long, and made like a Snakes Tongue, so that that
being thrust into any piece of Flesh, the Flesh may not easily be gotten off;
the end of the said Peg or Pin I must be thrust into the Hole K, to hold the
said two pieces fixed like a Cross, as No. 7.

The next thing to be done, is to prepare four pieces of Iron, as No. 8. each
eighteen Inches long, and about a quarter of an Inch square, unless C, where
they must be somewhat thicker, that is, almost half an Inch thick, and not
square, but only where the Teeth are. The end marked A, should be rounded with
a single Supporter, pierced through in the middle; and the other end H should
be like a Fork, with a crooked Back about two Inches, as described.

All these Pieces being thus prepared* begin to compose the whole Engine by No.
1. placing them Peg E into the Hole I, that they may not stir. Then take a
piece of Iron MI, No. 6. force the end I into the Hole K, of each piece PNOL,
fixing it very fast that nothing may give way. The No. 7. shows them
altogether. Then take No. 8. and put the end A into the Mortice or opening N,
and then into one of the Supporters B of No. 3. and there fasten it with an
Iron Peg that it may play in and out, and turn like a Casement Hinges. Also do
the same with the three other of the same pieces, placing the crooked Forks
upwards, as in the three Figures which represents the whole ready Set.

Your Engine being thus prepared, carry it where you find any Carrion laid, and
about fifty or sixty Paces from the said Carrion set your Engine, and fasten it
with a Stake, or Iron-Peg, to the ground, and if it might be, place it in the
midst of some Highway, or Foot-path; or Earth the whole circumference of the
Engine, so that the middle may be half a Foot deep, like a square Bed; just in
the middle drive in your Stake or Iron-Peg, which must have a head or round
knob, that you may fasten thereto the Cord B, which holds the whole Engine.

Then cut a pretty big piece of Carrion, and fasten it to some Stick or Rope of
Hay, and Engine or Trap at a good distance, and then clap it upon your piece of
Iron M, having first rubbed over therewith the whole Engine, Rope, Stake, and
all that the Beasts may not smell your design. (But it is held better, that you
make your Train to and from your Carrion, and not your Engine; and that you
placed your Train Carrion with the rest of the Carrion, and baited your Engine
with a fresh piece) you must Carrion, with a piece of white Paper on the top of
it, to the end you may frighten the Beasts from approaching it; for they will
not presume to come very near it, but will surround it at a distance on every
side, and at length fall in with your Engine, and coming with fury to seize on
the Bait, the four Crooks or Forks H will seize on him, and the more he
strives, the faster he will be.

If you place three or four about a piece of Carrion, you cannot well miss of
your design; and that the Carrion may be preserved the longer, take care that
no Dogs, Crows, or the like, come to it.

The Badger is not very clear sighted, nor good scented, so that there is no
great skill required in taking him, a small blow on the Head betwixt the Eyes
knocks him down.

The Otter is said constantly to use his wonted Road, and can hardly be put by
it, should you make a Hedge thwart their Walks. But on the contrary, the Fox,
if he find any new thing, or any alteration in his accustomary Road, he
presently retires upon his steps, being jealous of a Surprizal.

I shall present you with a Device for the taking a Badger, but not a Fox, as
being too fearful and shy.

Provide a Stick, as the letter A, about the bigness of a Threshing-Flail, with
a Hole about four Inches distant from the great end A, and your Stick must be
sharpened at the small end. Then prepare another Stick B, which must be somewhat
bigger, but of the same length with the other; This Stick must have a Mortice
in it about four Inches from the great end B, which may play in and out, and
receive a Pulley of Wood; and the small end must be pointed. Likewise get a a
third Stick five foot long, and as big as a Man's Arm, pointed at one end, and
forked at the other, or at least Notched or Forked through to receive a Peg or
a Cord. Then have a strong treble twisted Cord, about twenty Foot long, as
marked IHG, at the end G you are to make a loop, through which pass the other
end I, and about two Foot off at H make a stay, either by tying a knot, or
which is better by whipping a packthread four or five times about, and fastening
it there. Your lord must have a Buckle, or Ring of Iron, or strong Leather, as
D, and that Ring or Buckle must have a second Cord, about two Foot long,
wherewith it may be fastened at the Hole or fork of the Stick G.

These are the chief things you are to prepare, for it is supposed you may
easily find a large Stone of about thirty pound Weight, which you are to use.

When you find that any Badger has passed, either by his Footing, or leaving
some of his Hair on the Boughs (which Hairs are whitish Engine, which seldom
fails of taking him in three or four days time. But observe that you set up the
Engine just in the Mesh of the Badger (that is the Hole, or through fair in the
Hedge, by which he passes) and about the middle of the Hedge drive in your
Stick A until the Hole be only eight or nine Inches above the Earth; and just
over against him at about a Foot distance in your Stick B, so that the under A;
set your third Stick about three Foot from your second in the Hedge, and fix it
strong; at the upper end fasten your Leather Buckle, or Iron Ring D, then
thrust the end of the Cord I, through the top of the Cord C, next through the
Hole in your Stick A, and then through the Mortice under the Pully of the Stick
B; and lastly through the Leather, or Iron Ring D; strain the end of your Cord
I, until the stay H be just at hole of your Stick A, in which hole gently put a
small Peg about an Inch long, which may only keep the said stay H from sliping
through the hole, then take your Stone or Weight of Lead, and lift it up to the
Buckle D, and fasten it to your Cord, letting it hang there. Then open your
Collar F just in the Mesh, that the Badger may not possibly get through at that
place, unless he put his Head through the Noose. In case the Mesh be large, and
that the Noose will not stand Grass; and if the Mesh be high, support your
Noose with a little Fork as K. You may try when all is right, for the least
twitch of your Noose will thence force out the Peg L, and make way for the stay
H, then falls the Stone E, and strangles the Badger.

In case you perceive that a Badger uses to cross any Highway, or to frequent
any Foot-Path, make an Artificial Hedge cross his walk, Engine; for he will
endeavor to get through, rather than return or walk about.

Your Ironmongers sell certain Engines, which they know not the use of; there
is much Art and Caution to be observed in planting them as they should be; for
one well planted is better than ten set at adventure and indiscreetly. I shall
not trouble you with the manner of composing them, because they are every where
to be bought, no^ how to open them, that being known to Fox or Badger, place
your Gin in this manner; Dig up a square plot of Ground, and bruise the Earth
to fine Dust, that it may lie smooth and plain; the midst of it must be deeper
and hollower, to the end the Bridge may have Room to play when the Beast treads
on it.

Place your Gin cross the way, by which the Vermin uses to pass; and cover
over the whole plot with Grass, or Leaves gently strewed, that the Beast may
not suspect any thing; if you did the like in two or three places, by which he
uses to pass, he would go over the more boldly. It is not amiss to make a
Train of some Carrion, to draw him on the more boldly. You may tie the end of
the Chain to some Stake, removed about four or five Foot from the Gin; and when
you are making it, let the Soles of your Shoes be rubbed over with some Carrion,
that the Beast may not perceive you have been there. This following Figure
shows the Form thereof.

There is great Art to be used in drawing on all Beasts of the Forest, as being
by nature jealous and fearful, so that your Art must be to work your Devices
with Subtilty. Therefore wherever you find a Beast has past, lay some Baits
for him three or four days one after another; and if you find them still eaten,
you may assure your self of taking him; but plant not your Engine all at once,
but first make your place ready, then let him eat out of it once or twice, then
let your Engine lie there a day or two, and if he still continues eating the
Baits, then fit it up for the taking him.

This Invention shows how to shoot a Fox, Woolf, Badger, or other Beast, if
once you know the place by which they pass, or the Earths where they Retreat by
day, which are generally in strong Thickets, and amongst Rocks that cannot be
dug; nor are these Beasts to be gotten out by force, therefore this Invention
will be good to take them. Suppose the Letters AB were the Hole, by which they
enter, drive in a Stake half a Foot long, just in the Mouth of the entrance,
and another at df, as big as ones Thumb, and about a Foot long on the other
side, within two Inches of the Hole; this Stick at the end F must have a little
Notch, as F, which must be four Inches out of the Ground, than have a Stick
hec, which must be four Fingers longer than the space between the two first
Sticks bA; at one end a must be a little Crook, and at the other end e a small
Notch; it is described in the Figure No. 17. marked OF. So is the great Stake by
OP, with the Notch at the part P.

Then look out for a convenient place, to stand about ten or twelve paces from
the hole, to make a Shoot directly into it, without the interruption of any
Boughs, Bushes or the like, as for Example at GQ, and there fasten a lusty
Stake, about four or five Foot long into the Earth, with a Head like a Rest,
and about three or four Foot near the Hole, drive in just such another Stake,
but Gun LRM, upon your two Rests or Stakes, and level it directly with the
Hole, then bind it very fast to the Stakes, so that it may directly hit the
middle of the Entrance. Your Gun being thus fixed according to Art, get a small
but strong Cord, which draw on the forked places of the Stakes just under the
Gun; at the end P tie a Stone of seven or eight pound weight, and at the other
end f a small Stick, half as big as ones little Finger, and about two Inches
long; strain your Cord until the Stone be just at the Tricker of your Gun, and
that the small Stick may be put with one end into the Notch e of the Stick aec,
in such manner that the said Stick may be about an Inch clear off the Ground,
the Stone holding all right; Then place a small thin Board, about eight or nine
Inches long, and half so broad over your little Stick, and cover it with dry
Leaves, light Dust or Grass, then cock your Gun, and Tricker one end of a
little Packthread, the other end whereof must be drawn through the Rest P, and
then tied to the Stone, and your work is done.

For there is not any Creature which passes in or out, but must tread on the
Board, which causes the small Stick to give way, and then down falls the
Stone, and off goes the Gun, which being well charged with Pistol Bullets,
cannot miss Execution, unless it happens to Rain, and the Powder that it does
not Fire, and that may be remedied by making a Case of Wood to be over the
Lock. By this means you may kill Wolf, Fox, or other Creature, if you can find
out their Retreats or Harbors, or but their usual Paths or Roads. You may also
make Trains and lay a Bait just at the level of your Gun, at about twelve or
fourteen Paces from it, all which I refer to your ingenuity, that I may not
wear out the Thread of this Discourse, and leave nothing

CHAP. XXII.
Directions for taking Polecats, Fichets, Martins, or Marterns, and the like
Vermin that are injurious to Warrens, Dovehouses, or Henroosts.
THese Creatures are found very offensive to such places as they frequent, as
Warrens, Dovehouses, and Henroosts, not only destroying the Young, but often
times devouring the Eggs.

They are great Encreasers, and if care be not taken to destroy them, they will
do great and many mischiefs. Here follows a devise to take them by Night, for
they are not often seen by day, but do either lie close in their Holes, or in
some concealed places as amongst Stones, under Logs, and sometimes on thick
Boughs of Trees.

It Is good that a Warrener do sometimes look about in such like places with a
Gun to shoot them, and not altogether to trust to his Box, or Chest-Traps,
which are here represented unto you in these Figures. The first being with a
single, and the latter with a double Entrance.

I shall show you how to make and use these Traps. Take three pieces of Oak, or
Elm Boards of an equal bigness, like that which is in the first Figure, and
marked with ABCD; let them be four foot long, and one over, and about an Inch
thick; nail them together just like a Coffin, and close up one end with a piece
of the same Boards, which must be nailed fast on, as ACEF. Likewise nail over
three main Boards, another piece, as AFGH, which must be as large as any of the
rest, but not so long by two parts in three; and for the rest of the covering
you must have another piece of the same sort of Boards. On the other side of
the Boards make a Hole with a Gimler at the places marked GH, where fasten two
Nails, which may be driven into the Board that lies on the top, so as to serve
for Sockets, or for your better comprehension as the Axletree of a Coach, so
that the Board may be easily lifted up, and let down; and at the other and ^K,
nail another piece of Timber just equal to that marked with AFGH, which must
only be fastened to the upper Board in such manner, that being let down, the
whole may seem to be some Chest close shut.

Then get two pieces of Wood as LMPQ, two Foot long, an Inch and an half thick,
and pierced at the ends LM, with a Hole big enough to turn ones little Finger
therein; then nail them on your two side Boards about the middle of them, just
opposite to each other, with a piece of Wood an Inch Square, shaped at both
ends like an Axletree, which put easily into the two Holes LM; At the middle O
of this said Axletree frame a Mortice, or hole to fasten and tie a Stick ON,
which may fall down upon the moveing Plank, when it is let down; and this is
intended to prevent any Beast from lifting up the Cover, when once it is down.

Before you nail all the Boards together, make a hole in that plank marked
ABCD, at the place marked vx, which hole should be two Inches long, and half an
Inch over, just opposite thereunto; and in the other Plank bore a little hole
with a Gimler as at R, that you may put in a small Cord there, at the end of
which tie your Tricker RST, made of a Stick as big as ones little Finger, which
though fastened at the end R, may however have liberty enough to move up and
down, and must pass through the Hole V, about two Inches out, with a Notch or
two as T: about the end of it tie your Bait on this Tricker within the
Chest-Trap, which ought to be appropriated to the Nature of the Beast or Vermin
you intend to take. For a Polecat or Fitchet use a Chicken, for a Weesil or
Martin, Eggs, and for a House-Cat some small Birds, or a Pigeon.

For the setting this Trap, you must have a strong Cord fastened upon the moving
Plank, near the middle of it marked Y toward the end; at the other end of the
said Cord tie a small Stick marked V, an Inch and an half long, and half as big
as ones Finger; formed at one end like a Wedge, so that the Trap being lifted
up about half a Foot, as you see it represented in the Figure; and the Cord
being passed over the Axletree ZO, the little Stick may have one end in the T
of your Tricker, and the other end in the Hole X, and then is your Trap or
Engine right as it should be.

If your Tricker be but a quarter of an Inch clear from the bottom Plank, when
any Vermin is once in, and gives but one touch to the Bait, which is on the
Tricker, that gives away, and down falls your moving Plank, with the Door fast
shut.

The other Trap with the double Entrance, is Vrmin you intend to take, may see
through it to behold the Prey, and come in at which side they please, and
therefore will sooner venture in.

It is formed much after the same manner with the former, only it has two
turning Planks, and falling Doors, and the Tricker ought to be in the middle at
Z. I need not give you further Directions therein, seeing you cannot miss the
hitting this latter, if you have truly comprehended the former, it requiring
nothing more than doubling the Instructions for the Trap-Doors, the Sockets,
Cords and the like. Besides every Warrener can either make them, or show you
them ready made, if in case you cannot make one by these Directions.

CHAP. XXIII.
Directions for killing Field-Mice, and Rats.
I shall in this short Paragraph give you a useful Invention for the killing
Field-Mice and Rats, being great devourers of Wall-Fruit; and it is generally
believed that Birds do the mischief, when in truth it is the Rats by Night. They
differ from House-Rats, being grayer and longer Haired, their Tails are not so
long, and have two thick knobs on them, full of bushy Hairs; they are said to
sleep about six Months of the year, viz. from September to April, and are often
found in the Roots of old Trees, and the like places. Therefore these following
Figures will show a device to take them.

I shall give some Rules and Directions for the making setting and baiting the
aforesaid Trops to the most advantage; observe the middle Figure, and by that
you may regulate your self. Get a piece of Pipe-s^a^^ two Foot and an half
long, and six Inches broad, then take a piece out of it from the pointed line g
h, about Ten Inches from the end C* D; then opening a pair of Compasses an Inch
and an half, set one foot of the Compasses at the edge g, and carry the other
foot over the line g h, q. and from thence placing one foot of the Compasses at
D, make one point or mark at the letter c* to draw a line from thence to q: Do
the very same on the other part of the Board ^ E H, then with a fine Saw cut
out your Board by the lines e q, and d i, and so take off the piece G, H.

When you have proceeded thus far, make a little kind of Gutter or Channel
along the thickness of your Board with some small Knife, just where E F, about
half an Inch broad over the two branches C D, to strengthen them, as likewise
to hold the Cord, which is to bend and set the Gin, as shall be showed in its
proper place. Next cut a piece of Pipe-stast as H C I, a little bigger than
your excision, and form it so that it may slip in and out by the Gutters or
Channels which you have made in the thickness of the main piece from whence you
cut the piece first mentioned.

This piece had need be three or four Inches longer than that which you cut
out, and in the room thereof this latter must be placed, and the other end I,
may be stoped to a point; and at the end of it bore a small Hole n thwart the
Board, wherein put a strong well twisted Cord; you must likewise have a piece
of Holly about three foot and an half long, as M K N, and as thick as ones
Finger, (if it were of strong round Whalehone it would do well) which bend like
a Bow, and at the end M, tie a strong Pack-thread which must pass through the
Hole N, of the end I, of the moving piece H G I, and from thence tie it to the
other end N of your Red or Holm; then get three little pieces of Wood as K f b,
somewhat less than ones little Finger, and place them in the Holes made six
Inches from the excision; then place the middle of your Bow upon your main
piece of Pipe-Staff at the letter K, so Crooks may be just at K, and the other
two at b, f, and between them three your Bow must he held right and firm; then
^^ a strong Cord at the Staff E* F, at the Letter ^, and at the other end a
little Stick c o, two ^nches long, and half so big as ones little Finger; the
said Cord from the letter G to this last mentioned Stick must not exceed six
Inches in length. You must have another little Stick f c, eight Inches long,
but no bigger than the former, which Cord at the middle of your Bow K, in such
manner that it may turn to which side you please* and the other end of the said
Stick must have a No^^h made in it as c, and near to it tie your Bait. The
Stick f c, and the Pack-thread (...) must be of a convenient length, so as the
piece of Wood. H G I, being drawn and stayed by the little Stick o c, whereof
the end o must be placed against the end H, and the other end e into the Notch
of the Stick f c, and so it makes up a kind of Window, or entrance about the
bigness of two Inches and an half, or three Inches, as is represented by the
Letters a, o, c, in the second Figure. The Bow M, K, N, must be so bent, that
when it is drawn as you see in the first Figure, the ends M, N, may be in a
direct line with your strengthening piece E, F. The first of the Figures is to
show the form of the main piece, as likewise the running one. The end A of the
main piece must be sharpened to the intent you may either set it against the
Wall, or on the ground, when you bend it; and about eight Inches from the end
A, at the letter L you may cut in a pretty deep Notch whereon to rest your
Foot, that you may hold it the steddier when you go about to bend your Engine.

I shall now show you how to B^it it, and where to set it up. You must Bait
before you bend: A little piece of Lard, a Candles end, or the like will do the
work, which fasten to the Stick f, e, about an Inch from the Notch c, just at
the place marked with the letter a. Then set the end A to the ground, rest your
Foot on the Notch L, take with one hand the end I of the moving piece, and
strain it until the end A be three Inches or thereabouts distant from B; then
take in the other hand the little Stick o c, and place the end thereof o just
against the end H of the moving piece, and then place the end c of the little
Stick o c, in the Notch thereof c, and so the Bow is bent as it should be. Now
for the setting or placing it, observe where the Fruit is most eaten, and there
place the Trap or Gin in this manner. Thrust the end A into any Hole of the
Wall, it matters not how little way it enters, provided it stand firm, the Bow
being undermost, that so the Vermin may go along upon it by the pointed Line A
K B, to seize on the Bait a by the opening a, o, c; and being on the Board B,
he will stretch out his Head and Legs to reach it, and of necessity will force
the little Stick o c, from the Notch c of the Tricker; then down goes the Bow
and forces on the moving piece, so that the Rat is taken by the midst of his
body. Be careful of setting this Gin that there be no Bough adjoining; for then
by the help thereof the Rat may get off the Bait, and not come upon the Gin,
This Device is also good for House-Rats.

CHAP. XXIV.
How to take Hares and Rabets by Nets, etc.
I shall next proceed to show you several ways how to take Hares and Coneys,
and so conclude this Discourse of Hunting; first giving you some Figures, and
then give you Directions for the ordering them for use.

Nets are proper either for Hares or Rabets, but they must be placed as
hereafter follows. Observe the Path or Tract in any Copice or Furrow by which
any Hare uses to pass, likewise how the Wind is, that you may so set the Net
that the Hare and Wind may come together. If the Wind be side-ways it may do
well enough* but never if the Wind blow over the Net into the Hares face, for
he will scent both it and you at a great distance. The two pointed Lines A. B.
C. D denote the Foot-path by which the Game uses to pass; then prepare three
or more Stakes, according to the length of your Net; the Stakes should be about
the bigness of ones Thumb, and about four foot long, sharpened at the greater
end, and a little crooked at the smaller R. S. T. Stick them in the ground
somewhat slooping, as if so forced by the Wind; two Net from falling, but in a
very slight manner, that if the Game run against it, it may fall down, and so
entangle him. Be sure to hide your self in some Ditch or Bush, behind some
Tree, or in such like place behind the Net, for if you should be perceived your
expectation would be frustrated; nor indeed should you walk in the Pathway by
which you expect Game to come, for they will have some imperfect scent of you.
When you perceive the Game to be past you, give a Shout, flinging your Hat at
them, which will put them into such a surprise, that they will spring on, and
run just into the Net, so that you must be nimble to take them, lest they break
out and make their escape. This Net is not so good in windy Weather as in Calm.

The middlemost of the three Figuers I shall Way and Wind. You see how the two
Cords at each end of the Net ought to be disposed; next you must have two
Sticks K, L, M, N, each four foot long, and thrice as big as ones Thumb, they
must be cut exactly smooth at each end, and placed in this manner; Take the
Stick K, L, and put it on the edge of the Way upon the Cord L, which is at the
bottom of the Net; The other Cord must be placed on the top of the Stick; then
go along behind the Net, supporting it with your hand, and place your second
Stick just as you did the first; you should endeavor to let your Net lean a
little toward the way by which you expect your Game will come, for the Game
running fiercely against the Net, will force the Sticks to give way, and so the
Net falls on him.

There is another Net represented by the last Figure, which is less troublesome
than either of the former, only it may be further discerned; however it is
excellent for Rabets in such Footpaths, where sometimes you have three or four
Couple running after one another, all which may be taken at once, for it does
not fall as the two former.

The two former are useful for taking Wolves, Foxes, Badgers, and Polecats, as
well as Hares and Coneys; but the latter only for Hares and Coneys. The true
time to set these Nets is at Daybreak, until half an hour before Sunrise; and
from about half an hour before Sunset, until Dark-night.

I shall forbear to instruct you further in the setting this last Net, the
representing it, together with the preceding Rules being sufficient, only this
is of another make, and indeed a Net enclosed within two others.

There are three or four other ways to take both Hares and Coneys with Nets at
any time of the day, especially if you know any Furz-Bushes or strong Thickets,
where they use to resort. I shall not need to trouble you with the Forms of the
Nets, only the Names shall suffice. You must observe which way in probability
the Hare will take, and at twelve or fourteen Paces distance, pitch your Net in
a Semicircle; then fetch a compass about and beat the Bush, and you cannot well
miss; for Rabets will make to their Burrows, and Hares to the Coverts.

The Nets that are of use for this purpose are called Hays, and are common to
be bought at any Shop that sells Nets; you may have them longer or shorter as
you think fit, about fifteen or twenty Fathom is a good length, and for depth a
Fathom.

Rabets do often straggle abroad about Midday for fresh Grass; when you
perceive any store to be gone forth to some remote Brakes or Thickets, get one
with you, and pitch two or three of these Hays about their Burrows, and lie
close there. In case you have not Nets enough to enclose all their Burrows, you
may stop some with Stones, Bushes, or the like; then go with your Coney-Dog to
hunt up and down at a good distance, beating the Bushes, and drawing on by
degrees, and the Man that is with you, which lies close by the Hay, may take
them as they bolt into the Hay.

Your Purse-Nets are very useful to take both Hares and Rabets at certain
times, but you must watch them, else they will soon bite through and escape;
they are to be placed in their Meshes through Hedges, and in their Burrows or
Holes. These Purse-Nets are also well known, and common to be bought in Shops
that sell Nets. Three or four Dozen of these Nets are sufficient to lay over
the Holes, and be sure to fasten them by tying the Strings to some Sticks
thrust into the Earth, otherwise when the Rabets bolt out, they will run away,
and get out of the Nets.

When your Purse-Nets are all fixed, and every thing in order, there must be
one or two to Game comes home, whilst in the mean time you beat the Bushes, and
hunting at a distance to force them home; and if in case you have not
Purse-Nets enough to lay over all the Berries, then stop those that remain with
Earth, Bushes, or the like, to keep them out.

There is another way to take Rabets with these Purse-Nets, and that is at
their coming out of their Berries, and you must Feret them out Nets over the
Burrows, and so put in your Feret, or Ferets, with a Bell about their Necks,
which will give notice of their coming to the Rabets, who endeavoring to avoid
the Ferets will bolt out into the Purse-Nets; from whence you must immediately
take them, before the Ferets seize them, and when they come out of the Burrows,
put them in again. You must Cope their Mouths, Chaps with some fine Packthread,
which will hinder their seizing on the Rabets, and sucking their Blood; for
when their Bellies are full, they will lie in their Burrows and sleep, so that
you may wait above half a day before they will come forth, so that your Sport
will be spoiled.

Some use to shoot a Gun into the Berries to awaken them; but I hold not that a
good way, for it will terrify the Rabets, and occasion them Berries.

You ought not to destroy too many Does, but of the old Bucks the more the
better.

The Hay, as well as the Purse-Nets, must be made use of with your Ferets; for
if they escape the Purse-Nets, then they are taken in the Hay.

For the keeping your Ferets observe these few Directions; Let them be lodged
in some Hutch or Hutches, or for want thereof in Tubs, with Straw, which ought
to be shifted every three or four Days; give them every Morning and Evening
some warm Milk from the Cow, and for want thereof, sometimes a warm Egg, the
white and yolk being beaten together. You may sometimes Reward them when they
hunt, with the Eye, or some part of a Rabet. You must carry your Ferets in
Bags, and so carry them home again; also feed them with Sheeps-Hearts and raw
Flesh.

As to the taking Hares and Coneys with Slipping-Knots, Collars, or the like
Nooses, although the ways are common to many, yet I shall speak something of
them.

In setting these Runing-Knots rub them over, as also your Hands and the Soles
of your Shoes, with some of the Crosels of a Hare, or with some green Wheat, or
the like; for they are of so quick a smell, that you will else be discovered.

In planting your Collar, make the least alteration imaginable; for old Hares
are as subtle and jealous as Foxes, and their custom is when they come to any
Hedge through which they use to pass, to scrape with their Fore-feet round
about the Mesh, both before and in it, ere they will adventure through, so that
you shall often find your Knot slipped aside and drawn, which you will hardly
believe; yet Experience has demonstrated it in the same, place fifteen or
twenty days together, so that for the greater security, it will not be amiss to
plant a second Runing-Knot flat on the ground, just under that which you spread
abroad, by which means you may take the Hare by the hinder parts. This second
is intended to surprise him by the Foot, and one or the other will hardly fail.

It is the nature of the Hare, being once taken in any of these Knots, to pull
with all his strength, and he seldom or never turns about like the Rabet, to
bite off the hold-fast; you should therefore use Latin-wier double twisted,
which will be sure to hold either Hare or Rabet, or else as this Figure
directs.

Take a little Stake T, twice as big as ones Thumb, and about a Foot long; at
the upper end S, make a Hole big enough to receive the Tip of ones
Little-finger; then make your Collar of strong Packthread or Wier; if of the
latter, tie the end of it to any strong Packthread, which draw through the Hole
of the Stake, and fasten it to some strong Bough, which you must bend down
toward the Stake; then put a short Peg of about an Inch long, and somewhat
less than ones Little-finger very gently into the Hole S, so that the Branch
being let go may not slip your Knot, but may stand bent. Then open your Collar
R to the largeness of the Mesh, and if any Rabet or Hare be taken, and they
turn about to bite off their Chain, they presently rub out the little Peg, then
the Bough flies back and strangles it. This is an excellent way to take any
Vermin.

I should now proceed to show you several ways to take Deer, both with Toyls or
Nets, and without, as also the manner of making them; but I forbear, lest I
should be thought to teach the Art of stealing Venison; Custom and the Laws
having so prevailed amongst us, as to discountenance all ways of taking them,
but by hunting them with Dogs.

I shall next proceed to some few Observations about Parks, and so conclude
this Discourse of Hunting, with the Laws relating thereunto, as also to Forests.

CHAP. XXV.
Of PARKS and WARRENS.
PARKS and WARRENS may not improperly be termed the Nurseries and Storehouses
of Game, as being always furnished with Deer, Hares, and Coneys, and generally
with Pheasants, and other winged Fowl. The first Roman wild Beasts, was Fulvius
Herpinus; and Varro had the first Hare-Warren.

As concerning the Situation of a Park, I shall let you know wherein the
beauty and advantages do consist; not that every place can afford such a
ground; however he that cannot have all the conveniences and benefits, should
get as many of them as the place will afford, not losing any, and not to follow
the Footsteps of some,

A Park should have three sorts of Land in it, viz. Mountainous and Barren,
Hilly and yet Fertile, Plains and Fruitful: The Mountainous part should be well
covered with high Woods, at least a third part thereof; the Downs and Hilly
part, should have one third part Coppices and low Woods; and the Plains, at
least one third part Meadows, with some Arable for Corn. A Park should not want
a River to run through some part of it; also it ought to have a small Brook or
Springs; but if Nature denies these Conveniences, Art must supply it by Ponds,
made to receive and preserve Rain which falls; and such Ponds will be very
profitable for Fish and Fowl, in some of which may be made a Decoy.

You should have your Park well stored with M^st-Trees, as Oaks, Beech, and
Chestnut, which are not difficult to be had, and are quick of growth, especially
the two last, and they exceed the former also in sweetness and goodness;
neither should Apple, Pear, and Plumb Trees be wanting, all affording good food
for them. You should also have your Park well enclosed, if possible, with a
Brick or Stone-Wall; or for want with a Pale of sound Oak, so high and close
joined, that neither Badger or Cat can creep Fox nor Wolf leap over; and for a
further defense it were not amiss to have a good Quick-set Hedge, which should
be always kept in a good Husbandlike order. Some part of the Mountain and
High-Wood may afford a Hernery, and some part of the Midling-ground may be for
a Coney or Hare-Warren. In the whole, you may breed young Colts and Horses, nor
is it amiss that in some part of the lower Ground you have a Cow-Walk during
the Summer Season. There should be at least five or six Enclosures in your
Park, that you may shut out and let in your Deer, as you see occasion;
sometimes altogether into your High-Woods, where in cold Frosts and Snows they
may be sheltered and fed by the Keepers with Hay and Provender. You may also
in Summer let such a proportion as you intend to use, be fed in better Ground
than the others which are for Store. You should also make artificial Holes and
Caverns for the Deer to retire into, as well in the hot as cold Seasons.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Terms relating to Forests, and Forest-Laws.
A Forest is a place peculiarly set apart by Royal Authority for the keeping
and preserving of Game; and to that end there are certain peculiar Laws,
Officers and Orders, many of which I shall here take notice if, and which may
at large be found in the great Charter of the Forest.

A Purlieu is Ground adjoining to Forests, which being made Forests by K. Henry
the Second, Richard the First, or K. John, were by perambulations granted by
Henry the Third, and severed again from the same. And a Purlieu-man is he that
has ground within the said Purlieu, and 40 s. per Annum Freehold; and such a
one may hunt within his Purlieu.

To every Forest does belong certain Officers. A Regarder is an Officer sworn
to take care of the Vert and Venison, to view and enquire of all Offenses
committed within the Forest, and of all concealments of them, and to see that
Officers do well execute their Office; and of these Regarders there are more or
less belonging to every Forest according to the largness thereof.

A Forester is an Officer sworn to look after and preserve the Vert and Venison
within his Bailiwick or Division, and to watch the same both by day and night,
likewise to apprehend all Offenders, and to make complaint thereof to the
Forest Courts.

A Verderor is an Officer chosen by the Freeholders of the County, by a writ
directed to the Sheriff for that purpose, and is to look after the Wood and
Grass in the Forests, and of these there are also more or less according to the
extent of the Forest.

A Raunger is to look after the purlieu and to drive back the Deer into the
Forest and to enquire after Offenders, and to present their Offenses.

An Agistor is an Officer that takes in to feed Strangers Cattle, and receives
for the Kings use all such Tackmony as becoms due for the same.

A Chase is much of he Nature of a Forest, being a place for the keeping of
Game, to which belongs also several the like Officers.

The TABLE of the Contents of the several Things treated of in the respective
Chapters in this Treatise of Hunting.
Chap. I.
THe Introduction page 67
Chap. II.
Of Dogs or Hounds, and the several sorts 68 Beagles ib. The Tirrier or Harrier
69 The Tumbler and Lircher ib. The Greyhound ib.
Chap. III.
Of Breeding of Hounds, with Directions for the Hounds, and how they ought to
be ordered by. Of the disposal of a Kennel, and how it ought to be situated for
the Convenience of the Hounds 70 Hunters Notes, with Directions for Winding the
Horn on several occasions 71 Rules for the Entering your Hounds ib. How the
Huntsman ought to Dress, Govern and attend his Hounds 72
Chap. IV.
The Common Diseases incident to Hounds, with Directions for their ^ure. ib.
The Mange, Letters, Ring worms, and S^abs in Dogs ib. To kill Fleas, Lice,
Ticks, and such like Vermin, that Dogs are subject unto 73 Of Madness ib. To
prevent Dogs from being Mad that are bitten of Mad Dogs by Bathing them 74 Of
Gauls, Tetters, Ring-worms, Cankers and dry Sores, with Directions to kill them
ib. To kill the Canker in a Dogs Ear ib. Of Dogs bitten by a Mad Dog ib. Of
Worms ib. Concerning Dogs that are Surbaited in their Feet ib. Of Bruises ib.
To Cure the Biteing, or Stinging of Venomous Creatures 75 Obstructions in the
Bladder ib. Cancers and Sores in Dogs Ears ib. To keep Bitches from being proud
ib. To heal Wounds on a Dog ib.
Chap. V.
Hunters Terms of Venery ib. Terms of Art used for Beasts of Venery and Chase,
as they are in Company one with another ib. Terms for Copulation 76 Terms for
their Noise at Rutting time ib. Terms for their Ordure ib. Terms for the
Footing and Treading of Beasts of Chase and Venery ib. Terms for Lodging and
Dislodging of Beasts ib. Terms for the Tails of Beasts of Chase ib. Terms for
the Attire of Deer ib. Terms of F^^ying, striping and Caseing of Beasts 77 The
Seasons for Beasts of Chase ib. Terms for the Noises of Hounds 78 Other Terms
to be taken notice of ib.
Chap. VI.
Of the Heart or Stag 79 In what Season the Stags Mew, and betake themselves to
the Thickets, etc. ib. Of Fraying their Heads 80 Rules to know an old Heart by
the Slot, Fewmets, Carriage, Fraying Posts, and by his Gate, Head and Branches
ib. Of the Rutting of Hearts ib. Of the Coats and Colors of Hearts 81 Their
changing their Food according to the Season of the year ib. Directions how to
use the Blood-hound or Suit-hound, for the finding out and Harboring a Stag or
Heart ib. The Chase of the Stag 83 The Stags taking Soil 84 To kill a Heart or
Stag at Bay ib. The Death of the Stag, with the Ceremonies to be used therion
ib. The Profits and Advantages accruing from the several parts of the Stag 85
Chap. VII.
Buckhunting ib. The Keeper Shooting a Buck to be run down 86
Chap. VIII.
Hunting the Roe-Buck and Do ib.
Chap. IX.
Hunting the Rain-Deer 87
Chap. X.
Hunting the Fox ib. Earthing the Fox 89 The Death of the Fox ib. Of Terries
ib.
Chap. XI.
Hunting the Badger, and the Advantanges accruing thereby. ib.
Chap. XII.
Hunting the Hare 91 The Subtilties of the Hare when Hunted. 92 How to Enter
Young Hounds to the Hare 93 The best Season of the year to hunt the Hare, with
directions how to seek her, start her, and hunt her ib. How to Reward the
Hounds when they have killed the Hare 95
Chap. XIII.
Of the good shape of a Greyhound, with directions how to choose a Whelp, and to
Order, Breed and feed him etc. ib. Coursing with Greyhounds, with the several
sorts of Courses, viz. The Course at the Deer, the Hare, and the Fox. 96 The
Paddock Course, with the Description of a Paddock ib. The Course of the Deer in
a Forest, or Purlew 97 Coursing the Hare ib. Coursing the Fox ib. The Laws to
be observed in Coursing ib.
Chap. XIV.
Treats of the Taking the Coney with Dogs, Nets, and Ferets, and how to order a
Warren, with Directions for Breeding, and keeping Tame Rabets. 98 The Ways to
take Coneys 99 Of the Ferets ib.
Chap. XV.
Hunting the Otter 100
Chap. XVI.
Hunting the Beaver ib.
Chap. XVII.
Hunting the Wild Boar 101 The Nature and Subtilties of the Boar ib. Terms of
Art used in Hunting the Boar. 102 How to know a great Boar by his Foot, by his
Routing, and by his Soil ib. How to hunt the Boar at Force with Dogs. ib.
Chap. XVIII.
Of the Polecat, Fitchet and Martern 103
Chap. XIX.
Hunting the Squiril ib.
Chap. XX.
To know by the Impression of the Foot, or by the Dung any Forest Beast. 104
Chap. XXI.
Concerning the taking Wolves, Foxes, Badgers, Otters, etc. with Engines,
Traps, etc. 104
Chap. XXII.
Directions for taking Pole-Cats, Fitchets, Martins, or Marterns, and the like
Vermin, that are injurious to Warrens, Dovehouses and Hen-roots 108
Chap. XXIII.
Directions for killing Field-Mice, and Rats 109
Chap. XXIV.
Directions to take Hares and Coneys by Nets, etc. 112
Chap. XXV.
Of Parks and Warrens 113
Chap. XXVI.
Terms Relating to Forests, and Forest Laws ib.
Chap. XXVII.
An Abstract of certain penal Laws, relating to Hunting 114 Other Penal Satutes
Relating to Forests and Chases 115
To the most noble Prince Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England.
Earl of Arundell Warren Surrey* Norfolk and Norwich, Baron Howard* Mowbray
etc. Chief of ye. illustrious family of ye. Howards Lord Leiutenant of y^.
Counties of Norfolk Surrey and Berks* Counstable and Governor of Windsor Castle
etc.

This Plate is humbly dedic^^^ by Ric. (...).



THE COMPLETE ART OF FOWLING.
PART IV.
Containing great variety of Experimental Secrets, for the taking of all FOWL
both by Land and Water; by Bird-Lime, Snares, Traps, Nets, Engines, Bird-Calls,
Decoys, Intoxicating-Baits; the Fowling-Peece, Stalking-Horse, Setting-Dog,
Spaniels, etc. Illustrated with great variety of useful Figures, for the better
Explanation thereof.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction; Showing what Fowling is, with the nature of the several
sorts of Fowl; Their Haunts, etc.
FOWLING is an Art for the taking all manner of Fowl, either by Enticement or
Enchantment, as Calls, Intoxicating Baits, or the like, or else by Guns, Nets,
Engines, Traps, Setting-Dogs, etc.

Now forasmuch as the Fowl on which this Art depends are various, and indeed
numerous, so that to run into all the Particularities would viz. Waterfowl and
Land-fowl.

Waterfowl may also be distinguished into two several kinds, that is, such
that live of the Water, and upon the Water, by gathering much of their food
from thence, and Swiming for the most part on the surface thereof; and such as
live of the Water, but not upon the Water, as by the gathering of most of their
food from thence, but not Swiming upon the same, more than wading with their
long Legs, and diving with their long Necks for the getting their food therein.

Such as live on the Water, are Wild-Geese, Swans, Mallards, Teyls, Curlues,
Widgeons, Moor-Hens, Dabchicks; and generally all such that are Web-footed and
I Swim. Those that live of the Water, and not on the Water, are Herons, Cranes,
Bitterns, and any Fowl that has his sustenance in the Water, and yet has his
feet Cloven, and Swimeth not. And there are some which may not improperly be
termed Amphibious, as partaking of the Land as well as the Water; and such are
the Sea-Pies, which are not Web-footed, and yet can Swim.

Land-fowl are properly those that have their sustenance and abode only on the
Land; either in Woods, Coverts, Enclosures, Vplands, both Arable and Pasture;
in Marshy Grounds, or by and near Houses, Hedge-rows, and Highways; And these
Fowl may be distinguished under the general name of Fowl; and such are
Pheasants, Partridges, Heath-Cocks, Plovers, Lapwings, Wood Cocks, Snipes,
Ring-Doves, etc. also small Birds, as Quails, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Starlings,
Larks, Wheat-Ears, Chawfinches, Sparrows, with abundance of other sorts, too
tedious to name.

Now for your better effecting the taking of the aforesaid Fowl and Birds, I
shall first give you some Instructions how to know and find out their haunts*
and then proceed to the several Waterfowl are the sub^^les^ of Birds, and have
the greatest regard to their own safety; whence it is that they are compared to
a well governed Camp, having Scouts on Land afar off, Courts of Guard,
Sentinels, and such like watchful Officers, surrounding the Body, to give a
speedy Alarm at any approach of seeming danger. And indeed, whosoever shall
observe their manner of living shall Fowl aloof of the main Body, which upon
any suspicion of danger take Wing, and give notice to the rest* and it is the
nature of Waterfowl, to fly in Flocks, loving Society. The like does
Starlings, (...), Ringdoves, Plevers, Lapwings, ^aws, etc.

Of the Haunts of Fowl.
THe greatest thing of moment for a Fowler to understand is the haunts of Fowl,
and accordingly apply himself to take them. In order thereunto take notice,
that all sorts of great Fowl that divide the foot, have their residence by the
edge of Shallow Rivers, Brooks, Rivulets, and ^lashes of Water, and these keep
not in flocks together, but are single, or here and there a Couple together,
which makes them difficult to be taken by (...), or the like; but are
River-Hawks that can be, especially the H^^n, that takes the greatest delight
in such like places, where he may wade and dive in for the getting of Fish for
his sustenance. They also delight in low Marshy, S^dgy, and Boggy Grounds;
likewise in the dry parts of drowned Fens that are overgrown with Reeds,
^ushes, and Sedge* and in such places the Bittern naturally delights, as being
a melancholy Fowl; they also delight in half drowned Moors, Heaths, or Downs,
that is sheltered with Hedges, Bushes, or Trees, where they may obscurely lurk.

For the lesser Fowl, and such as are Web-footed, they frequent those Fenny and
Moorish Grounds that are continually overflown, where they may sw^m free from
disturbance of Man or Beast; they also affect the man Streams and Channels of
large Rivers, with swift and deep Currents; but the Wild-Goose, and the
Barnacie, delight not Water above their Sounding; for when they cannot come to
the bottom to suck up the ou^ or the fatness of the Water, they seek new
places. They also greatly delight to feed on green Winter-Corn, especially
where the Lands are low and drowned with Water wherein they may paddle and
bathe after feeding.

The smaller Fowl do also delight to feed in drowned Meadows, Moors, and such
like places; also upon Plashes, Meers, Lakes, and Loughs, which have the
shelter of Shrubs, Reeds, and such like things for their preservation from
danger.

As to the haunts of Pheasants, Partridges, Woodcocks, Snipes, Quails, and
other Land-fowl, I shall speak of it when I treat of each in its proper place.

CHAP. II.
Directions for the making of Bird-Lime, and Lime-Twigs or Rods; and how to
apply them to use for the taking of Fowl and Birds.
THe best Season for making of Bird-Lime, is between the tenth of June and the
end of July, at which time the Sap is strongest and quickest in the Bark; but
rather about Mid-summer Moon: And then take the Bark of Holly, put it into fair
Water, and boil it six or seven hours, and when it is so soft that you may
pinch it through with your fingers, it is enough. Then take it off the Fire,
peel away, the Inner white ^ind* which cast away, and the green Bark (which is
for your use) lay in some damp and moist place, covering it over with green
Weeds, and as they wither put fresh thereon; and thus do for about nine or ten
Days, by which time the Bark or Rind will be all rotten, with a white ^oar over
it. Then put it in a Mortar, beat it very fine like Green-Sawce; then wash it
very well in Runing-water, to get out all the filth, making it into small
Balls, the better to squeez out the filth with your hands in the Water. And to
know when it is washed enough, it will swell in your Hands; and then keeping it
still washing, it will fall a little, and be fine and white, which is a sign
that it is enough.

Being thus washed, put it into a Stone-Pot, fill it about three parts, because
it will work and swell, and keep it close covered to preserve it from the Dust:
In three or four days it will have done working, and then keep it for use.

If you will have it for Water-Lime (which must be very strong;) then after it
has done working, as aforesaid, take what quantity you please, put it into a
Skellet, to which put the like quantity of Venice Turpentine, as also the like
quantity of Goose-Grease, with about half a quarter of a Pint of Aquavitae; let
these boil gently on the fire, keeping it always stirring; and to know when it
is enough, have a Pail of clean Water, in which put Halt a Crown; then put the
Stick which you stir the Bird-Lime with down into the Water to the Half-Crown,
and when it brings it up it is strong enough, so that you may take it off the
Fire, and put it into a Pot or Ports for use.

This Bird-Lime will never Freez, and therefore in the extremity of Frosty
Weather you may use it in stead of the weaker for Land- fowl or Birds; And if
for Waterfowl, so stick the Twigs in the Banks, and up and down the sides of
the Ponds that about a handful of the Twigs be under Water, and if it touches
but the foot, or the feathers of a Fowl, it will hold her.

Of Rods and Twigs.
THe next direction shall be touching your Rods and Twigs, which must be bigger
or lesser according to the strength of the Fowl you design to take; and of all
others, those of Willow are the best, as being the toughest. You must also be
careful how to plant your Twigs; for example, for great Fowl they must be at
least half Heads inclining from the River, for no Fowl will come up against the
Rods; and you cannot plant less than two or three hundred in a place: In the
morning early visit your Rods to see what Fowl are taken; and if none, then
beat about the Banks of the Rivers, and the like places for about half a Mile
compass, to force them to your Rods, if possible, against the next Night.

In large deep Ponds and broad Rivers where Rods, you may use this Device;
fasten two Poles, on each side of the River one, and strain your Cord, which
must be artificially daubed over with Bird-Lime, and let it remain a little
above the Water; to facilitate which, tie at certain distances little Bundles
of dry Rushes, or Pease-hawm handsomely compacted; and this Device will not fail
to take good store of Fowl, especially Duck, if any frequent the place; and two
or three times a day; especially Mornings, Noons and Evenings see if any Fowl
are taken.

To place Lime-Rods for the Land for taking small and Great Fowl.
YOu may plant your Lime-Twigs, or Rods on the Land, especially in Green Wheat
for Pigeons or Partridges; and if the Weather be hard, for Wild Geese; but if
you plant for heavy great Fowl, your Rods or Twigs must be proportionable; and
you ought to lie near hand concealed, that you may run in with your Spaniel on
any occasion. Hares and Coneys may be also taken by this Device. You must place
your Rods slope-wise, and the tops not above four or five Inches from the
Ground, at about half a Yard distance, and as it were in Ranks.

The small and straight grownd Twigs cut from the Willow-Boughs are the best,
and must be greater Fowl you design to take, but not very big that they may be
pliable and wind about the Feathers of the Fowl they touch. These Rods or Twigs
being thus prepared, let the upper part, or half, be daubed over with strong
Bird-Lime which must be well melted by the fire and even laid on, that Fowl may
not discern the Bird-Lime.

Being well acquainted with the Haunts and Feedings of Fowl, either before
Sunset, or before day, go with your Rods to the said places, and there pin
down a Stale, that is, a live Fowl of the same kind you design to take, but
with liberty to flutter up and down at pleasure; then round about it within a
Foot of each other, prick down your Rods slopewise in ranges, some one way, and
some another, about a foot high; and the more Rods you have to stick down, the
better success you will have. If you design to take Pigeons it were not amiss
to have two or three of these Stales tied down; and near the said Rods scatter
some grains of Corn, the better to entice them to the Rods. You must lie
concealed, but in sight of the Rods, and you should have small Strings tied to
the Stales running along the Ground unto you, which by giving a twitch will
cause them to stir; so that the other Fowl seeing, will light in amongst them,
and if with convenience not frightning away the others, you may take these that
are entangled, if not, let them flutter and tumble amongst the Rods. For the
better facilitating your Sport have a well taught Spaniel, that when any Fowl
offers to get away, your Dog will bring them to you; for in Flocks, especially
of Pigeons, there will be work enough for both.

It were convenient to keep some for Stales for the like occasion; And when
your Sport is done, gather up your Rods or Twigs, bundle them up and keep them
for further use; and thus you may do Morning and Evening during the Season of
the Year.

To take small Waterfowl with Lime-Rods.
THe aforesaid Rods may be used for taking Waterfowl, and then they must be
trimmed, and sized out according to your use, and the depth of the Water; for
the deeper it is the longer must your Rods be, and they must be trimmed with
the strongest Water-Lime. For the placing these Rods stick them in the Water as
you did those on the Land slopewise, and amongst your Rods here and there stake
down a Stale or live Fowl, either Mallard, Teyle or Widgeon, as you can get;
and place your Rods very thick, the better to take them. You need not watch
your Rods as you do for Land-fowl, only visit them two or three times a day, as
aforesaid, always having with you a good managed Water-Spaniel to find out
those that are escaped with the Twigs, as for other uses.

For the taking of Wild Geese or Barnacles, which commonly feed and frequent
together, their haunts must be found out; and their most certain place is upon
Green Winter-Corn that is remote from Houses. Your Rods must be large for such
great Fowl, and placed slopewise in Rows, about the Water-furrows, and in the
midst, so that they cannot come to the Water without touching them. Let the
Rods be of a dark color, resembling the Earth, and you should be near hand to
make in, for when any of them are taken they will flutter, and the rest will
take Wing; and if any do endeavor to escape (not b^ing thoroughly Li^^ed) your
Spaniel must retrive them whilst you take up those that are entangled.

To take small Birds by Lime-Twigs and the Lime-Bush.
FOr taking small Birds with Twigs, get up before Day, and go to their Haunts,
and all along the Hedges place your Lime-twigs, some upright, Birds cannot well
pass in or out without being entangled. Having thus set the Twigs (which must
be after the Birds are gone into the Fields to seek their Breakfasts) go into
the Cornfields, or Meadows near adjoining where they usually feed, and with a
Pole beat or fright them up, and they will betake themselves to the Hedges for
Sanctuary, and are so taken. This exploit is to be done about the Spring, in
Harvest, and at Leaf; also early in the Morning and about Sunset before they
go to roost.

For the better taking the Birds get an Owl, and tie him in some part of the
top of the Hedge, and the Birds seeing it, will come to gaze upon it, and so
will become ensnared.

LIME-BVSH.
THe Lime-Bush is esteemed a very good way Birds, which is thus done; Cut down
an Arm, or chief Bough of any bushy Tree, whose Twigs are thick and long, yet
smooth and straight, as the Birch, Aspen, Popler or Willow; then neatly cut off
all the superfluous Twigs, and having your strong Bird-Lime well mixed and
wrought together with Capons or Goose grease, warm and fit to work, daub over
(of an equal thickness) the Twigs or Branches that are left within about four
fingers of the bottom, but the Body Arms must be free.

Your Bush being thus prepared and Limed, place it for the Spring season on
some Quickset or dead Hedge near unto a Towns end, a Farm yard or the like; In
Summer and Harvest in Groves, in Hedges near Confields, Orchards, Flax, Hemp,
or Rape-Lands; and in Winter about Barns, Stables, and Stacks of Corn, where
Chaff and Corn is scattered up and down.

Having set your Bush in any of the said places Bush you should have about half
a dozen Stales fixed, whose chirping and singing will entice others to the
Bush; and it were not amiss if you were expert in their Notes to imitate them,
which practice and due observance will bring you unto; and for the effecting
it, be provided with Bird-calls which are of several sorts, some being made of
Wood, others of Tin, Horn; also some of Vellom, and some of Cane, etc.

This Bush is also of excellent use in the Winter for taking Feldefares, which
usually fly in great Flocks, and settle upon Trees; so that being provided with
one or more of them which fasten upon Trees, and having fixed thereon some
Stales, beat about the adjacent Grounds to raise them up, and when they epsy
the Stales they will light on the Tree and Bushes for Company, and so are taken.

These Birds do also resort unto Hedges for the Haws; so that it is good to fix
your Twigs thick up and down in such Hedges with some Stales.

Also they use much Marshy low Grounds to get Worms; so that they may be taken
with your Lime-Twigs set up and down slopewise as before directed.

How to take Woodcocks and Snipes with Bird-Lime.
IT is by observation found, that a Disease is half cured when found out: so
likewise it is easy to ensnare any Creature or Fowl, if their nature is
rightly understood, and what they delight in either for Food or Exercise. But
these Birds are difficult to discover, lying close, and not resorting much
together, especially in the Day.

The nature of the Snipe is to lie in Frosty-weather, when all Plashes are
frozen, by the sides of Rivers, and always with their Heads up or down the
Stream, and not thwart it; and for the finding them out, you must be expert in
the knowledge of the color of their Feathers.

The Woodcock does usually lie on Banks by Hedges and Ditches, against the Sun;
and note, that a Day after a Moonshiny-Night they will endure one to come
better to find them, than after a Dark-Night, and the reason is, for that in
Moonshiny-Nights they can see to feed, and will not be so still and watchful
taking their rest.

Now for the taking them with Bird-Lime, you ought to be provided with about
sixty or seventy Twigs, which must be exactly and smoothly Limed; and having
found their haunts, which you may know by their Dung, which is generally in low
Plashy places, and such as are subject to Weeds, and not frozen in
Frosty-weather; and at such places set your Twigs more or less, as you think
fit, at about a Yard distance one from the other, and let them stand slopeing,
some one way, and some another. If you design to see the Sport, you must lie
concealed. And if there be any other open place near to that where your Twigs
are set, beat them up, or else set your Twigs also there.

It Is said, that these Birds do put their Bills into the moist places of the
Earth where they frequent, and so jogging and moving them about disturbs the
Worms, and cause them to come up, and so they become their Prey.

How to take Pigeons, Rooks, and Crows, upon new Plowed or Sown ground.
TAke a good quantity of small Lime-Twigs, or strong Wheaten-Straws of a good
length which must be well Limed; these lay up and down where they frequent, and
they will soon be entangled therewith; and for the better drawing them to your
Twigs or Straws, you may be provided with two or three Pigeons tied to the
ground amongst your Twigs.

Another way to take Pigeons, Rooks or Crows, very pleasant.
TAke some thick Brown-Paper, cut a Sheet into about 8 parts, and make them up
like Sugar-Loaves, then Lime the inside of the Paper indifferent well three or
four days before you intend to set them; then put into each Paper, toward the
further end, two or three Grains of Corn, lay these Papers up and down the
Ground, and as near as you can under some Clods of Earth, early in the Morning
before they come to feed; for the quantity you may use your discretion, Corn,
and begin to peck them out by thrusting in their Heads; then are they
hood-winked, for they cannot get it off by reason it sticks so close to their
Feathers; when they find themselves thus served they take Wing, and will fly
bolt-upright until they have spent themselves, and then come tumbling down to
the delight of the Spectators.

If you use this Invention in Plowing time, instead of Corn you may put into
the Papers Worms, which will do as well.

CHAP. III.
Compositions and Baits for Intoxicating
THere are several Artificial Compositions and Baits for Intoxicating Fowl, and
yet without tainting or hurting their flesh, so that it is unfit to eat; some
of them I shall mention.

Take a Peck, or a lesser quantity of Wheat, Rye, Barley, Pease, or Tares; to
which put two Nux-vomica, and boil them in Runing-water very well, until they
are almost ready to burst; then take it off the fire, and when they are cold
strew them upon the Land where you design to take the Fowl, and such that eat
thereof will immediately be intoxicated, and lie as if dead, so that you may
take them up at pleasure, provided you stay not too long (for the dizziness
will not last long upon them, therefore be near at hand;) and it were not amiss

As the greater sort of Land-fowl are thus taken, so may you take small Birds,
only making this alteration, that instead of Wheat, Pease, or the like Grain,
you use Hemp Seed, Rape-seed, or Canary-seed, but above all Mustard Seed.

If you approve not of Nux-vomica, you may boil the said Grains or Seeds in the
Lees of Wine (the stronger the better) as you did in the Runing-water, and
apply them to use as aforesaid, and it will work the same effect, being
esteemed more wholesome, having nothing of that poisonous nature in it; but in an
hour or two the Fumes will be perfectly wrought off.

Instead of boiling the said Grains or Seeds in the Lees, you may steep them
therein; but then they will require longer time before they are sufficiently
swollen and fit for use.

Or instead of Nux-vomica, or Lees of Wine, you may infuse the said Grains or
Seeds in the Juice of Hemlock, mixing therein the Seeds of Henbane and Poppy,
or either of them. These must stand two or three days infusing, before they are
fit to strew on the Ground for use, as aforesaid.

Having showed you how to take Land-fowl, it will be necessary to give you some
Instructions to take Waterfowl, especially at such times as they range up and
down to seek their food on the Land; for effecting of which,

Take the Seeds, Leaves and Roots of the Herb called Bellenge, and having
cleansed them from all filth, put them into a Vessel of clean Runing-water, and
let them lie steeping therein at least twenty four hours, and then boil them in
the said Water until it is almost consumed; then take it off the fire, let it
cool, and scatter it in such places where the Fowl have their haunts; they will
greedily eat it, so that they will become immediately intoxicated, and lie in a
Trance as if dead; but you must watch them, for the Fumes will soon wear off.

Some do add to this Concoction the Powder of Brimstone boiled therein, which
is very effectual.

For destroying Crows, Ravens, Kytes, and such like mischievous Birds, that are
found injurious to Warrens and Parks for the killing Coneys and Lambs, as also
Chickens: Take the Garbage or Entrails of any Fowl, or for want thereof of a
Pig or Rabet; this Garbage steep in the Lees of Wine with Nux-vomica, and when
it is well infused therein, cast it forth in such a place where these Birds use
to prey, or resort, which must be very early in the Morning, or in the Evening;
and having a place prepared to lie concealed in near at hand, you may take
those that are Intoxicated by the eating a bit or two of the said Garbage.

Or instead of the Garbage, you may take little pieces of flesh, and thrust
therein a small piece of Nux-vomica, closing the place that it may not be
discerned; and scatter the said pieces up and down where their haunts are, and
it will do the same effect.

Having showed how to take Fowl and Birds by intoxicating Baits, I will give a
Receipt how recover them, that they may be made Tame.

Take a small quantity of Sallet Oil, more or less, according to the bigness of
the Fowl or Bird, and drop it down its Throat; then chafe its Head with a
little strong Whitewine Vinegar, and it will soon recover, and be perfectly
well.

SHOOTING FLYING

To the Honorable Thomas Fairfax Es^ eldest Son of ye Rt Honbl* Henry Lord
Fairfax of Denton in Yorkshire.

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

it in good Order, and for that purpose observe these few directions. Keep it
always in a Case either of Wood or Cloth, in a dry place, for the Damp spoils
and rusts it. Let your Lock be kept always clean and oyled, that the Cock,
Hammer, and all the parts may be of a nimble Motion, upon the drawing the
Trigger. Also a good Flint is of necessary use; and indeed the Fowler ought to
be provided with several in his Bag, for fear of any Disaster of the other. The
Barrel must Fowl are alarmed, and so escape, with several more ill Conveniences
that may attend.

You must also be well acquainted with the condition of the Gun, whether it be
apt to scatter, or carry the Shot round within compass, Fowl, then the Shot
must be large, and there must be more Powder, and less Shot; and if you shoot
at a single Bird, then less Powder and more Shot; for the former will scatter,
and the latter fly close and compact.

Directions about Shooting.
IN Shooting, whether the Game be Flying, or on Ground, on a Tree or Hedge,
always (as near as you can) endeavor to Shoot with the Wind, and not against
it; and rather sideways or behind the Fowl, than in their Faces; and not at a
single Fowl, if you can compass more within your Level; and if on a Tree,
Hedge, or the Ground, seek the convenientest shelter you can of Hedge, Bank,
Tree, or the like, to be absconded from the Fowls seeing you, which is very
offensive to them; and being within Shot, and

A Spaniel of great use.
YOU must always have your Spaniel, which must be trained up for the Sport (of
which more in the Chapter of Land-Spaniels) attending you very close, to fetch
what you have Shot, as well those that are killed, as those that are maimed,
and it may be all, or most of them Waterfowl) are not to be conveniently come
at by you, so that they would be lost, were it not for the assistance of your
Dog, who upon your word of command, immediately seeks them out, and brings them
to you. And be sure to have your Dog in such Obedience, as not to stir from
your Heels, until you have shot, and give him the word of command to go; for to
rush forth too suddenly upon the first fire, or snap of the Cock when it is
probably the Gun goes not Dogs will do, may be the loss of your Game by
Springing them.

Shooting Flying.
IT is now the Mode to Shoot Flying, as being by experience found the best and
surest way; for when your Game is on the Wing, it is more exposed to danger;
for if but one Shot hits any part of its Wings so expanded, it will occasion
its fall, although not to kill it, so that your Spaniel will soon be its
Victor; and if well disciplined to the Sport, bring it to you.

For your better instructions herein, I shall lay down some few Directions. The
Gun most proper for this sport, should be about four Foot and a half long in
the Barrel, and of a pretty wide Bore, something under a Musket. You should
have your Gun always Cock't, in readiness with your Thumb over the Cock, for
fear of its going off contrary to your intention; so that when you meet with
any Game, you must be quick, and having got an aim to your mind, let fly with
all Expedition.

Some are of Opinion that you must Shoot something before the Fowl, otherwise
it will be past before the Shot can come to it; but that is a vulgar Error; for
no Game can fly so quick, but that the Shot will meet it; for the Shot flies
as wide as about the compass of a Bushel, if rightly ordered in the Charging:
Yet I am of the Opinion, if the Game flies as it were over your Head, that
it is best to Aim at the Head; and if it flies from you, to Aim as it were
under its Belly. And it is found best to let the Game fly a little past you
before you let fly; for thereby the Shot will the better enter the Body.

Your next business must be to be provided with one, or at the most two
Spaniels, such that are rather slack metled, not ranging out of Shot, than
those that are hot Spirited, to raise the Game beyond Shot, and withal such
that are at good command, being Trained up to bring the Game, and tender
Mouthed, so as not to tear and spoil them.

Now for your better sport, it were good to have a Companion also expert in
this exercise, who must be provided likewise with a Gun; then let one go on the
one side of a Hedge, or Field, and the other on the other, provided the Field
be not too broad, and beyond the reach of your Guns to the midst thereof; then
cast off your Spaniels to range about betwixt you^ (...) near at hand,
observing to follow their Motion, so that (...) any Game is sprung up, you or
your Companion may be in reach thereof; the like observe if you seek for Cocks
or Snipes about Plashes. But above all things observe that you Train up your
Spaniels, so that they may hunt not straggling, but in compass.

If you design for Cocks, and in a Wood, you may use two or three Spaniels; and
if you had three or four Men on Trees to observe* that when the Spaniels have
Flush't any, he that sees it, should say I have Marked, which gives notice to
him that Shoots to come, and make his Shot. If you design to kill Ducks, use no
Dogs to Range, but only to follow you close behind, for those sort of Fowl will
rise fast enough.

For your Learning to Shoot Flying, the Spring is the best time for Swallows or
Swifts, and you will not miss of them in Churchyards, and such like places.

This Method of Shooting Flying, may be performed also on Horseback, which is
more commodious and less Toilsom; but then your business must be to bring your
Horse to good command, and to understand his Duty, which he may be soon brought
unto, the chief thing being to stand still upon the least check of the Bridle,
but chiefly not to start at the noise, or report of the Gun.

CHAP. V.
Of the Stalking-Horse, with several Artificial Engines, for the getting near
to Fowl to Shoot them.
FOr as much as Fowl do frequently lie remote from Shelters, so that the Fowler
is deprived of a Shot; Therefore by the Assistance of a Stalking-Horse, he may
command a Shoot at pleasure, and to that end observe these Directions.

Let your Stalking-Horse be of the largest size, it is no matter how old he be,
but he must be Art in Reclaiming a Horse, which by Nature is Wild and Fearful
of Noise and Fire, such as that which a Gun makes, (especially at that nearest
unto him) therefore get a strong Chain, and fasten it about his Head, then tie
him up to a Tree, and Fire your Gun near him, giving him your Encouragement by
Voice and Hand, stroaking him, and so continue Shooting near him several times;
and although he continue his kicking and capering, yet in about a Weeks
Exercise after this Shoot under his Neck, without the least reluctance or
stiring. But some are of the Opinion, that during this teaching* the Horse must
be kept waking in the Nights, and to Shoot under his Neck as well as in the Day.

Having thus brought him to endure the Noise of your Gun, your next business
must be to Train him up to go as you would have him, moving gently

Now for this Exercise your Horse must be Naked, that is, without Bridle and
Saddle (for that will fright the Fowl, and cause them to take Wing) only to
have a small slip, about six or eight Foot long, tied about his lower Chap,
wherewith you may guide him as you see cause; and Shoulders, for thereby his
Fore-feet will guide yours; and be advised to take your Level, from before his
Breast, and not under his Belly, for that is too open and often lays you to the
View of the Fowl, whereby you lose them. By this means you may gently, cause
him to move up and down, to Stalk over Rivers, on the Sea-shoar, in Moorish
Grounds, Dry Lands, Stubble Fields, or the like places; and as he moves he
will Feed: You must Shelter your self, and Gun behind his Foreshoulder, bending
your Body low by his side, and keeping his Body always full betwixt you and the
Fowl. Then having chosen your Mark, take your Level from the forepart of the
Horse, which is more safe and surer than under his Belly, and less perceivable;
for the Shoulder of the Horse covers the Man's Body, and his Legs the Man's
Legs.

You ought not to endeavor the coming nearer the Fowl than your Piece will
carry, nor to discharge out of Distance; for by the latter you are sure to
miss, and by the former you hazard the disturbing them.

Some are of Opinion that to Shoot over the Horses Buttocks is the best way,
and others are of the contrary, holding it best to Shoot over his Neck; but
these ways I think not so good, yet leave them to your Judgment, and to use
which way you find best.

You must upon no Account be without your Spaniel, which must be so exactly
Trained up, that he may lie by your side until you have made your Shot; for if
you appear in View, the Fowl will never permit you to come near them; and when
once you have Shot, then give him your word of Command to fetch the Fowl unto
you, especially those that you cannot come at, which with practice he will soon
be expert in, for they are Creatures of a great knowledge, and ready
Apprehension, and naturally inclined to the Sport.

And for as much as Stalking-Horses are chargeable to keep, and that you cannot
always have one at command, I shall furnish you with other cheaper Inventions,
with the help of which you may approach near enough, to make a Shoot at the
most coy Fowl that are.

An Artificial Wheel-Barrow for Stalking.
TAke a Wheel-Barrow made of light Fir for the purpose, and build it about with
Boughs and Bushes, so that you sit in it, and not be discerned, and when you
come where the Fowl are, move it very gently, that the Fowl may not discern it
to disturb them, then Level your Gun through the said Wheel-Barrow, and Shoot
kneeling, your Spaniel being always in readiness, and at command to fetch your
Game. But this Invention is something troublesome, therefore I shall proceed to
some others more commodious.

The Stalking-Tree and Bush.
THe Artificial Tree is thus made: Take small Wands, or thin Splinters, foulded
together in the shape of the Body of a Tree, and so covered with Canvass, and
painted like the Bark of the Tree it represents, that it may not be discovered
by the Fowl; of which the Poplar and Willow that grow by the Rivers sides are
the best, as being most known to the Fowl, and so the less to be suspected.

STALKING

To the Honble. Sr. Henry Goodricke of Ribston Park in Yorkshire Knight and
Bart. his Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the King of Spain. Anno Dom^.
1682/3;.

This Plate is humble dedicated by Richard Blome

Arthur Soly fecit ^683



Having made the Boal of the Tree, as aforesaid, in certain Holes made on the
Top for that purpose, stick in the Boughs and true natural Branches of the Tree
which you would make, in such sort as they grow at that Season, according to
this following Figure.

As for the Stalking-Bush, it must not be so Tree, but much thicker, and may be
made either of one Bush, or of several neatly entangled and made fast together,
and about the Man; and in the midst of the bottom must be a small Stake, with
an Iron-point, to drive into the Ground to support the Bush whilst you take
your aim. This way is so easy, that there needs no further explanation.

The Stalking-Hedge.
THe Stalking-Hedge should be two or three Yards long, and about a Yard and an
half Hedge, with certain Supports or Stakes, to bear it up from falling whilst
you take your aim to Shoot. And this is to be carried before you for your
Shelter from the Fowl.

These dead Engines, which carry not the shape of a living Creature, are not so
necessary and useful to stalk with, as for a Stand; for their seeing a dead
thing move will cause apprehension of fear and danger in them, as some design
against them; therefore I shall give some Examples of such living Shapes whose
motion is not strange unto them; and first of the Horse.

An Artificial Stalking-Horse.
TAke some old Canvass, cut it into the true shape of a Horse with the Head as
if feeding; then paint it like a Horse of a Brown color, which is best. It
must be made so portable, that it may be easily carried with one Hand, so that
it may be moved in such manner as if it grazed as it goes, nor must it exceed
the usual bigness of a Horse; and to make it so light, it may be stuffed with
Straw. In the midst let there be fixed a Staff, with an Iron-pick in it, to
stick down in the Ground at pleasure, and to stand fast whilst you take aim to
Shoot, as also to turn and wind any way for the advantage of the Wind, or the
like. This Figure shows its form.

There are some of Opinion, that the stuffing the Canvass thus out is not so
good as unstopt, being more troublesome to command; but if unstopt, it must be
artificially painted, and very thick, lest in the turning it against the Sun it
appears transparent, which will affright the Fowl; and it must be
proportionable to a Horse, being stretched out upon Splents of Wood, or strong
Wier, This is so easy to be made, that it needs no Figure to explain it; and
it were not amiss, if you cut a little Hole through the Shoulder-part, to level
your Gun.

Instead of this Artificial Stalking-Horse, you may make in Canvass (either
stuffed or unstuft) the shape or proportion of a Cow or Ox, which must be also
very well painted to the life, and according to the usual color of Cattle in
those parts, and be very exact in the Horns, to make them suitable to the Breed
of that sort of Cattle there usual; and thus by the change of your Engines you
may make your Sport the longer to continue.

If you design these Artificial Stalking-Engines for Fowl that flock together,
especially Waterfowl, they will soon grow too crafty for those unstuft; but
for Pheasants, Woodcoks, and the like, there cannot be a more useful and cheaper
way than the unstuft; for when you have made a Shot, you may roll up your
Engine, and keep it for another occasion.

To conclude this Chapter, observe this Caution, That these several sorts of
Engines are to be used early in the Morning, or late in the Evening, and they
are more proper for Water than Land-fowl; for when the Sun is up, its
reflections sooner discovers the Imperfections in your Engine, which the Water
better hides.

CHAP. VI.
Of a Decoy-Pond, with some Directions concerning the same, and Decoy-Ducks.
THe Fifth Chapter teaches you several ways to take Fowl by Stalking-Engines,
for the getting near to Shoot them; I shall now speak of Decoys, by which means
great store of Ducks and Teal are drawn into a Snare, and that by the subtilty
of a few of their own kind, which from the Egg are trained up to come to hand
for the same purpose.

These Decoy-Ducks fly abroad, and light into the company of Wild ones, and
being become acquainted with them, by their allurements do draw them into the
Decoy-place, where they become a prey.

The manner of doing it, and the making the Decoy-Pond, with the several
Apartments belonging to it, requires a long Discourse; nor indeed can any
particular Rules or Directions be given therein, as being variously made
according to the Kingdom, especially in Lincolnshire, Cambridg-shire, and such
like Fenny Countries; for it must be Moist, Moorish, and Fenny Grounds, with
the convenience (if possible) of a River running through, or by it; so that I
shall only say, that the place where these Decoy-Ducks entice them, must not be
very Osiers, and at the Top and Entrance must be Nets to let down by the Man
that is to attend it, when he sees the Ducks all entered in, by which means
they become taken.

And great care must be taken, that the Nets are not let down until all are
within the limits of the Nets; for if any should escape it would be very
prejudicial, for such a Duck, or Ducks, would be shy of being drawn into the
like Snare again, Decoy would be much prejudiced.

CHAP. VII.
Directions for the making, choosing, ordering and preserving Nets.
BEfore I enter on the ways of taking Fowl with Nets, it will be necessary to
give you some Directions touching the making, choosing, and preserving them,
left the charge exceed the profit; for Nets are a dear and perishing Commodity,
without due care in the well ordering them; and it were very good Husbandry if
you, or any belonging to you, had the Art of making them, for some are very
chargeable to buy. The Instruments or Tools required for the making them are
Wooden-Needles, of which you should have about half a Dozen of several sizes,
and as many Moulds of diverse sorts, some round, and others flat; also a pair of
flat Round-pointed Scissers, and a Wheel to wind off the Thread. It cannot be
expected to give Rules for the knitting or making the several sorts of Nets,
but it is requisite to be understood by every complete Fowler, were it only for
the mending them abroad as well as at home.

But a word or two concerning the making thereof: Let your Packthread be the
best and evenest you can get, and greater or smaller, according to the Fowl you
design to take; the like must be the Meshes; for great Fowl, let the Meshes be
about two Inches from point to point, for the larger they are (provided the
Fowl cannot get out) it is the better to entangle them. Let your Nets be not too
deep nor too long, for that is troublesome to manage; let them be well verged on
each side with a strong twisted Thread.

As for the Coloring your Nets, they should be either yellow, green, or
russet; the latter is done by putting them in a Tanners-Pit, where they must
lie until well colored, and this Tincture is also an excellent preserver of
them: The second color is Green, which may be thus made; Take green Wheat,
chop it, and boil it in Water, and then rub your Nets therewith, and let them
lie infusing therein about twenty* four hours; this is the color that Birds
least fear, as resembling the Grass. But to be more exact in this color, it
were well to have it done by some Silk-Dyer. The Yellow is done by steeping the
Net in the Juice of Salandine, which being dried in the shade will become a
good yellow; for it must not be over-bright, but of the color of Stubble in
Harvest time, for which Season this Color is most proper.

For preserving your Nets, be sure to keep them dry; and to that end, hang them
abroad in the Sun whenever you have used them in the Dew or Rain. And be
careful to mend the least Rent or Breach upon the first discovery, lest it
become worse; and be persuaded to hang your Nets from the Wall, to prevent
their being injured by Rats and Mice, which are great Enemies to them. What
relates more to Nets, I shall speak of when I treat of each sort.

In the next place I shall proceed to the use of Nets for the taking Fowl and
Birds, both for River and Land.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the taking of Partridges with Nets, as also with Calls, Engines, etc.
PARTRIDGES are for the generality cowardly and fearful, likewise very simple,
and easy to be deceived with Nets, Baits, Trains, calls, Engines, etc. so that
the taking them may be obtained by a Man's own and only labor and industry with
great ease and pleasure.

The most usual ways are by Nets, Engines, Calls, by the Setting-Dog and
Stalking-Horse; for as touching the killing them with the Hawk it is treated of
in Hawking; therefore I shall omit it here.

In the first place, it is necessary to know their Haunts, which are not certain
like Pheasants, but Cornfieldsd, during the time that it grows, or is standing,
for under that Covert they shelter and breed, nor do they quit the Cornfieldsd
after Harvest, for the Stubble, especially of Wheat, affords them shelter and
food; but when the Stubble is soiled or trodden down with Cattle, then they
forsake it, and betake themselves to the Barly-Stubble, and in the Furrows
amongst the Clots, Brambles, long Grass, and Fog, hide Cov^ys.

Upon the approach of the Winter Season, when the Stubble-fields are broken up,
or that it is trodden and spoiled with Cattle, they betake themselves to
enclosed Grounds and Vpland Meadows, and take Covert under Hedges, amongst
Mole-hills, at the Roots of Trees, amongst Broom, and in the foggy dead Grass.
You shall also find their Haunts all the Year long in small Coppices or
Underwoods, especially if adjoining to Cornfieldsd; also in Closes pestered
with Shrubby-Bushes, Brambles, Broom, Fern, or the like Covert; also in the
height of Corn-Harvest, when the fields are pestred with People and Cattle to
disturb them; they frequent the Fallow-fields all the Day, and early in the
Mornings and late in the Evenings come thither to feed.

Having knowledge of their Haunts, according to the situation of the Country,
whether Mountainous or Plain, Champain or Woodland; and the Summer or Winter;
Your next business is to find them out in their haunts, and where they lodge,
and this is done diverse ways; some there are that will find them out by the
Eye, although they lie never so close couched together, distinguishing them by
their color from the Earth, which is an Art not to be taught, but only by
practice; and in seeking them this way, make your approach nearer and nearer
unto them until you perfectly discern them (provided you do not stand at gaze
upon them) but keep in a continual motion, looking another way as if you saw
them not; for they are a lazy and fearful Bird, and unwilling to take Wing.

Partridges may also be found out by their Haunts where they did last couch or
lie; that is, whether the Haunt be Old or New, which may be thus known. If it
be new, their Dung will be green and soft; also the padling with their Feet
round about will be soft and dirty, and the Earth will appear new broken, and
of a darker color than that round about it, and if very new the place where
they sat will be warm and the ground smooth, with some Down, or small Feathers
scattered upon it. If the Haunt be old and long forsaken, the Dung will be dry
and brickle, their Treading will also be dry, rough and hard, and of the color
of the rest of the ground; for the less dry, clean and soyled the Haunt is, the
longer has it been left; and the more moist, dirty, etc. the later was it
since they were there.

If you find the Haunt to be new and warm, then be assured they are not far
off, if not forced away be some disturbance; therefore be very careful and move
with leisure, having regard to the Furrows of the Lands, to the end you may not
raise them, and there is no doubt but that you will find the Covey, and so soon
as you do, immediately wind off from them, and look not upon them but
carelessly cast your Eye another way, and so fetch a large circumference about
them, and lessening it by degrees until you have discovered them; and although
they lie dispersed (as often times they do) as being the nature of the old Ones
to lie a little distance from the Covey, yet you need not fear the taking them.

To take Partridge by the Juck.
THere are others that find them out by going to their Haunts very early in the
Morning, or at the close of the Evening which is called Jucking time, and there
listen for the calling of the Cock-Partridge which will be very loud, and with
no small eagerness, upon which the Hen will answer him and soon come together,
which you may easily know by their chattering, and rejoying Notes, upon which
take your Rang about them, drawing in by little and little to the place where
you heard them Juck, and be sure to cast your Eye about, especially toward the
Furrows, and without doubt you will soon discover how they lie, and accordingly
proceed to take them.

To take Partridge with the Call.
IT is an excellent way to take Partridges with the Call, concerning the making
of which, and the manner of using it, I shall speak of more anon.

With this Call having learnt their true and natural Notes, and being expert to
tune every Note in its proper Key; and arrive to the knowledge of the due times
and Seasons for every Note which are as various as the Pheasant, if not more;
then being prepared with your Calls, go to their Haunts very early in the
Morning, or late at Night, (the rest of the Day being inconvenient) and having
placed your self secretly, so as to see and not be seen, as if in Wood-lands
under some Bushes, Brambles, or the like; If in the Champain, under some Bank
or Ditch, If in Meadows, under the Hedges, and if in Cornfieldsd in the
Furrews. Then listen Call, and accordingly answer them with your Call in the
same Note, always altering, or doubling it over more or less as the Partridge
does, until you find it draws nearer and nearer unto you, and not only one
single Partridge will come, but all that hear it, as being so natural to them.

Of the Net.
THe Net for taking Partridge should be Phea^an^-Net, only the Mesh must be
somewhat smaller, but as to the color it may be the same; yet some are of
Opinion, that it were not amiss if it were somewhat longer and broader, for
thereby you may catch them with the greater certainty, your circumference or
walk about them being the larger, and will cover more ground, but let not your
Net be so long, or broad as to be cumbersom unto you; For that will rather
obstruct than further you; The Nets, if for a Covy should be sixteen or twenty
Yards long, and four or five deep; and if in Paring time, then eight or ten
Yards long, and about four deep; And let your Lines and Cords be answerable.

Having your things in order, and found out a Covy, draw forth your Nets. And
taking a large circuit about the Partridges with a quick pace and Nets for the
purpose, then begin to draw in your circumference less and less, until you come
within the length of the Net; then pricking down a Stick about three Foot long,
to which fasten one end of the Line of your Net, and making it fast in the
Earth as you walk about without making any stay, you shall then (letting the
Net slip out of your hands) spread it open as you go, and so carry it and lay
Partridges; but if there be more than your Net will cover by their straggling,
then draw forth another Net, observing the same method and joining them close
together, and after this manner you may do with a third, if occasion requires.
And having thus covered them, rush hastily into them, and with an affrighting
noise force them to Spring, and thereby they are entangled and may be taken
without hurt. And in this manner you may take them at all Seasons, Haunt,

The Tunnel-Net.
THe most usual way to take Partridge is with a Tunnel-Net, the form of which
is here represented as extended and pitched.

This is a Net so well known, that it is needless to give any further
description of it.

Having found out a Covy, take a compass, and so pitch the Net at a good
distance from them, but sometimes farther, and sometimes nearer as the Ground
falls out, and then surround them with your Stalking-horse, or for want thereof
with the Artificial Stalking-horse or Ox, as in the fifth Chapter treated of;
and gently drive them toward the Net, not coming on them in a direct Line, but
by windings and turnings, and sometimes standing still, as if the Horse
graised. If in case the Partridge make a stand, and look up, it is a sign they
are afraid and intend to take Wing; therefore make a stand or a little retreat,
and when you find them quiet after a little respite that they are busy in
seeking for Meat (which is a good sign they are not afraid) you may move
nearer; and if any single Partridge lies remote from the rest, he must be
fetched in by taking a circumference about him, and thus they may be driven
like as it were a Flock of Sheep into a Pen. But a live Horse made for the
sport does far exceed the artificial Stalking-Horse, or Ox.

The Wings of the Tunnel must not be pitched in a direct Line, but inclining to
a Semicircle, when the Partridges are at the mouth of the Tunnel the old ones
will stand a while as if to consider, but pressing gently on, some of the young
ones will venture in, and then all the rest will follow, upon which make in
apace to secure them from returning back and making their Escape.

Of the Spread-Net, or Drag-Net.
THere is another way to take Partridges with a Spread-Net, which by some is
called a long Tramel-Net, the Figure thereof is here described.

The use of this Net is thus; a little after Sunset go into some Field, or
place where you think to find sport, and there hide your self, and you will
soon know if there be any by their Calling and Judging, and then they will take
a small flight, and often times two or three before they go to roost; and be sure
to observe exactly the place where they roost, by making some Mark at a
distance, to the end you may not be to seek the place in the dark, Then prepare
two strait light Poles which must Net is broad, which to do well should be
about fifteen or twenty Foot, and of a proportionable length; As to the Poles
they need not be all of one piece, but of two or three, well fixed together
fasten the Poles upon the ends of the Net with small Cords, and let the Tail of
the Net have three or four little Cords fastened with small Bushes to trail on
the ground, that the Partridges may be forced to spring up when they hear the
rus^ling noise. They are represented by the Letters M, N, O.

This Sport cannot well be performed without one to assist you; Then being near
the place, unfold your Net where the Ground is clean, and being extended each
must lay hold on the middle of the Poles, listing up the higher end of the Net
about five or six Foot from the Ground, and letting the lower part follow
slopeing about half a Foot from the ground. The Cords with the Bushes must drag
on the Ground, and should not be above two foot Partridges rise both must let
go their hands, and let the Net fall on the ground upon them Sometimes it so
falls out that the Partridge rise before the Net be over them, which may be
occasioned by the too great noise you make; therefore be as still as possible,
and if so, then let them rest at least two or three hours before you attempt
any thing again; then march over the whole Field with your Net ready set, and
it is ten to one but you will meet with them

This way is good only in dark Nights, therefore some use to carry a Light, or
some Fire with them, which the Partridges perceiving believe to be Daylight,
and are discovered by the noise they make in wakeing and stretching out their
Wings; then they hide the Light and draw the Net over them.

How to take Partridges with Lime-Rods.
TAke the largest and strongest Wheat-straw you can get, or for want thereof
strong R^e-straw, cut them off between knot and knot, observing that the lowest
joints are the strongest and best. These Straws lime with the strongest
Bird-Lime you can get or make, in doing of which observe the same way as
formerly directed for preparing your Lime-Rods. Then go to the Haunts of the
Partridges and call them, and if you are Limed Straws in several cross-rows,
not only cross the Lands, but the Furrows also, taking within your
circumference two or three Lands; Then lie down close, and call again, not
ceasing till you have drawn them toward you, by which means they will be no
sooner touched but entangled and besmeared, so that you may take them.

By the way take notice that this manner of taking Partridges is proper only
for Cornfieldsd, and chiefly in Stubble time. But if you would take them in
Woods or Meadows with Bird-Lime, then use the ordinary Lime-Rods as before
treated of, and order them as the Lime-Straws.

Taking Partridges with an Engine, or Driving them.
THe taking Partridges with an Engine is no less profitable than either of the
other, and somewhat more delightful; you may use this way in any Grounds; The
manner how to do it is thus, first make an Engine in the fashion of a Horse of
Canvas stuffed with Straw according to the examples of artificial Stalking-Horses
already treated of.

Having this Engine and your Nets in readiness, go to their Haunts, and having
found out a Covy, pitch your Net with the greatest advantage of secrecy you
can, lying on the Ground that they do not see you until they are entangled; for
by gentle Steps you may steal upon them, and drive them before you, like as it
were Chickens, provided you are not too hasty; If they run any By-way or
contrary to that which you would have them, then cross them with your Engine,
and they will presently run back into any Tract you would have them; and thus
by a gentle and slow pace you may drive them into your Net. Be sure to take the
advantage of the Wind. Let your Nets be pitched slopewise, and let your Face be
veiled over with something Green or dark; Blue Sarsenet is very good.

Several sorts of Pitfalls above and under Grond, for taking whole Covies of
Partridges, as well as single ones, or indeed any other Birds.
THere is a cheap invention for the taking of a Covy of Partridge, or any other
Birds in Flocks, or single by a Pitfall. You are not obliged to wait upon it,
except to vvatch others from stealing your Game when taken. The Engine is
represented by this Figure.

It is composed of four Sticks, or pieces of Timber AB, AD, CD, and BC, each
about three Foot long, and bored through within two Inches of the end, with a
Hole big enough to turn ones middle Finger in. They must be placed on each
other in a Square, and let into each other about half the thickness of the
Stick; then take two Hazel tough Rods about the bigness of ones Finger, each
four or five Foot long, which must be fixed in the forementioned Holes,
crossing them over each other, Angels, as the Corner Sticks in Cages use to be
laid; then you must have store of light strait Sticks, longer than each other
by degrees, about the bigness of ones Finger, which you must compile one over
another, the longest first and the shortest last up to the height of the
crossing of the two Rods, so that the whole will resemble a kind of Be Hive;
but remember to leave a Hole at the top, to be covered or uncovered with Stone,
or the like, to take out the Birds when they are in the Pit-Fall. You must at
last bind the end of your Sticks to the two Rods with Oziers, strong
Pack-Thread, or small Cords, and this is all that belongs to the Pit-Fall. But
for the erecting or tilling it up do thus. Take a Stick FG, Three Foot long,
and the bigness of ones little Finger, which must be smoothed above and below;
then tie the end F, with a little Cord to the middle of the foundation Stick
AB, the Stick FG, must have a small Notch in it about two Inches from the end.
The next thing is to provide another Stick IK, about a Foot and a half long,
with a small Cord fixed on the upper end thereof, where you may place another
little Stick GH, half a Foot long, having the end G shaped like the sharp end
of a Wedge, the lower end of the Stick IK, must be fixed into the Earth, which
being done, the fore part of the Pit-Fall DE, will come to be lifted up, and
then place the end H, of the little Stick HG, Cage to support it, and the other
end shaped like a Wedge into the Notch of the Stick FG; then let the Pit-Fall
rest gently on it, and it will be ready set with one side lifted up about a
Foot high, and the Stick FG, will be about three Inches from the Ground; then
strew your Bait under the Cage. If you are certain there is a Covey which
frequents any Ground, if you can entice them to feed in one certain place but
two or three times, you may then plant your Pit-fall Pit-fall will serve to
take small Birds, Hares, Rabets, or Vermin.

Directions to take old Cock Partridges, with Natural and Artificial Calls,
with Directions to make them.
THis way of taking them is laborious, and requires much exactness in
imitating their Voices, and at last you can pretend to take but one at a time,
however that there may be no deficiency, in giving you the secrets in this Art
of Fowling, I shall show you several ways to take Partridges with Calls.

You must know that Partridges begin to pair, or Couple about February, or the
beginning of March, if the Weather be not cold, and do continue in their Woings
until the end of July.

It has been the Opinion of several, that one Hen will fly to the Call of
another, moved thereto through jealousy and fear of losing their Cock; and
that they fly on purpose to beat that Hen that calls; but there is no such
thing, the occasion of this Error has proceeded from hence, that there are
some Cocks that call just like Hens.

This Sport may be practiced every day, during the aforesaid Woing Season, from
Day Break, until Sun Rising, and from Sun Setting until Night. This ensuing
Figure does represent the manner how to take them.

Suppose the space from H to J, be a Hedge that encloseth some piece of Wheat,
Barley, or other Grain, set your Hen Partridge in a fine open thin Wire Cage, so
as she may be seen at a good Distance, but not the Cage, the Letters T, V, X,
is the place where she must be placed, then pitch your Net called a Hallier,
quite round, as you see it formd by the Letters, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S,
each part distant from the Cage about twenty Foot, then retire behind the
Hedge; if any Cock Patridge in the Ground Call, the Hen will presently Answer,
nor will the Cock fail to come unto her, and sometimes five or six will come
together and fight with each other just under the Net, which of them shall have
the Hen, until at length some of them find themselves entangled: In this case
you are not presently to sally forth, for peradventure some more may be
likewise ensnared; nor can they soon disintangle themselves.

I shall give you one caution to save a great deal of pains, that is, never
pitch in any place but where you have heard some Cock call; and then to pitch
within sixty or eighty Paces of him, that they may be within hearing of each
other.

Let your Cage be colored green, and let the Bars be at such a distance, that
the Hen may thrust out her Head and Neck to hearken and Call; and if you have
well Trained her to this sport, she will be industrious at it.

How to make Artificial Calls.
YOU have had Instructions as to the Natural Calls, now follows to speak of
Artificial ones, with directions how to make them; these following Figures do
represent the Forms thereof.



The first shows the Outside, and the second Box, Walnuttree, or such kind of
hard Wood, and formed as you see like a Boat, and about the bigness of a Hen
Egg, with two ends AB, bored through from end to end; and that about the middle
DC, there must be a Hole about the bigness of a Sixpence hollowed within to the
bottom; then Pipe of a Swans Quill, and the Bone of a Cats Foot opened at one
end, which you must convey into the Hole A, and so thrust it on to the opening
D, the other end of the Bone A must be stopped; then take a Goosquil opened at
both ends, which must be put in at the Hole B until the end C be near the end D
of the Bone, and that blowing at the end B, you make the Noise of the Cock
Patridge, which varieth much from the Call of the Hen; and you must remove
further, or nearer the end C of the Quill, from Bone B, until you have found
out the exact Note, for it is not soon done, your Call being fixed, and that
you are expert in the Notes, get a Net called a Pocket Net, the form of which
is here described.

To this Net fix a pliant Stick of about four or five foot long; and so you may
go abroad early in the Morning, and late in the Evening, or as occasion serves,
when you hear a Partridge Call, the manner of pitching the Net, and the placing
your self, is represented in the said Figure; for Example, suppose you heard
the Partridge Call at A, then hide your self flat on your Belly at B, having
planted your Net just in the Way or Furrow, betwixt your self and the
Partridge, but within ten or twelve Foot of the Net, especially if there be any
Bush or advantage of Ground to shelter you. The way to set the Net is thus; Tie
the Packthread, Number 1, which passes into the Buckle Number 2 of the Net,
unto the end of the Stick, which must be stuck in the Ground, and so bending it
like a Bow, fasten the other end of the said Stick in the Ground on the other
side or Furrow, having in like manner tied to it the end of the Packthread
Number 3, which passes through the Buckle Number 4, so that the two Buckles 2
and 4 may come pretty near each other; then take one end of the Pocket-Net,
Number 5 or 6, and cast it over the bended Stick, so that it may lie thereon,
the other end may hang on the Ground in such manner, that if any thing
endeavor to pass by that way, it must needs run into the Net. Every thing
being in order, and that you heat the Partridge Call, you must return two or
three Answers louder or softer, according to the distance from whence you hear
the Call, and only so loud as to be heard, and the Partridge will presently
make near you; then give him a soft Call; when he has answered your first Call
he will begin to run, and coming near the Net will make a little pause, and
forthwith rush on so that the upper part will fall on him and entangle him,
then take him out; and after this method you may take several. But this way of
taking them lasts only during the time of their Breeding, which is in April,
May, June, and July.

Another way to take Partridge with the Call, and a Broad Net.
HAving found out the Partridges by your Call, as aforesaid, pitch up your
Broad-Net, which should be about fourteen or fifteen Yards long, and seven or
eight deep. This Net spread over the Ground near them, the length-ways Net to
the Ground on all sides, except that toward them, and that raise up in the
midst by a Stick about four Foot long, with a Notch in the Top, the better to
hold the Line of the Net from slipping, and bend the Stick from the Net to make
it the stiffer, which Stick must be thrust into the Ground, the better to hold
it.

Your Net being thus fixed, you must have Natural, or an Artificial
Stalking-Horse, to drive them into the Net; but I hold the Natural one the
best, which must be one that is trained up for the Sport, as already taken
notice of in the fifth Chapter.

Directions to take Partridges in hard Frosty-weather with Slipping-Knots.
IN hard Weather, whilst the Snow is on the Ground, and that Birds are very
hungry, make your search in small Coppice-Woods, and in Corn-Lands, especially
near little Springs where the Snow does commonly lie; and if you find, Dung,
that they have been there; then cleanse away the Snow about thirty Foot square,
and your small Hed^e, as before directed, thwart the Lands that are sowed, and
in the bottom of each Furrow plant the Snare, or Runing-Loop of Horse hair,
just the height of the Partridges Neck; then strew a little Oats or Barley on
both sides the Hedge, and let it be ready fitted by Sunset, and by Morning you
may expect to take Bait twice or thrice before; for the expectation of finding
food will entice them to come.

The same Art may be used when there is no Snow; if you are sure the Partridges
frequent any certain place, and if it be Pasture-ground, it is then in vain to
make your Hedge rows; you need only in that case to plant the little Stakes
confusedly up and down in good quantities, with little Runing-slips and Loops,
and throw some Grains of Corn near every one of them. I will not say you may
take a whole Covey; but questionless if a Covey light amongst them, you will
take the greatest part.

If you plant these Devices in April, May and June for old Cock Partridges, you
must then be sure to make a kind of a Slopeing in your Passage where your
Collar is placed, that the Partridges may be forced to stoop with their Heads;
for else they run at those times to Couple with each Heads aloft; and without
this Caution you will not take one in an hundred.

I should here speak something of the Setting-Dog; but by reason I design a
Chapter for that purpose, I shall omit it here.

CHAP. IX.
Directions for taking Pheasants several ways.
PHEASANTS, as well as other Fowl, are to be taken diverse ways. I shall name
those in most use, which are performed with the Gun Spaniel, with Nets, with
the Call, with the Lime-Bush, or with particular Engines, of which there are
diverse kinds, and of sundry shapes, according to the Season of the Year they
are to be used in, and the manner of the place in which they are to be used.

Pearching of Pheasants, and Shooting them.
YOu must be provided with a good Spaniel, that will Range well about, and when
he has Pearched the Pheasant, to Bay soundly, which will cause them to keep
the Perch the better; then hearing whereabouts he is, make up to him as
privately as possible, and having espied him (being at a reasonable distance)
make your Shot; and for your Dogs encouragement, let him bring it to you, and
make much of him.

For your Dog, it may be either a Land or Water Spaniel, or one betwixt both,
provided he is trained up to a Gun, and to bring his Game to you.

If you desire to take them in the Night (provided it is Moonshine) the places
where they usually Perch (if it be Windy) are upon the lower Boughs, near the
Body of the Tree; but if in a clear and fair Night, or although a little Rainy
they will set at the further ends of the Boughs; and when you find them, make
your Shot.

You may have a Dog to fetch them to you, in case they are not killed dead, but
run away, as having broken a Wing; but your Dog should not Bay and make a
Noise, as in the Day.

They are to be found in Cornfieldsd and Hedge-rows at other times, where they
may be Shot and Pearched, as aforesaid.

Taking Pheasants with Nets.
FOr the taking Pheasants with Nets, which is only in Crowing-time, that is,
about the end of February, and in March, before they begin to breed: It is done
either generally, or particularly. Generally, when the whole Eye, that is,
both the Old Cock and Hen, with all their young Ones, or Powts, as they flock
and run together in the thick Woods or Coppices, are taken; or Particularly,
when you take none but the Old, and such of the Young as are of Age fit for
Coupling, so that you cannot have any assurance with your Nets, to strike at
more than one or two at a time; for the Pheasant is of a Melancholy and Sullen
disposition, and when once they have Coupled do not accompany in flocks as
other Birds.

Now for the greater facility of taking them you must be acquainted with their
Haunts, and their usual places of Breeding, which are in thick young Coppices
well grown, and free from the annoyance of Cattle, or the Path-ways of Men; for
being of so fearful a Nature, they esteem the strength of their Covert their
only safety, and do not abide or breed in open or plain Fields, nor under the
Covert of Cornfieldsd, low shrubby Bushes, or in large and tall Trees.

Having found their Haunts, the next thing will be to find out their Eye, or
Brood, which may be done several ways; But take notice that Pheasants do
usually come out of the Woods and PEARCHING the PHEASAN^

To The Right Honble: Kenneth M'Kenzie Earl of Seafort: Lord M'Kenzie, and
Kentaill, Baron of Ardelu, Islandonan, and Lews, Shiriff principal of the
Shires of Ross. and North Nass. etc.

This Plate is humble dedicated by Richard Bl^me.

Arth* Soly fecit

the aforesaid Game off from their own Ground, yet would be glad to preserve
them for their own use, and so to manage the Game, that they might always have
some thereon as well to please them selves, as to delight a Friend that
desires to see some Field Sport; for the benefit of such, this follovving
Invention is very proper and Delightful. When you perceive an Eye of Phesants,
or Covey of Partridges to Haunt such a Ground, go thither, and in some place
thereof distant from any Hedge, Bush, or Gate, about forty or fifty Paces pitch
up four Sticks, each a Foot long in a Square; and in the middle of the Sticks
scatter four or five handfuls of Oats, Barley or Wheat; and as you walk through
the Ground from the Sticks, scatter a few Corns, which may serve as a Train to
draw on the Game, to the great heap in the midst of the Sticks. The Pheasants
or Partridges coming to feed according to their use, will soon find out the
Train, and consequently the great Bait. The Furz; if they eat the second time
(which you may discern by their Dung) notwithstanding the Furz Bushes, then
against the next coming cross some Lines of Packthread in Form of a Net, and if
for all this they come and Eat, you may be assured to take them when you
please, with this

Take away the Sticks, Furzbushes, and Packthread, and then pitch the Net as is
here described.

The four main Supporters of the Net, A, B, C, D, must be fixed strong in the
Ground, that the Net may be light spread on the Top. The four Sides of the Net
must be ordered in the same manner as shall be now directed by the Example of
one of them, according to the description in the said Figure. Lift up the Side
of the Net designed by the Letters E, F, over the Top of the Net that is
spread; for the Side must not lie flat, but stand sloping like a Pent-House
supported by small Twigs; the Bottom fastened in the Earth, and the Cord or
Verge of the Net resting on them; then place the four Furz-Bushes at each
Corner of the Net, the more to embolden them; and be sure the Running Cord of
the Net be exact and right, the two Ends whereof must be tied to a strong Cord,
designed by the Letter G, which Cord must reach to the next Bush or Shelter
where you lie concealed, but within view of the Net. When all is fixed, spread
your Bait as formerly; but try once or twice how the Net will draw, that upon
occasion all may be in good Order. The best time to wait their coming is at
Daybreak, when they are all busy in Eating the Bait; then draw your Line with
a quick Motion, and presently fix it to the Bush where you are, and make all
possible haste to the Net, to prevent their escaping.

If you have a desire to preserve a Breed in your Grounds, then kill the Cocks
and keep the Hens until toward Lent in some convenient Room, and then put them
out into your Grounds, and they will soon find Cocks for a Breed.

To take Pheasants without hurting them, for preserving the Breed.
Grounds, or accomodating a Friend; having found their Haunts (which is easy
to be done by their Calls, Crowing, and little Paths which they make,
especially in the Dew) then place your self for the better view on some Tree
without Noise; and when you find they are there, strew a little Barley, Oats,
or Wheat in those little Tracts for a Train, and in some likely place lay five
or six handfuls together, to which they will come, as being drawn thither by
Train; then provide for them after this manner: Plant your Pocket-Net,
described by the last Figure in the Eighth Chapter, the Use of which is in the
said Chapter at large treated of. You may set two or three of them in other
places, and plant cross their Walks some short Nets, called Pocket-Hayes, made
as here described;

They are about a Yard long, and sixteen Inches deep. You may also in other
Paths place three or four of your Collars of Horse-hair in certain fit Passes
athwart their Paths, to take them by their Legs, and be sure to watch out very
narrowly; the first that is taken will struggle hard to get off, so that speed
is required to prevent it; he will also make a great Cry, which may occasion
the frighting away the rest that are near at hand, so that nimbleness is
required; Strings, they will hazard the breaking the Lines and their own Legs;
and you should not forget to Bait the Passes to the several Snares.

Of Driving of Pheasant Powts.
FOr the Driving and Taking young Pheasants, called Pheasant Powts, in Nets,
observe these Directions.

Having by your Diligence and Skill found out an Eye of Pheasants, place your
Nets cross the little Pads and Ways that they have made, which are much like
Sheep-Tracts; and if possible, you should find out one of their principal
Haunts, which may easily be known by the bareness of the Ground, their Mutings,
and the Feathers that will lie scattered about; and always take the Wind with
you, for it is their custom to run down the Wind;) place the Nets hollow,
loose, Ground, and the Upper-side lying hollow, loose, and bending, so that
when any thing rusheth in, it may fall and entangle it.

Having so sixth your Nets go to the Haunts, and with your Call, if you find the
Eye scattered, Call them together; and when you find that they begin to Cloock
and Peep one to another, then forbear Calling, and take an Instrument, Driver,
which is made of good strong white Wands, or Osiers, such as Basket-Makers use,
which must be set in an Handle, and in two or three places; it must be twisted
or bound about with small Osiers, according to this Figure.

With this Driver, so soon as you see the Pheasants gathered together, make a
gentle Noise on the Boughs and Bushes about you, which will so fright them,
that they will get all close together, and run away a little distance, and
stand to hearken; then make the same Noise again, which will cause them to Run
again; and observe the same way until you have driven them into your Nets, for
they may be drove like Sheep. But if it happen that they take a contrary way,
then make a raking Noise, as it were in their Faces, which will presently turn
them the right way, as you would have them.

Observations in Driving.
IN using the Driver there are two chief things to be observed; The first is
Secrecy, in keeping your self from their sight, for if they espy you they will
run and hide themselves in Holes under Shrubs, and will not stir till Night:
And the other thing is Time and Leisure; for rashness and too great haste
spoils this, and indeed any other Sport.

To take Pheasants with the Lime Bush, or Lime Rods.
IN taking Pheasants this way, you must know their Haunts; and be provided with
good strong Bird-Lime, and trim them therewith according to Art.

The Lime Bush used for this purpose should not contain above eight Twigs, and
should be the Top Branch of a Willow-Tree, with an indifferent long Handle,
made sharp to stick into the Ground, or into some Shrub or Bush; and it were
not amiss if you planted your Bush near that Branch of a Tree that the Pheasant
uses to Perch upon; and you should be furnished with two or three of them, to
fix up and down for the surer taking them.

The use of the Lime Bush.
WHen you have placed these Lime Bushes, take forth your Call, and use it as
before Call is good, and that you are expert therein: And as they are taken by
the Rods on the Ground, so you will surprise them with your Bushes; for being
scared from below they will take Perch, as is natural unto them, to see what
becomes of their Fellows; and when one is Limed, what by her striving and
struggling, and by the rest coming Limed.

It is the nature of old Cock Pheasants when you call, to come flying from
Perch to Perch till they come near you, and not to run upon the Ground,
especially in the Winter Season, which is the chiefest time for the using the
Lime Bush, and as soon as they light on any of those Pearches where your Lime
Bushes are placed, upon the least touch they will be taken.

It is very requisite to count all your Lime Rods; for when you have gathered
up all the Pheasants, and see what Rods are wanting, you may conclude that some
Pheasants are run with them into the Bushes; so that it will be necessary to
have a good Staunch Spaniel, that is well trained up to hunt, and bring his
Game to you with a soft Mouth without hurting it.

The Form of the Lime Bush and Rods.
Rods, as well as the Bush, may be placed upon Bushes, Shrubs, and Trees, as
well as upon the Ground, and in any open place Bird must pass from one place to
another.

The Lime Rods must be set slope-wise, and for the generality cross one
another, and not only one way, but the quite contrary way, so that the Points
be severed agood distance from one another, and place them in Rows; which being
duly observed, no Fowl can come any way but they must be in danger of touching:
And, for a Caution, place them not too thick, for that will occasion fear in

The Season to be observed for the use of the Nets, Lime Bush, and Rods.
THe Use of the Nets is from the beginning of May till the latter end of
October.

The use of the Lime Bush, and Rods, is for the Winter Season; viz. from the
beginning of November March or April, so that there is no time of the Year (but
their Breeding time) but that they may be taken in.

To take Pheasants with a Cocking-Cloth, in Crowing time.
TAke a Cloth of course Canvas about an Ell square, which put in a Tan-Pit to
color hem it about, and to each Corner of the Cloth sow a piece of Leather
about three Inches square, and put two Sticks to go cross-wise to keep it out,
as A, B, C, D, and there must be a Hole in the Cloth to look out of, as E; the
Figure describes it.

And being provided with a small short Gun, when you are near enough hold out
the aforesaid Cloth at Arms end, and put the Nosel of the Gun out of the Hole,
which serves as a Rest for the Gun, and so let Fly, and you will seldom miss;
for Pheasants at this time will let you come near them, and the Cocks will be
so bold as to fly at it.

In this Season the Pheasants use Hedge-rows and Coppices, and by their Crowing
you will know where to find them.

Another way to take Pheasants.
BY an experenced Sports-man amongst diverse ways to take Pheasnts, this
following way is found most Effectual for the taking them in the Winter-Season,
provided there is no Snow.

Be provided with a Net in the shape of a Casting-Net, but larger, with the
Meshes about five Inches wide. Then take some Pease or Wheat, and knowing their
Haunts, which will be in young Coppices about three or four years growth, and
in such places seek out their Paths and their Dropings, that is, their Dung;
these Paths generally lead from the Young Coppices to those that are Older; and
having found any Path out, lay about a Pint of the Corn in a place, observing
where you lay it, so that they may come to eat. Thus do for several days for
about a Fortnight, by which time they will be so accustomed to it, that they
will come to expect some Food; and by this means all or most of the Phesants in
that part will be gathered to it. Having thus trained them to it, and that you
certainly know when you come in the Morning that they have been there, which
you will find by their Eating, and by their Dung: Then in such places set your
Nets, that is, one in a place, which is thus done. Tie the Top of your Nets to
a Bough, then spread it at the Bottom and Peg it down to the Ground on all
parts except one, which must be raised up about a Foot and an half, like an
Arched Door, with an Ashen-Stick; then fix to the said Arch several Rods made
of Hasel, with the Taper Ends to the Earth within the Net, so that the Phesants
may come in by parting the Sticks, but not go out again.

Having thus set your Nets, which must be made of course Thread, such as Rabet
Hayes, and of a Tand-colour (by putting it into a Tan-Pit,) cover your Nets
with Boughs, to prevent others from finding them, and be sure to set them some
distance in the Wood.

CHAP. X.
How to take Quails, More-Powts Rails, etc. with Calls; with directions to made
the said Calls; as also with Nets.
THe best way to take these Birds as well as those aforesaid, is to know their
Haunts, and to learn their perfect Notes on the Call.

The Quail delights in Cornfieldsd and Mowing-Grass. The More-Powt in Heaths
and Forests, and the Rails in long Standing-Grass, where they may lie obscure.

Quails are to be taken by Calls, whilst they are in their Wooing, which is
from April to August. Quail will Call at Sunrising, about Nine a Clock, about
Twelve, about Three in the Afternoon and at Sunset. The Notes of the Cock
differ much from the Hen, so that you must be expert in both if you intend to
do any good in taking them; and when you hear the Cock Call, Answer in the Hens
Note, and so contrary-wise Answer the Hen in the Cocks, and thus you will have
both come to you, so that you may cast over your Net and take them.

If it be a single Cock-Quail he will come at the Call; but if he have a Hen
with him, he will not forsake her. Sometimes you shall hear only one to answer
your Call, yet Three or Four will come to the Net, so that you need not make
too great have when you find one entangled, for in a short time some more may
be taken.

Quails are a neat cleanly Bird, and will not much run in Dews or Wet Places,
but choose rather to fly, that they may not dirty themselves; you must
therefore at such times place your self Net as possible.

If by Accident the Quail passes by one end of the Net, lie close for some
time and let her go a little way, then gently remove your self on the other
side of the Net, and Call her back again, and she will soon come to your Net.

The Form of the Calls, and how to make them are as follows.
THe first is made of a Leather-Purse, about two Fingers wide, and four long,
in fashion like a Pear; It must be stuffed half full of Horse-hair in the end
marked with the Figure 5, fasten a small Device marked C, made of a Bone of a
Cats, Hares or Coneys Legs, or of the Wing of a Hen, which must be about 3
Fingers long, and the end C must be formed like a Flagelet, with a little soft
Wax; also put in a little to close up the Hole A, which open a little with a
Pin, to cause it to give the clearer and shriller Sound. This Pipe fasten in
your Purse, and then to make it speak hold it full in the Palm of your Hand,
and place one of your Fingers over the place, marked 5; you must strike on the
place D with the hinder part of your left Thumb, and so to counterfeit the Call
of the Hen Quail.

The other Quail Call must be 4 Fingers long, made of a piece of Wire, turned
round in such form as the Figure describes. It must be covered over with
Leather, and one end thereof closed up with a piece of flat Wood marked 2;
about the middle you must have a small Thread, or Leather-Strap wherewith you
may hold it, so as to use it with one Hand, and at the other end place just
such a Pipe, as was described before in the making up the first Call.

Now for the Calling with it, hold the Strap, or piece of Leather, with your
left Hand close by the piece of Wood No. 2. and with your right Hand hold the
Pipe just where it is joined to the Flagelet No. 3.

The Net to be used should be made of Silk, or very fine Thread, about Twelve
yards square, with a Hole in the midst, large enough to sit in, so that when
the Quail comes within the Compass of the Net, your rising up will cause her to
fly, and so she will be taken: The places to pitch these Nets must be in
Cornfieldsd, as Barley, Oats, or the like.

Another way to take Quails.
THere is another way to take Quails with the same Calls, but with a different
Net, made also four Square, about Twenty or Two and Twenty Foot every way, and
of Green Silk or Thread, with a couple of strong Straps at any two of the
Corners. There must be two in company to use it, and each must hold one of the
Straps, when they use the Net, and so to draw it over the Quails, the bottom
hanging a liltle on the Ground. The manner is that when you hear any Quail
Call, listen exactly whereabouts it is, and go softly thither; if it Call no
more, give it a light touch with your Pipe, to make it speak. This way is most
fit to be used in Standing-Grass, or in Stubble-Fields.

You must have a nimble Ear to discern the place, and so go thither with your
Net drawn, Hat, or the like, to cause it to rise, and by this means you may
take many in a day.

If you are alone then pitch your Net in such manner as the Forepart may rest
clear from the Ground about Eight or Nine Inches by the help of the
Benty-Grass, or some small Sticks; then give a Call, and they will come under
the Net.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the taking Birds great and small, especially Wild Fowl with Lines,
Springs, Strings, Bird-Lime, etc. in Woods, Meadows,
WHen you have found out any place where Fowl resort, either great or small,
observe this Device. Get a good Bundle of Sticks sharpened at one end, and
forked at the other, and about a Foot in length; stick these into the Ground
slightly, only to bear up the Lines or Cords of which we come now to speak, and
the Sticks Haunt where they resort. You must get such a proportion of
Pack-Thread, or small Cord as you intend to use, which must be daubed all over
with strong Bird-Lime, if it be for strong Fowl, or that you use it in the
Water, otherwise ordinary Bird-Lime may serve. Your Rows of Sticks should not
be above Two Yards distance from each other, and the Sticks of such proportions
as to support your Lines, which Forks. You must fasten the ends of your Lines
to your last Sticks with slipping-knots, that when any Bird comes to touch on
any part of the Line, the whole Line may give way to ensnare it, so that the
more the Fowl striveth to get away, the more fast it becomes.

If you set against the Morning, fix your Rods over Night, and set the Lines at
least an hour before Day; for if you go later, it is twenty to one but the Fowl
will be there before you; and if you set for the Evening, all must be fitted by
Sunset, or before, lest the Birds finding you there do avoid the Place: And
it is not amiss that in all these places you embolden the Fowl by strowing some
Baits to entice them thither.

If you set in the Water, your Lines should be not above five or six Inches out
of the Water, that the Fowl may not touch on them as they Swim to and fro; and
you may then fix one end of your Line, and only let the other end be with a
running knot, and so you may be assured of finding what you take. If you set
over any Water, your Sticks must be longer or shorter according to the depth of
the place. In light Nights this Device is not so good, but in dark and great
Fogs it is excellent, for you need not watch them, only repair thither every
Morning and Evening, and when you have tried one place you may remove to
another Haunt, and still preserve and supply your Sticks, Lime, and Lines as
you see occasion.

It were not amiss in case you set for Waterfowl, that some of your Lines be
about two Foot high above the Water, to ensnare the Fowl as they make their
flights, not before they descend into the Water; for you cannot but have
observed that they use to fly about that distance at such times.

CHAP. XII.
How to take Fowl and Birds by the Legs, Necks, or both in Noozes made of
Horse-Hair with running Knots.
THe Devices to take Fowl and Birds by the Necks or Legs and sometimes by both,
is very sure; the most fitting places for this purpose are amongst Bushes and
small Coppices, and the manner is thus; Make as many little Hedgrows of about
half a Foot high (by sticking small Furz Bushes, Brambles, Thorns, or the like
in direct or crooked Lines, and of such length and in such number as you think
fit, and according to the Game you think the place may afford.)

At several distances leave little open Spaces big enough for the Birds to pass
through. This ensuing Figure represents unto you the same.

The Letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, represent the Passages or void Places, in
each of which fix a short Stick of the bigness of ones Finger, and tie
thereunto a Nooze of Horse-hair finely twisted with a slipping Knot, as the
aforesaid Noozes do demonstrate, that the Fowl endeavoring to pass through may
draw upon his Neck, and so become strangled.

For Wood-Cocks lay those Strings flat on the Ground to take them by the Legs;
If you make Furrows, place your Strings in the bottoms thereof, you may take
store of Partridges, provided there be any in the Ground; and for the enticing
on the Fowl it were good to scatter in and about the Knots or Noozes some Grain.

CHAP. XIII.
Directions to take small Birds in Pit-Falls.
HAving given Directions for the taking Partridges with Pit-Falls, I shall now
proceed to some of the like Nature for the taking small Birds, but the former
was above the Earth, these in and under it, and are excellent for taking
Blackbirds, Thrushes, Feldivares, and such like Birds that feed on Worms. The
best Season for this Sport, is from the beginning of November, to the end of
March; the Device is cheap, profitable and so common, that scarce any Schoolboy
but what is acquainted therewith; however these ensuing Figures will
demonstrate it unto you.

The Figure marked A is a plain Paddle such as Countrymen use to carry in their
Hands as they go about their Grounds; with this Turfs, wherevvith the Pit-Fall
is to be closed, which Turfs must be cut at least two Inches larger than the
Pit: The same Paddle may likewise serve to dig your Pits, which should be
always made in the Sun, near some Hedge where Birds frequent. They may be also
made in great Woods near some Holly Bushes, for in hard Weather Birds use to
resort to such places in expectation of Worms, by pecking up and removing the
Dead Leaves that lie on the Ground. The Holes may be about seven Inches deep,
on the opposite side let it be about four or five Inches long, as is designed
by the letter O, and from X to O, there may be a Distance of about six Inches.
Then take a small Stick V, X, not quite so big as ones little Finger, and about
five Inches long, which cut sloping at the end V, the other Part of the Stick
toward X being Tapered, or cut small by Degrees: Prick the small end X into the
side of the Pit marked M, and let the end V lie upon the Ground. Then have
another Stick marked as S, T, about the bigness of a Swans Quill, and four
Inches long; which cut flat and smooth on one side, and at the end S on the
other side cut a Notch.

In the next place you must have a forked Stick marked, as Y, Z, somewhat
bigger than the other Sticks, and about five or six Inches long; the end Z
being cut like the end of a Wedge.

Your next business is to make use of your Turf, which must be four or five
Inches thick, the bigger side to be laid over the largest side of the Pit.

Take the end S, of your little Stick, and lay the flat side on the place M,
upon the end of the Stick, which is pricked into the Ground; then place the end
Z, of your Forked Stick into the Notch S, and lay on the Turf, making the end
of the Forked Stick marked Y, to be just under the place of the Turf marked K;
then move and place the small Stick which holds the Fork in such manner, that
the least Bird that comes to tread upon the end of the Stick T, the Turf may
fall down, and so ketch the Bird in the Hole.

For enticing the Birds to come to your Pit-Falls, get some Earthworms and
stick four or five of them through the Body with some long Thorns, or small
Sticks for that purpose, and so set them in your Pits, to be seen by the Birds
that come near it; and be sure that the Birds cannot come to the Pits any other
way than by that marked O; you may Plant a little Hedge-Row of short Sticks
about the two sides of the Pit.

If in hard Frosty Weather, stir up some fresh Earth about the Forefront of
the Pit, which will much entice Birds to come.

There is another kind of Pit-Fall, which is not so Troublesome as the former,
nor so many Sticks or Devices required, you may use it in any Hedge, Bush, Tree
or the like, and in all Weathers. It is to be made and used after this manner,
as it is here described.

Take a Holly Stick about the bigness of ones middle Finger, and about a Foot
and a half long; ly that of Wheat from the middle of October to the end of
March, and that after this manner.

About Nine a Clock at Night, the Air being Mild, and the Moon not Shining,
take your Low-Bell which must be of a deep and hollow Sound, and of such a
reasonable size, that a Man may carry it well in one Hand; which Towl just as a
Sheep uses to do whilst it Feeds. You must also have a Box much like a large
Lanthorn, and Foot and a half Square, big enough for two or three great Lights
to be set in; and let the Box be Lined with Tin, and one side open to cast
forth the Light; This Box fix to your Breast to carry before you; and the Light
will cast a great Distance before you very broad, whereby you may see any thing
that is on the Ground, within the Compass of the Light, and by Consequence the
Birds that Roost on the Ground. And for the taking them have two Men with you,
Lanthorn or Box casts forth; and each of them must be provided with a Hand-Net
of about three or four Foot Square, the Figure represents the Form, which must
be fixed to a long Stick to carry in their Hands, so that when either of them
sees any Birds on his side, he must lay his Net over them; and so take them
up, making as little Noise as possible, and withal be not Light and Low-Bel be
the foremost, for fear of raising others, which their coming into the Limits of
Light may occasion, for all is dark except where the Light casts its Reflection,
so that by no means there must not be any Light.

Note that the sound of the Low-Bell does cause the Birds to lie close, and
dare not stir whilst you put the Nets over them, and the Light is so

If you would use this Sport by your self, then in one hand carry the Low-Bell
as before directed, and in the other a Hand-Net about two Foot broad and three
Foot long, with a Handle to it, made as the Figure represents, which is to lay
upon them still as you espy them, and some like this way better than the
former.

If you have Company with you, one may have a Birding-Piece, to the end that if
you espy a Hare, the best way is to shoot it, for it is hazardous to take it
with the Net.

Some there are that instead of fixing the Light to their Breast as aforesaid,
do tie the Low-Bell to their Girdle by a String that hangs to their Knees, and
their Motion causes the Bell to strike; and then they carry the Light in their
Hand, extending their Arm before them, but the Lanthorn Box must not be so
large as that which you fix to your Breast. Your best way is to try both, and
use that which likes you best.

CHAP. XVI.
The way to take Small Birds, called Bat-Fowling.
BAt-Fowling is likewise a Night Exercise, and takes all sorts of Birds both
great and small that Roost not only on the Ground, but on Shrubs, Bushes,
Hathorn Trees, and the like places, and therefore proper for Woody, Rough, and
Bushy Places.

In the Depth of Winter is the best Season for this Sport, and the darker the
Night, and the colder the Weather, it is so much the better.

For the manner of Bat-Fowling, it may be used with Nets, or without, according
to your Pleasure and Fancy. If without, suppose your Company be twelve or
fifteen, let one Third Part carry Poles, to which little Bundles of dry Wisps
of Hay or Straw (or instead thereof pieces of Links, or Hurds dipped in Pitch,
Rosen or the like that will blaze) must be bound at top; another third part
must attend upon the said Fires, with long Poles Rough and Bushy at the upper
ends, to knock down the Birds that fly about the Lights; and another third Part
must have long Poles to beat the Bushes, and other places to cause the Birds to
fly about the Lights, which they will do as if amazed, not departing from it;
so that they may be knocked down at Pleasure. And thus you may spend as much of
the Night as is dark, and find good Divertion.

It will be convenient for one in the Company to carry a Candle and Lanthorn,
that in case all the Lights are Extinguished, they may be kindled at Pleasure;
And be sure to observe the greatest Silence imaginable, especially till the
Lights are kindled.

The other way with Nets is thus done, Let two or three go with Lanthorns and
Candles lighted, extended in one of their Hands, (just such as before described
to carry in your Hand, in the Chapter of the Low-Bell,) and in their other
Hands small Nets, something like a Racket* but less, which must be fixed at the
end of a long Pole, to beat down the Birds as they sit at Roost; which being
surprised with the great blazing Light, will sit until they are knocked down;
then there are others whose Business is to gather the Birds up, and to put them
into a Basket or Bag to carry home.

A Cross-Bow for this Sport is very useful, to Shoot them as they sit.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Tramel-Net, and its use.
THere is another way to take great and small Fowl by Night in Champain
C^untries* and that is with a long Tramel-Net, which is much like the Net used
for the Low-Bell, both for Shape, Bigness and Mesh.

This Net is to be spread upon the Ground, and let the neither or further end
thereof (being Plummed with small Plummets of Lead) lie loose on the Ground;
and then bearing up the former end by the Strength of Men at the two foremost
ends, only Trail it along the Ground, not suffering that end which is born up
to come near the Ground,

Then at each side of the Net must be carried great Blazing Lights of Fire,
such as were formerly spoken of; and by the Lights Men must be with long Poles
to raise up the Birds as they go; and as they rise under the Nets so to take
them. And in this manner you may go over a whole Corn-Field or other Champain
Ground, which will afford both Pleasure, and Profit.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Sparrow-Net, and its use.
THe Sparrow-Net is an Exercise used after Sun Set, and before Sun Rising,
being the Birds go to Roost; and before their stiring in the Morning.

The Engine or Sparrow-Net is to be thus made, first have a long Pole much like
a Hawks Pole, and at the upper end must be fastened strongly either with one,
two, or more Grains, a small square cross piece of Wood like to the Head of an
ordinary Hay Rake, but much larger for length and size, and of a little longer
Square, according to the Fashion of this following Figure.

Then make another Staff like unto this, but not above a third Part in length,
and join it to the longer with a strong small Cord, so loosely that at pleasure
it may fall too and fro from the longer Cross-Staff; and when both the
Cross-Staves meet together, they may be both of one equal Length and Height,
and join together without any difference, for otherwise they will be out of
order; and so be ineffectual.

The Form and manner of the Second Cross-Staff.
THese two Cross-Staves being thus joined fit to meet together, fix both to the
one and the other a large and wide Pur-Net, having that Liberty at the top,
that the Cross-Staves may fall and part the one from the other a pretty
distance; and the lower end of the Net must be straight and narrow, and made
fast to the same Hole in the lower Cross-Staff, to which the shorter
Cross-Staff was before fastened; then take two small Cords, or Lines, which must
be fastened with knots to each of the shorter Cross-Staves, passing through the
two Holes, and so through the Holes of the Cross-Staff, through which they may
go and come at Pleasure; and then shall the two ends of the Wards be tied on a
knot together, at such an even Distance, that the shorter Staff may fall at
pleasure from the lower as far as is convenient, or the wideness of the Net
permit; and then another single Ward being made fast to that last knot of the
two Cords (which single Ward always carry in your right Hand) draw the
Cross-Staves close together, and close up the Net as Staves and Net fly open,
and widen as the place requires where you are to set it.

The Form and Manner of the Sparrow-Net, as it is fixed together.
THis Sparrow-Net is to be used Early in the Morning, or Late at Night as
before Noted, and must be set, or fixed against the Eaves of Houses, Barns,
Dovehouses and such like places, as also against Stacks of Corn or Hay; and if
they were thatcht it were the better, and being set close against them to knock
and thrust the Cross-Staves close against the same, making a noise to force
them to fly out into the Net, and immediately draw the long single Line, and
shut up the Cross-Staves close; and so take out the Birds.

The chief Benefit of this Net is either to destroy the Sparrows that lie about
your Yards, Orchards, and Fields, devouring the Corn and spoiling the Fruit, or
for the Mewing of Hawks, or getting such as are Weak and Sick into Strength;
for with this Net you may take Morning and Evening such quantities as are
sufficient to give them warm to your Hawks, which is a great Nourishment, and
makes them Mew faster; or if for a weak Person, enough to make some Broth.

CHAP. XIX.
How to take Wild Fowl with a Net,
THere is an Invention for taking wild Fowl in Winter with the Crow-Net, which
may be used in the Day time. It is made of double Twisted Thread, or fine
Packthread; the Meshes should be two Inches wide, the length about ten Yards,
and three in depth; It must be verged on the sides with good strong Cord, and
extended out very stiff upon long Poles made for that purpose.

When you are on the place you intend to spread your Net, open it, and lay it
out at its full Length and Breadth; then fasten the lower end of the Net all
along on the Ground, so as only Net should stand extended on the long Cord, the
further end thereof being Staked fast to the Earth by a strong Cord about five
Yards distant from the Net, which Cord place in an even Line with the lower
edge of the Net; the other End of the Cord must be at least twenty five Yards,
to reach unto some Natural or Artificial Shelter, by the help of which you may
lie concealed from the Fowl, otherwise you can expect

Your Net must be in that exact order, that it may give way to play on the Fowl
upon the least pull of your Cord, which do smartly lest the Fowl be too quick
for you.

This Device may be used for Pigeons, Crows, or the like, in Cornfieldsd newly
Sown; as also in Stubble-fields, provided the Stubble conceal the Net from the
Fowl.

It may also be used for small Birds, as Barn-Doors; Corn or Chaff, to entice
them to the Net, lying concealed.

This Crow-Net may also be spread to great pleasure and profit in the Mornings
and Evenings, where you know their Haunts are; at Weather Fowl use to fly in
great flocks to and from the Land, with and against the Wind; and then they fly
close to the Ground in open Countries and low Lands, which generally are not
full of Enclosures; and when they are within reach of your Net, let go, and it
rises over them, and brings them back to the Ground with a notable Blow.

CHAP. XX.

THis Day-Net is generally used for taking such small Birds as play in the Air,
and will stoop either to Stale, Prey, Gig, or the like, as Larks, Lennets,
Buntins, etc.

The Season of the Year to use this Net is August to November, and the best
time is very Early in the Morning; and by the way observe, that the milder the
Air, and the brighter the Sun is, the better will your Sport be, and of longer
continuance.

As to the Placce where to lay your Net, let it be Plain and Champain, either
on short Stubbles, green Lays, or flat Meadows, near Cornfieldsd, and something
remote from Towns or Villages; be sure let your Net lie close to the Ground,
lest the Birds creep out, and make their escapes.

The fashion of this Net appears by the following Figure; and it is made of fine
Packthread, with a small Mesh, not exceeding half an Inch square; the length
must be three Fathom, and the breadth but one; the shape is like the Crow-Net,
and must be verged about after the same Cord, and the two ends extended upon
two small long Poles, suitable to the breadth of the Net, with four Stakes,
Tail-Strings, and Drawing-Lines.

This Net is composed of two, but are both of one length, breadth and fashion,
and are to be laid opposite to each other, so close and even, that when they
are drawn and pulled over, the Sides must meet and touch each other.

This Net Stake down with strong Stakes very Lines, to the end you may with a
nimble Twitch cast them too and fro at pleasure. Then fasten your
Drawing-Cords, or Hand-Lines, (which must be at the least a Dozen, and each two
Yards long) to the upper end of the foremost Staves, and so extend them of such
a reasonable streightness, as with little strength they may raise up the Nets,
and cast them over.

When your Nets are thus laid, place your Gigs or playing Wantons about twenty
or thirty Paces Nets. These Gigs must be fastened to the Tops of long Poles and
turned into the Wind, so as they may play and make a noise therein.

These Gigs are certain Toys made of long Goose-feathers, like Shettle-cocks,
and with little small Tunnels of Wood running in broad and flat Swan Quills made
round like a small Hoop, and so with longer Strings fastened to the Pole, will
with any small Wind or Air move after such a Birds will come in great flocks to
wonder and play about them. The following Figure shows the same.

Your Gigs being placed, then place your Stale (which is a small Stake of Wood
to prick down into the Earth) having in it a Mortice-Hole, in which a small,
long and slender piece of Wood about two Foot long is so fastened, that it may
move up and down at pleasure; and to this longer Stick fasten a small Line,
which running Hole in the aforesaid Stake, and so coming up to the place where
you sit, you may by drawing the Line up and down with your Right Hand, raise up
the longer Stick from the Ground, as you see occasion.

To this longer Stick fasten a live Lark, or such like Bird, which with the
Line making it to stir up and down by your pulling, will entice the Birds to
come to your Net, and so are taken.

There is another Stale, or Inticement, to draw on these Birds, which is called
a Looking-Glass, and that is a round Stake of Wood as big as a Man's Arm, and
made very sharp at the lower end to thrust it into the Earth. It is made very
hollow in the upper part above five Fingers deep, into which hollowness is
placed a Three-square Piece of Wood about twelve Inches long, and each Square
two Inches broad, lying upon the Top of the Stake, and going with a foot into
the hollowness; which said foot must have a great Knob at the Top, and another
at the Bottom, with a deep slenderness between; to which slenderness fasten a
small Packthread, which running through a Hole in the side of the Stake, must
come up to the Seat where you sit. The Three-square Piece of Wood, that lies on
the Top of the Stake, must be made of such a true poyz and eveness, and the
foot in the Socket so smooth and round, that upon the least touch it will
twerle and turn round, winding the Packthread so many times about it, which
being suddenly drawn, and as suddenly let go again, will keep the Engine in a
constant round Motion. Thus done, fasten with Glue upon the uppermost flat
Squares of the Three-square Piece, about twenty small Pieces of Looking-Glass,
and paint all the Square Wood between them of a light and lively Red, which in
the continual Motion will give such a reflection, that the Birds will play about
it to admiration until they are taken.

Both this and the other Stale are to be placed in the midst between the two
Nets, and about two or three foot distance from each other, so that in the
falling of the Nets the Cords may not touch or annoy them; neither must they
stand one before or after another, the Glass being kept in a continual Motion,
and the Bird very often fluttering.

When you have thus placed your Nets, your Gigs and Stales, go to the further
end of the long drawing Lines, and Stale-Lines; and having placed your self,
lay the main drawing Line overthwart your Thigh, and with your Right Hand
always draw the Glass-Line, and with your Left pull the Stale-Line to show the
Bird; and when you perceive the Birds to begin to play near and about your Nets
and Stales, then pull over the Net with both Hands with a quick, but not too
hasty Motion, for that spoils your Sport.

Always remember to lay behind you where you sit, all the square Instruments
and Implements to be used, as the Stakes, Poles, Lines, Packthread,
Knitting-Pin and Needle, your Bag with Stales, a Mallet to knock in the Stakes,
and a small sized Hatchet to sharpen or make new Stakes upon occasion; and
lastly, be sure that the first half Dozen of Birds you take be preserved alive
for Stales, for you must not be unprovided therewith upon no account.

Having fully treated of the Day-Net, this ensuing Figure gives you the full
demonstration and proportion thereof, being a Net commonly used by all Bird-Men.

Figure, observe the several Letters which denote the Parts.

A shows the Bodies of the main Net, and how they ought to be laid.

B the Tail-Lines, or hinder Lines, Staked to the Earth.

C, the fore Lines also Staked to the Earth D, the Knitting-Needle. E, the Bird
Stale. F, the Looking-Glass Stale. G, the Line that draws the Bird Stale. H,
the Line that draws the Glass Stale. I, the Drawing double Lines of the Nets,
which pulls them over. K, the Stakes that Stake down the four Nether Points of
the Net, and the two Tail-Lines. L, the Stakes that Stake down the fore Lines.
M, the single Line with the Wooden-Button, to pull the Net over with. N, the
Stake that Stakes down the single Line, and where the Man should sit. O, the
Wooden-Mallet. P, the Hatchet: And Q, the Gig.

And thus much for the Day-Net.

How to take Larks with a Looking-Glass and Clap-Nets, also with a Draught-Net,
etc.
I Have observed two or three ways purposely for the taking of Larks; the first
shall be with a Looking-Glass, called a Doring or Daring,

I shall not trouble you with Instructions what Bag you shall use for the
carrying the many little Implements used in this Sport, leaving it to your
discretion; yet in place more convenient I shall give you two or three Forms
which are most useful: Neither shall I trouble you with Instructions Net,
which may be bought at most Shops that fell Nets; but my business shall be to
give you a full description of the thing it self.

You must provide four Sticks very strait and light; about the bigness of a
Pike, two of which should be four Foot nine Inches long, the other two five
Foot long; they should be all Notched at the Ends, as it is in those Sticks
marked with the little a and b; at the End b fasten on one Stick of about a
Foot long, of the same bigness with the other four Sticks, and on the other
side a small Peg of Wood marked A, three Inches long. Then provide four other
Sticks, each a Foot long, as the Letter f; each must have a Cord nine Foot
long, fastened at the bigger End of them, as e, f; every of these Cords must
have a Buckle at the End e, for the commodious fastening them to the respective
Sticks when you go about to spread your Net. This following Figure represents
it.

The next thing to be provided is a Cord a, k h, g, which must have two
Branches a, k, one of them must be nine Foot and an half long, the other ten
Foot, with a Buckle at each End; the rest of the Cord from h to g, must be
between 22 or 24 Yards long.

All these Cords, as well the Long ones as those with the Sticks, should be
strong twisted, about the bigness of ones little Finger.

The next thing to be provided is a Staff m, n, about four Foot long, Pointed
at the End m, and at the end n fasten a little Ball of Wood, for the convenient
carrying of those many Necessaries in some Sack or Wallet. You must have a
small Spade of Iron, to level the Ground as you see occasion. Also have two
small Rods like that marked l, m, n, o, each eighteen Inches long, having a
great End l, and thereunto a small Stick fixed, as p, with a Packthread near
the End of the said Rod; and about the Letter m, being some nine Inches from
it, tie another Packthread with two Ends, each hanging clear a Foot long; at
each End tie a little Piked Stick, as q, r; At the smaller End of the said Rod
tie a Packthread with Loops, as o, which tie at the Legs of some Larks. You
must also have two small Reels, as F, G, by the help of which you may make the
Larks fly as you have occasion The last thing you are to prepare is a
Looking-Glass, according to these following Figures.

Take a piece of Wood about an Inch and an half thick, and cut it like a Bone,
but so as there may not be above nine Inches space between the two Ends a and
c, and let it have its full thickness at the bottom, to the end it may receive
into it that false Piece marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, in which the Figure 6 is the
lowest, and the upper Inch large; the five Corners 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, must be let
in, to receive as many pieces of Looking-Glass.

In the middle of the said Piece of Wood, in the Bottom or Under part thereof,
by the Letter b, make a Hole to receive a little Peg of Wood, as l, j, b, six
Inches long, and about the bigness of ones Finger, Pointed at l, and a little
Hole in the Middle j. You must likewise have another Piece of Wood n, m, o, q,
a Foot long, and about Inches Square, sharpened at the End q. Make a little
Ingraving in it at o, about two Inches high, and one Inch and an half broad;
then Bore or Piece a Hole into the said Piece above the End n to receive the
Peg r, which must come down an Inch into the Hole o, and so turn easily about.

When it is thus fixed, put a small Line, into the Hole, j and your Glass is
finished. You must place it between the two Nets near the middle of them, as
the letter j, and carry the Line to the Line you may make the Looking-Glass
play in and out as Children do a Whirlegig made of an Apple drawn throught a
Net.

Always keep it turning that the twinkling of the Glass against the Sun may
provoke the Larks to come to view it.

The true season for this Sport is from September to March, especially in cold,
clear and Sunshiny Weather. When you intend to pitch your Nets, be sure to have
the Wind either in front or behind your Nets, lest if it be on either side it
hinders the playing of your Nets. Close some open place, and let it be remote
from Trees or Hedges, at least an hundred Paces. The Ground being clear from
all Stones and Rubbish, spread your Net in the manner described by the Figure,
viz. The longest Sticks fastened to that part of the Net which is largest, as
for Example in the Figure, that on your Right Hand is bigger than the other.
You must drive the Peg c into the Ground, and pass the end a, of the Stick into
the Buckle of one of the Cords of the Net, and the Peg d into the other Loop of
the same End. Also do the same with the other Stick at the End e, l. But before
you drive your Peg into the Ground strain Cord c, t, as much as you can; then
take two of the Sticks as f, e, whereof one has a Cord Nine Foot and an half
long, and the other half a Foot less. Put the Knot e, of the longest Cord about
the end of the farther Stick, and then retiring drive your Peg f into the
Ground just opposite to the two little Pegs c, t, and then coming to the other
end past your Stick a, into one of the shorter Cords, and so drive your Peg
just with the others in a direct Line as c, t, f, that your Cord a, e, of Net
may be thoroughly strained.

Having thus directed you to set one Net, your own Judgment will lead you to do
the like with the other; only observe so to place them that when they are
drawn, one may clap about half a Foot over the other.

The next thing to be done, take the Grand Cord which is to make your Net play,
and place the longer Branch^ a, about the end of the Stick a, and the other
Branch K, about the Stick K; then tie the Knot h, so that it may rest in the
middle, and carry the end to your Lodge; strain it a little, and then fasten it
with a Peg A, and about B, make some kind of Hold-fast for the better straining
it, and that it may not slip again through your Hands, and just even with the
said Hold-fast make two Holes D, E, in the Ground to thrust against with your
Heels.

Your Lodge must be made of Boughs in such manner that you may have a full and
clear view on your Nets before, and it should be covered over head, nor be very
high, that you may have a prospect on all Birds coming and going.

The last thing is the placing your Calls (for so are the live Larks called);
you see by the Figure in what place you are to set them; set your little Stick
p in the first place, and let the upper part be about six Inches out of the
Ground, then place the two others q, r, on the right, and the other on the
left, just at m, of the Rod, where the Cord of the said Pegs is fixed. Then tie
the end of one of the Packthreads of one of the Reels about three or four
Inches from m near the place marked n, and then carry your Reel to the letter
F, the like you must do, with the other Rod tied at the end o, and at equal
distances tie the Call-Larks by the Feet, so that when you see any Birds near
you, it is but twitching your Cords, and you force the Larks to mount a little,
that thereby those others may take notice of them; when they are within your
distance pull your main Cord and your Net flies up, and claps over them.

They that have observed any great Flight of Larks toward Evening, may take
many of them by the help of a large Drag-Net, the description whereof together
with its use is treated of in the Eighth Chapter under the Head of the
Spread-Net, Drag-Net; only for Larks the Meshes must not be above an Inch
Square, and your Net should be large* You need no other directions.

CHAP. XXI.
Instructions and Directions touching Cock-Roads for the taking of Wood-Cocks,
and to supply the defect of a Tree in a convenient place for a Cock-Road.
COck-Roads are easily made and being once done cost nothing the preserving,
yiedling a considerable Profit as well as Pleasure, when in an Evening either
by ones self, or his Servant (if he be trusty, and that you live near no great
Markets,) you may perhaps take Three or Four Brace, and as many in the Morning
of excellent Wood-Cocks; and one so taken is worth two that are Shot.

The Nature of the Wood-Cock is to lie close Hedge, or near the Roots of Old
Trees, picking for Worms under dry Leaves, nor will he stir unless some
accident of noise spring him up, being of a fearful Nature, and does not see
well his Way before him in the Morning early: and toward the Evening they use
to take Wing that they may get to Water (for they seldom meet with any but at
those times) and then they would hardly stir, did not mere Thirst compel them.
When they fly it is generally low, to the Wood or Range of Trees they use to
venture through. In such places therefore it is that you ought to make your
Cock-Roads, and plant your Cock-Nets, according to the Following Figure.

Supposing then that your Range of Wood be about Thirty Paces long, then cut a
Walk through it, near about the middle, about Thirty six, or Forty Foot broad,
which must be directly straight with all the Shrubs, and Underwood carried
away; likewise all the Boughs that hang over the said Walk must be cut off;
then choose out two Trees opposite to each other, as it is represented in the
said Figure marked A, B, and prune, or cut off all the Front Boughs to make way
for the Net to hang and play.

The next thing is to provide two strong Legs of Wood, which open or cleave at
the biggest ends, as marked C, D, the middle parts tie fast unto some Boughs of
the Tree, as the letters E, F, direct, and let the Tops hang over, as G, H,
represent; you should always have in readiness good store of Pullies or
Buckles, made of Glass, Box, Brass, or the like, according to the Form designed
by the Figure, which should be about the bigness of a Man's Finger, and fasten
one at each end of the Perches, or Legs G, H, having first tied on your Pullies
about the two Branches marked 3, a certain Cord of the thickness of ones little
Finger, and then tie another Knot on the said Cord about the distance of a
Hands breadth from the first Knot marked 4, and so let the two ends of the Cord
hang down about a Foot long, that therewithal you may fasten them to the
Pullies which are at the ends of the two Pearches or Legs, as is marked by I,
L, close to the Notches G, H, then clap into each Pully a small Packthred, the
end of each should reach to the Foot of the Trees, that by the help of them you
may draw up two stronger Cords into the said Pullies where you hang the Net,
and not be forced always to climb up into the Tree.

These latter you may let hang, always provided you live by honest Neighbors.

The last thing to be provided is a Stand to lie concealed, about half a dozen
Boughs pitched up together may serve for that purpose, with a storng Crooked
Stake forced into the Ground just by the Stand, whereon fasten the Lines of the
Net when it is drawn up. Remember to tie a Stone to the end of each of the two
Cords of about four or five pound weight a piece, that when Stones may force
down the Net with a strong fall, and pull up both the Stones, and the upper
part of the Net close to the Pullies I, L, the Stones are marked M, N, and the
Figure represents the whole Net ready for use. The ends of both Lines must be
drawn to your Lodge or Stand, and wound twice or thrice about the Crooked Stake
to prevent the falling of the Net, until you think fit, that is, until some
Game Flies against the Net. Sometimes Covey of Partridges have been taken by
this Invention, and now and then a Hare; so that you should be sure to look out
diligently against all occasions.

If any Beast come Thwart you, let them pass under your Net, about five or six
Foot, then make a noise with a shout, and so let go: The Beast at the first
noise will retire back, and so become ensnared. To be sure if you let go whilst
he is just under the Net, he will either spring forwards or back-wards, and not
be taken, but most

If often happens that a Man perceives a great Through-fare of Birds between
some Coppices or Timber-Woods over a certain piece of Ground, where he wants
the convenience of a Good Tree to oppose some other, which possibly stands
according to his mind; but whether he wants one or two, if he find the place
likely, and that in a probability it will quit his cost, let him then take one
or two young Trees fit for the purpose, and plant them deep in the Ground, that
they may Weathers.

To take WOOD-COCKS by Nets in high Woods by driving them into Nets.
YOur Net must be like your Rabet Hayes, but not so strong, and about Twenty
Fathom long; and of these you should have Two or

Being provided with Nets, and having the assistance of five or six to go into
the Wood with you, which should be at the least Seven or Eight Years growth
(for the elder the better) then go into some part thereof, about the middle, if
it be not to large, and Pitch your Nets along as you do for Rabets (but one
joining to the other) slopewise, hanging over that way which you design to
drive the Cocks. You may make room for the Nets, if there be no Paths, by
splashing away the Shrub-Wood. Your Nets being thus fixed, let your company go
to the end of the Wood at about Ten Rod asunder; and having Sticks in their
Hands, make a noise, as also use your Voices as if you were driving Cattle
along, and so go forward and forward till you come to the place where your Nets
are set, and you will not fayl to catch those that are in that part of the Wood.

Then when that part of the Wood is thus drove, turn your Nets slopewise to the
other side, and go to the other end, observing the aforesaid Directions.

This way you may use to take them at any time of the Day, with great ease and
pleasure.

CHAP. XXII.
Several Sorts of Strings, Springes. Engines, etc. for the taking of Fowls and
Birds, either on Hedges, Trees, or on the Ground.
THere are several Devices for the taking of Fowl, and Birds, both great and
small; and that either those peculiar to the Water or Land, or for both; and
that on Hedges, Boughs, Trees, or on the Ground. The first way I shall
represent is to take Fowl with Strings or Lines.

Let the Strings or Lines be made of long small Cord, knotted here and there,
and containing in length as many Fathoms, as the places, or Haunts where you
are to lay them require. These ate of great use for the taking of all sorts of
large Wild-Fowl, as also for the Plovers of both kinds.

When you shall use these Strings, they must be well Limed with the strongest
Bird-Lime; then coming to their Haunts, if it be for the Evening Flight, then
before Sunset; if for the Morning Flight, then at least two Hours before Day;
and having a burden of small Sticks about two Foot long, sharpened at the lower
end, and with a little Fork at the upper end, let them be pricked into the
Ground in even Rows, all over the place of their Haunt, one Row distant from
another about a Yard or two, and one Stick siding another within Four or Five
Yards as they may conveniently bear up the String; and let them be pricked a
little slauntwise, so as they may be within a Foot and an half of the Ground.
Then shall these limed Strings be drawn and laid upon the Forks some Rows
higher than others, and higher in one place than in another, like the Waves of
the Water, till every Row be filled, and the Haunt covered all over. Then
fasten the ends with a Sliping Loop in such wise, that upon any Violent strain
the whole String may loosen, and lap about any thing that touches it, and by
this Invention great store of Fowl, especially Plovers, may be taken by reason
of the great Flocks they come in; and they are commonly taken at their coming
to the Ground; whose Nature is to swoop close to the Ground for a pretty
distance before they light, and so falling amongst the Strings, are taken. You
need not be constantly at Watch; for being entangled they cannot loosen
themselves. When you have done your sport lay them up for another time, only
new daubing them with fresh Bird-Lime.

You may make use of these Strings or Lines for the taking Waterfowl, and then
use the best and strongest Water Bird Lime, such as before showed you. These
Strings must be laid over the Rivers, Ponds, or Plashes of Water where you
design to take any, which must be in such places where their Haunts are, and
let the said Strings almost touch the Water, and as thick laid as before Land
Fowl. And be sure to take this Caution, not to use these Strings in
Moonshine-nights; For the Shadow of the Lines will create a jealousy in the
Fowl and so frustrate your Sport.

Of the great and lesser Springes.
SPringes are thus made, and thus to be accommodated; Fowls Haunts, and the
places where the Flocks or Couples of great Fowl do usually feed in the
Mornings or Evenings, and observing well the Furrows and Water-Tracts, where
they usually stalk and paddle for Worms, Flot-Grass, Roots, and such like
things on which they feed; and be sure to observe where several Furrows or
Water-Drains meet into one, and after a small course divide themselves again
into other Parts or Branches; Sticks, and prick them cross-wise overthwart all
the other Passages, one Stick within about half an Inch of each other making as
it were a kind of Fence to guard every way but one, which you would have the
Fowl to pass.

All Ways except one being thus hemmed out, take a good stiff Stick cut flat on
one side, and pricking both Ends into the Water, make the Upper part of the
Flat-side of the Stick to touch the Water, and no more; Then make a Bow of
small Hazel or Willow in the fashion of a Pear, broad and round at one end, and
narrow at the other, and at least a foot long, and five or six Inches wide, and
at the narrow End a little small Nick or Dent; then take a good stiff young
grown Plant of Hazel, Elm, or Withew, Knots, three or four Inches about at the
Bottom, and about an Inch at the Top; and having made the Bottom-end sharp,
fasten at the Top a very strong Loop of about an hundred Horse-hairs, plaited
very fast together with strong Packthread, and made so smooth and pliable to
slip and run at pleasure; and this Loop shall be of the just quantity of the
Hoop made Pear-wise, as Loop with strong Horse-hair, within an Inch and an half
of the end of the Plant fasten a little broad but thin Tricker, made sharp and
equal at both Ends after this proportion. And then the bigger sharp End of the
Plant being thrust and fixed into the Ground close by the Edge of the Water,
the smallest End with the Loop and the Tricker shall be brought down to the
first Bridge, and then the Hoop made Pear-wise being laid on the Bridge, one
End of the Tricker shall be set upon the Nick of the Hoop, and the other end
against a Nick made on the small End of the Plate, which by the violence and
bend of the Plant shall make them stick and hold together until the Hoop be
moved: This done, the Loop shall be laid upon the Hoop in such fashion as the
Hoop is proportioned; then from each side of the Hoop prick little Sticks, as
aforesaid, as it were making an impaled Pathway to the Hoop; and as you go
farther and farther from the Hoop or Spring, so shall you widen the Way, that
the Fowl may be entered a good way in before they perceive the Fence. The first
Entrance being about the wideness of an indifferent Furrow, so that any Fowl
falling, they may be enticed to go and wade upon the same, where they shall no
sooner touch the Spring with their Head, Foot, or Feathers, but they shall be
taken; and according to the strength of the Plant you may take any Fowl both
great or small.

To take small Fowl with the Engine.
FOr the taking smaller Fowl with this Engine, as the Snipe, Woodcock, Pewit,
or the like, that uses to feed in Wet and Marshy Grounds, and amongst
Water-furrows or Rillings, from thence sucking the Fatness of the Soil, the
Device and Engine is the same without alteration; only it may be of much less
strength and substance, according to the Fowl it is set for, especially the
Sweeper or Main Plant, which as before is prescribed to be of Hazel, Elm, or
Withew; or so in this case may be of Willow, Sallow, or strong grown Osier, or
any yielding Plant that will bend, and come again to its own straitness. And
this kind of Engine is only for the Winter Season, when much Wet is on the
Ground: But if there happen any great Frosts, so that you are deprived of the
Waters, then search out where these standing Waters have any descents or small
Passages, so as by the swift Current the Water is not frozen, and there set
your Springes, and the greater the Frost is, the apter are they to be taken.

Directions for making the Bramble-Net, Termed by some the Hallier.
THe Form of this Net is Represented in one or more of the foregoing Prints.
Those that are for Pheasants are larger than those for Partridges; and those
for Partridges larger than those for Quails, Coots, and the like. The manner of
making them is one and the same. Your great Meshes must be four Square, those
of the least size are three or four Inches Square, and those of the biggest are
five; in Depth they should not have above three or four Meshes; as for the
length you may enlarge them as you think fit, but the shortest are usually
eighteen Foot.

If you intend to have your Net of four Meshes deep, make it of eight, for as
much as it is to be doubled over with another Net, likewise between the said
Doublings; the Inward Net must Meshes two Inches Square made Lozengewise, with
a neat Cord drawn through all the upper Meshes, and another through the lower,
by which you may fasten it to the double Hallier.

In the last place fasten your Net unto certain small Sticks, about one Foot
and a half, or two Foot long, and about the same distance from each other. Your
inward Net must be both longer and deeper than the outward, that it may Game.

For Pheasants, both the one and the other should be made of strong double
Twisted Thread, and for Partridges, Quails, and the like, of Silk.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to take Blackbirds; Feldivars,
IN Mysty Weather, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Feldivars, and such like Birds do
generally fly by the sides Hedges, making no long Flights. For the taking them
in the midst of their Flight do thus. Observe the Figure in Chapter XXV. and
accordingly prepare your Net about six Foot deep, and twenty Foot long, it is
called the Cobweb-Net. Then get a Staff about six or seven Foot long, which
must be a little slit at the small end D, and sharpened at the other end F, with
which go along by the Hedge side, where you suppose there is Game; and having
found some, pitch Net about twenty or thirty Paces from the place where they
went in according to this direction. If there be any Tree about twelve or
fifteen Foot from the Hedge side, or if it be in a way where there are two
Hedges not above fifteen or twenty Foot asunder, then you need not make use of
your Staff, otherwise you must.

Suppose it were in a Highway with Hedges on each side as E, I, for Example,
then choose out some Bough about six or seven Foot high, which hangs in
toward the way as the Letter B; make a small cleft in it at A, and gently
thrust thereinto the small wooden Wedge, which is tied at the Packthread,
running through the upper part of your Net; and then do the very same on the
other side of the way, as F, I, so that your Net may hang as it were bent. Then
fetch a Compass about at least thirty Paces beyond the place where you saw the
Birds fly in; and when you come near, they will fly back by the Hedge side, and
so come against your Net, which being slightly hung, will fall upon them, and
so they are taken.

In case there be but one Hedge, and no opposite Tree, then make use of your
Stick.

CHAP. XXVII.
Diverse necessary Observations touching the Natures and Dispositions of
Plovers, and other wild Fowl, with Directions to take them.
I shall begin with an Apology for the length and Curiosity of this Chapter, to
the end, Industrious and Active Spirits may furnish others with fresh and
Beneficial Advantages of the same kind.

Plovers use to fly in exceeding great Flocks together, they generally come to
us about September, and leave us in or about March; In Frost and cold Weather
they seek their Food on such Lands as lie near and adjoining to the Sea. In
Thaws and open Seasons they go higher into the Country, so that their whole
labor is to rise and fall, as we say. They delight much to feed in Ploughed
Lands, especially if Sowed; and having fed they presently seek out for Water to
wash their Beaks and Feet. When they sleep they do not Perch on any thing, but
Couch or sit on the Ground as Ducks or Geese; they only sleep in Calm Weather,
otherwise they pass most part of the Night in running up and down to seek for
Worms, as they come out of the Ground; and then they always make a little cry
purposely to keep close together, for at day break they all unite into one
Body, and so depart; if in their Flight they chance to espy any others on the
Ground, they usually call them to them, and if they refuse to go, they make a
stay expecting some Booty. There are many other Fowl that accompany with them,
as Lapwings, Teal, and the like.

They are most easy to be taken when not intermixed with other Fowl. Especially
in October, soon after their first coming, as being unacquainted with the
Instruments of their Ruin; also in March they are easily taken, for then they
begin to Couple. It is not good to set your Nets for them in long Frosts, and
continued cold Seasons, but intermixed with Weathers; of all Winds the
North-west is the worst to take them; and as you ought not to set your Nets in
some Winds, so ought you exactly to place your Net according to the Wind, as
hereafter shall be directed.

All Sea Fowl fly against the Wind, when ever they design to rest on the Land,
therefore observe to fix your Nets according, to play with the Wind.

This following Figure does represent the manner Nets when the Wind is
Easterly, that they may play Westerly, that so the Birds may be taken flying
cross the Net, not longways with it; nor are you tied exactly to observe the
Situation of the Wind, in regard sometimes the place where you intend to pitch
will not bear it, but the nearer you come to it, so much the better.

Several necessary Instruments to be used in taking Plovers.
THere are many little necessary things to be used in taking Plovers; I have
therefore represented the Forms of them in a Figure altogether, as follows.

Net or two, which are called Leap-Nets, the Meshes are Lozengwise and about
two Inches Square. The Net should be about two Fathom long, and eighty Meshes
deep; I shall not trouble you with the way of making it, although it be of
great use in Fowling, it being an Art it self, and to be bought at the Shops
that sell Nets. Secondly, you must have two Staves marked 1, 2, about the
bigness of a Man's Arm, the one about nine Foot Pipestave, as marked 3, a Foot
long, and three Inches broad, pointed at one end. Fourthly, you must have a
couple of Staves about the bigness of ones Thumb, ten or twelve Inches long,
and pointed at No. 4. Fifthly, get three other pieces of Wood No. 5. each two
Foot long, and about the bigness of a Pitchfork, sharpened at one end. Sixthly,
you must be provided with a small Hatchet, marked No. 6, the sharp side not
above three Inches deep, with a strong Head to beat in the Staves. Seventhly,
you must have a good Knife, as marked No. 7. Eighthly a Stick in the Fashion of
a Billiard Stick, as No. 8. represents, which must be two Foot long from a to
b, ending in a point at a, the other end b, c, must be a Foot long bending; and
it must be cut in three Angles at the Letter c. Ninthly, have a Pipe or Whittle
to call the Plovers, as No. 9. represents; it may be made of the Thigh Bone of
a Goat, or a large Sheep, and cut off at both ends about three Inches long, at
the end h fill it with Wax into the opening e, then make the hole d plain under
the Bone, that the Wind may come in; Then make a Hole at the middle f, just
above big enough to receive a small Goosquil, and another a pretty deal bigger,
to give it the clearer Sound; and likewise that you may thereby hang it about
your Neck, pierce a small Hole at h, to receive a Packthread. Tenthly, have a
small Pannier, or Basket as No. 10. big enough to hold three or four live
Lapwings, with a Hole at the top to put them in. In the Eleventh place have
three or four Reels, such as Gardiners use to Line out Borders and Walks, for
the Winding up your Lines, as is Represented in the eleventh Figure. Sack or
Wallet to carry your things according to No. 12. Thirteenthly have another sort
of Pipe, represented by No. 13. being nothing but a piece of Wood, lesser than
ones little Finger, and three Inches long, cleft at the end s, unto the middle
T, wherein six a Bay Leaf to imitate the Cry of Lapwings. Fourteenthly have two
Rods according to No. 14, each two Foot and a half long, and strait, light and
slender, at the bigger end 5, you must fasten Peg as marked 6, three or four
Inches long, and pretty close to the Rod; at the middle 2 that is nearer the
great end, tie a couple of Packthreads each two Foot long, with a Peg at each
end, as 3 and 4, of the same size with the former No. 6. At the small end of
the Rod j, fasten a slender Packthread, with a Double at the end to clap about
the Body of a Lapwing; and the other end which is single must be a good deal
longer, to fasten the Tail of the Bird. And in the last place Holm Stick,
according to No. 15. about four or five Foot long, indifferent strong, at the
great end fasten two Pegs at each side, one as 10 and 11, about the bigness of
ones little Finger, and six Inches long; about a Foot and a half from thence
fasten two Packthreads, each two Foot and a half long, with a Peg at each end,
about the same size with the former, marked 13 and 14. These are the main
Implements to be used; now follows to apply them to use.

Instructions h^w, when and where to pitch your Nets for the taking of Plovers,
and the like.
THe best place to pitch for Plovers and such like Fowl, is in large common
Fields of Green Corn, where there are neither Trees nor Hedges, at least within
three or four hundred Paces of the place where you design to work. If Plovers
delight therein to cleanse their B^^ks and Feet after they have dirted them
with turning the Earth up and down for Seed or Worms. You must be careful that
the Plot where you pitch, be a little lower than your Hedge, or at most equal
with it, for higher it must not be. This following Figure shows the manner of
contriving your Plot of Ground.

Suppose the place where you design to pitch, reach from A to B, and the
distance between the Platform, and your Lodge from B to E; and that the Wind
blow South, you must have a Packthread about fourteen or fifteen Foot long, and
fasten it to a couple of Pegs A, B, which fasten in the Ground to line out the
place for your Nets. Then take the Billiard Stick No. 8. in the foregoing
Figure, and beat the Earth with the Triangular end, as if you would cut, and so
pass along that whole length of the Packthread, which is about twelve or
fourteen Fathom, the exact length of your Net: And when your Border is made,
then take away the Packthread, and take the shorter of the two Sticks No. 1,
and place it at the bottom of the border at No. 1, and the bigger end of the
said Stick must be at No. 8, not directly strait, but bending at least two Foot
inwards, just as you see it drawn before you in the Figure. Then hold it fast
with one Hand, and with one Finger of the other, or with the handle of your
Knife Trace out the Form of its Position, that it may rest Imprinted in the
Earth; then with your great Knife No. 7. cut along your Trace or Border of your
said Stick, and with your Hatchet No. 6, cut out the Earth between the two
Traces or Lines a, 1, 8, 0, beginning at the End j, and finishing at 8 in such
manner, that at the End j the Earth may be taken out but one Inch over, Inches
large, that your Stick may be hid as it were in the said Gutter.

This being finished, carry the other Stick No. 1. (being the longer of the
two) unto the other End of your long Border, and plant it in the self same
fashion; then take your little Stick No. 3. which drive into the Ground at the
end of your two Gutters, as 8 and 9, to hinder the two main Sticks from beating
into the Ground with Net. Your two Sticks No. 4. also drive into the Ground
about half a foot from your Border at 1 and 3, a little inclining Inwards; the
intent being to prevent your main Sticks from returning back when the Net is
strained until the Cord be pulled: besides, should you place them Outward upon
the Lines 9, 6 and 8, 0, it were impossible to make your Net play; for then the
more you strain the Cord, the closer would your main Sticks come under Sticks
No. 4. then remove all the loose Earth, except an Handful or two, which lay on
the two Ends 5 and 7, the better to raise up the other Ends of the main Sticks,
and then your Platform is ready fixed.

Now in case you make two other Gutters, as 2, 8 and 4, 9. on the other side of
the Border, opposite to your two first, then your Platform will serve for two
contrary Winds, viz. North and South. I shall direct you how to dispose of the
Vtensils, in turning back to the first Figure in this Chapter.

If you intend to take any Plovers, be on the place where your Platform is
ready made with all your Implements early in the Morning; then place the main
Sticks in the little Gutters, and take your Net on your left Shoulder, or Arm,
and go toward the Lodge, which is about fifteen or sixteen fathom from your
Platform, and there place the Buckle which is at the End of the Cord of your
Net, and so go backwards toward your Platform, letting the Cord trayl all
along, and being at the Stake or strong Peg S, fasten thereto the Cord of the
Pully T, so that the Pully be in a direct line with the two Pieces of Wood Q,
o; then when you come to the form let your Net it self fall by degrees, and
still retiring backwards. When you are at the Peg behind, which is R, strain
the Cord until it be right and strait, and then fix it to the said Peg that it
may not

I have also for the convenience represented to you, with what menner of Knot
it is that you should fasten your Cords on this occasion. Supposing that the
Peg 7, be the Piece whereunto you pretend to fasten your Cord 2, 4, take it in
one of your Hands at 1, and being over the Thread 2, to form the Buckle or Knot
5; which pass over the Peg 7; then make another Bow or Buckle, as 6, wherein
the Thread 4 is passed under, and to clap this Bow over your Peg upon the Top
of the other Bow; then strain the two ends 2 and 4, and your Knot will be
complete, and you must be very exact and ready at it.

When the End of the Cord of the Net is thus fastened, lift up your man Stick P,
Q, and place the great End in the Gutter Q, drawing the Cord of your Net
toward your Border, and force it into the Notch in the small end of your main
Stick, and let some Body hold it there; But in case you have no help, lodge it
in your Gutter under the Peg P, and drive the sharp End of the Billiard into
the Ground upon it, to stay there until you go to the other main Stick N, o,
and there fix your Cord into the Notch at the End M. It must be so straightened,
that a great deal of strength may be used to get it into the Notch; then place
your main Stick in the Gutter under the Peg N. Remove your Billiard from your
main Stick V, Q, and force your Net into the Platform, so that it be hid under
the Cord.

The next thing to direct you in is the placing your Call-Plovers and
Artificial Lapwings, which must be disposed as you see the Ciphers 00000. In
case the Wind be not directly East, but inclined a little toward the South;
then your first Pelt, or counterfeit Bird (which is nothing but the Skin of a
Bird stuffed with Chaff, or the like) marked 3, shall be placed half a foot from
your Border, and about eight or nine foot from the End V, the rest you may
range in such order as they are designed by the Figure, at about two foot
distant from each other; whereas in case the Wind be North-East, place your
Birds a good deal farther from the End V, that is to say, about six foot
further; because Wild-fowl always fly against the Wind, and then as they pass
over the Stales, or Artificial Birds, that is betwixt them and the hinder Stake
R, it may so fall out that they may pass under the Cord; for that will be
shorter by a third part when it is let loose, and by a moity, if the Wind be
strong, which you must diligently observe when there is but little Wind
stirring. You may place two thirds of the Birds behind your Net, and if it be
strong, one third part is enough, the rest should be before, because Plovers
will come where your Birds are.

As for Lapwings, they must not be mixed with your Plovers, but placed just by
your Gutters, as the Letters g, g import.

The next thing you are to dispose is your Live Birds; if you intend to use
two, drive them one before, and the other behind; if you have only one, place
it behind in this manner: Force your little piked Staff-C into the Ground,
which is tied to the bigger End of the Rod, and then hold up the little End F,
to see if it stand right with the Lodge, and if so, hold it a foot high whilst
you stick the two Pegs A, B, into the Earth; then tie a live Lapwing unto it
with the Packthread about its Legs which Packthread should be indifferent long,
to the end the Lapwing may not hurt it self; then put the Tail about the End of
the Rod, and fasten it with another Packthread, and so taking one of the Reels,
fasten the End of the Thread which is above the quarter part of the length of
your Rod, to the place marked E; and the Reel to the Lodge. If you plant a
couple of Lapwings, you must place the other in the same manner before your
Platform.

Your Holm-stick must be placed about three or four fathom from the Border, and
about six foot beneath the last Pelts or Artificial Birds. To set it right in
order do thus: Drive into the Ground the two Pegs marked at the great End M, in
such manner as your Holm-stick may move like the Axeltree of a Cart between the
two Wheels; take the little End X, and lift your Rod almost strait up, that it
may be right with the Lodge, and then fasten your two Pegs H, j in the Ground:
Then fasten the End of your Line to one of your Reels at the middle L of Rod,
and carry the other end to your Lodge. The Holm-stick must be tied at the End X
of the Rod; your Holm-stick must be laid down close, and covered with some
Boughs, Straw, or the like, that the Birds may not be affrighted at the sight
thereof.

This Holm-stick is nothing but the two Wings of a Kite or Buzzard, which are
tied with two or three Hawks-bells at the End of the Rod for the purpose that
shall be anon declared.

Directions for preparing the Lodge, for those that take Plovers and the like
Wild-fowl.
THe Lodge is to be thus made: Take five or six Boughs about three foot high,
and stick them in the Ground like an Hedge; it must be open at the Top, that
you may hear and see the Birds that pass near you.

The Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 represent it unto you, as also how you
may (being a single Person) manage two Nets at the same time from one and the
same Lodge. Your Seat must be of some Turf about a foot square, and three or
four Inches thick, which put beneath the Cord at the place marked C, where your
Cords cross each other, and where one may touch the Holdfasts f, g, to strain
the Nets. You must lay a good handful of Straw under the Cord upon the Turf, to
prevent dirting the Cord, as well as spoiling the Turf; and you had need to
have a good Armful in your Lodge; to keep you warm and dry as occasion
requires. You must likewise cut two little Holes in the Ground to rest your
feet when you strain your Cords, the Letters D, E denote the place where. The
same things must be all observed, if you use but one Net. But he that will
undertake to manage two Nets, had need to see first the manner of it, at least
to observe these following Directions.

You have been already fully instructed how to plant one single Net, which
being done, Take a long Cord, represented by the pricked Line K, j, which at
one End fasten to the Peg M, about two or three foot from the side of the Peg
Y; the other End fasten to the Peg H, so that the part K of the Packthread may
be distant between five or six fathom from the End of the Gutter O When the
shorter of your two main Sticks is fixed, one End at K, and the other at Q,
carry the bigger of them ten or twelve fathom distant; one End being set at j
within half a foot of the Packthread, and the other toward L. Let them be
stooped down, and then fix another Packthread, represented by the pointed Line
S, T, which must be strained hard: Then with your Billiard-stick make your
Border or Platform Q, P; then cut out your Gutters, and place your Pegs and
Sticks as they are placed in the beginning of this Chapter, numbered 3 and 4,
and placed in the former Net.

You may make this Form serve for two Winds, if you make the Gutters V, X, Z,
R, just opposite to the others; and then place your main Sticks in them,
turning about your Cords, and transplant your Lodge: As for Example, The
foregoing Figure represents two Nets, which are set for a Westerly-Wind;
Suppose the Wind should chop about and turn Easternly, you must then Cord M to
the Letter B, the strong Peg A to the little p, and the Stake behind H to the
little m; the main Stick K to the Letter X, the other j to the Letter V, and
your Net will be then set for the East Wind. You may likewise transpose the
other Net by turning the Cord Y to the little a, and the strong Peg to the
little o, and that Stake behind to the Letter N.

You must also turn about your main Stakes, h, and dress up your Lodge there;
the two pointed Lines a, h, j, n, and b, h, p, m, do fully demonstrate how the
Nets should be placed when the Wind is turning about. Your Birds both dead and
alive must also be altered as you there see; and you must set two or three
counterfeit Birds before the first Border with a Lapwing or Call-Bird, and
another behind the Platform, the rest of the Artificial Birds may be set before
the Border P, Q, and the Holm Rod behind the last Net.

Instructions when and how to Call, also when and how to draw the Net for
taking Plovers, etc.
YOur Implements being all disposed as before Lodge, having your Pipe hanging
at your Neck, and when you espy any Game on the Wing, give them a Call, and
make your Call Birds fly a turn or two ever and anon, as occasion requires; for
the Game perceiving the Lapwings to stir and fly from place to place, and your
other Birds to stand feeding as it were, will be decoyed thither in expectation
of some Food. When they come near, be sure do not make your Birds to stir at
all, for they would then soon perceive by the forceness of the Motion, that
they were tied; and for fear of being suprized themselves, they will fly away.
Neither must you with your Pipe give them such loud Calls, as if at a remote
distance; but lessen your Notes by Degrees. I have thought fit to set down the
said Notes.

The Natural Call for Plovers. ^

The Call for Curlues. The He-Lapwing coming. The Female Lapwing. ^

It is very difficult to imitate exactly the Notes, without good Observation
and Practice, but as near as you can Call in the same Notes as you hear them as
they pass by you; and be sure not to let fly your Net, though there were never
so many of them, and that they were just at the Net, unless they come flying
against the Wind. When you perceive they begin to descend, and that they come
within eighteen or twenty Foot of the Platform, let go your Pipe, and lay both
hands on your Cord, to let fly with all the force you Stakes, K, I. If they are
about eight Foot high from the Ground, let them pass on, for they will wheel
about and take another turn, nay sometimes they will pass by you eight or nine
times before you will find them right for your purpose. You will find that most
an end they will pitch a good way from your Net; if you perceive them so
inclined, make some little noise Lodge, and fetch a great compass behind the
Plovers, and if you had for that purpose your Artificial Stalking Horse or Cow,
it would be of great use. But for want thereof, let him go on all four, or at
least stooping with his Head down, by which means he may by degrees drive them
from side to side, within ten or twelve Foot of the Border, at which time let
Hat, and give a great Shout; upon which they will take Wing to fly over your
Nets, at which Instance of time draw in your Cords very briskly, and take up
all those that are under the Nets.

When all are gathered up, clear the place of all the loose Feathers that lie
on the Ground, and then set your Net in its former State to take others.

When you have two Nets Planted, and that a Flock come, do not presently draw,
but let your Assistant fetch a compass and raise them, by which means you may
be assured of them.

When you see a great Flock coming, your Assistant must hold the Cord of your
Holm-Rod, that is, the Kites Wings; and draw it just when you direct him, that
is to say, when the first Birds of the Flock fly low, and are within about six
Foot of the Form; for as soon as ever they perceive the Holm-Rod aloft, the
last of the Flock will first pass on, and all of them come within a Foot of the
Ground, so that you may take the greatest part of them, were they ten or
fifteen Dozen, You must be sure not to stir the Holm-Rod, until the Birds be
within seven or eight Foot of the Ground, lest they pass over the whole Form
before they stoop to the Ground. And this is all I shall say as to this
particular way of taking Plovers, which though difficult to observe, yet if
expert in, is very profitable.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How to take Wild-Ducks with Nets, Hooks, Sliping knots and the like.
THey that would employ themselves in taking Ducks and Mallards with Nets, etc.
should always have some wild ones reclaimed, and made same for that purpose;
for the wild will never accompany themselves with those of the real tame Breed.
Therefore be provided with at least a dozen of them, for fear of wanting any
upon occasion, for they are often lost, and much subject to miscarry.

Never place your Nets but where you have at least a Foot of Water, nor much
more, so that Marshes, Sands, Flats, overflown Meadows and the like, are proper
for this Sport.

The Nets to use are the same with those used for Plovers, and plant them after
the same manner, only these are set under Water, and you need no Border to
conceal your Net; your Main Sticks should be of Iron, strong in proportion to
their length; but if of Wood, fasten good heavy pieces of Lead all along your
Net, at about a Foot distance on the sides of it, to sink it down into the
Water, that the Ducks may not escape by Diving; and your Lodge should be so
contrived as before directed for the Plovers. When all is ready, place Ducks
(that is, she ones) in this manner; Net, and as many behind by the Legs, but so
as they may swim up and down, eating such Grain, or Chipings as you shall throw
to them for that purpose; The Drakes keep by you in your Lodge; When you
perceive a Flock coming near you, let fly one of your Decoy Ducks, which will
presently join with the Wild ones in expectation of his Mate, and not finding
her there, he will begin to call; and the Female that is tied by the Legs Mate
to call, will begin to cry out, and provoke the others to do the same, upon
which the Drake comes to his Female, and generally draws with him the whole
Flock, which greedily fall to eat the Bait laid for that purpose. The Ducks
being once come within your Draught, pull your Cords with the quickest force
you can; and having thus taken them, let go your Decoy Ducks, and feed them
well, and the Wild ones you may kill; and so set your Nets again as you

Sometimes the Wind is so contrary, that the Male Duck cannot hear his Mate when
she cries; in that case let go a second, and a third to bring in the company
you design to surprise. Your Decoy Ducks should have some mark of distinction
for your more ready knowing them from the Wild ones, as something sowed about
one of their Legs.

To take Ducks with Running Slips, and Collers of Horse-hair.
I shall now show you a cheap, and easy way to take Ducks with Runing-Slips,
etc. especially in such low Marshes, as are overflown not above a Foot and a
half deep.

Observe the Haunts most frequented by them, and there cast a little Grain for
two or three days, to embolden and draw them on, for having Bows of Horse-hair
tied by two or three together unto little sharp Stakes, which must be fixed
into the Ground according to this ensuing Figure; and they must be so placed,
that the upper end of the Sticks and the Collers may be just hid a little under
Water, and then throw some Barley or the like Grain amongst your Traps, that so
you may take them either by their Heads, or swiming by their Legs.

You must resort thither thrice every Day, to see how you succeed, and to order
your business as you see occasion.

This Figure offers you a Device much of the same Nature with the former; It
is a Stake which for length is according to the depth of the Water as T, V, at
the great end T, bore it with two cross Holes, and put into the said Holes two
Sticks, one P, R, the other Q* S, each about the bigness of ones little Finger,
and about two Foot long; they must be strong set in, and well peg'd, at each
end of the Sticks fasten your Collers or Slipping Bows of Horse-hair well
twisted, as the Letters P, Q, R, S, then place your Stick T, V, that it may be
all under Water; and so as your knots may just swim open on the top of the
Water, and then cast your Grain or Chippings of Bread in and out amongst the
said Stakes, the better to entice the Ducks to come.

To take Ducks with Hooks, and Lines.
Those that use the Water much, and observe where Ducks resort, do frequently
use to take store of them by Hooks and Lines, the manner is as here described
by these Figures.

Fasten your Lines well and strong unto piked Sticks, as the Figure marked G
represents; and stake down your Sticks into the Ground, then Bait your Hook
with an Acorn, Bean, or the like, as the Figures B, E, represents, or with a
Fish as the Figure C. You may also bait it with a Worm. By these you may learn
to Bait with Pasts, or the like; and you should do well to feed the Ducks three
or four days before, at the place where you intend to set your Lines and Hooks
the better to draw them on an embolden them, and you should visit your Sport
every Morning and Evening, to take in what you have caught, and to Rectify
what is a miss.

CHAP. XXIX.
Directions to take Herons, Bitterns, Wild-Geese, Ducks, Swans and the like.
THere are diverse sorts of large Fowl that frequent Rivers and Moorish places,
seeking Fish, Frogs and such like Food that the Water affords, especially upon
great Floods, and the like; when you perceive any such Fowl, to frequent a
certain place, you may take them with Hooks and Lines set, and baited according
to these Figures.

Your Hooks must be strong, and well tied to your Lines, then Bait them in this
manner, thrust Hook into the Mouth, or Throat of the Frog, and let the end come
out at the Tail, and then fasten it to the Line, which must be tied to some
Bough, Root of a Tree, or Stump; and for want of such convenience, drive in
some Stake to fasten it unto.

If you can get a small Fish about the bigness of a Gudgeon it will do as well,
and for some sort of Foul better; and therewith Bait your Hook, thrusting the
long end in at the Throat g, and out Fundament h; and there fasten your Hook to
the Line, and your Line to some Stake or the like, as marked e, the end f being
fixed into the Ground, and the great end e being just covered over with the
Water; And the first Hern, or Bittern that shall perceive it, will make at it,
and devour it, and so become taken.

You must attend Morning and Evening to look after your Baits, and to do well
you should place good store of Hawks in several places.

If your Baits do miss, and that you find the Fowl do resort thither; then
fetch a great compass about them, and as it were gently drive them to those
places where your Baits are set; and if they pass within sight thereof, they
will come to them and be taken.

For this Sport the Stalking-Horse, either Natural or Artificial, may be of
great use.

CHAP. XXX.
Several Directions for taking Hawks, as also other Birds, with an Owl, or
Horn-Coot.
YOu must know that all Birds that sleep in the Night, are Enemies to those
that take their Rest in the Day. Such that sleep by Day are the several sorts
of Owls, the Osprey, etc. and when any of the Day Birds, espy them, they gather
about them both great and small, endeavoring to kill them. You may with the
smaller sort of Owls catch good store of ordinary Birds, as Sparrowhawks,
Magpies, Jayes, Daws, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Sparrows, Lennets, and the like:
And with your great Horn-Coot, the Goshawk, Faulcon, Lanner, etc. besides the
aforesaid Birds.

The Horn-Coot is a large sort of Owl, and keeps altogether in Woods and great
Forests; he is ofttimes bigger than a middle sized Goose, with hairy Legs and
rough Footed; he has great Tufts of Feathers on either side of his Head,
bearing out like Horns; his Face is broad and large, his Eyes great and
sparkling, and his Voice terrible and frighting. Having got such an Owl, you
need want no Recreation, having first made him fit for your purpose, and to
that end follow these Directions.

The first thing to be taught him is to come and feed on your Fist, being ready
and perfect at that, put him into some Room or Cockloft, where you must place
two pieces of Timber at each end of the Room one, which must be about two foot
high, and cut on the upper-side like the Ridge of an House, declining on both
sides, that your Horn-Coot may Perch on them; then tie a Cord from one of the
said Pearches to the other, having first drawn it through an Iron-Ring, or some
strong Leather-Strap, whereunto tie a Strap about three foot long, and at the
other End your Horn-Coot must be fastened by the Legs, just like unto Hawks.
Your Ring, or Leather Strap, must be loose, so as to play forwards and
backwards from one Billet to the other, that your Horn-Coot may divert himself
when he is minded to change places. At first, place not your two Pearches, or
Billets, above six or seven foot asunder; but afterward you may lengthen them
by little and little, as you perceive he comes on. Let him not rest at any time
on the Ground, and let the Strap, by which he is tied, be proportioned to the
height of the Pearches.

You must teach him to fly from one Stand to the other, by never feeding him on
that Perch where you find him, but only show him his food, and so draw or
entice him to the other; when he has had a Reward of two or three Bits, remove
your self to the other End, Calling him, and unless he come to the other Perch
give him no more; and by this means in a little time you will find he will be
too quick for you, for as soon as he perceives you to move, he will fly along
and get thither before you: He is then well made, and will be brought to that
pass in about two Months.

My next business shall be, to show you how to prepare the Place and
Instruments you are to use in taking Hawks, and other Birds, by the help of
your Horn-Coot.

Choose out some Quarter that lies high and open, free from Hedges, Trees, or
Bushes, only with a single ^ree, distant at least four hundred (...) from any
other, with a large round spreading Top, and pare away all the under Boughs.
This Figure shows the whole, with the Explanation.

From A to E is the Stem of the Tree, cleansed Boughs about twelve foot round
from Nets may the freer play: If there be any void place in the Tree, by which
a Bird may stoop through and stick at your Horn-Coot which is under it, you
must there stick in some Boughs to fill it up; and it were not amiss if you let
Boughs below to stand out somewhat more than the rest, upon which a Bird might
take stand, to view your Owl or Horn-Cool at the bottom of the Tree.

You must carefully gather up all the Leaves, Chopings, and broken Sticks, and
put them out of sight for the avoiding Suspicion; for Hawks especially are very
jealous and observant. Then choose out three Boughs from under the Tree, that
stand in a Triangle at an equal distance, as those marked T, V, the third being
just behind the Tree; then make a little Incision, or Cleft, with your Knife in
the End of each of the said Branches; the Clefts should be distant about nine
or ten foot each from the Body of the Tree; the intent of these Clefts are to
receive as many little Pegs, which are fastened to the Cords of your Net, as
hereafter in the next Figure shall be declared.

Then prepare two Billets, one of which place at H, L, about four or five foot
from the Body of the Tree, which must be strong set into the Ground; the other
at I, must be placed about an hundred Paces distant, and forced also into the
Ground; then stick up four or five Branches, as R, S, about three foot from it
for a Lodge, where you may withdraw with your Companions; behind each of the
Billets drive a strong Peg of Wood, as M, and your place is fitted.

Your place being thus prepared, take your Horn-Coot, your Cord, and a
Folding-Ladder, and get early in the Morning to the place. Plant the Ladder
against the hindermost of your Triangle Clefts, and fix the Peg, which is
fastened to one of the Cords of your Net into the Cleft, and it must be very
gently thrust in; then remove your Ladder to the Branch V, P, and gently thrust
into the Cleft the Peg that is at the other end of your Net. Then carry your
Ladder to the Branch Y, Z, and put into the Cleft T, one of the Pegs of the
other Net; the other Peg of your second Net must be fastened into the Cleft of
the Branch which is behind the Tree; then your two Nets are set in Triangle
above, as appears by the Letters below X, E, A, g, X. Then remove your Ladder
into some Private place, or fasten it on the backside of your Tree to lie close.

The next thing to be done is, to draw your Line between the two Pearches, viz.
from H to I, with your Iron-Ring, or Leather-Buckle clapped on it, for your
Horn-Coot to move in and out as you see occasion; fix the End of the Line over
the Billet I, at the Stake, in the Lodge M. Every thing being thus disposed,
withdraw your self, and watch your Horn-Coot, to observe if he discovers any
thing; for you shall sooner discern by his Eye than your own, whether any Bird
be stiring or not. When you find him turning his Head a little on one side,
with his Eyes aloft, give him a little twitch, and make him forsake the Perch,
or Billet I; for on that he must be first placed, and he will fly along after a
heavy manner, to rest himself on the other Billet, or Perch, under the Tree.
The Bird that was passing by having once discovered him, will presently stoop
at him, and perceiving the Tree will take a Stand, to consider his strange
Countenance, and resolving to set on him, Casts himself into one of the Nets,
which soon falls down upon him; and you must be nimble to take him out, that
he bruise not his Feathers, nor over heat himself by Bating, and send him away;
then set your Net as before, and withdraw your Horn-Coot to your Lodge again on
the Perch I.

The Nets to be used are the same with that mentioned in the Twenty fifth
Chapter, where it is at large described.

The Preceding Device is very good, but that which is designed by this
following Figure is much better, in regard there is no need of any Tree, and
also because you may by this take two or three, nay twenty at one time; and
likewise Birds which now come to your Horn-Coot, have no Perch to stand and
gaze, whereby they may hazard the discovering of your intent. Furthermore, if
five or six Hawks, or other Birds, should be at once in your Tree, you may
expect to take but one, and probably the worst of them all.

This Figure is much the same with that for taking Plovers, already at large
discoursed of.

For taking of Hawks use a double Platform, of which I have also treated; only
in the placing of these, your Nets must play the one on this side, and the
other on that side; whereas for Plovers, they both play one way. For Example,
When you draw your Cord of the Net, the side M, falls on the Point 2, and other
4 upon 3, to the end that the Bird that strikes at the Owl, or Horn-Coot, may
be sure to be taken, on what side soever it come.

You see where to place the two Pearches, viz. one at A, and the other at D.
You must at first place your Horn-Coot on that by your Lodge, and when you find
by him that he discovers any Bird, force him from you that he may fly to the
other Perch A, to give a full opportunity of discovering himself.

In case you have any Stale Pies, or Jays, they will be also great helps to
call in other Birds; and remember this thing, that in case you see any Bird
which you desire to take, if he come on the Right hand, you must take him with
that Net which is on your Left hand, and so on the contrary.

Having hitherto treated of the taking of Hawks, as also other Birds with an
Horn-Coot; I shall next proceed to treat of the taking Hawks several other
ways, and of all Ages, especially of such as are most frequent in our Kingdom,
as the Goshawk, Sparrowhawk, Merlin, Hobby, Castrel, and the like; all which
have their Ayries and Breed here, though not esteemed so good as the Beyond Sea
ones, especially the Goshawk.

Hawks, that by some Accident or other come into this Kingdom wild, and others
break out of the Mew, or by Misfortune are lost, and Breed here.

Hawks are taken three several ways, and at as many several Seasons; to wit,
from the Ayery, after they be disclosed, at which time they are called Eyasses,
or after they be full Summed, and begin to leave their Nest, at which time they
are called Branchers; or after they have preyed for Sore Hawks, or Hawks in
their Sorage.

The Taking Eyasse-Hawks.
FOr the taking these Hawks (which is as soon as they be disclosed, and have
cast off the first Down which covers their Feathers) there is no difficulty
to be used, more than finding out the Ayery, or Nest, which is amongst the
tallest Trees that grow in the thickest Coverts, and are Paths, or frequented
places; and when you come where the Ayery is, you may know it by the Mutings
and Slicings of the Old ones about the said Ayery, and at the foot of the Tree
you will find much Plumage, Feathers, and Bones of Birds, so that if you watch
near the said place early in the Morning, or at the close of the Evening, you
may see the Male bring in Prey for the Female that sets on the Nest.

Having thus found the Nest, about Midday (being the time that she rises to
bathe and solace her self) you may climb up the Tree, and look into the Nest;
to see how many Eggs she has, or whether Young ones; but be sure do not touch
either, for that will make her forsake the Ayery. And when the Young ones are
about ten Days old you may take them away, and bring them up with warm Meat,
and li^^ Birds, till they be full Summed and hard Feathered, and after that you
may Reclaim and Man them as you find occasion, according to the Directions
given in the Treatise of Hawking.

These Hawks are called Eyasses, as taken out of the Nest; but this is not the
best Season for taking Hawks, for they cannot be so naturally fed as by their
Damb, nor so well kept and ordered.

The next Season for the taking young Hawks is when they are Br^nchers; that
is, when they are hard Summed, and begin to forsake their Nests.

To take Branchers.
FOr the taking of Branchers with Nets, observe Ayery, or Nest, be there very
early in the Morning, to watch the rising of the Old Hawks to fetch Prey for
their Young ones, and soon after their departure you shall see the Young ones
fly forth upon the Boughs and Branches of the Trees, skiping up and down to
exercise their Wings. Now the thing to be observed is their Nests, which is
ever one and the same; then climb up the Tree, and being provided with several
little Nets about two foot, or two foot and an half square, which must be made
of strong twisted Thread, and dyed of the color of the Leaves, for fear of
frighting them, place one of those Nets about the Nest half circular, leaving
one passage for their going in and out; and let it be placed about a foot and
an half above the Nest, Penthouse-wife, and in such secret manner at a distance
from the Net, that it may not be perceived by the Old ones. Let your Net be a
running, Net, so drawn upon a strong Line, that when any thing shall strike
against it, it may run together like a Purse, and enclose and keep fast the
thing taken: and to that end make fast the strong Lines to some Branch of the
Tree, that when they are taken they may not fall to the Ground, but hang
fettered in the Net, without bruising themselves, or breaking their Feathers,
which is much to be regarded.

Having thus placed your Net about the Nest, Branches, through which they pass
in and out to their Nests, especially at that place where you saw the Old ones
make their passage out; and let them be placed more uprightly, and fasten the
strong Lines to some Branches as aforesaid.

Your Nets being thus placed, which are to be done with all have imaginable,
for fear of the Old ones coming, you must descend the Tree, Hawks, yet so as
you may have sight of them; and when the Old ones brings them Prey, they flock
about her to the Nest for it, so that as many as touch the Nets, become
entangled; and those that escape are taken often times at their coming out. Those
that are so taken fetch not down until the Old one is departed, and the other
Young ones are come out for fear of affrighting them from their Nest, and so
lose the taking them; Feathers, in the taking them out of the Nets; and you
should be provided with some Rufter-Hoods to put on their Heads, which will
make them quieter from struggling.

To take Hawks in their Soreage.
THis Season is from the time they have Preyed for themselves, until the first
year be expired, and that they have Mewed. For the taking them you must well
know their Ayerie, and diligently observe their Mornings and Evenings going
forth for Prey, as also their returning home, and where they take their Stands;
for Hawks of all Birds are the most constant to their wonted places. Therefore
being thus acquainted with their times of going out, and the places where they
sit at their return, take the advantage of their going out for Prey, and climb
up the Tree where their Stands are, and in the strait places where they must
pass, take a pair of those Nets called by Falconers, Vrines, or Vrnes, which
for shape are not much different from those you are to use for the taking of
Branchers; but they are much more larger, and more hollow in compass, with a
large Mesh; they are made of strong Twisted brown Thread, and dyed Green as
aforesaid; but being common to be bought at Net-makers Shops, I shall say no
more of them.

These Vrines or Nets place in the several passages, and in diverse Trees round
their Stand, so that let them come which way they will, you may meet with some
of them, and place your self in some secret place, as before directed, to watch
their taking, for fear of hurting themselves; and when you have taken them
down, Hood them as aforesaid.

But if it happen that this takes no effect, then six Stales under your Nets,
of such Birds either great or small as you see they Prey upon; and these Stales
tie at such a convenient liberty, that they may flutter up and down within the
compass of the Net. Then about Daybreak when the Hawk begins to rouse her self
upon her Stand, and to gaze about according to their Nature; and has cast up
her Casting of Plumage, or Feathers, and being sharp and hungry, will soon espy
your Stales, and with all eagerness make them her Prey, by which means she will
become entangled in the Nets; and by this Device you may take all the Ayerie,
provided you be not too rash, by getting up the Tree, to take that down, and so
a^^right the rest away.

To take Hawks with Lime-Rods, or a Lime-Bush.
THere are some that for taking of sore Hawks do use Lime-Rods, or a small
Lime-Bush, artificially made of five Twigs, gently fixed into a little Socket
of Wood made like a Handle, that so soon as any thing touches or strikes
them, they presently depart from the Socket, and clap close to the thing that
it touches, and so become entangled; those little Bushes are artificially
placed about the Stand where the Hawk uses to fit, compassing it so about,
that she cannot come to the Stand without intangling.

As for the single Lime-Rods, they must be fixed to the nearest Branches to the
Stand, coming slopewise so near the Stand, that she cannot come in without
touching them, and so become entangled. These Lime-Rods are to be placed not
only about he Stand, but also in and about all Passages, through which she
comes to her Stand; and they must be artificially placed, that she may not
distinguish them from the Natural Twigs of the Tree.

These single Lime-Twigs or Rods must be about a Foot and an half long, and
about half ways Limed; but those used for the Bush, must be about Rods in a
Cluster, and so placed that one may not touch another; which Twigs must be
about six Inches long, of which Lime four Inches toward the top.

But although this manner of taking Hawks is very certain, and not much
troublesome, yet it is not so good and neat, by reason of besmearing their
Feathers with the Lime; therefore for the cleansing their Feathers from the
Lime, have very Capons Grease, or Goose Grease, anointing therewith the Limed
Feathers very well, then take of the sinest Hourglass Sand, and scatter it
thick upon the Ointment; and having warm Water, either bath the said places, or
with a soft Spung dipped into the said Water, bath the Feathers therewith,
working them betwixt your Fingers; by which means you will get off all the
daubed Lime, and perfectly cleanse the Feathers from the same.

Taking Hawks with a Dark Lanthorn.
THis way is very good and sure for single Hawks, as well Young as Old. Observe
this Method. Having found the Stand of a Hawk, in the dead of the Night when it
is very Dark, get a Dark Lanthorn, and turn the Light just before your Face,
and against the Hawk, by which means your Face will not be seen by the Hawk,
and make as little noise as possible; and by this Stand with your Hand; for the
Light does cast an Amazement unto her, and it were not amiss if you covered
your Face with a piece of thin Green Silk; for nothing is more affrightful to
them, than the Face of a Man.

This way is good to take all Hawks that through ill Reclaiming, or otherwise
do escape, and break away, and so become Wild.

Concerning the Stands of Hawks.
IF it be a Day-Stand, you shall find about it nothing but Mutings, and
Slysings without any mixture of Matter. And if it be a Night-Stand, you shall
find lying amongst the Mutings many and diverse Castings of Feathers, Plumage
and the like, which you may know to be a Hawks from other Fowl, by the bigness,
proportion and Substance. Also by the difference of the Castings, Stand; if her
present, then you shall find Castings of all Natures, as some altogether dry,
some about three parts dry, others half dry, some less; and probably her
Casting that Morning. But if it be her forsaken Stand, then all the Castings
will be dry, old and withered. And thus much concerning the taking of Hawks.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Singing Birds, and how to preserve and keep them.
HAving thus largely Treated of the taking both Land and Water Fowl; It will
not be unnecessary to Treat of such Singing Birds as are of most esteem amongst
us, with some short Directions how to keep them; and first with the Nightingal.

The Nightingal.
THis Bird by most is esteemed the Queen of all Singing Birds, as well for her
sweet as various charming Notes, which she (though but small) loudly warbles
forth, and generally in such places near unto Houses, and frequented places.
They begin to appear about the beginning of April, and where their Winter
Habitation is, none knows, but it is supposed by some that they sleep all that
Season.

She makes her Nest in Quickset Hedges, or the like places, not far from the
Ground, and Hatcheth her young about the beginning of May, and the earlier the
young ones are hatched, they are esteemed the better. They should be taken out
of their Nests when indifferent Fled'g, for if well Feathered, they (as all
other Birds) will become sullen and dye, and if too little or callow, they are
tender and also in danger of dying.

For their Meat give them Sheeps Hearts, or Bullocks Hearts, but take off the
fat skin that covers it, as also the Sinews; then soke the like quantity of
White-bread in Fair Water, squeezing out some of the Water, and mince them
small together, and give it them on the point of a Stick, as much at a time as
is sufficient. When they are old enough to fly out of the Nest, put them into a
Cage, with several Pearches to sit upon; and let them be lined with green Bays,
for at the first they are very subject to the Cramp, and at the bottom of the
Cage put in some Moss, or fine Straw; and it were not amiss if their Cages were
lined in the Winter, otherwise they must be kept in a warm place. At their
first Caging put amongst their Meat Ants Eggs.

In Summer every day feed them with fresh Meat; when they begin to Moult, let
their Meat be hard Eggs and Sheeps Hea^^s, o^ equal quantities mixed together
with Saffron and Water, but by the way take notice that D^ck-Egs will kill
them: Sometimes you may give them Catterpillers, Red Worms, F^gs Lice, or Meal
Worms.

As to their Diseases and Cure^, observe that at the latter end of August they
grow very fat, as well those abroad* as those in Cages. When their fat abates
and they cease Singing, it is an ill sign; therefore keep them very warm, and
give them Saffron in theer Meat or Water* When you perceive the growth of their
fat* purge them thrice a week for a Month, either with a Worm usually found in
Dove-Houses, or with a Speckled Spider, which you may find about Vines, or
Goosbery Trees, about August, and at no other time.

If they are Melancholy, put into their Drinking Pot, some Liquorice, with a
little White Sugar Candy, and let their Meat be Sheeps-Hearts Shred, some
Meal-Worms, and hard Eggs mingled with Pismires.

If you keep them not clean, so that their Feet Claws will rot off, and they
will be subject to the G^ut and Cramp, and take no delight in themselves;
therefore keep the Cage clean and handsome, with good dry Sand in the Bottom.

For the Cure of the Gout, take Fresh Butter, and Anoint their Feet, Four or
Five Days, and it will cure them.

They are also troubled with Apostumes, and breaking out about their Eyes and
Neb, for which Capons Grease.

The way to take Nightingals.
FOr Young ones observe where the Cock sings, and if he Sings long the Hen, is
not far off, and when you come near the Nest she will Sweet and Cur; if
notwithstanding you cannot find the Nest stick a Meal Worm or two upon a Thorn,
and retiring into some place out of sight, observe Nest, do not touch them, for
then they will not tarry in the Nest.

The way to take Branchers, is thus; scrape in the Ditch, or Bank-side, the
Earth about three quarters of a ^ard square, that it may look fresh; then take
a Bird-Trap or Net-Trap, which make after this fashion.

Take a Net made of Green Thread, or rather Silk, which should be about a Yard
in compass, and made after the fashion of a Shove-Net for Fish; then get some
large Wire, which bend round, joining both ends together, which put into a
short Stick about one Inch and an halt long; then take a piece of Iron with two
Che^ks, and a Hole on each side, through which put some fine Whip-Cord three or
four times double, the better to hold the piece of Wood unto which the ends of
the Wire are put; and with a Button on each side the Iron Whip-Cord, to the end
the Net may play the quicker. You must fasten the Net to the Wire as you do a
Shove-Net to the Hoop, then get a Board the compass of the Wire, and join the
two Cheeks of Iron at the Handle of your Board, and make a Hole in the middle
thereof, and put a piece of Stick, about two Inches long, and a Hole at the Top
of your Stick where you must have a Peg to put in with two Wires an Inch and a
half long, to stick your Meal Worm upon, Net, tie a String drawing the Net up,
having an Eye at the end, of the Handle to put your Thread through, and pull it
till it stands upright, then pull it through the Hole of the Stick that stands
in the middle of your Board, and put your Peg in the Hole, to hold the String
of the Net, that it cannot fall down; upon the Wires put two Worms before you
put it into the Hole, and set it as gently as you can, that it may fall down
upon the first touch of the Nightingals approach. Then having scraped the
place, your Net and Worm being in a readiness, put some Ants in your Trap-Cage,
and upon the Board put some Worms upon Thorns, and set them at the bottom of
the Trap-Cage, to which end little Holes should be made to stick in the Ends of
the Thorns. Then plant your Trap near the place where you heard them Call, be
it in the Ditch, by the Bank-side, or Corner of a Hedge, and you need not fear
of catching some. You may set what number of Cages you think convenient, the
more the better.

Having taken any, tie the ends of their Wings with strong Thread, to disable
them from bruising and hurting themselves against the Top and Sides of the
Cage; and to that end, it were convenient to let the Cage be lined with
Green-Bays.

For Four or Five Days until they are Reclaimed, let them not be disturbed with
Company, as little as may be; let their Food be Sheeps-Hearts, and hard Eggs
finely shred, and mixed together, with Red Ants, and a few Red Earthworms will
not do amiss. At the first taking them they will Eat nothing but living things,
as Worms, Ants, Flies, Catterpillers, and the like; But if through fulleness
they will not Eat, then open their Bills and force them, strewing some of the
said Meat at the bottom of the Cage.

Those Nightingals that are taken in July, or August, will not sing till middle
October, and then they will hold in Song till June following; but those taken
in the beginning of April, are esteemed the best for Song. Those Birds that Sing
before they feed, are generally excellent; but those that are long a feeding,
and do not begin to Sing, are not worth the keeping.

Cocks are thus known from Hens; the Cock is said to be longer and bigger than
the Hen; to have a greater Eye, a larger Bill, and a Tail more reddish: But
take this for a certain Rule, that if any of your Nestlings, before they can
feed themselves, do Record a little to themselves, and in that Recording you
perceive their Throats to Wag, it is a sure sign they are Cocks.

Brainchers, when they are taken and do Feed, whether Cocks or Hens, will
Record; but the Cocks do it much longer, louder, and oftener.

CANARY BIRDS.
THese Birds take their name from the place from whence they first came, viz.
from the Canary Isles; but of late years there is a sort, (but not so good)
that are brought from Germany: And there are some that are curious in this
Diversion in their Aviaryes that breed them in England, which are excellent,
surpassing all others; but the keeping and ordering them is troublesome.

These Birds being of such esteem for their pleasing Notes are much prized, so
that as a Merchandise they are brought over and sold by certain Shopkeepers
about Billings-gate, in London, for Ten, Twelve, or Fiften shillings a piece,
more or less, according to the goodness and excellency of their Notes, there
being a great difference in them.

If you would know whether they are in health before you buy them, take them
out of the Store-Cage, and put them into a Clean Cage alone; and if they stand
up boldly without crouching or shrinking their Feathers, and looks with a brisk
Eye, it is a sign they are in Health; but if they Dung very thin and watery, or
of a slimy White, without,

They are Subject to many Diseases, as Impostumes, which afflict the Head, and
will cause them to fall suddenly from the Perch, if not speedily Cured.

The most approved Medicine is to make an Ointment of Fresh Butter, and
Capons-Grease melted together, and anoint the infected place therewith Three or
Four Days together, and when it is soft, open it gently and let out the
Corruption, Ointment, and it will perfect the Cure in a short time; and during
the time of the Cure give them Figs and Liquorice, with White Suger-Candy in
their Water.

The LINNET.
THis is a pretty Bird, and for a sweet and pleasing Note takes place next to
the Canary Bird, and were it not so common would be of great esteem; the
feeding the Nestlings is with White-Bread soaked in Milk, or Water, with
bruised Rape-Seed mixed of the like quantity, and let it be fresh made every
day, for that which is four will breed Diseases; this Meat give them on the Top
of a Stick as often as occasion serves to seed them.

If you would have them to Whistle, you should Whistle to them in the time of
feeding them, and Flagelet, observing constant Tunes, and what Bird soever you
would have him to learn his Note, under that Bird let him hang, and he will
perfectly imitate him, especially the Canary Birds Notes exactly.

The Cock is known from the Hen by the Breast, which is redder, and his Back is
browner, with White under his Wing, viz. the fourth, fifth and Sixth Feathers.

His usual Food is Rape and Canary-Seed mixed Hemp Seed. And blow off the Huks
every day from the Seeds in the Drawer of his Cage, and betwixt the Wire put
some Chalk to rub his Bill, also a Lump of Sugar is very good sometimes to pick
upon; the Dutch-Seeds are esteemed better than the English, as being thiner
skinned.

Many are the Diseases of this Bird, as Convulsions of the Breast, Ptisick,
known by the panting, staring of his Feathers, and lean Breast; Chick-Weed, or
the like; in the Spring sometimes he is troubled with Hoarsness in his Voice,
by over-streyning to sing, but of all Diseases, scowring is most dangerous, and
if it is clammy, it is mortal. Saffron is very good to give them in their
Water, and Suger-Candy.

The Robbin Read-Breast.
THis Bird being so innocent and harmless is most beloved, and of all others is
the most familiar, coming into the Houses to eat Crumbs of Bread; and for a
sweet and changeable Note is little inferior to the Nightingal, or
Canary-Bird; besides it is very tractable to Whistle. They breed generally
thrice a year. Those that you intend to keep should be taken from the Old ones
before they are much fledged, otherwise they will be sullen and dye; and being
a tender Bird are to be kept in Cages lined with Bays. They are to be feed in
all respects as the Nightingal.

In the bottom of the Cage put Moss for warmness. If you would have them learn
to Whistle use the Flagelet that has a small fine Note.

The way to take the Old ones is both easy and common, which you may do either
with a Pitfal, or with a Trap Cage, bought at any shop that sells Cages, and in
the said Cage you may put for a Bait some little Worms, Crumbs of Bread, or the
like.

The Cock has his Breast of a darker Red than the Hen, and it goes further up
upon his Head.

The WOOD-LARK.
THis Bird for its excellent, pleasant, and various Notes, is held in great
esteem. They Breed very early in the Year, and make their Nest in Lair-Ground,
where the Grass is rank and russet, under some large Tuffs, to shelter them
from the Cold. It Is a very difficult Bird to take from the Nest, and so to
breed up, generally dying of the Scouring, or Cramp in a short time after they
are taken out of the Nest; so that the best way were to take the Old ones, or
Branchers, before Moulting-time; the chief Season being in June, July, and
August.

The way to take them is with a Hobby, after this manner: Go out in a Dewy
Morning to the sides of some Hills that lie toward the rising of the Sun,
where they most usually frequent; and having Sprung them, observe where they
fall; then surround them twice or thrice, carrying your Hobby on your Fist,
causing him to hover as you draw near, by which means they will lie still until
you clap a Net over them, which carry on the Point of a Stick. If you would
take three or four together, have a Net made like that for Partridge, only with
a smaller Mesh, and carrying your Hobby, as aforesaid, which will serve you as
the Setting-Dog for the Partridge, and with your Net at one Draught you may
take them all: But those taken in these Months are not so good for the Cage, as
those taken in February, or January, as not holding their singing so long.

Upon your first taking them, put into the Cage two Pans, one for minced Meat,
and the other for Oatmeal, and whole Hempseed; then having boiled an Egg hard,
take the Crumbs of White-bread, with the like quantity of beaten Hemp Seed, and
mix them altogether, mincing the Egg, very small, and give it them to eat. At
the bottom of the Cage should be fine Gravel, and be sure to keep the Cage
clean, and shifted every three or four Days at least with fresh Gravel, which
they much delight in. If you would have them sing loud, and much, feed them
with Sheeps Hearts, hard Eggs, and Hemp Seed bruised, mixed together, and put
into the Water a little (...), white Sugar Candy, and Saffron, once a Week.

If in the beginning of the Spring you find them (...) poor, give them for two
or three days a Turf of ^hree leaved Grass, as is used to the Sky (...) also
some Sheeps Hearts boiled, and mixed with B^^ad, an hard Egg, and bruised (...)
before directed.

If those Birds (...) in January, or February, Sing not within a Month, it is a
sign they are other (...), or will not be worth the keeping. Now for the
knowing a (...) observe these Rules; Note, called Cudling in the (...).

These (...) are very subject to (...)* the (...) and (...) in the Head. The
best Cure for (...)* is to take them out of the Cage. and smoke them with (...)
then put fresh (...) and set them in an hot place where the Sun shines, that
they may ^ask them selves in the (...). For the (...) also, shift the Eggs.
(...) Water

The SKYLARK.
The Skylark is more handy than the (...)* and (...) troublesome to keep; but

They Breed in (...)* or in high Turfs of Gran in (...), and seldom have Young
ones till Mid May.

They are taken several was, as already is treated of in a (...) relating to
the Taking them* to which I refer you.

(...)
THere are said to be five kinds of, (...).

The (...) has great variety of pleasing (...) and sings about nine Months in
the Year They generally Breed three times in Birds usually prove the best.

The Young ones may be taken from the Old (...) about fourteen days, keep them
dry and clean from their (...) and feed them with (...) Meat and some (...)
together with bruised (...) the Bread before you mingle it with the Meat; and
let them have always fresh Water, and the bottom of the Cage kept clean,
otherwise they will be troubled with the Cramp.

The BLACKBIRD.
THis Bird by the ordinary Country People is in much esteem, but not for its
pleasant Note, nor its long continuance in Singing, fearce exceeding, three
Months. Their food is much the same as for the Throsh, and are to be so ordered.

The STARLING.
THis is a very docile Bird, and if taken out of the Nest young is apt to learn
both to ^alk and Whistle. It Is a hardy Bird; their food is Sheeps-Hearts, or
other raw Flesh, hard Eggs minced, Hemp Seed, wet Bread, and the like.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the WATER-SPANIEL, How to Train and Order him for the Game, useful in
Fowling.
THe Water-Dog is of such general use, and so common amongst us, that there
needs no great description of him; but there are great differences amongst
them, as well in Proportion as otherwise. As to Color, the Curious will make a
difference, as the Black to be the best and hardiest, the Spotted or ^yed
quickest of (...), and the (...) swiftest in Swimming: but in truth (...) is
nothing material* for without doubt there are good and bad of all (...), and
that by Experience is found: But his Breeding, Training-up, and the coming of a
good ^^rd, are the chief things, yet it must be confeited, that as to
handsomness the Color is to be regarded so is the Proportion as to his Shape*
and then his Head should be round, with curled Hair, his Ears broad and
hanging, his Eyes full and lively, his Nose short, his Lips like unto an (...),
his Neck thick and short, his Shoulders broad, his Legs strait, his (...)
square, his Ribs with a compass, his (...) round, his Thighs brawny, his (...)
gaunt, his P^ster^s strong, and (...), and his Fore-feet long and round with
his (...) in general long and curled, not loose and ^^agged: for the first
shows hardiness and strength to endure the Water, and the other much
tenderness and weakness.

Now for the Training and Bringing him up, you cannot begin too Early* I mean*
to teach him (...) when he can but Lap, for that is the (...) thing to be
learnt: for being made to Obey, he is then ready to do your Commands: Therefore
so soon as he can Lap, teach him to Couch, and Lie close, not daring to stir
from that posture without your Command; and the better to effect this, always
cherish him when he does your Will, and correct him when he disobeys; and be
sure observe, that in the first Teaching him you never let him eat any thing,
but when he does something to deserve it, that he may thereby know that Food is
a thing that comes not by chance, or by a liberal Hand, but only for a Reward
for well doing; and this will Teachers or Feeders than one, for Variety breeds
confusion, as teaching diverse ways, so that he can learn no way well.

Another thing is. You must be very constant to the Words of Direction by which
you teach him, choosing such as are most petinent to the purpose, and those
Words that you first use do D^gs take notice of the Sound, not of the English,
so that the least alteration puts him to a stand: For Example, If you teach him
to Couch at the Word Couch, and afterward would have him Couch at the Word
Down, this will be an unknown Command unto him; and I am of Opinion, that to
use more Words than what is necessary, for one and the same thing, is to over
load his Memory, and cause Forgetfulness in him. (And this Method should be
observed Setting-Dog.) You must teach him also to know the Word of Correction,
or Reprehension, for no Lesson can be taught without a Fault, and no Fault
should escape without Reprehension at the least of Chiding, and in this be as
constant to a Word, as Go too Sirrah, Ha Rascal, or the like, which at first
should be used with a Last, or Jerk, to make him know that it is a Word of
Wrath or Anger; neither must such Words proceed from you lovingly or gently,
but Whelp may Tremble when he hears you thus speak to him.

You must have certain Words of Cherishing when he does well, that he may be
thereby encouraged, as That Is a good Boy, Well done, or the like, using
therewith Cheerfulness of Speech, with Actions of Favor, as Spi^^ing in his
Mouth, Clapping him on the Back, and the like. Take heed, Hem, or the like.

When your Whelp is brought to understand these several Words, viz. of
Instruction, Correction, Cherishing, and Advice, and that he will Couch and Lie
down at your Feet, how, when, and as long as you please, and that with a Word
Line and Collar, and to follow at your Heels, without coming too close, or
hanging back; and the meaning of this is, to teach him to be the more Familiar
and Obedient unto you.

Having brought him to perfect Obedience, to follow you in a Line, the next
thing must be to make him Follow you in the like Nature loose, without a Line,
and always to be at your Heels, and to lie down by you without your leave to
the contrary; and this is as necessary a Lesson as can be taught him, for he
must be so but upon especial occasion, as to raise up Fowl from their Haunts,
and to find out and bring such as you have shot, or killed, unto you.

The next Lesson to learn him is to Fetch and Carry any thing that you shall
Command him, and this you may begin to teach him by the way of Sport, as by
taking your Glove, and shaking it about his Head, making him to catch at it,
and to play with it; and sometimes let him hold it in his Mouth, and strive to
pull it from you; then cast it a little way from you, and let him Musse it on
the Ground; then take it from him gently, giving him Cherishing words, as
That Is a good Boy, Well done, or the like. After you have spent some time in
this, and that you find him to take it from the Ground, and to hold it in his
Mouth as it were for you, then begin to cast it further and further, giving him
your Command, saying Fetch, or Bring it Sirrah; and if he brings it, then
Cherish and Reward him with Meat, or a Crust of Bread, and let him have no
food, but what he deserves by doing this Lesson, and by your continual Practice
he will fetch your Glove, or any thing else you shall throw out for him.

If at any time he offers to run away with your Glove, or to toss it up and
down wantonly, not bringing it to you orderly; then first give him your Word of
Instruction, and if that will not do, your Word of Correction, and if neither
avail, then proceed to Blows, and give him nothing to eat as a Reward until he
does as you Command. When by this means you have made him perfect, and that he
will fetch your Glove readily where e're you throw it, bringing it to you
although in Company, and all call him to come to them, you must then make much
of him, and Reward him very well: And having Trained him up to fetch your
Glove, then proceed to teach him to fetch whatsoever you throw from you, as
Staves, Nets, Stones, Money, or any thing that is portable.

Also teach him to carry live or dead Fowl, and with a tender Mouth, that when
you have occasion to use him for the Sport, he may bring them to you without
tearing, or so much as bruising a Feather.

And as you walk with him in the Fields, drop something behind you unknown to
him; and being gone a little way send him back to seek it, by saying, Back
Sirrah, I have lost; and if at first he stand amazed urge him still, and cease
not by pointing to him the Way you would have him go, until by seeking out he
finds that which you so dropped, which make him take up by saying That Is it, and
to bring it after you; then drop it again, going twice as far as formerly,
causing him to go back to seek it, not leaving him till you have made him find
it, and bring it to you; for which Cherish and Reward him, and where he fails
there Chastise or Chide him, sometimes with angry Words, other times with
Blows, and sometimes keep him Fasting, according to his Offense; and thus do
until he will hunt the way back which you went, were it above a Mile.

But if your Dog happen to bring to you a Wrong thing, you must receive it from
him, and Cherish him; but send him back presently again, saying, Away again, or
I have lost more, and be not satisfied until he bring you the right thing; and
if he return without any thing, then be sure Chide and Beat him for his Sloth
and Negligence.

When he will thus Fetch, Carry, and Find out things thus lost, then Train him
to hunting, beginning, first with ^ame-fowl, which by your help, (when they
Dive, or otherwise) you may with little labor make him take, which will much
hearten and encourage him to the Sport. After this make him use all his
Cunning* without your assistance, whether he gets or loses the Game, and
Reward or Correct him; and by this Practice he will become Master of his Game*
and be sure always that he brings his Game (when taken) to the Shore unto you,
without hurting it.

Your next business shall be to Train him unto your Fowling-Piece, causing him
to follow as it were step by step behind you, and under the Covert of your
Shadow until you have Shot, or else to Couch down, or Lie close, where you
appoint Lie close, until you have Shot: and then upon the least Notice or
Beckon, speedily to come, and to do what you Command.

Some Dogs are so expert as to have their Eye on the Game, and upon a Guns
going off immediately run to fetch it; but it is not adjudged so good, for the
Piece should not be the Warning to him, but your Command; and if you give him
this Liberty at your Shooting, when you come Nets, or Lime-Reds, as soon as he
sees the ^owl entangled, and to flutter their Wings, he will pre^ently rush in
amongst them, which will occasion the spoiling your Lime-Reds, and the tearing
or entangling your Nets.

The (...) is of great use in Moulting-time, that is, when the Wild-fowl cast
their Feathers, and cannot fly, but lie lurking about in Secret places; which
Season is between Summer and Autumn, at which time take your Dog into such
places where they resort, causing him to hunt about, and when he finds them
they are easily taken, by reason they cannot fly. In Fenny Countries (where Fowl
do much resort) great quantities may be so taken, driving them into places
where you must have Nets ready fixed, as in Narrow (...), or the like. These
Fowl, if taken and kept tame, and fed with Beast-Livers, Whey, Curds, (...),
Sca^l'd-Bran, and the like, are Body, as also for sweetness of last.

There are diverse other things that your (...) are and may be taught, as taking
off ones Hat, shutting of a Door, and the like, all which I forbear as things
not absolutely necessary for our purpose, and chiefly to please the Fancy.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Setting-Dog, with Rules to choose one, and to Train him up from a
Whelp, to come to Perfection.
OF all sorts of Dogs there is none so fit and proper to be made a Setting Dog,
as a Land Spaniel, by reason of their Natural Inclination to Ranging and
Beating about a Field; But any Dog whether a Water Spaniel, or a Mungri^
betwixt both, or indeed a L^rcher or Tumbler, or any Dog that has a perfect
good Scent, and naturally addicted to the Hunting of Fowl, may be brought to be
a Setter.

You should choose one of a good and nimble size, rather small than large and
corpulent, of a high Mettle, and free for the Sport, being a nimble Ranger, of
Active Feet, wanton Stern, busy Nostrils, and quick Scent, that his Toil be
without weariness, his search without changableness, and yet that no delight or
desire of the Game* Transport him beyond Fear or Obedience; for it is the best
Sign of a good Spaniel, never to be fearful, but always loving to his Master,
yet of a bold Courage.

Some are so curious in observing the Colors, but that I Judge a vain thing,
for all Colors are alike, if the natural qualities be perfect and answerable
to your design. But those aforesaid properties cannot be known whilst they are
young, therefore your great care is to make choice from a good and right Breed;
and having so done, you may begin to teach him at five or six Months old, as
being then very Tractable, for the elder they are the more stuborn to learn,
nor will they retain their Learning so well.

The first thing is to teach him to be loving and familiar to you above all
others, taking his only delight in your Company; and the better to effect it,
let none feed him but your self, for by this means he will not only be loving
and fond, but obedient and careful of your Displeasure, a Frown or a sharp word
making the same effect as Blows, for beating takes off their Courage, and makes
them dull and dead Spirited.

Your Whelp being thus brought to the knowledge of you, and to follow you in a
Line without any Reluctance; your next business is to teach him to couch and
lie close to the Ground, first, by laying him down, saying, lie close, lie
close, or the like words of Command; and terrifying him with rough words when
he does any thing contrary to your desire, giving him not only good words and
cherishing, but Food when he obeys your Commands; and by this means you will
bring him to such Obedience, and perfect Understanding, that when at any time
you shall (...) Setting Dog and Partridg^^

To ye. Rt. Worshipful Sr. John Shelley of Michelgrove in Sussex Baronet

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome

say lie close, down, or the like, he will do it at a word, without any
awkerdness.

Then about a Yard distance lay down a piece of Bread or Meat, crying go near,
making him creep to it, but before he comes to it speak smartly to him, biding
him lie down, take heed, or the like, which obeying, give him your Commands by
crying Hey, or the like words, to signify him to creep forwards to it, and let
him eat it, making much of him; and be careful not to be too Words or
Corrections (especially at first) for that may spoil him; and being thus at
command to Couch down at your word, and always with his Head from you, make him
creep forward by saying go near, go near, or the like; and if he offers to
raise up his Head or any part of his Body, forthwith thrust it down to the
Ground, saying down, down, or the like; and if that will not do, correct him
gently with a Whip, or by biting his Ear, for by no means beat him Head, for
that makes him dull, and will spoil him; and be sure when you thus Chastise
him, have him always in a String (as indeed at all times during his making)
that he may not run from you; and this Method observe until he is very expert,
Couching at your Command, creeping on his Belly as far as you please, and lying
still until you give him your Command to rise; so that at any time when you
walk abroad with him in the Fields, and wantonly he rangeth about, upon lie
down, he Coucheth down, and so lies till your further Commands.

Having brought him to this Obedience and Knowledge, then take him into the
Field to Range about, suffering him to Spring any Bird or Game, not Correcting
him at the first, which will encourage him the better, and thus do for about a
Week, exercising him daily; and when he has been used three or four times to
Spring Patridges, he will Bird, sticking only to them.

Take notice that you give not a Bitch that correction as a Dog, for she will
not endure so much; and what a Dog learneth one Day, he will retein it, but a
Bitch is apt to forget, so that she must have the oftener teaching.

If you can get a Spaniel that has been accustomed to the Hawk (although a
year and a half old) he will be sooner made; for then there will Game but the
Partridge.

Having brought him to know his Game, and that he is so Staunch, as to Hunt
close and warily without questing or opening, provide a Bullocks Liver boiled,
(which has the same Scent of the Partridge.) Then take your Dog in a Line,
which must be about 15 Yards long to lengthen out on occasion; and take in your
Hawking Bag a good Liver, about the bigness of a penny Loaf cut into small
pieces, and lead him into the Field, and as you are going (your Dog being by
your side or following you, for he must not go before you) give him your
Commands to fall down as aforesaid; and if he does it not, correct him,
rewarding him with some of the Liver if he observes your Commands; then go a
little further commanding him down again, saying down, and thus do until he
will Couch at the first word; and being brought to this command, turn your face
to him, and take the Line by which he is led, gently pulling him by it crying
down, down, so that he will not rise without pulling almost by force; then go
to him, take him up in your Arms, and carry him two or three Yards, then set
him down making much of him, but not letting him go out of the Line from you.
When he is at this command by often using this way, teach him to Hunt by hand,
which is thus done. Take a piece of the Liver about the bigness of a Walnut,
which showing him in your Hand, and letting him smell to it, cast it down which
way you please, but at a small Distance at first, saying hey, hey, showing it
him several times before you cast it forth; then let him go to it, and eat it,
still having him in the Line. Then take another piece of the Liver, showing it
him as aforesaid; and cast it from you a little further than at the first time,
and permit him to go to it, and eat it for his Reward. Thus do several times
still casting it further and further; and as he is going you may give him your
Commands, crying hastily Down, Down, so that he immediately falls down with his
face toward the Liver, and lie close till you give him your Commands to rise,
by crying Hey, and pointing with your Hand for him to go forward to the Liver,
and so suffer him to eat it; then call him to you, and make much of him.

The reason of teaching him thus to Hunt with the Liver, is to bring him not
only to the Scent of the Partridge, and to be at command, to lie down, and the
like, but also to observe your Motion which way you cast it, that thereby when
he is beating about the Field, upon your crying Hey to him; and moving your
Hand he may know by the Motion thereof which way to Hunt, either to the right
or left. And he must be very expert in this, before you suffer him to Hunt
loose, for he cannot be at too much command.

Being thus expert at this, and also at great command, when he is Hunting at
about fifteen yards distance, which is the length of the Line, on a sudden cry
Down, then go round him at a small Distance at first, taking the Circuit larger
and larger, crying Down, that he stir not (which he may be apt to do being at
some Distance from you, as thinking that he should follow you) and then giving
him a jerk with the Line crying Down, by which he will know that he must not
stir.

Being thus used and that he is expert therein, and at command let him Hunt at
liberty, but with the Line hanging at length dragging after him; and as he is
thus Hunting loose, on a sudden give him your commands to lie Down, and Peg
the end of the Line to the Ground to hinder his running away; then pitch down
your Staff or Pole, to which fasten your Line of the Net at some Distance from
him, and having the other end of the Net in your Hand, gently draw the Net over
him as he lies; and if he offers to stir at your doing it, rebuke him, making
him lie close, saying Down, Down, and so draw it over him backwards and
forwards, that when you shall come to draw the Net over him when he sits
Partridges, he will not be afraid, knowing what he is to do. And the Reason of
the fastening the Line to the Ground that he is lead in, is to keep him from
running away at the first, if in case the drawing over the Net should frighten
him, as at first is usual.

When he is thus made perfect, and that he endures to have the Net drawn over
him without Scent to know the Partridge from the Lark, or any other Game, be
provided with a Brace, or Leesh of live Partridges, which carry into the Field,
and having Strings to their Legs, peg them down to the Ground, which should be
done over night, to the end he may not know they were there placed by you; and
for your mark of direction to know where they are when you come to Hunt with
him, place up a Bough near them, to the end that Field he comes near then, that
is, at about Ten or Twelves Yards distance having his Line dragging after him,
and gaining the Point to be under the Wind of them, give him your Command to
lie down; then round your Dog Five, Six, or Seven times, to find where they
are, as also that he may know his Duty; then come up to him, and peg the End of
the Line down to the Ground, that when you have drawn the Net over the
Partridges he may not Pole or Staff on the side of the Partridges at a
reasonable distance, to which six the Line, and gently draw it over your Dog,
and let it lie Spread all over. And fearing that your first Net will not be
sufficient to spread over the Partridges, be provided with another, the End of
which tie to your Staff, and draw down the Wind toward the Game, so that both
Nets may meet, which will spread over a good quantity of Ground. Nets, take the
Partridges, and make up your Nets, all which time cause him to lie close,
without stiring, and having so done, go to him, and reward him with one of the
Necks of the Partridges, permitting him to take their Blood. And if you chance
to miss, however reward him with some of the Liver, as aforesaid.

After this method do several times, by which means when he comes to know the
Scent of the Patridge, he will know how to set a Covey, and you will also know
at what distance he sits, for the laying over the Nets.

Note, that when you correct your Dog, always have him in a Line that he may
not run away, and also lead him some distance after his correction. Also always
when you go into the Field, and when you come out, lead him in a Line, until he
is perfectly made. And Note, that the best time to enter your Dog (provided he
Game) is in Paring time, for then you will find more Game, (that is, more
Pares) than before you can Coveys; and also at that time the Partridges will
lie more close, and not be so apt to spring, which is a great Encouragement to
your Dog. Also Note, that you never let your Dog Hunt too long in hot Weather
without Water, for that brings them to the Falling Sickness, which French Dogs
are more subject unto than English.

When you have brought your Dog to this staunch and obedient Hunting, and that
you find him come upon the Haunt of any Patridge, which you shall know by his
great eagerness in Hunting, as also by Wagging his Stern; then speak to him,
saying Take heed, Ware, Down, or the like, to keep him from springing them; but
if either he rusheth in, or Quest so that he springs them, take him up and
correct him well, keeping him some time after in his Line that you may not
discourage him; then cast him off again to Hunt in some other Haunt where you
think to find a Covey, and as before give him warning, and if you see that he
makes a Point, give him your Commands to fall, and taking Range about him, look
if you can find them, and if he has set them at too great a distance, give him
your Commands to creep nearer, saying, go nearer, go nearer, making him creep
upon his Belly toward them, until you think he is near enough; then make him
lie close without stiring, and draw over the Net or Nets as before directed,
and be sure to cherish and reward him well as aforesaid.

But if it so happen that he spring then through his rudeness, or want of care,
then correct him severely, and take him up in your Line, lead him Home, tying
him up for that Night, without giving him one bit of Food, and the next Day
take him to the field in your string, and cast him off to Hunt about, as before
directed, giving him harsh Words, to the end he may call to mind his former
Fault, and be sensible of your displeasure, which will make him the more
careful to obey your Commands, and if he does well cherish and reward him,
which will much encourage him.

Some Dogs will stand up in their Setting, which is a great Fault, so that they
must be brought from it. Also it is a gross Fault for them to rush in after
them, when you go to spring them into your Nets; therefore be sure he is in
such Command as not to stir until you have taken them up, as aforesaid.

There is one more material thing to be observed, and that is to know the
nature of your Dog, how he sets the Partridges, whether at hand, or at a
distance; for thereby you must be guided to draw over the Nets, otherwise you
may Spring them and no Fault of the Dogs.

CHAP. XXXIV.
An Abstract of certain Statute-Laws in Force, relating to Fowling.
NOne shall take Pheasants, or Partridges with Engines in another Man's Ground,
without License, on pain of forfeiting 10 s. to be divided betwixt the Owner of
the Ground, and the Prosecutor. 11 Hen. 7. Chap. 17.

None shall destroy, or take away the Eggs of any Wild-fowl, upon Forfeiture
for every one of a Crane or Bustard, 20 d. of a Hern or Bittern, 8 d. and of a
Duck, Teal, or other Wild-fowl, 1 d. to be divided betwixt the King and the
Prosecutor. Stat. 25 Hen. 8. Chap. 11.

None shall kill or take any Pheasants or Partridges, with any Net or Engine in
the Night Season, s. for every Pheasant, and 10 s. for every Partridge; and
upon Non-payment of the said Fine, within ten Days, then to suffer a Months
Imprisonment without Bail, and to enter into Bond with good Sureties for two
Years, before a Justice of the Peace, not offend in the like kind.

Every Person convicted by his own Confession, or by the Oaths of two
Witnesses, before two or more Justices of the Peace, to have killed Pheasant,
Partridge, Pigeon, or other Game; or to have taken or destroyed the Eggs of
Pheasants, Partridges, or Swans, shall be committed to Prison without Bail,
except he forthwith pay to the use of the Poor where the Offense was committed,
or where he was Apprehended, 20 s. for every Fowl, or Egg, so killed, taken, or
destroyed; and after one Months Imprisonment, shall be bound with two
sufficient Sureties in 20 l. a piece, not to offend in the like case.

2. Every Person so Convicted to keep a Greyhound, Dog, or Net; to kill or take
Deer, Hares, Pheasants, or Partridges (unless he have 10 l. per Annum Estate, a
Lease for Life of 30 l. per Annum, or be worth in Goods 200 l. or be the Son of
a Noble Man, or Knight, or Heir to an Esquire) shall suffer Imprisonment, as
aforesaid; or pay to the use of the Poor 40 s. for such Offense, as aforesaid.

3. None shall Sell, or Buy to Sell again, any Pheasant, or Partridge (except
by them reared up, or brought from Beyond Sea) on Forfeiture for every Pheasant
20 s. and for every Partridge 10 s. to be divided betwixt the Prosecutor, and
the Poor of the Parish where such Offense is committed. Stat. 1. Jacobi Cap. 27.

Every Person convicted by his own Confession, or by the Oaths of two
Witnesses, before two or more Justices of the Peace, to have Hawked, or
destroyed any Pheasant or Partridge, betwixt the first of July and the last of
August, shall suffer one Months Imprisonment without Bail, or pay to the use of
the Poor where the Offense was committed, or where he was Apprehended, 40 s.
for every time so Hawking, and 20 s. for every Pheasant or Partridge so taken
or destroyed; but this Offense shall be Prosecuted within six Months after the
Offense committed.

II. It shall be lawful for every Lord of a Manor, or having Free Warren,
Inheritance of 40 l. per Annum, Freehold of 80 l. per Annum, or Goods worth
400 l. or their Servants Licensed by them, to take Pheasants or Partridges
within their own Grounds or Precincts; Provided they do it in the Day time, and
only betwixt Michaelmass and Christmas.

III. If any Person of a Mean Condition be Convicted by his own Confession, or
by one Witness upon Oath, before two or more Justices of the Peace, to have
killed or taken any Pheasant or Partridge with Dogs, Nets, or Engines, shall be
committed to Prison without Bail, unless he pay to the use of the Poor, as
aforesaid, 20 s. for every Pheasant or Partridge so killed or taken, and also
become bound in a Recognizance of 20 l. never to commit the said Offense.

IV. Every Constable, or Headborough, upon Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
two Justices of the Peace, has power to search the Houses of Suspected Persons
to keep any Setting Dogs, or Nets, for the Taking of Pheasants or Partridges,
and Nets there found, to kill and cut in pieces at pleasure, as things
Forfeited to the said Officer.

The TABLE of the Contents of the several Things treated of in the respective
Chapters in this Treatise of Fowling.
Chap. I.
THE Introduction, Showing what Fowling is, with the Nature of the several
sorts of Fowl; Their Haunts, etc. Page 119 Of the Haunts of Fowl. 120
Chap. II.
Directions for making Bird-Lime, or Lime-Twigs or Rods; and how to apply them
to use for the taking Fowl and Birds several ways. ib. Of Rods and Twigs. 121
To place Lime-Rods on the Land for taking small and great Fowl. ib. To take
small Waterfowl with Lime-Rods. ib. To take small Birds by Lime-Twigs, and the
Lime-Bush. 122 The Lime Bush ib. How to take Woodcocks and Snipes with
Bird-Lime. ib. How to take Pigeons, Rooks and Crows upon new Plough or Sown
Ground. ib. Another way to take Pigeons, Crows and Rooks. 123
Chap. III.
Compositions and Baits for Intoxicating Fowl. ib.
Chap. IV.
Directions (...) the Choosing, Using, and Ordering of a Fowling Piece, etc.
124 Concerning Powder and Shot. ib. Directions about Shooting. 125 A Spaniel of
great use. ib. Shooting Flying. ib.
Chap. V.
Of the Stalkin-Horse, with several Artificial Engines for getting near to Fowl
to Shoot them. 126 An Artificial Wheel-Barrow for Stalking. ib The
Stalking-Tree and Bush. ib. The Stalking Hodge. 127 An Artificial
Stalking-Horse. ib.
Chap. VI.
(...) ^ond, with some Directions concerning (...) and D^coy-Ducks. 128
Chap. VII.
Direction for the Making, Choosing, Ordering and (...) Nets. ib.
Chap. VIII.
(...) the taki^^ Partridges with Nets; as also with Calls, Engines, etc. 129
(...) Partridges by the Juck. ib. To take Partridges with the Call. ib. Of the
Nets. 130 The ^unnel-Net. ib. The Spread Net, or Drag-Net. ib. How to take
Partridges with Lime-Rods. 131 To take Partridges with an Engine* or Driving
them* ib. Several (...) falls above and under Ground, for taking (...) of
Partridges* as well as single Onc^, o^ indeed any other Birds. ib. Directions
to take old Cock Partridges with Natural and Artificial Calls, with Directions
to make them. 132 How to make Artificial Calls. ib. Another way to take
Partridges with the Call, and a Broad Net. 133 Directions to take Partridges in
hard frosty Weather with Sliping-Knots. 134
Chap. IX.
Directions to take Pheasants diverse ways. ib. Pearching of Pheasants, and
Shooting them. ib. Taking Pheasants with Nets. ib. Of the Pheasant-Net. 135 To
take Pheasants with Snares. ib. To take Pheasants, as also Partridges, and to
preserve the Game on a Man's Ground. ib. To take Pheasants without hurting them,
for preserving the Breed. 136 Driving of Pheasant Powts. 137 Observations in
Driving. ib. To take Pheasants with the Lime-Bush, or Lime-Rods. ib. The Use of
the Lime-Bush, and Rods. 138 The Season to be observed for the use of the Nets,
Lime-Bush, and Rods. ib. To take Pheasants with a Cocking-Cloth, in Crowing
time. ib. Another way to take Pheasants. ib.
Chap. X.
How to take Quails, Moor-Powts, Rails, etc. with Calls, with Directions to
make the Calls; (...) also with Nets 139 Another way to take Quails. 140
Chap. XI.
Concerning the taking Birds, Great and Small, especially Wild-fowl, with
Lines, Springes, Strings, Bird-Lime, etc. in Woods, Meadows, Plashes, and the
like places. ib.
Chap. XII.
How to take Fowl and Birds by the Legs, Necks, or both, in Noozes made of
Horse-hair with Running-Knots. ib.
Chap. XIII.
Directions to take Small Birds in Pit-falls. 141
Chap. XIV.
How to take Birds in the Night with a Fold-Net, and Fires, and with a double
Hay, etc. 142
Chap. XV.
How to take Birds in the Night with the Low-Bell, Net and Light. ib.
Chap. XVI.
The way to take Small Birds, called Bat-fowling, 143
Chap. XVII.
Of the Tramel-Net, and its use. ib.
Chap. XVIII.
Of the Sparrow-Net, and its use. 144 The form and manner of the second
Cross-Staff. ib. The form and manner of the Sparrow-Net, as it is fixed
together. 145
Chap. XIX.
How to take Wild-fowl with a Net, called a Crow-Net. ib.
Chap. XX.
Of the Day-Net for taking of Birds. ib. How to take Larks with a Looking-Glass
and Clap-Nets; also with a Draught-Net, etc. 147
Chap. XXI.
Instructions and Directions touching Cock-Roads, for the taking Woodcocks; and
to supply the defect of a Tree in a convenient place, for a Cock-Road. 149 To
take Woodcocks by Nets in high Woods, by driving them into Nets. 150
Chap. XXII.
Several sorts of Strings, Springes, Engines, etc. for the taking of Fowl and
Birds either on Hedges, Trees, or on the Ground. ib. Of the Great and Lesser
Springes. 151 To take Small Fowl with the Engine. ib. To take Birds and Fowl on
Trees, Boughs, or Hedges. 152 Another way to take Fowl and Birds by Springes.
ib.
Chap. XXIII.
A Device to take Blackbirds, Thrushes, and the like Birds, that frequent
Misletoe Bushes. ib.
Chap. XXIV.
A Device to take Small Birds in hard Weather, at Barn-Doors, or House-Ends,
with an Old Door and a Cord, etc. 153
Chap. XXV.
How to take Coots, More-Hens, Dive-Dappers, etc. by Nets. ib. Direction for
making the Bramble-Net, termed by some the Hallier. 154
Chap. XXVI.
How to take Blackbirds, Feldivares, and the like Birds in Misty-Weather, in
Highways and by the Sides of Hedges. ib.
Chap. XXVII.
Diverse necessary Observations touching the Natures and Dispositions of
Plovers, and other Wild-Fowl, with Directions to take them. ib. Several
necessary Instruments to be used in taking Plovers. 155 Instructions how, when
and where to pitch your Nets for the taking of Plovers, and the like. 156
Directions for preparing the Lodge, for those that take Plovers, and the like
Wild-fowl. 158 Instructions when, and how to Call; and also how and when to
Draw the Net, for the taking Plovers, etc. 159 The Natural Call for Plovers,
Curlues, and Lapwings. ib.
Chap. XXVIII.
How to take Wild-Ducks with Nets, Hooks, Slipping-Knots, and the like. ib. To
take Ducks with Runing-Slips, and Collars of Horse-hair. 160 To take Ducks with
Hook and Line, ib.
Chap. XXIX.
Directions to take Herns, Bitterns, Wild-Geese, Swans, Ducks, etc. 161
Chap. XXX.
Several Directions for taking Hawks, as also other Birds, with an Owl, or
Horn-Coot. ib. The taking Eyasse Hawks. 163 To take Branchers. 164 To take
Hawks in their Soreage. ib. To take Hawks with Lime-Rods, or a Lime-Bush. ib.
Taking Hawks with a Dark-Lanthorn 165 Concerning the Stands of Hawks. ib.
Chap. XXXI.
Of Singing Birds, and how to preserve and keep them. ib. The Nightingals. ib.
The way to take Nightingale. 166 Canary Birds. ib. The Linnet. 167 The
Robin-Redbreast. ib. The Wood-Lark. ib. The Sky-Lark. 168 The Throsh, or
Throstle. ib. The Blackbird. ib. The Starling. ib.
Chap. XXXII.
Of the Water-Spaniel, how to Train and Order him for the Game useful in
Fowling. ib.
Chap. XXXIII.
Of the Setting-Dog, with Rules to Choose one, and to Train him up from a
Whelp, to come to perfection. 170
Chap. XXXIV.
An Abstract of certain Statute Laws in force, relating to Fowling. 172
FISHING, and ANGLING. To the Ri^ Worshipful Sr. William Drake of Amersham in
Buckinghamshire Knight

This plate is humbly Dedicated by Ric: Blome

FISHING

(...) Rt. noble Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torington, Baron Monk
of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys, Knight. of ye Garter, Captain of his Matys.
life Guard, Ld. Leiutenant of Essex and Devonshire, one of the Gentlemen of his
Matys. Bedchamber, and one of the Lord of his most Honorable Privy Council
etc.

This Plate of Fishing is most humbly Dedicated by Ric Blome.



FISHING.
PART V.
The Rules for Angling, as the choosing of Rods, Hooks, Lines, Corks, Floats,
etc. with Directions for the taking all sorts of Fish, and the making of Baits
proper for them, according to the Season of the Year and Weather. Also
Instructions for the taking Fish, with several sorts of Nets, etc. Directions
for preserving Fish in Rivers and Ponds, together with many Secrets and
Curiosities relating to the said Art.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.
IT will not be necessary to trouble the Reader with long Encomium's on this
Delightful Art of Fishing, but only repeat the words of a Worthy and Ingenious
Gentleman that

He that will be his Arts Master in this Innocent Recreation, must not only be
experienced in the several Tackling, as the Rod, Line, Hooks, etc. But also
must understand the Nature and Properties Fish, the proper Baits to take them
according to the Season of the Year and Weather. And the better to embolden him
to a progress herein, he must be endowed with Hope and Patience. The first
thing that I shall Treat of shall be the Rod.

CHAP. II.
Directions touching the choice of a Rod.
YOur Rod ought to be either of one entire piece, of two pieces, or of several
Joints; the former without doubt is the best, Art being but a Mimick of Nature;
for in the Composing and Framing Artificial Rods, we do but imitate the Natural
Ones, and think we have come nearest the Mark, when we have well Counterfeited
them; But it is the Opinion of an expert Angler, that Rods of two Joints are
the best; for that n^ shoot of any sort of Wood grows so exquisitely taper, as
to make a Rod of fourteen Foot ^on^, (which is the usual Length): And if by
great chance you should get one, the Peth of such a quick growing Wood, would
cause the top to be brittle, and if of hard Wood, it would then be lop heavy;
for the true Art of making a Rod is of a Rush Taper, which mu^^ Spring equally
in all parts, for being stiff in the one and weak in the other, does often
occasion the losing the Fish.

The Red Sallow, or With, and the Ground Hazel, straight and well grown
taper-like from the bottom to the top, are of ^ll others the most esteemed as
being the toughest and lighest, and yet strong enough to hold the bigest Fish.
They should be gathered in the fall of the Leaf, when the Sap is in the Roots,
for after January it asconds into the Trunk and Branches, and then they are not
good. Let them be the best Rush-ground Shoots you can get, not knotty, but
proportionable straight and Slender; the Boughs and excrescent Twigs should be
presently cut off, but not close, for sear of cutting any of the Bark, which is
not only an Eyesore, but a weakening to it.

Having thus prepared your Rods, lay them on a flat Floor with a good weight on
them, to keep them from warping; but contrariwise some hang them against the
Wall of a Room on small Tacks, with the great ends downwards, which is held the
best way, and about February you may pare off the knots close; and when they
are well seasoned and fitted to your liking, ^ix on the Loops of Silk or Hair
at the small ends; but by the way note, that they are not fully seasoned till
about

For preserving of these Rods or Tops from rotting, or Worm eating, it is good
to rub them over twice or thrice a year with Sallet or Linseed Oil, or with
Sweet Butter that has no Salt in it, chasing it well in; and if the Stocks or
Tops of your Rods cast with lying, Bath them, and set them in a gentle Straw
Fire, which will bring them right again.

Rods may be Distinguished into four Sorts, viz. the Trowling Rod, the Snaping
Pole, the Angling Rod, and the Fly Rod.

The Trowling Rod is the largest, at the top of which is put a short piece of
Wood, about six Inches long, with a strong Wire Ring to guide your Trowling
Line.

The Snaping Pole ought to be so strong and large, as the Angler can well
Manage, and to be of a Tough, and well grown Taper Pole of one Fish of about
ten or twelve pound weight, to throw out of the Water.

The Angle Rod ought to be of two, or more Joints of Cane, or Wood as aforesaid.

The Fly Rod must be small, curiously Taper, and light to be managed with one
Hand.

In a word, the great Art of making Rods is, that they be curiously Taper, and
in all parts of a quick Spring proportionable; for if it is not Fish.

The top Rods being short, are to be joined to Stocks, Art having supplied the
Defect of Nature. Your Stocks may be either of a good ground Ash, or
Witch-hasel about nine or ten Foot long, gathered as aforesaid; and be sure it
come not to the Fire until the Spring, then if you find it well Seasoned, set
it exactly, otherwise allow Rind, and either by its own Nature, or your Art get
it to be of a good brown Color, so that it make no Reflection in the Water; if
you mix a little Capons Grease with Spanish Brown, and rub the Rod over
therewith before a gentle Fire, you will quickly bring it to its right hue. In
the small end of the Stock, bore a Hole with a Taper bit, about four Inches
deep, and of a convenient size to receive the biggest end of the Top Rod, and
have it Ferretted; and the reason of doing it so, is to preserve the Stock from
Splitting where the Hole is made. Your Top Rod should be about a yard and a
half long, with the upper rind preserved entirely about it, and the top though
pliant, yet must be so strong to endure the ^erk of a Trout or Carp.

At the small end fasten the Loop either of Silk, or Hair, wherein to place the
Line, but of all Tops questionless the Whalebone is the best, being plyant and
strong.

The largest Joint which is the outward Joint, and carries all the rest as in
a case, ought to be either a Female Bambu Cane, or else a red Sallow, these
being the freest from warping, and a piece seven or eight Foot long will carry
longer and better Taper Joints than a piece of the same sort ten Foot long; and
for the inward Joints Hasel is the best, which Joint or Joints must be in
length proportionable to the size of the outward Joint, both to length, and to
make it exactly a Rush Taper.

If your Rod be of many pieces, they are then of Canes or Hasel, exactly bored
through to receive each other, the ends being neatly hooped about with Sockets
of Brass or Silver, as before taken notice of. And thus may you carry a Rod of
fifteen or sixteen Foot long, like a walking Staff; but these being bought at
the Shops of those that sell Fishing Tackle, and at such easy Rates, I shall
say no more, advising you rather to buy them, than to be at the trouble to make
them.

CHAP. III.
Of Lines, for the making, coloring, and preparing them.
FOr your Lines they are either all Hair, all Silk, or mixed with both; but
Lines of all Silk (though handsome) are very inconvenient, because of their
Twisting; so are Lines of Hair and Silk. Therefore make use of Lines of all
Hair, for all sorts of Angling, which must be Tapervvise; so that near the Hook
they may be of one or three Hairs. Next to Lines all of Hair, are those made of
Raw Ardas Silk neatly Twisted, which in the Opinion of many are excellent, for
these are far stronger and finer than Hair, and will not rot or twist in the
Water, or else where. And for the Trowling or Snaping Lines, let them also be
made of Raw Ardas Silk, worked with Bobbins, being far stronger than the
colored Silk Lines, and much smaller, and freer from Twisting.

Let all your Hair, as near as you can, be of an equal Bigness, and if you lay
them about a quarter of an Hour in Water, you will find which of the Hairs do
shrink, and such are not good. The best Hairs are plucked from the innermust
middle of the Tail of a White, or Gray Stone-Horse.

When you make a Line of Three Hairs, add one Thread of Silk, which is
sufficient; if you make Lines of Five Hairs, add Two Threads of Silk, and if of
Seven, then Three of Silk; this latter will be sufficient so the Chub, Barbel,
Pike, nay Salmon; the second for the Carp, Trout, Greyling, Gudgeon, Roach,
Bleak, etc.

In twisting your Hair, great care must be used that they be exactly done,
without Gaping and Snarles, and that they be strong tied at the ends with the
Fishers Knots, which is folded Four times about, under and above. You must in
drawing this Knot temper your Hair with some Water, or Spittle, for that will
make it hold. For the length of your Lines they must be proportioned to the
place, and the Fish you design to take, and your own

For the Color of your Lines, they should as near as possible imitate the
Color of the Water, so that if your Hair be White, let your Silk be Green, for
that mixture draws to a light Gray. If it be in a Muddy Stream, the Silk had
best be of a drak Ash Color; But for your exact Water Green, Take a quart of
small Ale, and boil therein half a pound of Alom until it be dissolved, then
put in the Hair, and let it boil half an hour; Elder and boil it half an hour
in a Pottle of Water, until you see a Yellow Scum rise, then put in your Hair
with about half a pound of beaten Copperice, or instead thereof, the like
quantity of Verdigrease, or a quarter of a pound of each, and let the Water
boil about half an hour more; then take it off, and let your Hair lie therein
four or five hours infusing, and you will have an excellent Green. To make your
Hair Yellow, Water wherein you have either boiled, or bruised two or three
handfuls of Green Walnut Leaves. To make your Hair Russet, take a Pint of
strong Lie, half a pound of Soot, and two spoonfuls of the Juice of Walnut
Leaves, and when they are well boiled together, take it off the Fire, let it
cool, and put therein the Hair, and let it continue until it be dyed enough; To
make it darker put some Vmber into the Liquor. If you would have the Hair
Tawny, bind it close Tanners Ouz until it be according to your liking; and if
you did first steep the Hair in a little Limewater, it would take the Tawny
Color the better.

You must die your Hair before you make it up into Lines, for then you may mix
it as you see cause. The Green Hair is good from March to September; from
thence to December the Yellow, and from thence to Easter the darkest Colors.

At each end of your Line make a Loop, the one for your Rod-Loop, and the other
for your Hook.

CHAP. IV.
Instructions relating to Corks, Flotes, etc.
TOuching your Flotes order them in this manner; Take the closest Cork you can
get, and with a sharp Knife pare it very smooth about, which for size and form
is left to your Judgment, it being only to show you when and how the Fish are
at your Bait; the lesser it is so much the better in this respect that it will
not frighten the Fish away, then with a hot Iron bore a Hole through it, and
therewith put a Goose-Quill of a fit size for the Cork, which must be fitted
with regard to the proportion of your Line, and that again to the strength and
dimensions of the Fish you design to take with the Line, as before noted in the
second Chapter. The small end of the Cork must be toward the Hook, the Quill
must be pegged into the Cork, and so your Line into the Quill, which you may
raise or let down as you see cause.

Your Flotes are made of Mascovy-Duck Quills, or Swans-Quills which are held
the best for Still Water; but the flat and round Flotes are esteemed the best.

When your Cork is gently drawn under Water then strike and not with too smart
a Jerk, but only to fasten your Hook, and then draw with an even touch
according as you see cause. If your Tackling be strong, and your Fish large,
you may be the bolder; but to go securely to work, never let the Fish feel the
strength of the Line, lest he Snap it off; but hold him gently under the Rod,
and let him tire out himself, which he will soon do by Eight, or Ten Plunges,
and then you may draw him gently toward you; if you be too hasty you are not a
good Fisher, for this Recreation requires great Patience, Industry, and
Vigilance.

CHAP. V.
Rules for the Choosing, making and fixing your Hooks, Plumets, and for sounding
the depths of Water.
AS for your Hooks choose them in proportion according to the size of the Fish,
you intend to Catch; Therefore as for the making them follow these directions.
Take either Old Spanish Needles, or strong Wier, drawn to the same height of
temper, that being nealed and laid in the Fire you may bend at pleasure. If you
make them of Needles, it is but holding them in the Fire or in the Blaze of a
Candle, until they be Red-hot; then let them cool, and you may turn them into
what Form you please; but for Wire you must use a Charcoal-Fire, and turn it up
and down until it be Red-hot, then let it cool, and so work it. First, File out
the Point of the Hook, which must be neither too sharp, nor too dull; for the
one will be too quick to catch every thing, and the other will hit nothing: let
it be therefore sharper than a Pin, and somewhat Needle; then with a sharp
Knife raise up the Barb, or Beard, wherein be careful not to weaken the
strength of the Hook too much; then with a Pair of Plyars form your Hook
rounder than a Semicircle, and let the Bow come in enough, so as to be hooked;
for it is that which chiefly holds the Fish, and not the Barb, as by Experience
has been often found; for the Taperer all Hooks are filed, the stronger they
are to hold a Fish.

The Shank of your Hook should be of a moderate length, a little flatter
toward the End, and knobbed, for the better fastening it to your Warp of Hair,
or Line. You must then Polish it all over, heat it Red-hot in a Pan of
Charcoals, put it suddenly into the Water, and that will bring it to its true
strength and hardness.

By this Direction you may likewise Form your double Hooks, which are two Hooks
made of one Wire, joined Back to Back, and turned Wire to the Stem, or Shank,
about three or four Inches long, and a Link fixed thereto with fine small Wire,
and unto this last Link fasten your Line, or else the Teeth of the Pike will
soon shear it off.

For the fastening your Length, or Link of Hair, to the Hook, do thus: Lay it on
the inside of the Shank, and so whip it about with a small Silk-thread well
Waxed, and neatly done, without Hair, and fasten the Ends of the Silk, by
drawing them under your Bows at the two or three last Turns; then cut off the
Ends of the Hairs which you turned from the Hook, and it is no ordinary twitch
which can separate one from the other. On the other End of that Link of Hairs
make a Loop, to fasten the remaining Line thereunto.

In case you Plum your Line, observe these Directions: Your Plumets must be of
Lead, some Hook, Line, Cork, etc. the End of the Plumets being to sink down
your Hook and Line, that it may lie either toward the Middle, or Bottom of the
Water, as you design to Fish; but they must not be so heavy as to sink the
Floats. Your first Plu^et may be about twelve Inches from the Ho^k, and the
rest about an Inch distant from each other; and of these you may use five,
seven, nine, or as you see occasion; for the form Plamets it is not material,
provided they be smooth, for otherwise they will endanger the tangling of the
Line, catching filth, or the like; yet some are of Opinion, that more than one
Plu^et is inconvenient.

To be exact in Pluming and Corking, you should know to an Inch the depth of
the Water where you Fish; for which purpose you must have a Musket-Bullet bored
through with a double Thread tied at it, which Thread being laid over your Hook
you may therewith Sound the Bottom, and then Plumb and Cork accordingly.

That you may not incommode your Tackle, it will be requisite to keep every
Thing or Utensil apart, and that you be provided with all your Tackle upon
occasion, as your Bob and Palmer, your Hooks of several sizes; also your Corks,
Flies, Silk, Thread, Lead, etc. each in its several Box; likewise your Linen
and Woollen Bags, for your several Baits; also a Whetstone, to sharpen your
Hooks; and forget not to be provided with a small Pole with a Loop at the End
thereof, to which a small Net may be fastened for your Landing of great Fish;
and be sure let not your Paunder be too heavy, those that are made of Osiers
are the best.

CHAP. VI.
Cautions to be observed in Angling, as to the Seasons of the Weather, the Time
of the Day and Year, etc.
IN Angling so place your self that your Shadow do not at any time rest on the
Water; but in very deep Waters that is not so necessary to be observed, yet to
be exact you should use all the Advantages the place will afford.

In a Pond you should Angle near the Foard where Cattle go to drink; and in
Rivers, in those places where such sorts of Fish that you intend to Angle for
do usually frequent, viz. the Chub in deep shaded Holes; Roach and Perch in
Scowrs; Eels under hanging-over Banks; Trouts in quick Streams, and with a Fly
upon the Stream on the Top of the Water; and for Breams in the deepest and
quietest part of the River. And if in such places where the Gravelly Bottom may
be discerned, then be sure to conceal your self as much as possible. In Waters
pestered with Weeds, Roots of Trees, and such like, Fish lie close and warm,
and resort thither in great Shoals, there they will Bite freely; but take great
care how to cast in the Hook, and how to strike a Bite, for the least Rashness
loses Hook and Line. But in case your Hook be at any time entangled, you
should be provided with a Ring of Lead some six Inches about, which fasten to a
small long Packthread, and thrust the Ring over your Rod, letting it go into
the Water, and work it gently up and down with your Packthread, and it will
soon disengage your Hook.

It is good Angling in Whirlpools, under Bridges, at the Falls of Mills, and in
any place where the Water is deep and clear, and not troubled with Wind, or
Weather. The best Times are from Angling.

To the Right Worshipful Sr John Bellciv of Belleivs^Town in the County of
Mead in Ireland Knight. whose family for many descents have been Knighted for
their service to ye Crown* This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome

April to October, for in cold, stormy and windy Weather Fish will not Bite;
and the best times of the Day are from Three to Nine in the Morning, and from
Three in the Afternoon to Sunset. If the Wind be Easterly it is in vain to go
forth to Angle, any other of the Points are well enough, if it blow not hard;
but the South is the best, and a close, lowering warm Day, with a gentle Wind,
and after a sudden Shower, to disturb the Water, at which time they will best
Fly and Bite eagerly, and therefore the most to be desired by the Angler; and
the cooler the Weather is in the hottest Months it is the better. In Winter all
Weathers, and all Times are much alike, only the Warmest are the best.

It is very good Angling a little before the Fish Spawn, for then their Bellies
being full, they frequent Sandy Foards, to rub and loosen their Bellies, at
which time they will freely Bite.

After a clear Moonshine Night, if the Day prove Dull and Cloudy it is very good
Angling; for in such Nights they are fearful to stir to get food, lying close,
so that being hungry the next Day will boldly and eagerly Bite.

At the opening of Sluices, or Mill-Dams, if you go with the Course of the Water
you can hardly miss of Fish, that swim up the Stream, to seek for what food the
Water brings down with it.

In Waters that Ebb and Flow, it is best Angling at the Ebb; but if the Tides
are not strong, then the Flood is to be preferred.

At any time when you perceive the Trouts to Leap pleasantly at the Flies above
Water, or the Pikes to pursue other Fish, then it is a good time to Angle.

I have showed the most proper Seasons for Angling; there are other Times as
improper, and such are after great Rains, whilst the Waters are Heat, when the
Earth is parched with Drought, especially in Muddy or clear Shallow Rivers: At
the Fall of the Leaf; not soon after Spawning time, for then their Appetite is
much abated; nor is it good to Angle near such places where Husbandmen wash
their Sheep, for that kills all sorts of Fish: To conclude, The Experienced
Angler must observe the Times, Seasons, and Places, otherwise his Baits, though
never so good,

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the Natures of Fish, in what Waters and Soils they delight.
I Shall next descend to the particular Nature of Fish, and consequently to the
Rules to take them.

Carps, Eels, Tench, Breams, Chevins, and Pikes, delight most in standing
Waters, and still Pools; the three former in Muddy Bottoms, the latter in
Sandy. Salmons, Trouts, Perch, Gudgeons, Barbels, Chubs, Roach, and Dace,
delight in Runing-Streams* the former in the Swiftest and Deepest places
thereof, the latter in still Pools and Shady places of the same Brooks and
Waters. The Shad, Mullet, and some others, delight in such Waters as Ebb and
Flow, provided the Floods be not exceeding Salt.

In this Chapter I have been very brief, by reason I intend to be more large
when I speak of each Fish in particular.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Baits Natural and Living, Artificial and Dead, etc. with Directions
for the Making and Preparing them, etc.
THere are three sorts of Baits for taking Fish; First, the Natural ones, and
those are generally Living, as Worms of all kinds, especially the Red, Maggots,
Bobs, Frogs, Grasshoppers, Bees, Beetles, Dors, Butterflies, which are
admirable for the Chubs; Wasps, Hornets, Snails, small Fish, etc. Next, the
Artificial Baits, and they are of two sorts; first, such as imitate the Living
Baits, especially Flies, for every Month and Season in the Year, nay, almost
for every Fish, so great is the variety of them that frequent the Meadows and
Rivers. These Flies are made on the Bodies of your Hooks, the Body of the Fly
being made of Wool, and the Wings of several sorts of Feathers colored to the
life, to resemble those you counterfeit; and with these you draw your Hook
gently on Top of the Water, and generally against the Stream, and the Fish will
Bite at them with such greediness, that you can hardly miss a Bite.

The second sort of Artificial Baits are Paists, which are made of several
Compositions, as the young Brood of Bees and Wasps, clotted Blood of Sheep,
Cheese, Whitebread, Corn, Seeds, Bramble-Berries, Flowers, etc. of all which I
shall speak more particularly in their due places, when I come to treat
particularly of the ways of taking each sort of Fish; however a word or two.

The Red-Worm is good for small fish the whole Year about, and small Fish are
good Baits for Pikes at all times; Sheeps-Blood and Cheese is a good Bait in
April; the Bob, dried Wasps and Bees are for May; Brown-flies are for June;
Maggots, Hornets, Wasps and Bees, for July: Snails for August; Grasshoppers for
September; Corn, Bramble-Berries, and Seeds, at the Fall of the Leaf: Your
Artificial Paists are for May, June, and J^^y; and Frogs are for March.

Now as concerning your Artificial Flies, The great Dun-fly will do well enough
the latter end of February, if there be fair Weather, for it is a sign the Air
is warm, and that the Fish begin to partake of the Suns Heat, so that in reason
you may expect they will bite freely; The little Dun-fly is proper for March;
The Stone or May-flye is for April; The Red and Yellow-fly for May; The Black,
Dark, Yellow, and Moorish fly for June; The Wasp, and Shell-flye for July; and
the Cloudy Blackish-fly is for August. But generally Fish most eagerly rise at
these Flies, at the Season when most sorts of Flies resort to the Water side.

The best way to make these Flies, is to get the living ones of the several
kinds; and thereby to imitate Nature both for Shape, Color and Size, for the
nearer the better. Those Fish that Bite freest at Flies are Chubs, Chevins,
Trouts, and Salmons.

The great Dun-flye is thus made, let the Body be of Black-wooll, and the Wings
of the Dun-feathers of a Drakes Tail. The little Dun-flye has his Body made of
Dun-wooll, and his Wings of the Mayle of a Partridge; these are for March. The
Body of the Stone or May-flye must be of Black-wooll, but under his Wings and
Tail give it a little tincture of a pale yellow, with some Silk of that color,
and his Wings must be of Drakes Down; this Fly is for April. The Red, Ruddy-fly
must have his Body made of Reddish-wooll, capt about with black Silk, and the
Wings mixed of the Mayle of a Mallard, and the red Feathers of a Capons Tail;
this Fly is for May. The Yellow or Greenish-fly must have his Body made of
Black-wooll, with a Yellow List on either side, and the Wings of a Red Cocks
Mayle. The Moorish-fly has his Body made of Duskish-wooll, and the Wings of
the blackish Mayle of a Drake. The Tawny-flye must be made of Tawny-Wooll,
Wings made contrary one against the other, of the whitish Mayle of a White
Drake; these Flies are for June. The Wasp-fly is made of Black-wooll, capt
about with Yellow Silk; and the Wings of a Buzzards Down, or of a Drakes
Feathers; this Fly is for July. The Shell-flye Termed also the Green-fly, has
his Body made of Greenish-wooll, and the Wings of the Herle of a Peacocks Tail;
this is also for July. The Cloudy Dark-fly must be made after a different way,
for it must be formed on a small piece of Cock, bound about with Black-wooll,
Black-silk, and his Wings of the under Mayle of a Mallard with a black Head;
when you draw it on your Hook, be sure no part of the Hook is discerned; this
Fly is for August.

The rougher the Bodies of your Flies are, and the more shining, the better are
they esteemed; and when you have got a Set of good exact Flies, they will serve
you many Years, if carefully kept in a handsome Box free from bruising Flies are
for cloudy and dark weather, and the darkest for the bright and clear Weather.

It is not amiss to lay down some Directions to be observed, for Artificial
Fly-Fishing. First, observe to have the Wind in your Back, and in casting off
your Line, be sure that the Fly fall first to the Water. For every sort of Fly
have several of the same, differing in color to suit with the several Waters
and Weathers. In slow Rivers, or still places cast your Line as far as you can,
and let it sink a little, then gently draw it back; and let the Fly float
leasurely with the Current. When you Angle after Rain, and that the Water
begins to become clear, use the Red-fly for dark Waters, keep not near the
Water side, and Fish down Stream; and let not your Line touch the Water, but
only the Fly. Your Line should be as long again as your Rod, unless the River
be very shallow, and clogged up. You must have a nimble Hand, and a quick Eye
to strike presently upon the rising of the Fish, otherwise the Fish will be apt
to spew out the Hook, as finding his mistake.

I shall next proceed to Live Baits, which are to be kept each sort by
themselves; and to be fed with such things as they use to eat, when at liberty.

The Red-worm delights much in black fat Earth; and if you mix therewith some
Fennel small chopped, they will very much improve; and sometimes give them a
little Ox, or Cow Dung newly made: They may be kept in some little Bag, or Box.

But Red-worms, as also all other sort of Worms scour quick, grow very tuff and
bright, by putting them into a thin Clout greased with Fresh Butter, or Grease,
before you put them into Moss, which of all things is best to keep them in, and
the Moss must be prepared by washing it very clean, and squeezing out the
Water; and for the Feeding them, drop a spoonful of Cream into the Moss every
three or four Days; and remove the Moss every week, keeping it in a cool place.
And note that a Dead Man's Skull beaten to Powder for the Worms to scour in, is
excellent.

White great Magots are to be fed with Sheeps Tallow, and Beasts Livers cut
small.

Frogs and Grasshoppers will do well in wet Moss and long Grass, which must be
every Night moistened; when you use them cut off their Legs, and Wings.

The Bob, Cadis-worm, Canker, and such like are to be preserved with the same
things where you take them.

Live-flyes must be used as you catch them.

The Wasp, Hornet, and Humble-Bee may be dried in an Oven after the Bread is
drawn, but be careful of scorching them, then dip their Heads in Sheeps Blood,
which must be dried on, and so keep them in a clean Box; and they will continue
good a quarter of a Year.

In the last place touching Compounded Paists, there are as many several sorts,
as there are Medicines for the Tooth Ach; I shall take notice of some few, and
such as are excellent and approved Secrets, reserving others to be Treated of
in their due places, when I come to speak of the particular ways of taking each
sort of Fish.

If you take Bean-flower, and those parts of the Rabets Legs called the
Almonds, or if it be of a fat young Whelp, or Cat, will do as well, add to them
a like quantity of Sheeps Suet, and Virgins Wax, and beat them in a Mortar till
they are Incorporated into one Body; then temper it with clarified Honey before
a Gentle Fire, and make it up into Bolls. When you use it, bait your Hooks
Artificially with a little thereof, and you will find a notable Attractive
quality in it. It will keep good at least a Year.

If you take the Kidney Tallow of a Sheep, and a like quantity of new Cheese,
and beat them together, Wheat Flour as will stiffen it; and kneading it before
a Fire, allaying the stiffness of the Paist with soft Honey, it is an excellent
Bait for all or most Fish, and will keep good a long time.

Honey with the Crumbs of White-bread, made up stiff, is a good Bait for drawing
Fish to it.

It is said that all strong Smells whether sweet or stinking will attract Fish,
such as Musk, Assasetida, Sperm^icaeti, Oil of Bays, Turpentine,
G^mmae-haederae; and likewise the sight of fine Colors, especially of Flowers,
which have also a fine smell.

The next thing to be considered is the Floating in a Pond, or River for Scale
Fish, and then take notice that Feed brings them together: Now there is no
better Feed to be cast in than Blood and Grains, although Paist is very good.
Also Crumbs of Household Bread mixed with Man's Dung Paist, is said to be admirable
to attract Fish, especially all white-s^aled Fish. Also Paist made of bruised
Hempseed is very attractive.

CHAP. IX.
Some General Observations, Directions,
IT is Customary for every Angler to have his peculiar Haunt. Now for the
attracting together the Fish in such a place, once in four or five Days cast in
some Corn boiled soft; also you Garbage, Worms chopped into pieces, or Grains
s^eept in Blood and dried; But for Carp and Tench throw in some Ground Malt to
keep them together.

If you Fish in a Stream, then cast in your Grains above your Hook down the
Stream.

If when you are a Fishing, you would know what Bait the Fish at that time best
love, when you have taken one, slit the Gill, and take out his Stomach, and
open it without bruising; and Hook.

In Fishing have a great care of wearing light and dazeling Apparel, but choose
those that are dark, or sad colored; also if possible shelter your self under
some Bush, or Tree, or stand so far from the Bank side, that you can only
discern the Float; for Fish are Timorous and Fearful of every thing they see.

The best way of Angling with the Fly is down the River, not up; and if you
would have them to bite freely, be sure of having such Baits as they are
Naturally inclined unto; and in such manner as they are accustomed to receive
them. If your Baits be of Paist, as before noted, for the keeping them on your
Hooks, add a little Flax or Wool. The Eyes of Fish are said to be good Baits
for all Fish.

Keep your Rod neither too dry nor too moist, for the one will make it brittle,
and the other rotten.

CHAP. X.
Of the Natures, Qualities, etc. Of Several sorts of Fish, with Directions to
take them.
THe GVDGEON is a small but excellent Fish, being not much inferior to the
Smelt, for an excellent pleasant Taste; he Spawas three or four times in the
Summer Season, and delights in swift Streams and gravelly bottoms, lying low,
so that he seldom bites eagerly; and if once he be struck, you can hardly lose
him, being a leather Mouthed Fish. Your Bait must always Trail gently on the
Ground, whether you use Float or not; some use a Runing-Line, without Cork or
Float as for the Trout, but of all Baits the small Red-worm is the best; also
Wasps, Gentles and Cad-baits are very good. In the Heat of Summer this Fish
lies scattered up and down in shallow places of the River; but in the Cold
Weather they betake themselves to deep places, and accompany together. If you
would catch store of this Fish, be provided with a long Pole, to stir up the
Sand and Gravel, which will gather them together; and cause them to Bite more
eagerly.

The ROACH is a leather Mouthed Fish, and being once struck, seldom loses his
hold, having his Teeth in his Throat, as all leather Mouthed Fish have; this is
no delicate Fish, being so full of Bones, the best part is the Spawn; he is
very easily taken, biting eagerly; and as the Carp for his cuning is esteemed
the Water-fox, so this for his Simplicity is Termed the Water-sheep. They are
great Storers of Ponds and Rivers, but those in the former are of less Esteem,
though not so long.

This Fish Spawns about the middle of May. The general Baits are small white
Snayls, Cadbaits, Bobs, Sheeps-blood, all sorts of Worms, Gnats, Wasps and
Paist; In April the Cadis, or Worms are proper; In the Hot Summer Months the
White Snayls and Flies; but note they must be under Water, for they will not
bite at the Top. In August any slight Paist made of Bread and Honey kneaded
into a Paist, will serve well enough; this will also serve in the Winter, but
Gentiles are esteemed a better Bait in the cold Weather: You must Fish about a
Handful from the bottom. The Black Ant-fly which is plentifully to be found in
Ant or Mole-hills about August, if it has her Wings entire, is an excellent
Bait, the like is the short thick white Worm, which is usually found at the
Plow-Tail, at the breaking up of the Ground. Also young Wasps and Bees their
Heads being dipped in Blood are Baits. There are several other good Baits, as
Sheeps Blood dried hard, mixed with a little Salt to drain out the wateryness,
and cut into small pieces; also take a handful, or two of good Wheat, boil it
in Milk till it be soft, then gently fry it with Honey, and a little beaten
Saffron dissolved in Milk.

DACE are much of the same Nature of the Reach, so that what Directions you
find for the one, may serve for the other, with this Distinction, Dace will
Bite toward the top of the Water very freely, but better at the bottom: If you
boil a Handful of Wheat in a little Milk until it be soft, and then fry it
gently with some Honey, so that you break not the Wheat, it is an excellent
Bait, especially if in the frying you add a little Saffron dissolved in two or
three Spoonfuls of Milk. The several sorts of Cadis-Worms, are also all proper
Baits for this Fish. It will Bite at any Fly, but principally at Ant-flies, of
Mole-Hills, in June, July, August and September, are the best; for preserving
them for use, put them alive into a Glass-Bottle, in which is some of the Earth
from whence they are taken, with some of the Roots of the Grass of the Hillock;
then lay a Clod of Earth over it, and they will keep good a Month or two,
provided you bruise not their Wings. The best time to take them is, when they
Swarm, which is about the latter end of July, and beginning August. The White
Worm with the Red-head, found in new broken up Grounds that are Heathy or
Sandy, are excellent Baits for the Winter. If you put them into a Vessel with
some of the Earth from whence they were taken they may be preserved all the
Winter.

The CHVB is known by the Name of a Cheven, or Chavender, in several places; he
Spawns in March, is very full of forked Bones, and eats Fish, he is best to
enter a young Angler, as being very easy to be taken greedily biting the Bait;
and although he is a Leather Mouthed Fish, and will not easily get free, yet
being strong, you must give him play, for fear of breaking your Line. He
delights to lie on the Top of the Water, but is of that fearful quality, that
he will sink down at the Shadow of any thing that he espies, were it a Bird
that flies over the Water, but he soon rises up again.

Now for the taking this Fish observe these Directions; Find out some Hole (for
he delights in such places, and Pools rather than in Rivers), and in a hot day
several of them will lie floating almost on the surface of the Water; and
having your Tackle in readiness, and your Hook baited with a Grasshopper (which
for that Season is best) be sure so to order your business (by absconding your
self behind some Tree) that you are not espied; then cast in your Hook gently
about Two Foot before the Chub, that you design to take, and you will hardly
miss him: For want of a Grasshopper you may use any great Fly, Beetle, or Dor,
having his Wings cut off, and in Winter the Brains of a Horse is a most certain
Bait to take them; for they bite so greedily at it in the extremity of Winter,
that you may in a manner clear a River of them, and indeed they will greedily
Bite at any Bait.

In Hot Weather Angle for him near the Top of the Water, and in Cold near the
Bottom; In March, and April Bait with Worms; In May, June, and July, with
Flies, Snayls, etc. and in August, September, etc. use Paists.

TROVTS are not only a delicate Fish, but afford great pleasure in taking them.
They Bite either high or low at Flies or Ground-Baits, in Pooles or in swift
Streams: It Is pity he is not always in Season, yet he comes in and goes out with
good Company, viz. the Stag and Buck. His chief delight is in hard Gravels. The
Spawns in October, and November, which is contrary to the Nature of other Fish,
which Spawn in the Spring, which is a Season most fit for generation.

The Trout is always lowsy, lean, and unwholsom, in Cold Weather; but when it
begins to be Warm, he gathers strength, and forsaking the still and deep
Streams, keeps in the Gravelly and shallow Waters, for the rubing and
cleansing himself from his Lowsiness; these Lice are a small Worm, with a
pretty big Head, and stick close to his Sides, sucking away his Moisture.

The Baits most proper for the Trout are Worms, Minnows, or Flies, either
Natural or Artificial; and of all Worms, those called the Dew-Worm, Lob-Worm,
and the Brandling, found in old Dung-hills are the best.

By the way remember that in Fishing with Worms, you always clap them alive on
your Hook, and get such as are strong and lusty, such as will stir and move a
good while in the Water on your Hook; for when once they are dead, it is to
little purpose to keep them on. For the preservation of these Worms, keep them
in a Box with Moss, to nourish them, which must be often shifted, and their
Food as often changed, especially in the Summer Season.

If you Fish with the Minow, or Stickle-bag, let it not be too big; or for want
of Natural Minows, use Artificial ones; all the skill is in Baiting your Hook,
which must be hid in the Mouth of the Minnow, and let the Point a little come
out of his Gill, but his Body must be strait.

Use neither Cork nor Plumet when you Fish for the Trout, either with Minnows
or Flies, Natural or Artificial. Now concerning the Flies, I have already
treated how to make them, however a word or two more. If you can Bait your Hook
with a Natural Live Fly, such an one as you perceive to use the Water at that
time, and at which the Trouts, leap that is best; and next to that an
Artificial Fly exactly made, for which take the assistance of some Expert
Fly-Maker; for one Ocular Observation will make a deeper impression than Twenty
Verbal Lectures, for Example teaches better than Precept.

In carrying your Rod, move it with an even hand, so as your Fly may gently
touch the Top of the Water, cutting the Stream as it were just as you shall see
the Natural Flies do.

As for Paists they are not very kindly for Trouts, unless for old large ones,
which are difficult to be got out of their Holes, unless by Night; for Hares.
When you suspect that any lie concealed in Holes, then go out in the Evening
and Bait your Hook with any Paist, drawing it gently on the Top of the Water;
and the Trout will then make to it very greedily; but be sure lie concealed if
it be Moonshine, for this Fish is exceeding quick-sighted, and very coy, so
that the Mornings and Evenings, are the best, except in Gloomy Weather.

The EEL was by the Romans esteemed the Helena of their Feasts, as being so
dainty a Fish; most men differ about their Breeding, for some are of Opinion,
that they Breed by Generation as other Fish, whist others say, that they are
Bred of Mud, or other putrefaction of the Earth (as are Rats, Mice, and many
other Creatures) and deny them to have either Spaw, or Melt; others hold that
when they grow Old, Breed others out of the Corruption of their Old Age; and
others are of Opinion, that they are Bred of a particular Dew that falls in the
Months of May or June, on the Banks of Rivers or Ponds, which in a few days, by
the heat of the Sun, is turned into small Eels; and these are by some called
Yelvers.

It is by Experience found, concerning the Breeding of Eels, That take two
large Turfs of Grass, which cut about a Foot square and Three Inches thick, lay
them Grass to Grass, tie them together with Pack-Thread, and lay them in a Pond
in May, and they will Bred Eels; and this may be Ponds therewith.

The most Curious have distinguished Eels into four sorts, viz. the Silver Eel;
the Greenish Eel, which is called a Greg; the Blackish Eel, which has a broad
flat Head, and the Eel with Redish Fins. I shall only speak of the Silver Eel,
which is believed to be Bred by Generation, and not by Spawning, the young
coming forth alive from her about the length and bigness of a middle sized Pin;
and this sort is esteemed the best and delicatest Dish

Eels delight in Muddy Banks, and in Rotten Roots of Old Trees, that grow on
the Banks of Rivers. The best places to Fish for them with an Angle are at
Mill-Ponds, Wears, Bridges, great Falls, and the like; Your Lines must be
strong, not very long, well Plumed, and must have a good round Hook without a
Cork; for you must hold your Line stiff, and not to pull smartly, but suffer
him first to tire himself. They seldom stir Holes during the Winter Season, but
keep in the Mud; nor do they much stir abroad at any Season in the Day, so that
the most proper time to take them is in the Night.

The best Baits to take them are the Red Worm, the Minnow, pieces of Sheeps, or
Hens-Guts, young Lampries, or Lamperns, but above all, pieces of raw powdered
Beef; Now the ways to take Eels with the said Baits are as follows: Fasten
your Line to the Bank-side with your laying Hooks in the Water, or you may
throw in a Line with good store of Hooks Baited and Plumed with a Float, to
discover where the Line lies, that when you come in the Morning, you may take
it up with your Drag-Hook.

Bobing for EELS.
THere is a way to take Eels, viz. Bobing, that is take very large Lobs, scour
them well, and with a Needle run some strong twisted Silk through them from End
to End; then take so many as to wrap them about a Board, at least a dozen
times, and tie them fast with the two Ends of the Silk that they may hang in so
many Hanks; then fasten all to a strong Cord, and about Four Inches above the
Worms fasten a Plum of about Three quarters of a Pound, and so fasten your Cord
to a strong Pole: Having thus your Tackle ready, choose a Muddy Place to Fish
in, and when you think they have swallowed them as far as they can, draw up
your Line gently, and bring them to Shore.

Snigling for EELS.
THere is another way to take Eels, called Snigling; this is done in the Day,
and after this manner: Take a strong Line and Hook Baited with a Lob, or Garden
Worm, and observing such Holes and places where they use to lie (as near Wears,
Mills, or Flood Gates) and gently by the help of a Stick, putting your Bait
into such Holes or Places where you think they lie, you will hardly miss taking
them; but be careful of pulling it out too boisterously.

Eels are also taken by Eel Spears, which you are to strike into the Mud to the
bottom, where they lie. These Spears are common and known to all. And this way
is best in Winter, for then they lie in deep, Muddy, Sedgy-Beds. many together.

FLOVNDERS delight in Brackish Streams, wherein the Salt Water Ebbs and Flows,
as the Thames, Medway, Severn, and the like; yet will they get up a good way
into Fresh Streams, where they will thrive very well. It is a Fish that affords
good sport to the Angler, and are greedy biters; nevertheless they are crafty,
so that you must not let your Bait lie still to draw them on the more eagerly.
The Months most proper to Fish for them are in April, May, June, and July, at
any time of the Day; they delight to lie either in a swift Stream, or in the
still Deep, but chiefly in the Stream. The best Baits are the Red Worms, Wasps
and Gentles, your Line must be strong, and Plumbed within Eight Inches of your
Hook. The Flounder will thrive and grow exceedingly in Ponds, but will not
Breed there.

The CHAR is a Fish not known to be taken any where but in Wimander-Meer, in
Lancashire; It is esteemed a delicate Dish, and is often used for Pies, and sent
to London for Presents. It Is a Spotted Fish, like a Trout, and seldom exceeds a
Foot and an half in length, being free from Bones, having scarce any but what
is on his Back. This Fish is for the generality taken with Nets.

The GVINIAD is an excellent Fish, and only found in Pemble-Meer, and generally
taken also with Nets.

The GRALING, and the VMBER, are by some esteemed all one Fish, but differ in
size, as the Herring and Pilcher, and are much of the nature and property of
the Trout, but scarce Sandy Shoars, and are taken with the same Baits, and
after the same manner; but especially the Fly is the chief Bait, at which he is
very greedy and bold. He is no Leather-mouthed Fish, therefore easily lost
after he is struck. In the Winter he lies very close; but after April he
appears, and is easily taken. But the best Fishing for the Graling is to go
into the Water, and to stir up the Gravel and Sand with your Feet, or with a
Pole; and then with a Worm Fish down the Stream, where the Water runs thick.

You should do well to Head your Hook upon the Shank, with a very slender
narrow Plate of Lead, and let it be slenderer at the Bent of the H^ok, that the
Bait may the easier come over it; and keep your Bait always in Motion.

The STICKLE-BAG is a small prickly Fish without Scales, and not Fished for,
but for Baits to catch other Fish.

The MINNOW is also a small Fish without Scales, and used also for a Bait for
other Fish. It is a great Spawner, and serves as well for a Prey, as for a
Bait for Fish; the like is the Stickle-bag.

The BARBEL is a Leather-mouthed Fish, and though he seldom breaks his hold
when hooked, yet he often breaks both Rod and Line, if he proves to be a big one.
The Male is Shoals, and are at their worst in April, about which time they
Spawn, but soon come in Season. This Fish loves to frequent Weedy places, and
in a Gravelly rising Ground, wherein he is said to Root with his Nose, like a
Hog: In the Summer he also frequents the strongest Swifts of the Water, as deep
Bridges, or Wears, etc. amongst the Piles, Hollow Places, and Weeds; but in the
Winter he retires Sand for her Spawn, which she hides from being devoured by
other Fish. It is a very cuning and curious Fish for his Baits, for if they be
not clean, sweet, and well scoured, and kept in sweet Moss he will not Bite,
which if well ordered, and curiously kept, he will Bite with great eagerness;
the best Bait is the Spawn of a Salmon Trout, or any other Fish; and if you
would have good Sport, Bait the places where Worms cut into pieces; and the
earlier in the Morning, or later in the Evening that you Fish, it is the
better; Also the Lob-worm is a very good Bait: Be sure to cover all your Hook
with the Bait. Your green Gentles are also a very good Bait, and so are bits of
tough Cheese, laid a steep about Twenty four Hours in Clarified Honey; and if
you Bait the Ground with the same you can hardly miss taking them, if there be
any. Your Rod and Line must be both long and strong, and let him tire himself
before you Land him; for it is a strong Fish, and will struggle much.

BREAMS are of two sorts, the one a salt, and the other a fresh Water Fish, but
differ little from each other as to Taste, Shape, or Nature. The fresh Water
ones breeds in Ponds and Rivers, but delight best in the former, and are
generally fairer and fatter in them than in Rivers. It is a lusty strong Fish,
so that your Tackling must be very good; he has two Sets of Teeth, is a very
great Breeder; the Melter being observed to have two large Melts, and the
Spawner as many Bags of Spawn, and Spawneth in June and July. The best Season
for Angling for him, is from St. James-Tide until Bartholomew-Tide.

This Fish is a great lover of Red Worms, especially such as are to be found at
the Root of great Docks, also Flag-worms, Wasps, Greenflies, Grasshoppers, which
must have their Legs cut off, and Paist, of which there are many sorts, which
are found very good Baits for him; but the best are made of Brown-Bread and
Honey, Gentles, young Wasps, Grass-hoppers, and the Red Worms.

It is a curious Fish to be taken with Hook and Line, therefore observe these
Directions, which may also further you in your Carp-fishing, which is much of
the same Nature. Get a Quart of large Red Worms, and in about three Weeks they
will be thoroughly scoured, if you put them into fresh Moss well washed and dried
every three or four Days, feeding them with fat Mould and chopped Fennel.

Your Lines should be Silk and Hair; but the best are all Silk. Your Floats
should be Swan-Quill Float, or large Goose-Quills. For your Plumb take a piece
of Lead fashioned like a Pear, with a small Ring at the little End of it;
fasten your Lead to your Line, and your Line-Hook to your Lead, about ten or
twelve Inches space between Hook and Lead is sufficient, and be sure your Lead
is heavy enough to sink the Float. Your Hook being well baited, and your Worm
strong, the Worm will draw your Hook up and down on the Bottom, which will
provoke the Bream to bite the more eagerly.

If you fit three or four Rods and Lines in this manner, and set them as shall
be directed, your Sport will be much the better. Get the exact Depth of the
Water (if possible) that your Float may lie just equal with the Water, directly
over your Lead. Then provide this following Ground-Bait; Take about a Peck of
sweet Gross-ground Malt, and boil it a very little; then strain it hard through
a Bag, and carry it to the Waterside where you have Sounded, and where you
suppose the Fish do frequent, there throw in the said Malt by Handfuls, well
squeezed, that the Stream may not separate it before it comes to the Bottom;
and be sure to cast it in at least a Tard above the place where you intend your
Hook shall Lodge, otherwise the Stream will carry it somewhat down. Do this
about Nine of the Clock at Night, and preserve some of your Malt in your Bag,
and about Three in the Morning Visit the place, but with great care at a
distance, least you are espied by them; for it is certain, that they have their
Sentinels watching on the Top of the Water, whilst the rest feed under; then
dexterously Bait your Hook, so that the Worm may crawl too and fro the better
to River) there cast it in, that it may rest about the midst of your Bait that
is on the Ground. Cast in your second Line to rest about a Yard above that, and
a third about a Yard below it. Let your Rods lie on the Bank, with some Stones*
or the like, to stay them at the great Ends, and then withdraw your self, yet
so as Floats, and when you see one bitten, and carried away, be not overhasty
to run in, but give time to the Fish to tire himself, and then gently touch him.

If there be any Carps in the River, it is an even lay you take one or more of
them; and if there be any Pike, or Perch, to be sure they will visit the Ground
Bait, though they touch it not, being drawn thither by the great resort of the
small Fish; and until you remove them it is in vain to Bream, or Carp. In this
case let one of your Hooks be baited with a small Bleak, Roach, or Gudgeon,
about two foot deep from your Float, with a little Red Worm at the Point of
your Hook, and if a Pike be there he will be sure to snap it.

This Sport is good till Nine in the Morning, and in a Gloomy Day till Night;
but however it is good to withdraw; and about Four in the Afternoon cast in the
remainder of your Malt,

The TENCH (for the most part) lies at the Bottom of the Water, and chiefly in
Muddy Soyls, and amongst Weeds; he delights in Pits and Ponds, more than in
Rivers; his Flesh is very good, and of a pleasant Taste, although he frequents
Muddy places: In the Heat of the Year he will Bite freely, else not; therefore
the best Angling is in June, July, and August, and early in the Mornings, and
late at Nights.

Though the Pike preys on most sorts of small Fish, yet he will not touch a
Tench, which is supposed to proceed from the benefit he receives from them in
point of Health; for being sick, the approach of this Fish to rub against him
revives him, and the Slime is very good for all wounded Fish, and therefore he
is called the Fishes Physician. Authors write strange Virtues to be in the
Tench; but how true, I dare not affirm.

Though Baits which the Tench delights in are sweet Paists, as that which is
made of Brown-Bread and Honey; he will also Bite very greedily at any Paist
wherein Tar or sweet Oil is an Ingredient; also at the Maggot, Red Worm,
Cad-Worm, Lob-Worm, Gentle, and at dried Wasps, especially if dipped in Honey.

To take good store of this Fish observe these Directions: Provide your self
with a good large Casting-Net well Leaded, with a large Mesh, and deep tucked;
then make the place (where you intend to Fish) clean from Stakes and Bushes
with a Rahe, or some such thing, that there may be nothing to entangle it; then
take a quarter of a Peck of Wheat baked well in an Oven, with about three
Quarts of Water, also five Pints of Blood, and mix it with the Wheat well
together, adding thereto as much Bran as will make it become a strong Paist;
then take about a Quart of Lob-Worms chopped in pieces, and mix them in the
Paist, and make it up into Balls about the bigness of a Goose-Egg, and throw
them into the Pond within the compass of the Casting-Net, and betwixt whiles
cast in some Grains; then when you think the Fish have found the Baiting place,
about the Close of the Evening cast in your Net over the said Baiting-place.
This being done, have a long Pole with a large Cork to stir all about the Net
to raise the Fish, which are generally stuck in the Mud, where they cannot long
endure, and let the Net lie near half an hour before you take it up, and be
sure to lift up the Crown of the Net upright with a long Staff, that the Fish
may play in the Tuck of the Net.

The PERCH is a bold biting Fish, being one of the Fishes of Prey, that like
the Pike and Trout he carries his Teeth in his Mouth, which are very large; and
he is so Voratious, that he dares attack one of his own kind, which the Pike
will hardly do: He has an hooked or Hog Back, which is armed with sharp and
stiff Bristles, and all his Skin is covered with dry hard Scales, having two
Fins on his Back which few other Fish have; he is also a slow grower, and
seldom exceeds two foot in length; he Spawns but once a year, and that in
February or March. There are said to be two sorts of Perches, the one Salt
Water, and the other Fresh; the first has but one Fin on his Back, the other
has two. By the Physicians this Fish is held very nourishing, but hard of
digestion.

The Perch biteth well all the Day in Cloudy Weather, but chiefly in the
Morning and toward the Evening: The best Season of the Year is when the
Spring is far spent, at which time he Bites so greedily, that you may take at
one standing all that are in one Hole; and in a fair vvarm Day in the Winter he
will also Bite, else not.

The proper Baits for the Perch are the Belly of a Mackrel cut into small
pieces about the size of a Minnow; the small Frog, the Minnow, and the Worm
called the Brandling, if well scoured is the best; you may also use the
Lob-Worm well scoured, likewise Bobs, Gentles, Oak-Worms, Wasps, and Cad-Baits.

The Perch is no Leather-mouthed Fish, and therefore when he Bites give time
enough to pouch his Bait, and carry your Bait about Mid-Water, with a Cork on
your Line.

If you Bait with a Minow (which affords the most diversion), Fix your Hook
through his upper Lip, or in at the Back, only taking up the Skin, and then he
will Swim up and down, being kept up by the Cork and Line. If you Bait with a
Frog, then put the Hook through the Skin, and his Leg toward the upper part.

Your Line should be good and strong, and a good Hook Armed with Wyre, so that
if a Pike comes you may be prepared for him. But before Work, it were not amiss
to Bait the Ground where you intend to Fish over Night, with Lob-Worms chopped in
pieces.

The BLEAK is by some called the Fresh Water Sprat, or the River-Swallow, by
reason of his continual Motion, for it delights to be on the Top of the Water,
and always in Motion, making short and quick turns to entrap the Flies. He is
an eager biter, and is caught with all sorts of Worms bred on Trees, or Plants;
also with Flies, Paist, Sheeps-Blood, etc. and in an Evening the Bleak will
take the Natural, or Artificial Fly, that is but small, and of a Brownish
Color, with a Hook answerable*

The Fish uses to keep in Company together, so that a Paternoster Line is
good to take them; that is, a Line which Seven or Eight small Hooks fastened to
it, at every Six Inches distance, and with this a reasonable Angler may take
Four or Five at a time.

The best Bait in a warm clear Day is the small Fly, at the Top of the Water,
at which they will Bite very eagerly, especially in the Evening; and if it be
cold and cloudy, Gentles, or Cadice are the best, and to Fish at about Two Foot
under Water.

There is an excellent way to catch Bleaks, by whiping them in a Boat, or on a
Bank-Side, in swift Water in a Summers Evening with a Hazel Top about Five or
Six Foot long, and with a Line about twice the length.

The POPE, or RVFF, is a Fish not very common, especially in some Rivers; for
Shape it is like a Perch, but for bigness seldom exceeds the Gudgeon. It is an
excellent tasted Fish; they bite freely and keep in Sholes, where the Water is
deep, and runs quick, so that an Angler may catch Forty, or Fity at one
standing.

Your Bait is the small Red-Worm, and if you give him first a Ground Bait of
fresh Earth, it is Bob-Worms, and Maggots are also good Baits, and generally
all sorts of sweet Paists.

The PIKE is a Fish of a great strength, is said to live longer than any other
Fish; he is a great devourer of all small Fish; but will not meddle with the
Tench: They are bred some by Generation, and others by the Suns heat reflecting
on secret, and unknown predisposed Matters, which is a Truth past Controversy.

He is of such a Voratious Nature, that he is called the Fresh Water Wolf; he
is a Melancluly Fish, and loves to be alone, as greedy to seek his Prey, his
common Food is either Pickerel-Weed, Frogs, or small Fish. The best Pikes are
found in Rivers, and most in Meers and Ponds.

The Pike is a Bold Fish in this respect, that he fears not to see or to be
seen by a Man, which is contrary to the Nature of all other Fish. You may Fish
for him with Ledger, or a Walking-Bait, the former is fixed to some certain
place, of which hereafter; for the latter it is which is now to be handled.

The skill in Baiting your Hook with a Frog, or Fish, so that they may receive
little hurt, and to live long in the Water after, is the chief thing in this
Art of Pike-Fishing with an Angle. To be exact at it, do thus; Take the
Yellowest Frog you can get (for those are not poisonous, and Pikes are greedy
of them) from April till August you may find their Mouths open, but all the
year after quite locked up, so that how they can then feed is a secret in Nature
not known; having such a Frog, put your Arming Wire through his Mouth, and out
at his Gills; then with a Needle and Thread stitch up the upper part of his Leg
to the said Arming-Wyer, and so fix it; one Stitch is enough and do it so as
not to give him any hurt, that he may continue in full strength: Also cut a
little the skin of his Back and put in some Salt; this will make him Croak, or
Cry, which will the sooner draw the Fish to him.

If you Bait with a Fish, let it be either a Perch, Roach, Daice, or Large
Minnow; the manner is thus, Between the Head and Fin or the Back make an
Incision with a sharp prointed Penknife, that you may put in your Arming-Wyer,
and force it out at another Skar at the lower end of the Back near the Tail,
then tie him about with a Thread, but no harder than just to keep on the Fish
and not to hurt it. If you use a dead Bait, then put your Hook in at the Tail,
and let the Point come out just at the Gills, and ever move your Line to and
fro, that the Pike seeing the Fish move, may not discover your Fraud, and be
provoked to come on the more eagerly. The most excellent attractive way for a
Pike is to anoint your Baits, wheither dead or alive, in a little Ivy-Gum,
dissolved is some Oil of Spike, and cast it where you intend to Fish, and
having lain a little while at the Bottom, draw it to the Top, and so up the
Stream, and if there be any Pikes within sent of it, they will eagerly pursue
the Bait, and the bigger the Bait is the better. Having taken one be sure to
tire him well before you Land him, and let your Hook be well armed, and your
Line all of Silk, except within about a Yard of the Hook, which must be a
strong Wire twisted and strengthend about with other small Wire.

In May, June and July, Pikes are said to go a Froging in Ditches, and do also
lie a Suning themselves; at these times they are easy to be taken, and that by
this means; Take a Line of Seven or Eight Foot, then Arm a very large Hook to
the Line which must be neatly Leaded at the Shank of the Hook, and of such a
weight that he may guide the Hook at pleasure, and with this Hook without a Bait
a Pike may be struck without fear of losing it.

TROWLING for the PIKE.
THere is a way to take Pikes called Trowling which is thus done; Take a
Hazel-Rod about Twelve Foot long, then fix to the Top of the Rod some strong
Wire, which must have a Noose to draw up, when you have entangled the Pike.

Snapping for PIKES.
THis is thus performed, put a strong double Hook well Armed upon a very strong
Line, which must be of the length of your Pole. Bait the Hook as before
directed for the Trowling, Bird, his Feathers being all pulled off. Keep your
Bait always moving, and so soon as the Pike Bites, with a strong smart Jerk
strike, and fling him out of the Water.

There is another way to take the Pike, and that is, take a forked Stick with a
Line, about twelve Yards long wound upon it, and leave at the upper end about a
Yard to tie a Bladder, or some thing to keep it from the Ground. The Bait must
be a Fish, viz. a Dace, Gudgeon, or Roach. The forked Stick must have a slit in
the one side of the Fork to put in the Line, that the live Fish may be set to
swim at a Gage; and that when the Pike takes the Bait, he may have the full
liberty of the Line for his Feed.

This Device may be turned loose either in a Pond, or River, and be carried
about with the Wind or Stream.

The Hook must be large, and the Shanks something Wire softened, or with Twisted
Silk, which is esteemed the best.

The SALMON is said to be the King of Fresh Water Fish, and is always bred in
Rivers near the Sea, yet where they are not Salt. He casts his Spawn in August,
making a Hole in some safe gravelly place in the River, and therein hide their
Spawn, covering it over with Stones, and Gravel, and so leaves it; and both the
Melter Spawner betake themselves to the Sea before Winter, and if they meet
with any Obstructions by Floodgates, or Wears, or become lost in the fresh
Waters then those so left do by degrees become Sick, Lean, Unseasonable,
Pineing away and dye in about two Years; notwithstanding which they delight
most in fresh Waters, nor will they be so fat, and good in salt Water as in the
fresh; and it is observed that those little Salmons called Skeggers, are bred by
such sick Salmons.

The Salmon usually stays not long in a place, but covets to get nearer the
Spring Head, and generally keeps in the middle of the River, and near the
Ground, so that it is the more difficult to Fish for them with the Hook and
Line from the Banks side; you should therefore be provided with a small Boat at
Anchor, and from thence you may cast out your Hooks. Your Tackling must be
strong, and well fitted, for you are to May, June, July and August, especially
if the Water be clear, and that there be a small breez of Wind blowing against
the Stream.

The Baits proper for the Salmon, are the same as for the Trout, but above all
others he will Bite best at the Garden-worm called a Lob-worm, provided it be
well scoured, and kept clean in Moss, as formerly directed; and if you anoint
the Box wherein you put the Worms only three or four at a time, about an hour
before you use them, with two or three Drops of the Juice of Ivy-berries, or
Oil of Polypody of the Oak mixed with Turpentine, it is an excellent Attractive.

There is a way to Fish for the Salmon, with a Ring of Wire at the end of your
Rod, through which the Line may run to what length you please, by which means
he will not come to feel the Strength of the Line or Rod, for it is to be
feared if he should, he would with a Jerk of his Tail break either the Line, or
Hook, and so escape.

The Artificial-fly is a good Bait, but you must use a Trowl as for the Pike,
and your Fly must be large, with the Wings, and Tail very long. Be sure to give
him time to gorge the Bait, and be not over hasty in drawing him up, but let
him plung and tire himself.

The MILLERS THVMB, or BVLLSHEAD is a broad Headed, and wide Mouthed Fish,
having two Fins under his Belly, and as many near his Eyes, which are broad; he
has also Fins on his Back. This Fish begins to Spawn in April, and are full of
Spawn all the Summer Season. He delights in Holes, or amongst Stones in clear
Water in the Summer, but in the Winter frequents the muddy places like the Eel.
In Hot Weather he uses to lie suning himself in shallow gravelly places, and
is easily taken not refusing your Bait, the best being the Red-worm. It is an
excellent Fish for Taste, but of so ill a shape much resembling the Toad, that
it is not much regarded.

In the last place I shall speak of the CARPE, in the taking of which there
lies the main skill of an Angler.

CARPS are said to be of no long continuance in England; It is an excellent
Fish, a great Encreaser, Breeding several Months in the Year, which Pikes and
most other Fish do not; and it seems to be true, because that you shall scarce
take a Male-Carp without a Melt, and a Female without a Row or Spawn,
especially all the Summer Season; and by Observation they agree more naturally
in Ponds than Rivers, or Running Streams if they Breed there at all. In some
Ponds they will also not Breed; and such are those that have too cold Springs,
but in Ponds agreeable to them, provided their Spawn is not devoured by Pikes
or Perch, they greatly increase. I shall elsewhere give you some Rules for the
knowing a Brneding Pond from a Growing one, with some Directions for the well
ordering the same.

The Carp is a leather Mouthed Fish, so that if your Hook be once struck into
his Chaps, does seldom break his hold. He is the most Subtle Fish that is, and
not easily taken by the Angle, especially in Rivers, or in some Ponds, where
they have store of Feed and the Water is of a clayish color. The Carp will
seldom Bite in cold Weather, and in the Hot Season you can scarce be too early
or too late at your Sport, for he is a very difficult Fish to be taken: In the
Heat of the Summer, they show themselves on the top of the Water, at which time
if you Fish with the L^b-worm, as you do with the Natural-fly, you will have
very good Sport, especially if it be amongst Reeds.

If your Carps Breed too fast in your Stews, then put in some Gudgeons, which
will cause them to grow Fat and Thrive, and so lessen their Breeding.

The Baits most proper for the Carp are Worms or sweet Paists, of which there
are great variety, for he is a Fish that seldom troubles the top of the Water
for Flios. Of Worms the Blew Marsh-worm, the knotted Red Worm, and the Gentle
are the best; if you Fish with Gentles, anoint them with Honey before you put
them on your Hook. As for Paists, those that are made of sweet smelling, and
sweet tasting things are the best. Honey Crumbs of White Bread is very good,
being wrought up very stiff. Also Bean-flower, or other Flower, Virgins Wax,
some raw Flesh of a Rabet, or such like, being beaten well together in a Mortar
to a Paist, is a very good Bait for them.

When you Angle for a Carp, your Rod and Line must be strong, and by reason he
is so shie, it is very good to Bait the Ground where you intend to Fish two or
three Days before, with Paist made up into Pellets, or Blood mixed with Bran,
and Cow Dung; also take about a peck of Ale-grains mixed with Blood, and cast
into the place over Night, and it will gather the Fish together.

But all this while you are Detained from the chief Secrets, which in Truth
should not be made common. You must be first assured that the place where you
Fish for Carps is provided therewith, which to know make use of these following
Hook to rest on; which is a good Convenience; and you are also assured that
there are Carps in the place, the Figure shows the Form.

Frame same Bords together of such Length and Breadth as you think fit, but for
want of other Door may serve the purpose, but the larger your Platform is, so
much the better. The end Q is that which must lie next the Water side, at the
Letter S make a Hole to receive a good strong Cord, fastened with a knot on the
inner side, then flore over your Door with strong Earth or Clay about two
Inches Thick; and so stiff, that it may not easily dissolve, nor work off with
the Water, then stick the said Earth full of Beans (prepared as hereafter) at
every four Inches Distance; the Letters V, X, Y, denote them; they must be very
gently put in, so as a Carp may easily Bite them out, yet so fast as not to be
washed out by the Water. When all is fixed, let the end Q be put into the Water
sloping downwards, then when the Hole is close; on the bottom fasten the Cord
T, at the Root of some Tree; the next Morning visit your Baits, put out your
Door leasurely; if the Carps have eaten the Beans, it is a good sign of catching
some, but if not, try it a second Day and Night; if you then also find the
Beans unmoved, conclude there are no Carps. If you find the second time your
Baits eaten, Replenish them, and think not your time lost. In case the bottom
of the Water where you set your Door be clean and smooth, then remove your
Door, casting in two or three Handfulls of the aforesaid Beans; but in case the
Ground be Muddy, Weedy, Rooty, or the like, let the Door be Rebaited, and
returned to the place where it was, for there you may boldly let fall your
Hook. The way of ordering your Beans is thus. Take half a Bushel of Beans, and
let them lie seven or eight Hours in warm Water, then Boil them in a large
clean Earthen Pot in four Ounces of Honey, and as many Grains of Musk; then
boil them about a quarter of an Hour, and so preserve them for your use, to
Bait your Door, etc.

When you perceive that Carps are in the place, and that they bite your Bait,
then the Night before you Fish do thus; Put in some of your aforesaid Beans
into some River Water to Boil, and when they begin to bubble, put the quantity
of two small Beans of Aloes-cicatrina into your Pot to about a Handful of your
Beans, and let it Boil a little; when the Beans are cold Bait your Door with
them, the effect will be this, The Carps will eat them as before, and withal
fall a purging and scouring whatever is within them; and Consequently will be
exceeding Hungry, so as to Bite at any thing; then Early in the Morning Bait
your Hook (which should be strong and large) with your biggest Beans, and let
the point of your Hook but just pierce the skin of your Bean (but note that the
Beans wherewith you Bait your Hook, must not be of the bitter ones) your Hook
must have a Foot of Line to Trail on the Water; and your Line should be made of
Green Silk, with a Device to let go store of it as you see occasion. When you
perceive your Float to Sink, then strike him, but upright not slanting; and
when once he is hit, let him have Line enough to tire himself. In like manner
you should be very careful in Landing him, for many a goodly Fish has been
lost by overhastiness, to prevent which you may use a Comodious Net, which may
serve for other Conveniences, I shall here insert the Figure of it.

This Net is to be extended on a Forked Stick; the two Branches N, O, should be
each two foot long, and from the End N, to the other End O, should be likewise
two foot distance. The Net P, being tied on, should be about two foot deep;
when the Carp is within five or six foot of the Land, set your Foot on the
Line, and gently put the Net under the Carp, and so secure him: One Man may
manage three or four Lines at this Sport, provided they be near him, and well
secured on your Rods, and your Rods well Stick into the Ground about a foot
high, to support the Middle of your Rod, it were very secure, both for
preventing the drawing of your Rods, and the Carps would then strike themselves.

I shall next give you two Receipts for Paists, which are most excellent and
approved: Take a Heron, Plume him, then chop and mince him Glass-Bottle, which
stop very close, and bury in an hot Dunghill for two or three Weeks, so that
it may be brought to an Oil by a through Corruption; keep your Bottle always
well Corked: When you go a Carp-fishing, make up a Paist with Crumbs of
White-Bread, some ground Hemp Seed, with this aforesaid Oil; and with this
Paist bait your Hook so Artificially as no part be discernable; the quantity of
a large Bean is enough. Also Oil anoint all that part of your Line next the
Hook, and let your Paist rest a Foot on the Ground, as before directed.

The other Paist is more chargeable; but the excellency and goodness does
countervail the Cost, were it far greater: Take a Pound of the Dregs of
Hemp Seed (by the Dregs is to be understood the bruised Body of the Seed, after
the Oil is squeezed out) two Ounces of Mummy, or the Fat of a Man, which may be
had at the Apothecaries; the like quantity of Pork-Lard, also two Ounces of the
Oil of Herons, the like quantity of Honey, one Pound of grated Crumbs of
White-Bread, and four Grains of Musk; Make all these up into a Paist, and if
you find it too stiff, mollify it with Honey, and if too soft, thicken or
stiffen it with the Dregs of Hempseed. You may toll it into Pellets of the
bigness of large Beans.

Carps Spawn in May, or June, after which

CHAP. XI.
Directions for taking Fish by laying Hooks and Lines in the Water, by Day or
Night.
HAving gone through that part of Fishing which relates to Angling, I shall now
proceed to give you some other necessary Rules to be understood and practiced
in this Art, that you may thereby take diverse sorts of Fish, as well by Day as
Night, without being obliged to the continual Attendance, which the former part
of this Discourse does necessarily require: That is, the laying of Hooks and
Lines, which are usually intended for taking of Fish. If you set them for the
Pike, Perch, or Barbel, you should do well to keep your Hook and Bait about a
foot from the Ground by the help of some Cork; but for Eels your Bait must lie
on the Ground. You are to know, that besides the foregoing sorts of Fish, there
are some others which are usually taken with the said Night-Hooks; for which
you must prepare your Ground Paists, and your Hook Baits, according to the
several Natures; all which is already treated of.

But whereas I have in the Fourth Chapter treated of Hooks, I hold it not amiss
to supply here some few Omissions, which indeed were purposely there made, as
conceiving them more proper for this place. This following Figure represents
the exact Forms and Proportions of several Hooks, which ought to be used in
this kind of Fishing, and to fasten them to Links of twisted Wire, just as you
see in the Figures, which are so plain, that there needs no further
Explanation, unless of the last of them Number 3* which is framed by tying 2
single ordinary Hooks together in the manner as this is, for your help when you
are in a place where you cannot procure any of the former, as sometimes it so
falls out.

There is a great Care required in Baiting these Hooks; for your Directions
herein observe the manner of these following Figures.

If you are to Bait your Great Hook, No. 1. take the first Link of the Chain,
and put the End P, into the Throat of the Fish with an arming Bodkin made for
that purpose, so as to come out at his Gills X, in No. 6. and then draw it
close, that the Hook may rest at the beginning of the Mouth V; then fasten the
Shank of your Hook with a Thread about the Tail of the Fish, as G, in No. 4.;
and then tie the other Line, or strong Packthread, well twisted at the last
Link K, which said Line must be fastened to some strong Stake, Root of a Tree,
or the like.

Observe that when you Bait with any live Fish, to have them preserved in the
Water alive, and to move up and down on, and with your Hook, as long as
possible. Now if you draw your Hook, or Line, quite through them, they will
immediately dye, and consequently are but dull Invitations to Fish. Let your
great care therefore be to preserve your Bait-fish strong and lusty, and hurt
him as little as possible.

By the Directions given you in Baiting the Hook, No. 4. you may soon learn how
to do that, No. 5.

Young Carps are the best Baits for Pikes, or Barbels, for they will live long
in the Water. If you Bait with a Perch, cut off a good part of his Back-fin,
for when he bristles that up (as his custom is when any Fish of Prey comes near
him) it will hinder the Fish from Biting.

Be careful in what places you lay your Night-Hooks in regard of Stumps, Roots,
or the like; Fish of great strength finds himself Hooked, he uses to entangle
all, that he may break some part of the Line, and so escape, which often times
proves successful to him.

For Pikes, and the like, lay your Hooks in the midst of the Stream, in Ponds,
and other places; for Eels by the Bank-sides.

When you cast in your Baits, as No. 4. have your Line folded up as you there
see, with a piece of light dry Wood bored through the middle, L, and that you
should place some three or four foot from your Bait, more or less, according to
the depth of the Water; but if you made the said Float of a small bundle of
Rushes loosly bound up, it were better, and would not fright the Fish. In
Summer you should have all your Hooks laid between three and four of the Clock
in the Afternoon; in Winter an hour or two earlier, and both Winter and Summer,
visit them about eight or nine in the Morning.

You must not set your Night-Hooks in the same manner in Running Streams, and
swift Rivers, as you do in standing Ponds, and deep Pools; for you must in
Rivers and Streams tie a small Stone of about four Ounces weight, two or three
Yards from the Hook, the Letter N in No. 5. shows it, by which means your Bait
may swim about a Foot, or fifteen Inches clear from the bottom.

If you set Night-Hooks in Rivers, have a Boat; for it is very difficult to
cast your Lines off from the Land in such direct places as is necessary. If the
Sides of the River where you Night-Hooks be deep, then you may carry on your
design well enough without a Boat, and in such places you may use the manner,
as No. 7.

You must provide so many Forked-Sticks as you intend to set Lines. The Letters
A, B, C, D, represent the Form. From A, to C, D, let there be a distance of
four or five Inches, in this manner. From A, to the Twist or first beginning of
the two Branches, let there be about two Inches, from thence to the end of each
Branch about three Inches; the very Ends of the two Forks must be cleft to
receive your Line, as hereafter. At A, make a Notch to fasten a small Cord of
about two foot long, which Cord tie to some Tree, Stake, Stump, or the like, to
hold all sure. Fasten the End of the Line at B, and fold the rest about the two
Branches in and out, as you see by the Figure, until within eight or ten foot
of the Hook. At E, place a piece of Wood, or bundle of Rushes, together with a
Stone, etc. of both which I have just before treated; then pass your Line into
one of the Clefts at the End of either of your Forks, and that will hold it
firm until some good large Fish be caught, who having bitten and swallowed the
Bait will presently change place, imagining all is well; but finding he is
surprised will begin to plung, and to draw out your whole Line; and the longer
it is, the better. Be sure all be well fixed, and strongly tied, or else you
run a hazard of losing your Lines, as well as your labor.

This Figure shows how to fasten several smaller Hooks and Lines upon your main
Line, and serves to take Eels, Barbles, Perches, and the like.

Your Hook should be small, and Baited some with Minows, some with Frogs, some
with Worms, others with pieces of Powdered Beef, and the like; you may fasten
particular Lines, about two foot distance from one another; the smaller Lines
being each about two foot long. Every thing being so disposed, tie the End B
fast to some Stake, Bough, or the like, the other End A, fasten to some heavy
Stone, which throw into the River as far as you design. Your Lines and Baits
hanging thus cross the Water, no Fish can pass by without seeing them, and be
sure to lay these kind of Lines in places free from Trash, Roots, or the like;
for the great Eels will else endanger all by twisting themselves and the Lines
about the Weeds, Roots, or Stumps.

It is good to lay some Ground Baits which may draw small Fish, and those will
attract great ones, for which this said Device is chiefly intended.

CHAP. XII.
Of Night-Angling, and Ground-Angling.
GReat Fish (but chiefly Trouts) are shy and fearful of Ensnarements, and do
observe the most secure Seasons to seek their food, which

In Night-Angling you should be provided with some great Garden-Worms, or
instead thereof with Black-Snayls, with these Bait your Hook, and cast them off
a good distance, and draw your Line to you again upon the surface of the Water,
not permitting the Bait to sink, to which use not a Plumet of Lead, but only a
Float; whereas in Ground-Angling, you must use a Plumet without a Float; and
this sort of Ground-Angling Fish lie low. You may easily hear the Fish rise,
and therefore give him time to swallow the Bait, and then gently give him a
twitch to secure him. If you find that the Fish will not freely take the Bait
at the Top of the Water, then sink your Bait by putting thereto some Lead, and
order your self as at Day-Angling. It is observed that the best Trouts bite in
the Night, and do most commonly rise in the still Deeps, seldom in the

CHAP. XIII.
Directions for taking and preserving Worms, very useful in Angling.
WORMS of all sorts are very necessary, as well for Night-hooks, and Nets, as
Angling, or the like; they are not at all times to be had on a sudden, nor
without labor and industry. I shall here show you some ways to furnish your
self therewith at all times. If you be in any place where you suppose Worms
are, the way to get them out of the Ground is to keep a continual motion with
your Feet, by moving up and down in one small tract of Ground, and the Worms
hearing the noise will work themselves out round about you; then being provided
with a Stone Pot put them therein, and so order them as already directed, and
keep them for your use.

If in the Summer time, you take about a quart of Green-Walnuts with the Husks
and Shells, beating them in a Pottle or two of Water, with some Brick, or Tyle,
the Water will be come bitter, which being sprinkled on the Gound so as to soak
into the Earth, will presently cause the Worms to come out of the Earth. If you
take a strong Stake, and drive the small End about a Foot into the Ground, and
then settle your self to pull it out, not stiring your Feet from the place, but
continue this kind of motion for about a quarter of an hour, all the Worms that
are within a Fathom round you; hearing the noise will come up.

Another way is thus; Take a Candle and Lanthorn that has clear Horns, and
being provided with an Earthen Pot, in a dark Night go into the Walks of your
Garden, or else into such Lands that are in Tillage and free from Grass; you
must walk softly, and stooping downwards you may perceive the Worms half out of
the Ground, not only to enjoy the Fresh Dew, but also to Couple, and thus all
Summer long you may find such places full of them from an hour after Sunset to
near Daybreak, especially after a Shower of Rain, and in Winter the same upon a
warm Thaw after a Frost.

Having showed you to take Worms; I shall proceed to instruct you how to
preserve and keep them all the Winter. About November when you see any
Husbandman breaking up a piece of Lay-Ground, if you follow the Plough you will
find good store of small whitish Worms, some call them Grubs; they are bred of
the Eggs of a Beetle, which she leaves in Holes under Cow-Turds, or Horse-Dung;
these Worms in March and April become Red, and not long after grow to be
Beetles. If you gather two or three thousand of them, and put them into a large
Tub, with about two Bushels of the same Earth from whence they were took, and
keep it well secured from cold Blasts, and Frosts, they will live all the
Winter, especially if you give them a little fresh Earth once in about a
Fortnight. A Day before you use them, take so many out as you think to use, and
let them be put apart into a little fresh Earth moistened with Honey, and they
are excellent Baits.

Gentles are thus bred and preserved: Take a piece of a Beasts-Liver, and with
a Cross-Stick hang it up in some place over a Barrel half full of dry Clay;
they will fall into the Barrel, and there scour themselves. You may breed them
in this manner, until the Middle of October; but if you would breed them to
keep all Winter, get a dead Cat, Kyte, or the like, and let it be Fly-blown;
when you perceive the Gentles begin to stir, bury the Carcass in some moist
Earth, where it may remains as free from the Frost as you can. You may make use
of them at any time all the Winter until March, and then they begin to turn to
Flies.

CHAP. XIV.
How to take Eels with a Speer, or Darting-Rod, much used in Flanders and
Holland.
IN Flanders and Holland they take Eels in great abundance, with the help of a
Dart, or Striking-Iron; this Figure represents the fashion thereof, and its use
I shall here explain.

The Iron, or Steel, must be about a quarter of Inch thick all over, and in the
End must be a Socket to receive the End of a good strong Pole, the Letter L,
denotes the Socket, K, and L, the Pole which should be about fifteen foot long,
and must be fastened into the Socket with a couple of Iron-Pins, to take off,
and put on when occasion serves. The Iron, or Steel, must be framed into a Fork
with three Teeth, as the Figure presents, marked N, O, P, each above nine
Inches long, the two outermost N, O, bending outward, and the Adder's- Tongue,
a little rounding; and all three must have small Teeth within, and the whole
encompassed by an Iron-Band, or Hoop, that neither of them may stir out of his
place, as you see the Letter M. The Teeth of all must be so close, that a small
Eel cannot pass between; but toward the End P, you may leave them a little
wider. The manner of using this Instrument is easy, being only to poach and
stir with it up and down in Banks, and Bottoms, where you suppose they are; and
if there be any, you can hardly miss of them.

CHAP. XV.
How to take Frogs in a Dark
FOr the taking Frogs in the Night with light, there must be in Company three
or four; one must carry Bundles of dry Straw to make the Flame, for the Frogs
will not fail to make toward it. If it be a good big Torch it is much better,
especially if Wax; you must not make any Noise, but stand still, and let them
come about you in the Water; then for the taking them, each Person should be
provided with a Bag put between his Legs, with the upper part of the Sack
fastened to his Codpiece, and he may hold the Sack close with one Hand, and put
them in with the other; and so take either Great or Small, as you see occasion;
and if you be silent, they will not forsake the light.

CHAP. XVI.
A Pleasant way to take Pikes, called Huxing of the Pike.
IF you are minded to see excellent sport, choose out some Pond or Pool, where
you are assured Pikes of a large size are, and such as have good sharp
Appetites. Then take thirty or forty Bladders the largest you can get, blow
them up, and tie them close and strong; then at the Mouth of the Bladder tie a
Line, longer or shorter according to the depth of the Water; at the end of the
Line fasten your Armed Hook Artificially Baited; and put them into the Water
with the advantage of the Wind, that they may gently move up and down the Pond.
When one Master Pike has struck himself, it is a most pleasant Diversion to
see him bounce about in the Water, with the Bladder at his Tail; and when you
perceive him almost spent, take him up. The same Diversion may be done by tying
your Lines and Baits at the Legs of Geese or Ducks; but the Geese that have
been once so served, will be afraid to come near the Water for a good while
after, according to the Proverb, Hang a Dog in a Crab-tree, and he will not
care for Verjuice.

CHAP. XVII.
Observations concering Nets, very useful in Fishing.
THe next thing shall be to Treat of the taking Fish with Nets; and by the way
it is not amiss to give some few Directions concerning the Making, Buying,
Fitting, and Preserving them; not that I intend to insert the Art of making
Nets, but only to give some necessary hints; nevertheless take notice, that one
Homemade Net will out-last three Sale ones, and yet not cost the tenth part so
much; besides, with good usage it will do three times the service; and without
Nets you can be no Fisher, or Fowler, which are two delightful Country
Divertions. The charge, or Difficulty of making them is easy, for almost every
Barber is a proficient therein, and for the expense of about five Shillings,
you may be provided with all Instruments and Tackle necessary to be used
therein.

Now taking it for granted, that you will learn this easy and cheap Slight of
Net-making, I shall proceed to some Directions how to preserve them, in which
observe especially these three Cautions, Dye them into good Colors, wherein
there is a double Advantage, as not frighting the Fish, which white ones are
apt to do; and they will last strong and sound much longer. Secondly, that you
mend them upon the least Breach, for which end you should always have your
Implements about you, when you go to Fish with them; and Lastly, that you lay
them well up, which consists in these two things, first, that you carefully
dry them after usage, and Walls; and such places where Rats and Mice may anoy
them; to prevent which, keep them in some close Press, or let them hang down
from the middle of some Beam remote from any Wall, as tied thereto by a Cord.

For the Dying of Nets, there are but these Colors proper for Fishing, viz.
Green, Yellow, and a Sad Russet, the latter is effected by the help of some
Tanners Vate, which is a great preserver of Bushel of the outward Rind or Bark
of a Walnut-tree, and cut it into small pieces, then Boil them in a reasonable
quantity of fair Water about two Hours, then take it off the Fire, and put your
Nets into the bottom of the Vessel, laying the Bark upon them, and so let them
lie a Day and a Night to Infuse; and when you take them out, they will be a
good brown. The Yellow is made by rubing over the Nets with Celandine well
bruised, so that the Juice may soak into the Thread; And the Green Color is
made by Boiling young Wheat, Barley, or Grass chopped small, and let the Nets lie
a Day and a Night in the said Liquor. But if you would be at the charges, it
were better to have them done by a Dyer.

CHAP. XVIII.
Directions for pitching a Net called the Raffle, both by Day and Night.
THe first Net that I shall take notice of, is Raffle Net, it is to be supposed
from hence, that nothing can escape it, when once gotten in. The Form thereof
is here presented unto you, whose use I shall next describe.

You must be provided with five or six Poles of Sallow, so such light Wood,
which is strong withal, and each of nine or ten Foot long, but more or less
according to the Depth of the Water; at the great End sharpen them, the better
to be fixed into the Ground at the bottom of the Water. You must also be
provided with a Paring-Knife to cut away all Weeds, Roots, Stumps, Boughs, or
the like, which are in or near the places where you design to pitch your Net,
for them you must remove out of the way. The Figure of the said Paring-Knife is
here described.

Then fasten one of your Poles at either end of your Net, at either of the two
Wings, that is to say, the Cord below where the Lead is, unto the bigger End of
your Pole, and upper Cord where the Cork is to the smaller End of the Pole.
Then in case you have no Bait, contrive to get some Man on the opposite side of
the River with a Cord in his Hand, one end whereof must be fastened to one of
the Poles, which are fixed to the Net according to this Figure of the Pole.

The Man having drawn over that Wing, must force the great and A of the Pole in
the said Net into the Ground at the bottom of the Water C, the like must be
done with the other Pole of the said Net marked Z, h, on the side, just over
against the former.

Then must he throwover one End of the Cord, which fasten to the Wing of the
said Net, y, C, when it is drawn over, you must go along the whole length of
the Net. Your Poles being ready fastened as the two former, and streigning the
Cords of your Net indifferent stiff, drive the two latter Poles into the Ground
as you did the two first. Be sure all be well and strongly done, that the
Current may not force away your Supporters, then with the said long Pole you
may spread the Grass and Trash you formerly pared away all over the Net, as
well to secure it from the sight of Thieves, as to give a shade to the Fish,
for they covet shelter, especially in hot Weather. The Cord N, O, is your Lock
and Key, for by it you are sure no Fish can escape that are in your Net,
therefore be careful to hide it. You may let the Net stand a Day and a Night,
and if the place be well stored with Fish, you will hardly miss them. But if
you design to Fish only by Day, and not to let the Net lie in the Water, then
after the Net is planted, let a couple of Men beat up and down with long Poles,
taking a good Circumference; and Water, ever now and then thrusting their Poles
into the bottom of the Water, and when you are minded to draw, be sure in the
first place to strain in the Lock and Key N, O, and then having a Cord at each
Wing of the Net, from the other side draw them both at once gently toward you;
and when they are near at Hand together make what have you can, and thus you
may make several sets in a Day.

CHAP. XIX.
Directions for pitching a Net called the Wolf, together with its Form.
THe next sort of Net that I shall Describe is called the Wolf, being a great
destroyer of Fish, as well in Rivers as Ponds, and may not unfitly be called
the little Raffle, as exactly the same, except the four Wings, the Figure
follows.

You must carry this Net to the Waterside, near Rushes, Sedges, and such like
Water-grass. Then with your Pareing Knife aforesaid quarter out a place for the
Net, by cleansing away all the Trash, and Weeds near it, ^he larger the better;
especially if you did cut two Alleys in a direct Line, a pretty length, one to
each side of the Net, by which the Fish might be invited, and as it were guided
unto the Net, at the two Doors E, and F. Cords marked G, R, j, K, which Cords
fasten to some strong Staff, as by the said Figure is Represented. About the
middle of the Pole E, fasten a Cord L, R, of a convenient length, whereby to
draw the Net on Shore without being necessitated to go into the Water for it,
though possibly you were forced to do so when you placed it there, which do in
case you set the Net in the middle of any wide River: But if you place it
within ten or twelve Foot of the Bank, you may then cast in your Net; and
settle it afterward according to your Mind, by the help of some long Pole or
the like, though the former must be confessed is the better way, but more
Troublesome.

CHAP. XX.
Directions for pitching a Net called a Cinque-Port, and its use.
THis Net is so Termed from the five Entrances into it, and is of excellent use
for any Pond or River, Swift or Standing Water. The Figure here follows.

For the making use of this Figure be provided with four Poles, which must be
straight and strong, and for the length answerable to the Depth of the Water;
the great Ends must be sharpened like Stakes, and notched within a Foot of the
ends to fasten the four Corners of the Net, as E, F, G, H, the like Notches
make on the same Poles at a convenient Distance for the fastening the four upper
Corners in the same manner, as A, b, C, D. The Bottom of the Net is four Square
without any Entrance; to do well you should have the help of a Boat, when you
place the Net in the Water, for that you must drive your Poles fast into the
Ground; and at such a convenient Distance, that your Net may be stiff stretched
out, each Pole answering his fellow in an exact direct Line, and this may
suffice in any standing Water; but if it be in a swift Stream, the Motion of
the Water will always move the Net, and so frighten away the Fish, to prevent
which use this help; fasten at the very top of the four Poles, certain strong
Sticks to streighten and strengthen one another, and to keep all light; as for
Example, observe the same pointed Line marked with little a, b, c, d, and you
will easily comprehend it: But then if you fasten two other Poles cross ways
from A, a, unto great D, and little d, and from C, c, to great B, and little c,
you need not fear it, for the Water can have no power over it.

CHAP. XXI.
Inventions to draw or force Fish into such Nets as you set.
BEfore I proceed further in the Discourse of setting and laying of Nets, I
hold it necessary to present you with some Directions for the Attracting by
fair means, or frighting by violent ones the Fish into your Net. You must know
that Fish (as most other Creatures) do delight in the Company of those of their
own Pike that takes no pleasure in his Companions, unless to eat them, and
therefore is most easily taken; the like is the Tench, not upon the same
reason, but because he is always Hungry, which compells him to hunt up and down
expecting to get his Prey, neither is he afraid of the Net, as most other Fish
are. It is most certain that if when you set your Net, you put some live Fish
into it, or for want thereof a piece of some Dead Net any fresh colored
Flowers of diverse sorts, either the smell or sight will invite them to it. But
if you Bait your Net with a live Fish, let it be once taken out of the same
River; and if you can come near the same place where you pitch, for Fish do
know and are acquainted with each other, as well as any other sorts of
Creatures. If you hang in the Net a Bone of some salt Pork without any Flesh
Fish. The Dreggs of Hempseed, that, is the Refuge after the Oil is extracted
out, is a very great Attractive of Fish; But of all others Paists for Nets, and
to say Truth for a Ground-Bait, on any occasion this following one is the best.
Take a Leveret, or young Hare, let it begin to smell strong, then roast it with
a gentle Fire, and bast it well with Honey, when it is half Roasted, put in
the Drippingpan Sippits of White Bread; and let it drop thereon till the Pan,
and put in more; and so continue until all the liquor be dried up. If you tie
a piece of this Bread with a little of the Flesh upon any part of the Net
within side, it will draw the Fish to them in great plenty.

CHAP. XXII.
A Device to take store of Fish, at one Draught, and that in difficult places,
by reason of Rocks, Roots, Stumps, Holes and the like.
IN such Ponds and Rivers that are pestered with Weeds, Stumps of Trees, great
Stones, and the like, there Fish use to shelter themselves from the extremity
of Heat, as well as (...) likewise to secure themselves from the Snares and
surprises of such as design to take them. In such places Fish grow fat and
large. You must therefore be at some pains and charges to prepare the place;
but the best of it is, that being once fitted, it will cost nothing to repair.
Cleanse some part of the said Ground of all the aforesaid T^ash and
Impediments, for a good space, both in length and breadth, and then Bait the
middle thereof with the boiled Beans, as directed in the latter end of the
Ninth Chapter. The same Day that you cast in the said Ground Bait, drive crtain
Poles into the Ground under the Water, according to the subsequent Direction.
These ensuing Figures do present the manner how to employ and order them; but
for the better apprehension thereof I shall give you some Directions therein.

Get a certain number of Poles, each as big as a Man's Arm, straight, and so
such length as the depth of the place requires; the greater Ends whereof must
be sharpened the better to be drove into the Ground; plant them at equal
distances on the border of the Platform cross the Water as E, another at F,
about Ten or Twelve Foot distance, and so at G, and H. In like manner opposite
to these fasten as many others on the other side of your Platform, which R, S,
T, does denote, the said Poles being obvious by the letters E, f, G, H, the
same with the foregoing: Then pierce all the Stakes at the top just level with
the Superficies of the Water, with Holes large enough to receive certain Pegs
as big as ones little Finger; which Pegs must slip in and out very easily; and
at the biger end of the Pegs make a Notch for the snare, tying on a strong
Packthread of Foot and a half long. Every one of the Packthreads must be
fastened to a long Cord, as designed by the letters a, b, c* d. The Pegs you may
also discern to be fastened each the Hole by the letters N, O, P Q. When you
have thus far proceeded, cast in Morning and Evening Five or Six handfuls of
your Beans, and the Evening before you Fish, cast in as many of those which are
prepared with Aloes, and then set for Nets between Two and Three in the
Afternoon, in Tramel Nets long enough to encompass the whole Platform, or to
speak truly, the whole River above and below, fasten the Cork-Line at A, B, and
let the Lead-Line sink to the Bottom, then pass along by the Poles E, F, G, H,
and strain over the Net to the other side of the Poles C, D, and there fasten
your Cork-Lines and Lead-Lines in the same manner, Then strain your Cord for
the Pegs V, a, b, c, d, K. tie one end thereof on the backside unto some V,
distant from the Pole N, about Six Foot, then go with your Boat to the midst of
the Water, and take your Cork-Line in the Left Hand, and lift up your Net until
you have the whole in your Hand, that is to say, the Cork-Line, Net, and
Lead-Line which place upon the Peg O, in the upper end of the Pole F, and so do
unto every Pole one after another, until all your Net be so fixed. Then carry
the other end of your Cord just over against Platform where you cast in your
Ground Baits, and fasten the said End on a Stake, as at K; and thus having done
the one half, you are the better able to do the other, which is the same thing
as before described, in which you cannot well mistake, the Figure being marked
with the same Letters, though but one with the Net ready planted, the other
being to direct you by the single Cords, Pegs, and the like; Then at Night cast
in some more of the Beans, A, B, and the other on the side C, D, that you may
have one at each End of your two Tramel-Nets, but they must go cunningly and
quietly to work without noise, and keep at least Ten or Twelve Foot distance
from the Nets, until the Signal be given by him who is to let the Nets go, who
being at K, should get hold on both the Cords that hold the Peg-Lines, and
giving them a good pluck, shall thereby give way to the Nets to fall down, and
so encompass all the Fish, which are at your Bait, and within the circumference
of your Nets, or just at the same time that your Peg-Line is drawn, the Signal
must be given, and then must the Men bestir themselves to close in the Ends of
the Nets next the Shore, so that nothing may get out, and then are the Fish as
it were in a Cage.

The next thing to be done, is to close in the Ends of your Net, and from
beating from one End to the other, give no opportunity to the Fish to escape,
but keep them in continual Alarums until you have drawn in your Nets close
together, and so land them. You are to know, that it is to little or no purpose
to pitch your Nets after this manner in any swift Stream, for that will hinder
your Nets from resting on your Pegs, and will also prevent your Nets from
playing as they should.

CHAP. XXIII.
An Excellent way to take all manner of Great Fish by Night, with a Net and
Fire.
IF you know any place frequented with Fish that are grown old and subtle,
observe these following Directions: If the place be free from Weeds, and such
like Impediments, it needs not be cleansed. This ensuing Figure does represent
the Draught to your view.

Suppose the Pond, or Place you design to Draw, be the Space marked within the
pointed Line O, P, D, Q, and that I, L, be the length of the Banks-side which
you would encompass; then Bait the place with some good Paists, as the boiled
Beans with Honey, etc. for three or four days before you draw it; and if you
cast in all your Paists near one Spot, it were the better; as for Example,
within the pricked Line K. The Morning you intend to Fish, Bait with your
Purging Beans to make the Fish more hungry and eager to Bite. That Day about
two in the Afternoon plant your Net in this manner, with the help of a Boat or
long Tub; for want thereof go to the Verge of your Platform, as P, D, and then
let drop your Net just in the Form, you see it delineated by the Letters A, B,
C, D; that is to say, in a kind of Heap, yet so as it may be entangled by it
self. At the End E, fasten a Cord, and fix the other End of the said Cord on
the Shore at H, on some Stake, or the like, and another Cord at the End F,
whose End must be fastened at G, about an hundred Paces distance from K, the
place where you Bait, and the said place ought to be just in the middle between
the two Cords, which are fastened at the two Ends of the Net; Then on the Land
between M, N, just over against your Baiting-place leave a heap of dry Leaves,
Straw, Stubble, or Sticks, which may quickly take Fire; then withdraw, and let
not any more noise be made near the place that Evening. The Night being come,
the old crafty Fish will be sure to peep out, partly to see what was the cause
of the Noise, and partly through Hunger; The darker the Night is, the better:
Then go three or four together, one must gently (without noise) go to the Cord
G, and another to H, and there lie close until the Sign be given; then let one
set Fire to his Stubble at M, N, as secretly and quietly as possible, and so
lie flat on his Belly, to observe by his Eye and Ear if the Fish make a noise,
or motion; if they do, Beans, as he lies upon his Belly, but not the Purging
ones, and lie close for about a quarter of an Hour, by which time the Fish will
be all at work, some eating, and others looking on the Light; then give Notice
by a Whistle to your Companions to draw the Net with all imaginable dexterity,
inclining toward each other, that the Net may be extended like a Semicircle,
as you see the Letters O, P, D, Q: When Net are drawn, one to O, and the other
to Q, then with their Beating-Poles let them lay on at Top and Bottom of the
Water, to keep the Fish amused, that they may have no leisure or place to
escape, so by little and little gather the two Ends close together to the place
K; then take your Lead-Lines into your Hands, and let your Companions take each
one of the Cork-Lines, and gently pull in your Net, yet so that your Leads may
still graze close on Fish will get away under the Net, especially the great and
crafty Ones.

CHAP. XXIV.
A Device to make a Fishery in any
THere is an easy and cheap way of preserving Fish in the midst of any River,
by making a Warren, as it were, for the Fish to retreat into; yet may you take
them when you please. This Figure shows the Draught of the design.

Suppose the Circuit P, Q, R, be the place designed for the Fishery; then
provide about twenty large Fagots, bound at both Ends of about six foot long,
and four foot about; lay four of them in a kind of a Square at the Bottom, but
let there be about a foot space between every of them; then lay a Range on the
Top, cross them, and a third Range over them until you have piled up Fagots
almost to the Top of the Water; then lay some heavy Stones on the uppermost
Fagots to keep all close and sure against the violence of the Water, in case it
be a rapid Stream. It were not amiss, if you drove a strong Pole with an
Iron-Point through the uppermost Faggot, and so through all that are directly
under it, into the Ground, the better to support your Covert.

When every thing is thus fitted, do nothing for about a Fortnight, that the
Fish that pass too and fro may have time to acquaint themselves therewith; when
they find such Holes to receive them, with the benefit of the Retreat, they
will much resort thereunto, especially the larger Ones.

When you intend to try what store there is, do thus: Get your Tramel-Net well
Leaded at Bottom, and Corked at Top, into some Boat, together with an
Instrument, being a long light Pole with an Iron-Crook, strongly fixed at the
great End; and also be provided with Beaters, which are light long Poles, with
Flat pieces of Wood nailed on the top of them, to make a noise on the Top of
the Water, as also to thrust into the Bottom, thereby to drive in, and move on
the Fish. The Figures of the Poles are as follows.

Then beat up and down both above and below your Warren, yet drawing still
nearer toward it, thereby to force the Fish to retire thither; then Draw about
fifteen foot from your (...) your Stick may stand upright on the three Forks.
Also prepare a Dozen or Rods, or Sticks, about five or six foot long, cleft at
the small End, marked I, in which you may place some skinned Frogs, the Guts of
Chicken, or the like. When the Sticks, are all Baited, go out, and where you
find any likely Hole lay your Stick on the Ground, with the Baited End just at
the Hole in the Water, and there leave it; and so after this manner lay the
rest in the most likely places, Sticks, and when you find any fixed to the
Baits, gently move your Baited End toward the middle of the Water, and doubt
not but that the Cray-fish will keep their hold, and so put your Net just under
the Bait; then softly lift up the Bait, and as soon as the Cray fish the Air
they let go their hold, and fall into the Net.

It is most certain that about Five and twenty have been thus taken out of one
Hole, all hanging Bait; Consider then what may be done in a well stored River,
with about a Dozen Rods together. It is an excellent Diversion, seeing that two
or three Friends may discourse Walking, and yet mind the work in hand.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Directions to take Pikes as they lie Sleeping, and Sunning themselves in fair
clear Weather, the one with a Net, and the other with a Runing-Knot of
Horse-hair.
I Suppose most covet the Pike, as being an excellent Fish; They are often
found Sleeping in fair Open Weather, from March until August, on the Top of the
Water, and near the Land; they are thus taken. You must be provided with a long
Pole, or Rod, that is light and strait, on the smaller End thereof fasten a
Runing-Loop made of well twisted Horse-hair, and Silk, of a large compass,
which gently draw on him, Inches over his Gills, then hoist him up; if it be a
small one draw not the Collar so far on, lest he slip through: Make no Noise in
Walking by the Bank-side, but go gently without speaking, and in case you find
one in such a posture as that you cannot conveniently draw your Loop on him, you
may gently touch his Tail with the Rod, and he will turn himself as you would
have him.

You may also take them by a Net, which is treated of in the latter End of the
Ninth Chapter, touching the Landing of Carps, and other great Fish, to which I
refer you as to the Description thereof; and I shall here teach you how to use
it in taking Pikes, as aforesaid. When you perceive any one so Sleeping, put
your Net into the Water as gently as possibly you can, and guide it just under
the Pike, and so lift it up very softly until you are ready to touch him; then
give him a Lift with all the dexterity you can, and you will seldom fail taking
them.

CHAP. XXIX.
A Collection of several Artificial Baits, recommended by Authors of great
Esteem, that have been curious in Studying the Natures of Fish, and the Art of
Fishing.
I Shall in this Chapter give you an Account of such Baits, Paists, and
compounded Attractions, as I have met with from diverse Professors of this Art;
not that I will much recommend them, lest they should prove like those
Medicines for Agues, which may be a Cure to some, and fail in others.

Take Coculus-Indy, and Assefitidae, beaten and mixed, with a like quantity of
Honey, and dissolve it in the Oil of Polypody, and keep it in a close Glass,
and if when you Angle you anoint your Bait, whether Natural, or Artificial, it
will draw the Fish to it in great abundance.

Take ripe Cheries, and Stone them; then beat the Pulp thereof with Crumbs of
White-Bread into a Paist, and if you cast Pellets of it into the Water, it will
entice the Fish to the place.

Take some Blood, some of the Fat and some of the Dung that is in the small
Guts of a Sheep; some Thine, Pennyroyal, Organ, Savory, Marjoram, Garlic, the
Lees of strong Sweet Wine, of each a like quantity; mix and chop them small and
well together, then make them into small Pellets. These Pellets being cast into
the Water will be sure to draw Fish to them, if there be any stiring; and then
with your Nets you may secure them.

If you take the Blood of a Goat and the Lees of sweet smelling Wine, and
therewith make a Paist with Barly-Flowers, it will also attract Fish.

If you anoint any Lines or Nets whith Salt, it will cause the Fish to avoid
them.

Take of strong stinking Sturgeon, and of the yellow Butter-Flyes each an
Ounce, of Anniseeds, Hempseed, and Cheese, of each Four Drams, of Hogs-Blood,
and Galbanum, of each the like quantity, and of the Juice of Parsnipe Two
Drams; mix all these together with a little Red Wine, and make them up into
Pellets, drying them in the Shade, and this is said to be a very bewtiching
Bait.

Take some of the Worms called Glowworms, and distill them in a Glass-Vessel,
or Vial, with Four Ounces of Quick Silver, stoping the Vial very close, that
nothing may get in or out; then put it into your Nets, when you Fish, and it
will attract them.

Take Nettles, and Five-leaved Grass, chop them small; then mix some Juice of
House-leek with it, and rub your Hands therewith throwing the rest into the
Water, and if you then hold your Hands in the Water, the Fish will not forbear
to come to them, and so you may take them.

Take Heartworth, and Lime, mingle them together, and throw it into any
standing Water, it

It was the saying of a Learned Man, that Baits should have four qualities;
First, That Baits should be strong-smelling to draw them to you though at a
great distance, such as Oil of Anniseeds, Juice of Wild Parsnips, or the like;
Secondly, That Baits must be well Tasted, to invite the Pallet to eat them,
such as Hogs-Blood, Chee^e, made of Goats-Milk, White Bread, yellow
Butter-Flyes, etc. Thirdly, It must have an operating quality on the Head, such
as the Lees of Wine, Strong-Water, etc. And Fourthly, That Baits should have a
fumiferous quality, such as is in Marigolds, which being eaten by them, will in
a short time Stupify them. But for this business there is noting so exquisite
as Coculus-Indicus.

The Composition that Cardan has highly Coculus-Indicus, the sixth part of an
Ounce of Coleworts, and as much Strong-Water, an Ounce of Cheese, and Three
Ounces of Wheaten Flower; beat all these together into a Paist, and so use it.

Take Penni-Royal, Summer-Savory, wild and sweet Marjoram, of each Three
Ounces; of Frankincense and Mirrh, of each an Ounce, of dried Barley steeped in
good Wine, half a Pound Hogs-Liver roasted, Goats Fat, and Garlic, of each a
Pound, mince each by it self; then make it into a Lump, and after into small
Pellets, and if you throw these Pellets into any place they will attract the
Fish to them, and so take them with your Nets.

Take Mutton Suet, Garlic, Wild and Sweet Marjoram dried, Thyme of each a like
quantity, stamp them together with Crumbs of White-Bread and Wine, and give
thereof for a Bait; or you Paist of Wine, Lime, Old Cheese, and Rams Dung,
which will exceedingly Intoxicate all manner of Fish.

If you take of that Medicinal Shell, called by Drugsters, Vnguis Odoratus,
Cummin, Old Cheese, Wheat Flour, of each a like quantity; beat them well
together with Wine, and make it up into Pellets as big as Pease; then cast them
into the Water, and such Fish as eat thereof may be taken up with ones Hands.

If you make a Composition of Aristolechia-Rotunda, Hogs Fat, and Lime, it will
greatly attract Fish, which having tasted, will soon cause them to turn up
their Bellies.

I might have inserted diverse other Receipts; but these shall suffice, being
enough for the purpose*

CHAP. XXX.
Directions for preserving Fish both in Ponds and Rivers from devouring
Creatures, such as Otters, Water-Rats, Herns, Coots, More-Hens Sea-Pies, etc.
BUt whilst we are endeavoring to teach you the Art of Killing Fish, I hold it
not amiss to give you some Directions how to preserve them from the destruction
of such Creatures as use to devour them.

Otters, and Water-Rats are great destroiers of Fish, especially in Ponds and
Fresh Rivers; the best way to kill them is by Hunting them with Water-Dogs, and
Otter-Hounds; you may also set dead Falls for your Rats in Holes which they
frequent, and for your Otters you may poison them in this manner. Lay near his
Retreat (which is easily found out) a Bait of an Eel, prepared which Arsenik,
in this manner; Slit the back of the Eel above the Navel, and dexterously put
into the Slit Three or Four Crumbs of Arsenick; then place the Eel from the
Navel upwards out of the Water, the rest to be under the Water, having first
sowed up the Slit. Now it is the property of the Otter to eat to the Navel, and
seldom further; and you may be sure it will destroy him. You may also destroy
the Otter with a Wheel, which is so ordinary and well known, that the naming it
is sufficient. Yet I hold that the Wheel made with a double Tunnel is better
than the single one.

The Herns, Sea-Pies, Cootes, Mews, More-hens; and King-Fishers, are great
destroyers of Fish, especially the young Fry; you must therefore be provided
with Hooks and Lines baited proper for them, also with Lime-Twigs, Springes,
and with a Gun, for all which you will find sufficient Directions in the
Treatise of Fowling.

CHAP. XXXI.
Directions for making of Ponds, and storing them, etc.
NOw concerning Fish Ponds, and the making them, these Directions are necessary
to be observed. Those Grounds are best which are full of Springs, and apt to be
Morish, for the one will breed them well, and the other will preserve them from
stealing. You are likewise to consider the Situation of the Pond, and the
Nature of the Currents that fall into it; likewise that it be refresh't with a
little Rill, or with the

The TABLE of the Contents of the several Things treated of in the respective
Chapters in this Treatise of Fishing.
Chap. I.
Introduction 177
Chap. II.
Treats of Directions touching the choice of a Rod, ib.
Chap. III.
Treats of Lines, with Instructions for the making, coloring and preparing
them 178
Chap. IV.
Instructions relating to Corks, Floats, etc. 179
Chap. V.
Treats of the choosing, making and fixing of Hooks, and Plumets, and for
sounding the Depths of Waters. ib.
Chap. VI.
Cautions to be observed in Angling, as to the Season of the Weather, the time
of the Day and Year, etc. 180
Chap. VII.
Concerning the Natures of Fish, in what Waters and Soyls they delight. 181
Chap. VIII.
Concerning Baits Natural and Living, Artificial and Dead, with the making and
preparing them ib.
Chap. IX.
Some General Observations, Directions and Cautions to be observed in Angling
183
Chap. X.
Treats of the Natures, Qualities, etc. of several sorts of Fish, with
Directions to take them ib. The Gudgeon ib. The Roch ib. The Dace 184 The Chub
ib. The Trout ib. The Eel 185 Bobbing for Eels ib. Snigling for Eels ib. The
Flounder ib. The Char ib. The Guiniard 186 The Graling and Umbe ib. The
Stickleback ib. The Minnow ib. The Barbel ib. The Bream ib. The Tench 187 The
Perch ib. The Bleak 188 The Pope or Ruff ib. The Pike ib. Trowling for Pikes
188 Snapping for Pikes 189 The Salmon ib. The Millers Thumb, or Bull Head ib.
The Carp ib.
Chap. XI.
Directions for taking Fish by laying Hooks and Lines in the Water by Day or
Night 191
Chap. XII.
Of Night-Angling and Ground-Angling 193
Chap. XIII.
Directions for taking and preserving Worms useful in Angling. ib.
Chap. XIV.
How to take Eels with a Spear, or Darting Hod much used in Flanders and
Holland 194
Chap. XV.
How to take Frogs in a Dark Night, by Torch-light, useful for Baits. ib.
Chap. XVI.
A pleasant way to take Pikes, called Huxing th^^ Pike ib.
Chap. XVII.
Observations concerning Nets, very useful in Fishing. ib.
Chap. XVIII.
Directions for pitching a Net called the Raffle, both by Day and Night 195
Chap. XIX.
Directions for pitching a Net called the Wolf, together with its use and Form
196
Chap. XX.
Directions for pitching a Net called a Cinque-port, and its use ib.
Chap. XXI.
Inventions to draw or force Fish into such Nets as you set. 197
Chap. XXII.
A Device to take store of Fish at a Draught, and that in Difficult places by
reason of Rocks, Roots, Stumps, Holes and the like ib.
Chap. XXIII.
An Excellent way to take all manner of great Fish by Night, with a Net and
Fire 198
Chap. XXIV.
A Device to make a Fishery in any open River which wants Holes, and Weeds to
shelter the Fish from great Heats and Colds in the nature of a Warren. 199
Chap. XXV.
The use of the Sprit Net, with a Device to take great Fish as well as small
with it. 200
Chap. XXVI.
The use of the Casting-Net, with Directions to throw it off 201
Chap. XXVII.
Devices to take Cray-Fish very secure and pleasant ib.
Chap. XXVIII.
Directions to take Pikes as they lie sleeping and suning themselves in fair
clear Weather, the one with a Net, the other with a Running knot of Horse Hair.
202
Chap. XXIX.
A Collection of several Artificial Baits, Recommended be Authors of great
Esteem that have been curious in studying the Natures of Fish, and the Art of
Fishing. ib.
Chap. XXX.
Directions for preserving Fish both in Ponds and Rivers from Devouring
Creatures, such as Otters, Water-Rats, Herns, Coots, Seapies, etc. 223
Chap. XXXI.
Directions for making Ponds, and storing them, etc. ib.
Chap. XXXII.
An Abstract of the Penal Statutes concerning the taking of Fish. 20^
To the Ri^: Honorable Willi: Rerpepo^nt Earl of Kingston upon Hull, Vist*
Newarke upon Trent Baron of Holme-Re^repont, Manvers and Herris etc:

This Plate is Humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.



AGRICULTURE, OR HUSBANDRY.
PART VI.
Treats of the Improvement of GROUNDS, by Enclosures, Draining, and overflowing
by Engines. By good Manuring, Tillage, Feeding, etc. with the benefit arising
by the Trefoyl, Sainfoyn, and Clover Grass, showing their Nature and for what
Ground most fit. Of GARDENING for delight and profit, as the Raising, Sowing
and Setting of Seeds, Plants, and Flowers. Of FRUIT TREES, and how to Raise,
Graft and Inoculate them; with the benefit accrewing thereby; as also by Timber
and other Trees. The several sorts of BEASTS, FOWL, and INSECTS necessary to be
kept, and how to breed and order them; With a CALENDAR, or Monthly Directions
necessary to be known by the Husbandman.
CHAP. I.
The INTRODVCTION.
AGRICVLTVRE was of so as high an Esteem, and held so Honorable in Former
Ages, that the Philosophers; nay, Kings and Pinces, were exceedingly delighted,
not Rural or Country Habitation, but did also Exercise themselves in this Noble
Art. Giving Rules and Precepts (which by their Writings they left to Posterity
to their Immortal Fame. And the Romans had so high an Esteem for Agriculture,
that they gave encouragement to the Industrious Husbandman, and punished the
negligent; And when they gave names to their Tribes called the chiefest of the
States the Rustic Tribes, and the meaner in degree the Vrbane.

As to its Antiquity no Art stands in competition with it; for all know that
the Country Life was the most Ancient; for in the Infancy of the World, Men
inhabited in Tents, Woods, and such like places, instead of Houses, and lived
on the Fruits of the Earth by their Labor.

Plato says, That a Country Life is the Mistress, and as it were the Pattern
of Diligence, Justice, and Frugality, and that he could find nothing more
pleasant and profitable, than a Country Life, where they live free from Pride,
Malice, Covetousness and Ambition. And Cicero discoursing of the Utility of
several Arts, concludes, that nothing is more advantageous and pleasant, nor
more worthy an ingenious Spirit, than Agriculture.

Also Attalus, that rich Asian King, left his Regal Dignity, and betook himself
to a Country Life, and was very intent in Agriculture, forming and planting
several Gardens.

Likewise Dioclesian the Emperor, left his troublesome Empire, and betook
himself to a Country Life, and would not return to his Empire.

Many more Examples might be inserted, but these together with the multitude of
the like Presidents which our Age and Country Affords, may suffice to convince
any one of the Pleasure, Dignity, Peace, Content and Utility of a Country Life.

Agriculture is of a large Latitude comprehending not only all things that are
produced from the Earth, as all sorts of Grains, Fruits, Herbs, Plants, Roots,
Flowers, etc. but also such things Cattle, Fowl, Insects and Fish. Now the
Husbandmans great Skill and industry is to be used for the Improvement of the
Earth to bring forth her better increase, and how to Breed and order Cattle,
Fowl, etc. for the most advantage. Therefore having so spacious a Field to walk
in, I shall with what brevity I can, treat of the most essential things,
especially those that befit the qualification of a Gentleman to be a proficient
in, Rustic part of Plowing and Sowing of Ground, as also the Reaping, Mowing,
making and Housing the Corn and Hay.

This Treatise for Method sake shall be divided into several Chapters, and
first of Grounds and the Improvement thereof.

CHAP. II.
Of Meadow and Pasture-Grounds and how to Improve them by Enclosures, Draining,
and overflowing by Engines. As also by Manuring and feeding them; with
Of ENCLOSVRES.
ENclosing of Land brings a very great benefit to the Husbandman, and that in
several respects.

First, It ascertains every Man's just Proportion of Land. Secondly, It prevents
abundance of Trespasses and Injuries between Neighbor and Neighbor. Thirdly,
It gives great advantage for several sorts of Improvement, as planting the
Hedgrowes with Timber and Fruit Trees, by enriching it with Crops of Corn, if
converted to Arable, or by sowing it with some of the new French-Grasses as
Sain-foyn, Clover or Lucern; by feeding it with Cattle, or Mowing it for Hay,
which Improvements cannot be made in Champain Countries that are destitute of
Enclosures. Fouthly, It is observed that the Crops of Corn are better than in
open Fields; for if the Hedgrowes are tall, they keep the Land warm, and
shelter it from those pinching Winds that destroy much Corn; And the Hedgrows:
being well planted with Trees, give good shelter and shadow for Cattle, both in
Winter and Summer. Fifthly, The Hedgrows are very profitable, affording Firing
and Wood for the making Plough, Carts and the like necessaries; and Sixthly,
the Hedgrows are profitable for Mast for Swine, and for Fruit for Sider and
Perry. All which reason being so demonstrative, there needs no further
Arguments to be laid down or perswasons used for Enclosures. One thing more
give me leave to add, that is, Enclosed Grounds are far more pleasant and
delightful than the open Champain, and afford more diversion.

In the making of Hedgrows these Cautions are to be observed; Not to plant
Trees not naturally agreeing with the Soil they were removed from; that is to
say, not from a rich moist and worm Soil, into a cold, barren and dry; not to
plant them too deep, in the barrenest Earth; To defend them from the external
injuries of Cold, Drought, or prejudice of Cattle, which must be by fencing or
enclosing them in by an artificial dry Hedge on both sides.

For Hedges the best are Quickset of Whitethorn; and to set them on the flat is
far better than on the side, if a dry Bank; as has experimentally been found:
Three Rows are sufficient for a good thick Hedge; the richer the Soil is, the
better will the Quick grow, and the sooner come to perfection. You must keep
them free from Weeds which may be easily done with a Hoe; if the Quick be set
exactly in Ranges, and about Nine Inches asunder will be thick enough. The
Nursery Quick does far surpass that which is drawn up out of Woods or Hedgrows,
therefore in the Season when the Haws are ripe, let a sufficient quantity be
gathered, and sown in a Bed well prepared in some convenient place in your
Nursery, or Garden; after a Years growth they must be set, and if you keep them
longer they should be transplanted into Beds, as being sown too thick.

For Marsh or Watery Meadows Quick-set Hedges are not so customary, yet they
will grow well on the Banks, and are very serviceable and commodious to Cattle;
the most usual Fences are Willows, Popler and Osiers, being Aquaticks, and are
very quick growers, and by consequence greatly profitable; for it is observed
that a Willow and an Oak being set at one time, the Willow will buy a Horse,
before the Oak will buy a Saddle.

A Popler is also a quick grower, and affords a better Wood than a Willow.
The Osiers are cut every Year, and are of great use for diverse things about a
Country House, as for Baskets, Hurdles, etc. These, as also the Popler and the
Willow, are cut from the Trees sharpened at the points, and so thrust deep into
the Ground near the sides of Ditches, to the end they may have the benefit of
the moistness of the Water to nourish them. Let the Sets be busht about to keep
them from the injury of Cattle for Three or Four Years, and keep them clear
from Suckers that will spring out in the Bodies, which hinder their heading.

The best way to set them is in Rows, and at about Five Foot asunder; but the
Osiers are to be hrust in the Bancks close to the Water side, and at about 9
Inches distance.

Some are of Opinion, that Enclosures do occasion Mildews and Blastings; but
that is a vulgar Error. It Is true, Wheat is subject to it, both in Champain and
other Countries, as well as in Enclosures, in Moist Years, and on Rich Grounds.

Of Meadow and Pasture Grounds.
MEadow, and Pasture Grounds, are of two kinds, viz. Wet, and Dry: The Wet are
properly called Marsh Grounds, being those that are subject to Overflowings, as
well Naturally, as Artificially, by the help of Engines. The Dry Meadows are
such as are Vplands, and by Enclosures are subject to Improvements by
propagating of new Grasses, or Hays; as the Clover, Trefoyl, Sainfoyn, etc. of
which in order.

Of Marsh, or Wet Meadow Grounds.
WET Meadows may be considered under three distinct Heads; First, Such as lie
near the Banks of Rivers on a Flat, and have the benefit of overflowing by
Land-floods: Secondly, Rivulets, and may be oversflown by stopping the Current,
and turning it upon them: And Thirdly, Such Grounds that lie above the Surface
of the Water, and are overflown by the help of Engines to raise up the Water,
and cast it upon them. All which sorts of Ground are very improveable by
Overflowing, especially by the first, as leaving a more Fatning Substance
behind, so that the charge and trouble of Dunging such Grounds Engines, the
Manuring is very profitable: for upon such the Water is made use of chiefly in
a Dry Season, yet were they Overflown about a Month or five Weeks before Mowing
time, the Advantage would be sufficiently found by the great Burden of Grass,
especially if it prove a Dry Season: Also to Overflow them after Hay-Harvest,
will produce a Second Crop, or make After-Pasture, recompencing the labor in a
Tenfold manner. But by the way of Caution, let not the Water lie on the
Grounds, if possible, above Forty eight Hours; for if it lies too long it
Chills the Ground, and does far more hurt than good. Therefore your Grounds
must so be ordered by Rillings, to carry off the Water into Ditches, and those
Ditches to convey it into Rivers; and for the better performing the same, the
Bills and Ditches must always

There are several sorts of Engines to be used for the Overflowing of Grounds,
as the Persian-Wheel, so called, as being there first used, and is now very
common in Italy, Spain, and France, and draws up great quantities of Water.
This Engine is to be placed near the Banks of Rivers.

But although this Invention, as indeed the Windmill Engine, and some others,
are of good use; yet of late Years there are other of far more worth and
excellency for this purpose, Invented by that Ingenious Gentleman, Sir Samuel
Moreland; and which are exposed to Sale by his Substitutes, especially by one
now dwelling in Southampton Buildings, London, where you may make choice of
such as are most fit for your purpose.

Rules to be observed in the Overflowing of Grounds.
THe Water being raised to the designed height, let the main Carriage be cut,
allowing it a convenient Descent, to give the Water a fair Current all along:
Also let the Mouth of the Main Carriage be of breadth rather than depth,
sufficient to receive the whole Stream desired, and when you use but a part of
the Water, let the Main Carriage grow Narrow by degrees, unto the end the Water
may press into the lesser Carriages that comes from the Main.

At convenient Distances, and where the Ground rises, small Tapering Carriages
should be cut proportionable to the distance and quantity of Water, or Land;
for although it seems to waste Land by cutting so much Turf, yet it proves
otherwise, for the more nimble the Water runs over the Grass it is the better,
which is occasioned by making many Carriages, and those very shallow.

The Drains must be so made as to carry off the Water the Carriage brings on;
for as the lesser Carriages convey the Water to every part of the Land, so must
the lesser Drains be made amongst the Carriages in the lowest places, to convey
away the Water, which must widen as they run, and the Carriages be lessened,
for if the Water be not well drained off, it proves very prejudicial to the
Grass; for in the Winter it kills it, and in the Spring, or Summer, it
obstructs its growth, and breeds Rushes and Weeds.

Of Dry Meadows, or Pastures, and the Improvements to be made thereon.
MAny good Meadows are spoiled by being pestered with Ant-Hills, Shrubs, Fern,
Broom, or Goss, insomuch that good part thereby is lost, and cannot be Mowed,
and that which remains is not so beneficial as if Mown, or Fed together. For
the clearing the Ground of such Anoyances, Mr. Platt has invented an Ingenious
Instrument, which something resembles a three Tined Dung-Fork, but much larger
and stronger, the Stale thereof being like a large and strong Leaver; which
Instrument set about half a foot distance from the Root of the Shrub, then with
an Hedging Beetle drive it in a good depth, and so force it up by the Roots.

For destroying Ant-Hills, being provided with a sharp Paring-Shovel, divide
the Turf on the Top into four parts or quarters, laying them open several ways;
then take out the Core, which spread on the Land, and lay the Turf again neatly
in its place, but a little hollowing or sinking in, that is, lower than the
Surface of the Earth, so that at the beginning of the Winter the Water standing
therein will destroy the Remainder of the Ants, and by the Spring settle the
Turf.

In Cold, Moist, Claiy, Spewy, Mossy, or Rushy Ground, where the Pasture, or
Hay is sour and short, about July, or August, cause the Turf to be pared off
and burnt, as hereafter shall be directed, and Plow it up; and in the Spring
let it be Sown with Hay-Dust, or with Corn and Hay-Seed mixed together, which
will cause a great fertility, and alter the Nature of the Ground.

The best Season for Dunging of Meadows is in December, January, and February;
for in these Pluvial Months the Fatness of the Soil will be washed to the Roots
of the Grass, before the Sun dries it away; and for the breaking the Clods use
a large Wad of Bushes, to draw over the Ground with a Horse in the nature of an
Harrow; and what Stones are in the Dung cause to be gathered off the Ground,
for they do not only hinder the growing of the Grass, but endanger Scyth in the
Mowing it.

For such Grounds that are Sandy, Hot, and Dry, the best Manuring is Marl,
Chalk, Lime, or the like Cold Soyls: and for Cold, Rushy, Spewy, and Mosly
Lands, use Ashes of Wood, Turf, or Sea-Coal; also Pigeons Dung, and all Hot and
Sandy Soyls; and betwixt these two Extremes, viz. Hot and Cold, the common Dung
made by Horses and Cattle may be bestowed upon the

Of the several kinds of Grass, and Hay. CLOVER GRASS.
THere are several sorts of Clover, but the best is that which is brought from
Flanders, and bears the great Red Hony-Suckle, having a small Seed about the
bigness of Mustard Seed, and the best is of the greenest yellow Color.

The best way to Sow this Seed, is to mix it with Ashes, Sand, fine Dust, or
the like, that will help to fill the Hand, the Seed being so small, and
therefore not so well to be Sowed of an exact thickness in all places of it
self; yet good Seedsmen will do it well alone, and then it is best: Also
observe in Sowing it, to choose good Calm Weather.

The Season to Sow it is in the beginning of April, or latter end of March, if
it be likely to prove a Dry Season; and you must allow to an Acre about a
Gallon, or Nine or Ten Pound; some say less, but you had better over than under
Seed it. The Land must be brought to a good Tillage, then Sow first your Corn,
causing the Ground to be well Harrowed, and then the Clover-Seed, Harrowing it
with a Bush to cover it over with Earth; for if you should do it with Harrows,
the Corn would be raised up, and so spoil the Crop. Be sure to be provided with
good New Seed, otherwise your Crop will be but indifferent, and there is great
Deceit used in it by many Seedsmen.

This Grass is said to be so profitable, that it will produce three or four
Crops in a Year, that is, three to Mow, and one to Feed; the first Crop may be
cut in Mid May, which should be Cut green, and before the Stalk begins to grow
too big, as also too Dry and Wither, unless it be kept for Seed, and then it
must be quite Ripe, otherwise the Seed will be hard to Thresh out. Now for your
Directions to know when it is Ripe, the Stalks will Dye, and turn of an
yellowish Color; but if you intend any for Seed, the best is the second Crop,
about July: when the Seed is Threshed out, the Straw is good for little except
the Fire.

Some are of Opinion, that the Clover will grow on any Barren Ground; but by
Experimental Knowledge it is found otherwise, and that the Richer and Better
the Ground is, the better will be the Clover; therefore Sow it not upon Heathy
Barren Ground.

As to the Profit made of Clover Grass, an Acre of Ground (after the First
Year, if it be well Husbanded, and good kindly thick Clover) may be worth
Fifteen, or Twenty Pounds per Annum; for the two next Years, and as it
degenerates and becomes weaker, is less Worth, nor will it last above five
Years. An Acre (if Fed) will keep four Cows all the Year at Pasturage, which
is a great Advantage. After the Strength of the Clover is gone, which will be
after four or five Years, the Ground will be very fit and good for Corn for
two or three Years, and then it may be applied for Clover again. It is not to
let Cattle that are not used to this Food, to eat too liberal of it at first,
for it being so sweet and luscious will Surfeit them; so that the best way is
to Cut it, and give it them in Racks, as they do in Flanders. It is also good
Food for Hogs, and will make them Fat.

An Acre of Clover may produce three or four Bushels of Seed, and about three
Pecks is a good Days Work to Thresh.

SAIN-FOIN.
THe Soyls proper for this Grass are Barren, Dry, Stony Ground, hardly fit for
Corn, or Grass; but all Clays, and other Cold, Wet Grounds, bear it not. There
is such great Improvement made by this Seed, that Grounds not vvorth 2 s. an
Acre, may be made worth 30 or 40 s.

The Seasons for Sowing it are in Autumn, from the beginning of August until
the end of September; and in Spring, from the beginning of February until the
end of March: And the Earliear it is Sown in either Season, the better it is.
It Is a large and light Seed, and there must be Sowed four Bushels to an Acre.

In Autumn the Tillage must be as if for Wheat fine Plowed, and also as well
Harrowed; and then Sow it, and Harrow it again to cover the Seed. In Autumn it
must be always Sowed alone without Grain; but in Spring with Oats, or Barley,
Sowing the Corn but thin. In Spring the Husbandry must be the same in all
respects as for Summer Corn, and Sown as before directed.

New Broken Ground cannot be Sown with it; but if the Ground be presently
turned up after the Crop is off, and well Harrowed, it may be fit to Sow the
Spring following.

The Ground sown with this Seed, must be well fenced in, and secured from
Cattle the first Year; the second Year it may be Mowen, and fed about
Alhallontide, but when the Weather is wet, the Cattle should be taken out for
fear of Spoiling the Roots until they be strong, which Cattle too much trample
it, until the third Year. But always after (as long as it lasts which may be
thirty Years) it may be either Mown or Fed at pleasure, without any Emendation
of Dung. But it is best to be sometimes Mown, and sometimes Fed; when it is
designed to be Mown, it must be laid in about Our Lady Day; and Mow in the
middle of May, when it begins to Flower: It is made in all respects as other
Hay, and is very good for all Cattle (except Sheep) as being too gross for
them, breeding store of Milk; and in the Winter Season it is good for Sheep.

TREFOIL, or NONSVCH.
THis Grass is of that Nature to grow upon Tillage, yet will produce good and
profitable Crops of Grass, and all Land naturally kind for Corn, and unkind for
Grass, is kind for Trefoil.

The Pasture is very good for Cattle, especially for Cows, causing great
Increase of Milk; and the Hay is as Nourishing and Fatning, provided it be
Mowed and made in good Season, whilst it is full of Yellow Blossoms, and not
over-dryed, Clover-grass does, being much siner and greener. It is also
exceeding good for Ews and Lambs, it being a sound feeding, and free from
Rotteness; nor is it subject to Surfeit the Cattle as the Clover; and therefore
it is very good for preventing this mischief, to mix in the Sowing one Moity of
this Seed with another of Clover, which does thrive very well together, and
affords both good Hay, Pasturage.

The Trefoil will endure much longer if it stand not for Seed, for that is
Destructive to the Root, and the Sap is gone that should nourish it; because it
must be cut late, and in the Heat of Summer, always provided the Ground be Sown
with clean Seed, separated from the Husk wherein it grows, otherwise your
Expectation will fail in every point; for if it be not, it is impossible to
cleanse it from the course and four Grass which mixes with it; and is so
destructive to the Trefoil, that it will not last half so long; for as the
course Grass increases every Year, so the other decreaseth. The next Year
after the Corn, it may be either Fed or Mown.

The best Season for Sowing this Seed, either with Oats or Barley, is from Mid-
March to the end of April; and it must be Sown after the Corn, as before
directed for the other Seeds; and afterward finely Harrowed, and Rolled. About
a dozen pound of Seed is sufficient for an Acre.

Whereas Land that is brought out of Heart by frequent Tillage, produces
Couch-Grass, Twitch and the like Weeds, that are great Enemies to the Corn, and
impoverisheth the Land; this Trefoil does enrich the Ground, and prepares it
for Corn, destroying the Couch-Grass, and the like Weeds if it be kept Mowed,
and Plowed again before the Trefoil be decayed, and other Grass grow up in the
Room; and will likewise bear far better Corn than before: And when it is again
worn out, will bear good Trefoil as before.

La LVCERNE.
FOr Sowing this Seed, observe the same Method in ordering the Ground as for
the other Seeds. It must be sown about the Middle of April, and some Oats may
be sown with it, but not so great a proportion as with other Seeds. The Land
must be well dressed, and at least three times fallowed. It may be Mown twice
every Year, and Fed all the Winter; The Hay if well made and ordered, is very
good for all kind of Cattle; especially for Horses; and is good to fat store
Cattle. It must be give with Caution at the first, as directed for the Clover,
for fear of Surfeiting, so that it is best to be mixed with Straw, or Hay. An
Acre will serve three Horses all the Year at Pasturage; and will soon raise
them to Flesh, and make them Fat.

If it be Mown but once a Year, it will hold ten or twelve Years, but if twice
a Year not so long.

There are several sorts of other Grasses, but these being the chief I shall
omit the rest, only to say that Hop Clover, Trefoil, or Three Leaved Grass are
both finer and sweeter than the great Clover-Grass, and will grow in any
Ground. They may be Sown with Corn as before directed, or without, or being
Sprinkled in Meadows will much mend the Hay, both in Burden and Goodness.

CHAP. III.
Of Arable Land, how to order it with the several Grains usually Sown.
THe great and chiefest knowledge of the Husbandman, consists in the
Understanding the true Nature of the Ground, for every sort of Land almost
requires a different sort of Husbandry; some Grounds yielding plenty of that
which on another will not grow. The stiff and strong Ground receives the
greatest Improvement from the Plough, and the light, warm and Mellow Land is
most fit for Plantations and Gardenings; Corn, but the stiff is not so good for
Plantations. Also Mossie, and such like Grounds are much improved by Ploughing.

All stiff, Clayey, moist and cold Grounds are generally thrice Ploughed for
Wheat, and four times for Barley; for the several Ploughings are very
Advantageous to the Ground in diverse respects, as killing the Coutch, Twitch
and the like Weeds that the Ground is subject unto; It also makes it light,
Mellow and Finer for the Seed; and by giving it a Fallowing in the Summer, is
as good as a sorry Dunging to it.

Land that has layn long for Pasture, will be Moss and Weeds, so that
Ploughing of such Land for two or three Crops, will be very Advantageous, not
only in the Crops, but also to the Ground, especially if when it is laid down
it is Soiled, or Sown with some of the aforesaid French Grasses.

There is much wast Ground in diverse parts of this Kingdom, as Heaths, Moors,
and Commons subject to Broom, Rushes, Fern, Heath and the like, which if
enclosed and good Husbandry England, on Ground that would scarce bear Grass, to
produce good Crops of Corn; and the way to effect this is to Burn, or Denshire
them as hereafter shall be Treated of; which is so exceeding Advantageous, that
two or three Years Crops have been worth the Inheritance of the Land; and after
two or three Crops of Corn being lain down for Pasture, and Sown with some of
the aforesaid French Grasses, do become good Pasture Grounds, especially to
what they were before.

The severally sorts of Grain usual Sown in England.
THe Husbandmans great care is to understand the Nature and Temper of his Land,
and Grain is best agreeable thereunto, otherwise he can expect but indifferent
Crops.

There is no Grain so useful, and Universal as Wheat, of which there are
several sorts, as the Poland Wheat both White and Red, Great and Small, the
Straw Wheat, Rivet Wheat, both White and Red; The Turkey Wheat, the Gray Wheat,
the Flaxen Wheat, which in some places is supposed to be called Lammas Wheat,
Chiltern-Ograve Wheat, Sarasins Wheat, with other Names which it is probably may
be the same sorts: Of these sorts some prove good for cold and stiff Land; and
others for that which is Hot and Dry. The Great Pland and the Ograve delights
in stiff Ground, the Flaxen and Lammas on indifferent Lands; and the Sarasins
on any. The Bearded Wheat is not Subject to Mildews. The best Season to Sow
Wheat is about Michaelmas, and rather when the Weather is wet than dry.

RYE is a Grain used next to Wheat for Bread, and both mixed together in the
Sowing (which is called Measeline) makes an excellent sort of fine moist and
Palatable Bread. This Grain may be Sown something later than Wheat, if of it
self, and will Grow on a lighter and poorer Land; It requires a dry Seed time,
it is a great bearer, and yields an advantageous Crop.

BARLEY is a profitable Grain, but the Ground must be good and brought to a
fine Tilt; the best Season is about the latter end of March, or beginning of
April; and to be Sown when the Weather is dry, is very convenient.

OATS is a Grain much used in the Northern Parts of this Kingdom for their
Bread, as also for their Malt, making good Beer. This Grain grows almost on
any Ground, nor is there that fineness of Tillage required as for Barley, for
this may be Sown upon a Lay. The Season is in February and March. There are
two sorts, the White or Polish Oat, which is a fine weighty Grain, and the
Black Oat much Sown in Fenny Grounds, which sort of Corn is light, lank, long
tayled, and not so good as the White.

PEASE are of great use and very profitable; there are several sorts, as the
Green, the Gray, or Hog-pease, the large Rouncifals, and the White which are of
several sorts, as the Hotspur, Reading, Haisting, and Sandwich: And for the
Sowing them, several Seasons are to be observed, that is, sooner or later as
you would have your Crop to be Ripe; for the Hotspur about Christmas is a good
time, but if the Season prove frosty somewhat later. Pease do much Mellow Land,
making it fit for a Crop of Winter Corn; and it must be Sown in a good Ground,
your Stony, Rushy Land being unfit for it.

BEANS delight in a strong deep Land, and are of chief use for fatting Hogs,
and being ground and mixed with Oats, are a good strengthening Food for Horses.

TARES, or Fetches are not of such great use, but Pigeons much delight in them.
It is good Fodder for Horses if cut green. It requires indifferent good deep
Ground, the Season is about February or March to Sow them.

LENTILLS, or TILLS are very good Fodder, they grow on any Ground, yet afford a
great Increase.

LVPINS are a pulse of a very great profit, growing on any Sandy, Gravelly or
Rushy Ground, being sodden in Water are good Food for Swine and Oxen.

CERES

To the Worshipful Thomas Fawkes of Farnley in the West riding of Yorkshire
Esquire

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome.

good Crop, and curiously dried it like unto Hops, to a perfect and just gage
of Drought.

Of RAPE, or COLE-SEED.
THis Seed is very profitable to be Sowed upon Marsh, or Fenny-Land, or indeed
upon any Moist Ground, that is of a fat and rich Soil. The best Seed is the
biggest, and it must be dry and of a clear Color, like the best Onion-Seed.

The Season for Sowing it is about Midsummer, and the Land must be well Plowed,
laid Fine, and Even; about a Gallon will Sow an Acre, and for the Sowing it
Even, it should be mixed with fine Dust, or Ashes, as before directed for the
Clover.

The principal use of this Seed is for making Oil, and a good Crop is about
five Quarters, and commonly worth 4 s. a Bushel. When it looks Wheat, only it
is not to be bound up, but must lie in handfuls upon the Ground until it be
dry, which will be about a Fortnight, and when it is dry it must be gathered up
on Sheets, or large Sail-Cloths, and so carried into the Barn to Thresh, for
fear of shedding, to which it is much subject.

Directions for the Preparation of the Seed.
BY Nature every Seed is found to differ from another, and to require a
different Nourishment, insomuch that one sort of Seed will thrive where another
sort will not; and by Experience it is found very advantageous for the
Husbandman to change his Seed, especially for Land that is tired out with
frequent Tillage, into-Land newly broken up; and from dry, barren and hungry
Ground, to that which is fat Cattle that are taken out of barren, short, or
sour Pasture, and put into that which is good and sweet, how they thrive over
those that are not exchanged. The like is observed by Trees that are removed
out of Barren bad Ground, into a good rich Mould.

Seeing then the Husbandmans great care is to Manure and Enrich his Ground. I
shall with what brevity I can give an Account of the several Soyls, or
Composts, for effecting the same.

CHAP. IV.
Of Manuring, Dunging, and Soyling of Lands.
Soyls and Manures taken from the Earth.
LIMING of LAND is very good, much improving Barren Ground; about fifteen or
twenty Quarters of Lime is sufficient for an Acre: Also a mixture of Lime and
Dung is a very good Compost for Land. But where there is not the convenience of
a Kiln, to burn the Chalk into Lime, simple Chalk may be used, which by Frosts
and Rains will be dissolved, and prove a good enrichment to the Ground, and
will also be very good to mix with Dung: That which is called Chalk-Rubbish,
being the Offals of the Lime, is the best for this purpose.

MARL is very good for the enriching of Land, insomuch that it is commended by
all Authors; there are several kinds of it, as some Stony, and some Soft, and
some of diverse Colors, as White, Yellow, Gray, Black, Blew, Russet, and Red.

It is of a Cold Nature, and very much saddens Land; the Goodness and Badness
thereof is not so much known by the Color, as by the purity and
uncompoundedness of it, being smooth like Lead-Oar, without any composition of
Sand, or Gravel.

It is an excellent Improvement to High, Dry, Sandy, Gravelly, or Mixed Lands,
though never so Barren, keeping them in good heart fifteen or twenty Years, and
on some Grounds a longer time; but its strength and virtue will not appear the
first Year, so much as in the succeeding Years, until it begins to wax out of
heart.

Strong Clay Ground is not proper for Marl.

In the Spring lay the Marl on Light, Dry, Sandy, and Gravelly Grounds, as
aforesaid; and in the beginning of Winter on Hard and Binding Grounds, and
spread it abroad, that the Frost may moulder it in pieces. Yet some are of
Opinion, that the Winter Season is the best to lay it on, for any sort of
Ground.

FVLLERS-EARTH is likewise a good Soil, and is to be used after the matter of
Marl.

CLAY is a very good Improvement to Dry, Light, and Sandy Ground, being spread
thereon like Marl, or other Soyls.

By the same Rule that Clay is good for Light and Sandy Ground, SAND is good
for Strong, Cold, and Stiff Land, a sufficient quantity thereof being laid
thereon; but as to the quantity, it is good to try the Nature of the Ground,
and accordingly add a greater or lesser proportion. The best and fertilest Sand
is that which is washed from the Hills, or other Sandy places, by the violence
of Rain.

Sand is also very good to mix with other Compost, and for raising a good
quantity thereof, in the Winter House your Sheep, and other Cattle, but not
altogether, for fear of spoiling one another; and there fodder them, having
Racks placed up and down in the said Houses. Let there be first spread on the
Floor a good thick Coat of Sand, and short Mushy Straw, good for little else,
upon which they will Piss and Dung; and when it is well covered therewith, then
lay on another Coat of Sand and Straw; and this course using will make a
considerable quantity of very good Soil, for the enriching of any sort of
Ground.

The DIRT, or Soil of TOWNS, is a very good Improvement.

Soyls taken from the Sea-Shoar.
THe SANDS of the Seacoast, and Creeks, being of a Saltish nature, is very
good for the Improving of Barren Land, and is much used in the Western parts of
England. The like they do by Soyling their Land with the Sea-Weeds, Sea-Owze,
or Owzy-Mud, which turns to a very great Advantage.

In some places, when the glut of the Season of Fishing is, and that they are
very cheap and plentiful, cast a good quantity upon the Land, which will cause
an exceeding great Fertility, though never so Barren before. And without doubt
there is nothing that proceeds from the Sea, or Rivers, whether Fish, Garbish
of Fish, Shells, Sand, or Mud, but is very profitable to

Of Dungs, and other sorts of Soyls, and Manures.
SHEEPS-DVNG is the best and richest, so that the Folding them on the Land
(which is but a thin sprinkling) causes as great a Fertility as an indifferent
Dunging.

HORSE-DVNG, which is the most common, Stables, and their Soil preserved and
cast up in Dung-hills to Rot with the Litter, is also a very good Manuring to
Land, being of a hot Nature, and therefore excellent for Gardens, as also for
Cold Grounds.

COW-DVNG is of a colder quality than that of Horse or Sheep, and therefore
more fit for hot and sandy Grounds.

SWINES-DVNG is very good, and esteemed better than Cow Dung; and great
quantities Hogs, if well ordered; which is to keep them up in a Yard of an
indifferent largeness, well Paved, with a little Falling one way, to the end
their Piss may fall to one part where the Dung should be Shovelled up to Rot.
Let their Sheads, or Styes, be made along the side of the Pales, at the Upper
part. The Hog-Troughs should be fixed in the Ground, with some part without the
Yard, for the better convenience of giving them Meat therein without coming
into the Yard; and for the making the greater quantity of Dung, cast into the
Yard (besides their other food, as Roots, Offal, Wind-falls of Fruit in the
time of the Year, Coleworts, and Cabbage-Leaves,) great store of Fern, or Mushy
Straw, to make Dung of, which they will soon do by their Trampling, Lying, and
Dunging upon it, insomuch that there may be made yearly of good Soil out of
such a Hog-Yard, about forty or fifty

The Dung of FOWLS, as Pigeons, Hens, Ducks, Geese, and Turkeys, is excellent,
one Load being worth a Dozen of ordinary Dung, so that instead of laying it on
the Land in the ordinary Husband-like way, it should be sown on the Ground.

WOOD-ASHES makes a good Dung, and enricheth Land; so does those of Sea-Coal,
Peat, Turf, Fern, Stubble, Straw, and Moss, in cold Marsh, or Meadow Grounds:
And if Sea-Coal Ashes are mixed with Horse-Dung, they make an excellent Compost
for diverse uses.

SOAP-ASHES are esteemed a very good Soil both for Arable and Pasture Ground;
that is, the Stuff that comes from the Soap-Lees, when the Soap-Boylers have
done with it. The best Season to lay it on the Ground is in the beginning of
Winter, that the Rain may wash it into the Earth.

RAGS are excellent Soil for Land, one Load going as far as a Dozen of ordinary
Dung.

MALT-DVST is a very great enricher of Barren Ground. The way to use it is
thus; After your Corn is Sown and Harrowed in, take the Malt-Dust and Sow it
over the Ground, as you do Corn; about four Quarters is sufficient for an Acre,
and as near as you can let the Dust be Sown in a Wet Season, that the Rain may
wash it into the Earth. This is as good an enrichment to Ground (especially for
one Crop) as an ordinary Dunging. This Malt-Dust is to be bought of Malsters,
or great Brewers, and for about 3 s. the Quarter.

HAIR, HORN-SHAVINGS, Shreds and Pieces of LEATHER, are found to enrich Ground
very much, being thinly strewed thereon.

SOOT is very good, especially that which is made of Wood; It is most
beneficial to Trees, or Plants, that either grow in the Shade, or in Cold and
Moist Grounds.

SALT, if used with moderation, is said to be a good Improver of Barren Ground,
and doubtless it is true; for by Experience it is found, that Corn being
steeped for some time in Brine, does not only cause Fertility, but also
prevents Soot in the Ears, and some say Bliting also; but that I shall not aver.

The ways and means of Improvement of Grounds by Dunging and Soyling, as
aforesaid, is very good and effectual; but in many places very chargeable and
troublesome, by reason that it cannot be obtained but at dear Rates by Carriage,
or otherwise; so that the profit accruing thereby will not answer the Expense
and Trouble. In this case your Art must be used to the Seed designed to be Sown
on such Land, and for that, there are several ways to be used, some of which
are as follows.

Let your Corn be steept in Dung-water for some time, wherein put some
Saltpeter; then lay it to dry on some Floor, and so Sow it. It is also good to
steep the Corn in new Ale, or Wort; but more effectual to steep it in Nitre, or
Sal-Terrae, which is so highly extolled by Glanber, being that fixed Salt
extracted out of any Ashes either of Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals, that are
thoroughly calcined.

SHEEPS, or PIGEONS-DVNG, dissolved in Water, with Salt cast therein, is very
good to steep Corn in: But above all take ten, or twenty Gallons of Train-Oyl,
or such a quantity as you shall have occasion for; put it into a large Vessel,
and cast therein your Corn, that is, such a quantity as the Oil will well
cover, and there let it lie and steep until it be supple, and as it were
glutted therewith; then take it out, drain it, and spread it on a Floor, and
with a Sieve sprinkle it over with slack't Lime; then with your Corn-shovel let
it be turned, that the Lime may encrust the Corns, or Grains, all over, and so
Sow it. This way is recommended for an excellent Improvement, exceeding all the
Oil is fatning, and the Lime does preseve it from Vermin, as also from Smut.

There is another compound Liquor, which is said to surpass the former; that
is, Take a quantity of unslack't Lime, put thereto as much Water as will make
it swim about four Inches above the Water, and unto the Water that is poured
off mix one tenth part of Aquavitae, and in that Liquor steep your Corn about
twenty four Hours; then take it forth and dry it; which done, put it Corn, or
Grain, may be about nine Inches apart, if possible; and it is said, that one
Grain will produce thirty or forty Ears, very large, with a large and tall
Stalk; but this I leave to Trial, not averring it for Truth.

Of BVRNING of LAND.
THe Burning of Land, or indeed any other operation on it by Fire, is a very
great Improvement to Barren and Poor Ground, be it wet, or dry; and this is the
only Improvement the Americans use; for the Burning of any combustible thing on
the Land does much heat the Ground, and wastes that Acid sterile Juice that
hinders its Fertility.

This Art of Burning of Land, commonly callen Denshiring, is not to be
practiced on Ground of a good, rich, and loose Soil, that produces flourishing
Crops; but only upon Barren, Sour, Hide-bound, and Rushy Ground be it either
dry, or wet; hot, or cold.

The usual way to effect the Burning of Land is as follows, you must be
provided with a Breast-Plough to pare off the Turf, which must be turned over
as it is cut, that it may dry the better; and if it prove a Wet Season, the
Turf Wheel-barrows full in an Heap. If the Turf be full of sibrous Roots, or
has a good Sword of Grass upon it, it will burn without any other Addition of
Fuel; if not, the Heaps must be raised on a small Bundle of Goss, Fern, or
Straw to set it on fire; and being consumed to Ashes in a still time (when the
Wind will not Land. Then on those places where the Hillocks were, the Farth
must be pared away, to abate its over Fertility, caused by the Fire made
thereon.

And Note, That the Land must be but shallow, or half Plowed, and not above
half Seeded, and also Sowed late in the Season, to prevent the over-rankness of
the Corn; but for the second Crop observe the usual Husbandry as to your other
Grounds.

CHAP. V.
Of Herbs, Roots, Fruits, Plants, etc. Planted and Propagated in the
Kitchin-Garden; with Instructions how to Sow, Raise, and Order them according
to the several Seasons, as well those for Food, as others for Advantage.
Of HOPS.
HOPS are now grown a National Commodity, although formerly Petitioned in
Parliament by the Londoners, to be Prohibited the Importation or Growth in this
Kingdom, as a Nuisance, or an Offensive Commodity, for that it would spoil their
Drink, and endanger the Peoples Healths, it being an unhealthful Herb,
occasioning the Stone; for before Hops were used in Drink, that Disease was not
known in this Kingdom: However it advances Land to such an Improvement, that
sometimes an Acre is worth Fifty, or Sixty Pounds; but it is an uncertain Crop,
for overmuch Drought, or Wet, spoils it; the like does Mill-dews, which makes
the Price so uncertain.

The Hop delights in the richest Land, or deepest Mould, and Light (if mixed
with Sand) is the better; also black Garden Mould is very good; but a Barren
Moorish Soil is altogether unfit for it.

If it lies near the Water, and yet Dry, it is the better. It also ought to lie
warm, and free from the North and East Winds, as being sheltred by Hills, or
Trees.

If the Land that you design for a Hop-Garden be cold, stiff, four, or barren,
it will be convenient to burn it about the latter end of Summer, and to make
the Ground mellow, light and free from Weeds by sowing it with Turnips, Hemp,
or Beans; And fail not to Till it in the beginning of Winter with the Plough or
Spade, be it in what condition soever.

For the planting the Ground, the best way is to make the Hill where the Plants
are to be set in Squares, by which means the Ground will be better to plough,
and at every place where there is to be a Hill thrust down a small Stick for
your directions, the better to make the Hill; and if the Ground be poor and
stiff, make the Holes good by putting therein good Mould or rotten Dung, which
will sufficiently repay the charge and trouble.

As to the distances of the Hills, if the Ground be deep, moist, and of a rich
Mould, about Eight Foot asunder is convenient; but if of a dry and burning
quality, then not above Six: And let the Ground be what it will, so order it
that there may be room to come between, and that they may receive the influence
of the Sun; for in moist Years the Hops grow large, so that the wider the Hill
the better; and in hot and dry Years they grow thin, so that the nearer they
are the Hops they bear. Let the Hills be made of a middle size, for if they are
big, they require the greater quantity of Poles, and cannot be so conveniently
dressed.

The Season for planting your Hops is about the end of March or beginning of
April, but experienced Planters affirm that the best time is in October, for
then the Hops will settle againt the Spring.

Let the Sets be the largest you can get, with Bads; and before you take the
Sets out of the Ground, let the Holes be ready to receive them, and made as
deep as the Plant or Set, and about a Foot over, and at every corner of the
Hole put a Set, and raise the Earth Two or Three Inches above it; but if you
Plant so late that the Green Sprigs are shot forth, then cover them not quite
for fear of killing them.

If your Hops are Old or Worn out of Heart, through ill Husbandry, then about
the beginning Winter dig them, and take away as much of the Old Barren Ground,
as you conveniently can, and in the Room thereof (after they are dressed) put
good rich Mould, or Rotten Dung, which will exceedingly Nourish and revive the
Roots; and the Winter digging or tilling will destroy the Weeds and Couch
Grass: But if the Hops be strong and in good Heart, then dress them not until
March, or the beginning of April, and in dressing the Hops, these Rules are to
be observed, viz. Pull down your Hills, and undermine them round about to come
to the principal Roots, and shake off the Earth from the Younger Roots, and cut
them away, preserving well the old Sets, and in the First Years cutting uncover
no more than the Tops of the Old Sets, and cut not the Roots before March,
although you pull down the Hills sooner. The Roots, that grow downwards are not
to be cut, but only such that grow outward at the sides of the Sets. The Old
Roots are red,

For the Poling Hops, if the Hills are wide, the more Poles are required, and
if the Ground is hot, dry, and hungry, the Poles, may stand nearer together
than in Rich and Mellow Ground; where they must be also larger, and longer,
otherwise the best profit will be lost; whereas on the contrary if the Land is
Poor the Poles must be small, for if over-poled the Hop will run it self out of
Heart, especially the First Year: And begin Pole until your Hops appear above
Ground, for then you may discern where the bigest Poles are required; and you
may continue Polling until the Plants are about a Yard in height. Poles of
Alder are esteemed the best, as being Straight and tapering, and of a rough
Rind, so that the Hop, will not so easily slip down; But for lasting the Ash is
to be preferred before the Alder. Be sure to fix the Poles deep in the Earth
that the Wind force them not out, and let them lean outward from one another
to prevent Housling as they call it, for thereby they will have the greater
benefit of the Sun, and by consequence bear more and better Hops; and you
should be always provided with spare Poles if in case any should break, for if
the Hops lie on the Earth they will soon Perish.

Your Hops being got Two or Three Foot above Ground, it is time to fix them to
the Poles, by winding them about according to the Course, of the Sun, and by
fastening them thereto; but in doing this be sure not to break the young and
tender Shoots.

In April and May your care is required to be guiding the Shoots to the Poles
as you would have them, which may be done with forked Sticks where they are out
of your reach.

About Midsummer the Hops begin to leave shooting or running at length and then
begin to Branch; at which time those that are not at the Tops of Poles, should
be nipt off at the Top, to cause them to Branch the better.

In May after Rain, you should pare off the Surface of the Earth, with a Spade,
Hoe, or Breast Plough, and with the parings raise up the Hills, burying all
Superfluous Shoots of the Hops, as also the Weeds.

If it prove a dry Summer, it is requisite to Water the Hops, making a Hole in
each Hill, the better to receive the Water, and then raise up the Hills to keep
the Roots cool; once or twice watering is sufficient in the dryest Summer.

About the End of July Hops blow, about the beginning of August they Bell, and
are ripe in the latter End of August, or beginning of September. The Signs of
their being ripe are the changing their Color to brounish, and their fragrant
smell.

The best way for gathering Hops is in a Frame, or Bin, made for that purpose
of Canvass, and short Poles to remove from place to place, and the Pickers to
stand on each side to gather the Hops, and so convey them to drying; but cut no
more Stakes, nor draw no more than can be dispatched in an hour or two, for
fear of Rain; and let them not be over Ripe before you gather them, for fear of
shedding the Seed, which is the strength of the Hop: and gather them as free
from Leaves and Stalks as possible.

About Four Pound of Hops thoroughly ripe will make One Pound when dried; but if
gathered before they are so Ripe, then there will be about Five Pound to make
one. Great care is required in the well drying the Hops, for a little quantity
slack dried will spoil diverse Pounds.

These are several ways, as in Kilns made for that purpose, first invented in
Holland; but that which seems easier, and better, is to dry them on an
ordinary Malt-Kiln on a Hair-cloth, laying them about Five or Six Inches thick,
and when they are almost dry, to turn them up side down with a Scoop made for
that purpose, and so let them lie until they are thoroughly dried, and then
remove them in the Hair-Cloth to the Heap where they are to lie till picked. In
stead of the Hair-Cloth some use a Tin-Floor, or Bed, to lay over the Kiln, to
put the Hops in, which is preferred far before any of he the former ways, as
being more sure, less expensive, and more expeditious.

Before you Bag up the Hops, after they come from the Kiln, let them ly Three
or Four Weeks to cool and toughen, otherwise they will be brittle, and break to
Powder. The better the Bags are trod the better will the Hops keep.

Clear your Hop-Poles from the Hawm, and lay them up in some Barn, or dry Shed,
for use the next Year, for Poles are chargable, especially in many parts of
England.

Of SAFFRON.
THis is the richest Commodity that this Kingdom produces, quantity for
quantity; Diseases, and much used for several occasions. The best Season to
plant, or Set it, is about Midsummer, and the Land must be brought into a very
good and fine tilt, and of a rich Soil; for the better the Land is the better
Crop it will produce. For the Planting the Sets you must make use of a very
broad H^e, and with that draw the Land into Ranges open like Furrows (as if for
Pease) and about Two or Three Inches deep, in which the Sets are Inches
asunder. Let the Ranges be well covered over with Earth and about Four Inches
asunder, very straight, to the End the Ground may be the better Hoed to clear
the Weeds. The Winter following it grows green like Chives, or small Leeks, and
in the beginning of the Sumer it quite dies as to appearance, but it must be
clean H^ed, and then will come up the Flower without the Leaf which in
September appears like the Blue Crocus, in the midst of which Chives of a deep
yellow, which is the Saffron, which is to be gathered from the Flower, and very
early in the Morning otherwise it will return back into the Earth until the
next Morning. The Season lasts about a Month for the gathering it, so that you
must have many Hands to pick it.

The best way to dry it is to make use of a Kiln made of Clay and Sticks in the
fashion of a Bee-Hive, but not so big, and a little Fire made Char-Coal, being
carefully tended, will serve to dry it, for it must not be too dry.

An Acre may produce Fourteen, or Fifteen, Pound of good Saffron; but Eight or
Ten Pound is reckoned an indifferent good Crop.

When the Crop is off, about Midsummer is the time to take up the Sets, or
Plants, and to set them again as before directed, which course must be observed
every Year, for a Crop will hold good but one Year.

The Country about Saffron-Walden in Essex is noted for this Commodity.

Of LIQVORICE.
THe best Land for Liquorice is the richest, warmest, dryest, and of a very
deep Soil: Before the Sets are Planted, the Ground must be dug, or rather
Trenched about three Spades depth, and laid as light and hollow as possible:
And if the Ground be not Naturally very rich, it must be made so by Manuring,
for which Horse-Dung is esteemed the best, as being hottest.

Your Land being well prepared, and laid ou^ into four Foot Beds; you must get
the best and largest Sets you can, which are those called Crown-Sets, or Heads
taken from the top of the Root, or a little shived down; and Plant the Sets in
Beds at about a Foot distance from each other, with a Dibber, or such like
Tool, to make Holes in the Ground, and let the Earth be well closed. If it
prove a very dry Season when they are Planted, which is in the Months of
February, and March, then let them be Watered for two or three Days at the
first, or so long until you find they have recovered their witheredness.

This Crop comes not to perfection until the third Year to take up, but the
first Year you may Sow the Ground with Onions, Lettuce, or any Sallet Herbs
that take not deep Root downwards; and afterward keep the Beds and Alleys well
Hoed, and clear from Weeds.

In November and December is the best Season to take up the Liquorice; and
observe that in the taking them up there will run from every Master Root a
Runner, which runs all along the upper part of the Ground, which has little
Sprouts and Roots, which will yield excellent Sets, if they be cut three or
four of them in every Set, and about four or five Inches long, which also
Plant, being as good as the Crown-Set; and if it be a moist Season, the
Branches may be Planted betwixt the Set to thicken them.

In Planting the Liquorice, be sure to have your Ground ready prepared before
you take the Sets out of the Ground, for they will soon wither and be spoiled,
and make all the possible have you can in Planting them.

Of TOBACCO.
THis is a very Advantageous Plant, and of great esteem in this Age; it would
grow very well in this Kingdom were it allowed, but by reason of its
Prohibition, I shall not proceed to give Directions for the Planting, Dressing,
Ordering and Curing it.

GARDEN-BEANS and PEASE.
BBEANS are of several sorts, and known by diverse Names, as the Windsor and the
Sandwich, which are the chief, and the largest are esteemed the best; yet many
are of Opinion that the middle sized Beans (provided they are sound) are the
best, that is, they go farthest, there being the greater Number to fill the
Bushel.

Beans delight in a rich, stiff and deep Mould; good Husbandry ought to be used
in digging the Ground well; the Season to set them is from Christmas to
Candlemas, and also earlier or later, according to the Season of the Year; but
if too early, then great Frosts coming after they are Spired, will kill them;
and if too late, they must be steeped in Brine, or such Water, as before
prescribed for Steeping Corn in; and observe to set them very near when the
Moon is in her Wane.

It is the common and usual way to Set them here and there promiscuously in
Holes made with a Dibber; this way I do not approve of (as by Experience
finding it not the best) but make Ranges Hoe about three Inches deep, very
straight, and let the Ranges run from South to North, for the greater benefit
of the Sun, and this way they bear far more, the Sun and Air having a freer
passage between them; also it is more commodious to go between them to Weed,
Top, and gather them. You may Sow them thicker or thinner according to the
goodness of the Ground, and your own Discretion; when they are sown, with your
Hoe raise up the Foot and a half, or three Foot asunder; and that you may not
lose Ground, Carots may be Sown betwixt the Ranges, which will prove a good
second Crop. In gathering Green Beans it is not good to pull them from the
Stalks as is usual, for that prevents the thriving of the younger Cods not
ripe, but cut them off with a Knife; and if you cut off the Stalks close to the
Ground when the Beans are gathered, it is probable you Crop before Winter.

PEASE are of Sundry sorts, viz. Hotspurs, of which there are the Barns
Hotspur, the short Cod Hotspur, and the long Cod Hotspur; they are usually Sown
in November and December, and sometimes in January, they will be very early
ripe provided the Ground is rich and warm; The Sandwich white Pease; The White,
Gray, Blew, Green and Maple Reuncival; the large and small White Sugar Pease;
the Gray Sugar Pease; the White Rose and the Gray Rose Pease; the Egg, the
Wing, and the Sickle Pease; the Sugar Pease which is to be eaten in their Cods
like unto French-Beans, and by reason of their tenderness are to be Sown late.

Your Ground must be well ordered, if you expect a good Crop, especially if it
be Ploughed; and Sow them in Ranges made with a Drill Plough, or for want
thereof with a Hoe indifferent deep, earthing them well over; and when they are
come Roots, which is a great preservative to them, especially in a dry time,
and keep them well Hoed and free from Weeds. Those that have but small
quantities to set, and have the Convenience of Sticks, may use them for the
Pease to run upon, which does occasion a far greater increase.

FRENCH-BEANS.
FRench-Beans, or Kidney-Beans are of three viz. White, Speckled, and those
called the Canterbury Kidney Bean; the White is esteemed the best. They are
very tender at their first coming up, so that they must be Sown in warm
Weather: April being a good Season. To cause them to come up the sooner, steep
them in Water as aforesaid. It is a very great bearer, and would be very
profitable to Sow them for a ripe Crop for Poultrey; but the usual use of them
is for the Kitchen, being esteemed a very good Dish; and therein made use of
several ways.

ARTICHOAKS.
THis is an excellent Plant, and very strengthening; the Ground fit for them
must be deep, and of a very rich Soil, and Trenched up with Dung in the Winter,
to make it the better, which will produce the larger Choaks.

The Slips that grow by the sides of the Old Stubs serve for Plants, which are
to be taken from them, and Planted in April, the Ground being well Dug; and
they must be kept well watered until they have taken Root; and if they be
strong, they will bear Heads the Autumn following. They are to be Planted four
or five Foot distance one from another, and kept well Weeded; and if the Summer
prove dry, they must be Watered. This is a lasting Crop for diverse Years, but
your care must be to look after them in the Winter, to preserve them from the
pinching cold Frosts, by cutting the Stalks within about a Foot of the Ground;
and raise up the Earth about them like unto Molehills, within two or three
Inches of the top, and that covered over with long Dung; but do not Earth them
up too soon, for fear of Rotting them: When the Winter is spent, uncover them,
and lay them open by little and little, lest the Air pinch them as being
tender; then Trim them up very well, taking away most of their small Slips, not
leaving above three of the strongest to each Foot for Bearers, and dig about
the Roots as deep as conveniently you can, adding thereto good rotten Dung.

If you would have Choaks in Autumn, cut the Stems of those that bore in the
Spring, to hinder them from a second Crop, and in Autumn these lusty Stocks
will bear very good Choaks; but you must take away the Slips that draw the
Substance from the Plants, and dig about them, dressing and watering them as
occasion requires.

JERVSALEM-ARTICHOAKS.
THese are much of the Nature of Potatoes. but are neither so toothsom, nor so
wholesome, nor are they in any request; they are planted of the Roots, or come of
the Seed.

COLLYFLOWERS.
THis Plant is raised from Seed, which is sown in August, and carefully
preserved in the Winter, being a tender Plant; or you may sow them in the
Spring in a Hot Bed, and remove them when they have indifferent large Leaves,
and set them in good rich Ground, well prepared for that purpose; but the best
way is to dig small Holes about a Foot Square, and fill them with good rotten
Dung mixed with rich Mould, and therein Plant the Collyflowers very deep, almost
covering the Leaves, and be careful to water them well, especially in a dry
Season, otherwise they will not Flower. Let the Holes be about three Foot
apart, and set in Ranges, to the end the Ground may be the better Hoed, and
kept from Weeds.

CABAGES.
THere are diverse sorts of Cabages, those most common are the English, the
Dutch, the Russia, Red Cabage, of which the English and Dutch (which are
generally very large and firm) are the best.

The Ground ought to be very good, rich, and of a deep Mould: and the manner of
setting them is in Holes, as before directed for Collyflowers; They require
Watering, especially at the first setting, until they draw Root: It is most
convenient to set them in Ranges, at about four Foot asunder, if of a large
kind, otherwise three Foot is enough.

The Slugs are very injurious to them, so that if they are not carefully looked
after until they are grown pretty large, they will destroy them; therefore
every Morning very Early, and every Evening about Sunset they should be picked
off the Leaves, for at other times in the Heat of the Day they are not to be
seen; Now to ease your self of this Trouble get a parcel of Ducks, and they
will do that business, for the Slugs are good Food

The Cabage Seed is to be Sown between Midsummer and Michaelmas, that it may
gain Strength to defend it self against the pinching Cold, and in some Years
the sharp Frosts kill them. The Seed is also to be Sown in a Hot Bed in the
Spring, and then in April, or beginning of May they may be Transplanted into
your Grounds, as before directed.

Many ordinary Grounds will produce Coleworts, Cabage Plants are not good, or
if they be set too thick, they will turn to Coleworts.

These, as also the Ossal Leaves of Cabages, are very good Food for Cows and
Swine, so that were they Planted for no other use, it were beneficial enough.
They are also excellent for Rabets, either Wild or Tame.

If you would preserve any Cabage Seed, let it be of the very best; and let
them be placed very low in the Ground during the Winter Season, to Frosts and
Cold Winds, covering them with Earthen Pots, and warm Soil over the Pots, and
at Spring Plant them forth.

SAVOYS.
THese are of two sorts, Dutch and English; they are in Season earlier than
Cabages, and are more sweet: They are raised, and Planted Cabages, but not so
much Curiosity is required about them.

POTATOES.
THis is a Root in great Request in our American Plantations, as also in
Ireland, no doubt but it will grow well in England, were it Planted here. They
require good Garden Mould, and are easily increased, for the Roots, if cut in
small pieces, will grow as well as the whole Roots.

CAROTS.
OF this Root there are several sorts, viz. the Red Carot, the Swelling Orange
Carot, which is the forwardest, and the Yellow Carot.

The Ground most agreeable for this Root is a light, warm and sandy Soil, and
withal rich in Heart. The usual way was to dig the Ground for them, which for
small quantities for Gardens is the best; but of late Years the Farmer eases
himself of that great charge, by Ploughing it deep, which serves as well; but
it must be well harrowed and laid fine, otherwise it will be troublesome to Hoe,
which is the chief care and charge required about it, for it must be three
times Hoed, which will cost 30 s. an Acre to be well done; but those that Sow
but a little for their own use, their Gardener or other Servants may do it,
being no difficult thing to learn; the chief care being to set them apart, for
if two or more grow together, they will be small and come to nothing, and the
cutting the Tops of them with the small Hoe kills the Roots.

There are two Seasons for Sowing Carots, one is about February, for forward
Carots, and those will be ripe about the beginning of July; and the other
Season is in July and August for Winter Carots, and those will be ripe and fit
to draw in October.

These Roots are of great use, not only for the Table, but also for Swine,
Geese, Poultrey, and Rabets. The best way to keep them all the Winter, is to
lay them in dry Sand; and if you would reserve any for Seed, let them be the
finest.

PARSNIPS.
THis Root delights in a deep, rich and Mellow Ground, which must be well dug,
at the least a full Spit deep, and laid loose, the better to take Root. The
Season to Sow them is in the Spring, to wit about April; And great care must be
taken in the Hoeing them, as is for the Carots.

The Swelling Parsnip is by some preferred before the other. About Christmas is
the time to draw them, and the Season holds all, or the greatest part of Lent.
The fairest may be preserved for Seed.

This Root is of that Nourishment, that it will Fat Hogs with as firm a Flesh
as with Pease; and those that have Experienced it say, that the Flesh is
sweeter, and more delicate. Carots will also Fat them, but their Fat is loose,
washy, and waists in the Boiling. Parsnips are also very good, being cut into
small pieces and boiled for fatting Poultrey.

TVRNIPS.
TVrnips are of several sorts, viz. the long, the round and the yellow, of
which sorts the long are esteemed the best.

This Root is more usually Sown in the Field Garden, being generally a second
Crop, with no more Husbandry than only giving the Ground, one stiring or
Plowing after the Crop is taken off, and so Sowing the Seed, and Harrowing it
well in. They must be twice Hoed to sever them, but that great exactness is not
required as for Carots.

Besides the benefit of this Root for the Table, it is excellent good for Cows
and Sheep, especially in hard Frosty Weather; And this Crop does Crop, being as
good as a small Dunging; It is best to be Sown after a Crop of Pease, or Beans.

If you would raise good Seed whereby to have fair and large Roots, either of
Carots, Parsnips, or Turnips, gather the highest Branches when the Seed is full
ripe, which Sow in March, or April; and at drawing time choose the fairest
Roots, cut off their Tops somewhat low, and set Seed the next Year; which Seed
take from the highest Top Branches, and Sow them in Season, and they will
answer your Expectation.

SKIRRETS.
THis is a very sweet Root; it is raised of the Slips, and planted in the
Spring Season in Ranges about five or six Inches asunder, and at Roots, you may
lay the Tops in Earth until the Spring, for your further increase. They delight
in a very Fat and light Mould. If you would have the Roots of these Plants to
be large, often tread down the Tops to hinder the Sap from running up.

ASPARGVS.
THis is to be raised from the Seed in a rich Beds; which must be rich, and
well prepared with rotten Dung, about two Foot deep at the bottom; and also
very good rotten Dung must be mixed with the Mould. Then set the Asparagus
Plants at about two Foot distance, and three or four Rows in each Bed, which in
time will extend themselves throughout all the Bed.

After three Years standing they will be fit to Onions, and may expect a good
Crop.

At the beginning of Winter when the Stalks are cut away, pare up the Alleys,
and cover the Beds with Horse-Dung about three Inches thick, which will
preserve them from the Cold pinching Frosts, which otherwise will anoy them;
and about Mid March uncover the Beds, and let the Dung lie in the Alleys to rot
for good Mould against the next Season, and cast over the said Beds rich Mould,
about Two or Three Inches thick, which will exceedingly nourish them and bring
them forward and early.

Cut the Asparagus very low within the Earth and it will grow up the better;
but be careful, of cutting those that are just peeping up, for that will hinder
their growth.

If you take up the Roots of old decayed Asparagus about the beginning of
January, and Plant them in a Hot Bed, keeping it warm and sheltering it from
the Frosts, you may have Asparagus about Candle-mas.

MELLONS.
MEllons are very troublesome and costly to raise; about the Middle of February
make your Hot-Beds in some enclosed place that is sheltred warm from the Wind
by a Pail or Fence of Reeds, or Straw, which Hot-Bed must be made of good new
Horse-Dung Five or Six Foot high and about Four Foot broad, and very hard trod
or beat down; then sift some pure Mould of last years rotten Dung without any
mixture of Earth, about Four or Five Inches thick, and put in the Seeds with
your Fingers at Two or Three Inches distance, and an Inch and an half deep;
then cover them over with Mellon Glasses, the better to draw up the heat, and
bring up the Mellons; and this way is better than the covering the Bed with
Straw, or Mats, raised or supported up by Arched Sticks, which is the common
way to those that cannot, or will not be at the charge of Glasses.

When the Plants begin to peep up, cover them thinly over with Fine Warm Mould;
and when they are shot above Ground, cover up the Stalks close to the Leaves,
and in the heat of the Day give them a little Airing, taking off the Glasses,
but casting a little Straw over them for fear the Sun proves too hot for them,
and this do about Ten a Clock to a Eleven, and open them again about Two till
Four; and as the Plants rise, raise up the Earth to the Roots to succor them,
and when you find the Bed begin to decay, remove the Plants into another
Hot-Bed, otherwise they will decay for want of Heat; but coming into a fresh
Bed will mount up apace; If the Bed grows dry, Water them once in Twelve Hours
with Water made Luke warm: When the Plants are grown pretty big remove them
into another new Bed, and Plant them* about Four Inches asunder; Then Plant
them where they shall stand all the Year: dig a large Trench about Four Foot
deep, and Three Foot over, and place therein some Dung about Three Foot deep,
that will heat them; then make a square Hole about Four Foot deep and half a
Yard square, and fill it about half full with very rich Mould; Then take up the
Mellon-Plants from your last Bed very carefully, and set Three Plants in one
Hole Triangular in the warm Mould, so deep, that the Leaves may be level with
the Top of the Earth; then set the Glasses upon them, and cover them very warm,
and Water them with Dung-Water Blood-warm for Three or Four Days after the
planting, and be sure to give them good attendance in the time of their
ripening, for the excellency is to take them in their prime, and they will soon
be over ripe: Lay the young Mellons upon ride Tiles to to keep them from the
Ground, and to cause the reflextion of the Sun the better.

CVCVMBERS.
CVcumbers are raised in Hot-Beds, and from thence transplanted as Mellons; but
the more usual way is to make a Trench of a sufficient bigness for the quantity
of Cucumbers you design to sow, and fill it with new Horse-Dung and make square
Holes, as before directed for the Mellons, which fill with rich Mould, and set
Inches deep in it, and put about Twelve in a Hole dispersed up and down; when
they come up cover them with Straw, Cabageleaves, or Mats, to shelter them from
the Wind and Weather, until they are pretty Big, and then they will be out of
danger; but forget not to water them, especially in a dry Season. About the
latter End of March, or beginning of April is a good time to set the Seeds; and
if you would have them earlier you must make use of Hot-Beds Glasses.

Cucumbers are of Three Sorts, viz. long, short, and prickly Cucumbers.

POMPIONS.
THese Roots are set in good Mould after the manner of Cucumbers, and must be
well watered at their first appearing: When you perceive a Pompion to be
kerned, and Grown pretty Runner shoots forwards and produces another about a
Yard beyond it, lay the Runner about half a Foot in the Ground and it will
shoot out Roots and nourish the other Pompion, for that next the Root
intercepts all the Sap from tie other, so that in Two or Three Days it will
pin^ away; and observing this Rule you may have Nine or Ten upon a Root,
otherwise not above Two or Three.

MEKINGS and GOVRDS are not much Pompions and require the same ordering.

Of Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Shalots, with Sallating and Potherbs.

ONIONS are of several Sorts, viz. Strasburgh Onions, the Red Spanish, and the
White Spanish, the French that comes from S^^ Omers, and the English Onion.

They delight in a fine, fat and warm Mould; they are sown in March, or
beginning of April;

In August they are usually ripe, then gather them up, and lay them in the Sun
to dry on a Blanket; then make them up in Ropes and hang them up, or lay them
on some boarded Floor for your use.

The Strasburgh is reckoned the best.

LEEKS.
LEeks are of the nature of Onions, and are so sown, but when they are grown
big, if they were transplanted and set deep in the Earth they would have the
more white stalk for use, but this is too great a trouble for any quantity.

The fairest and best Leeks, as also Onions, are to be kept and planted for
Seed, and by reason of weightyness of their Heads they are to be propped up
with Sticks; when the Seed is ripe, cut off the Heads, and lay them to dry,
then rub out the Seed.

GARLIC and SHALOTS.
Garlic is set in rich Ground; one Head being severed into Cloves will set a
small Bed. Shalot is to be set in rich Ground, but this and Garlic may be
raised from Seed, as the Onions, and so ordered

Seeds necessary for the Kitchen.
THere are diverse Seeds necessary for the Kitchen, the sowing and propagating
of which, being so easy, I shall not trouble the Reader with a Discourse of
each particular Part, only say that they are to be sown for the generality in
the Spring, and the Ground must be of a rich and Mellow Mould, and well
husbanded by diging and laying into Borders.

As near as you can, let not the Seed be above a year old; and to try if it be
good, put some thereof into a Saweer of fair Water set over a Chafindish of
Coals, and if they be good they will sprout forth in a short time, else not.
Also new Seed is of a brighter Color than that which is old.

For sowing the Seeds being so small, the best way is to mix them with sine
Ashes, and that the Ground may lie the better, let it be finely raked, and then
sow the Seeds; and having good fine Mould, sift it through a Sieve on the Beds,
about half an Inch thick, which is far better than to sow them, and so rake the
Ground afterward.

These Seeds I shall divide into four several Heads, viz. Sallad Seeds,
Pot-herb Seeds, sweet-herb Seeds, and Phisical Seeds.

SALLAT SEEDS are Radishes, which are of Four sorts, viz. London, Sandwich,
Black spanish, and White spanish Radish. LETTVCE, viz. the Curld, the Red, the
Rose, the Savoy, the Roman, the Lombar, and the Cabage. SPINACH the round and
the prickly. The White, the Red and the Roman Beet, Sampier, Berry-bearing
Orach, Italian Selleree, Foenochio Rocket Spanish Rocket. Rampion, Hartshorn,
Taragon, French Sorel, Candy Sorel, Cardoon, Indian Cresses, Garden Cersses,
Broad leaved Cresses, and Curled Cresses, Chervil, sweet Chervit, Purslane,
golden Purslane, Parsley, curld Parsley, Alisander, etc.

POT-HERB SEEDS, Endive, Succory, Borage, Bugloss, Burnet, Bludwort, Clary,
Sorrel, Marygold, Pot Marjoram, Summer Savory, Colombine, Tansey, Nep, French
Mallows, etc.

SWEET-HERBS SEEDS are Thyme, Hysop,

PHISICAL SEEDS are Carduus-benedictus, Scurvy Grass, Angelica, Lovage,
Smallage, Dill, Caruway, Cumin, Anise, Coriander, Gromil, Henbane, Flea,
Foenugreek, Rubarb, Burdeck, Elecampane, Balsam, white Poppy, Cardemum, Gourd,
Citrul, Wormseed, Wormwood, Rue, Oculus Christi, Line, Marshmallows, etc.

Thus having given you a short Account of diverse Seeds; In the next place it
will be convenient to give some directions for the watering them which is the
chief preservative in a dry Season.

It is better to water a Plant, or Seeds seldom and thoroughly, than often and
sparingly, for that is but a deceiving it, and causes it to root not so deep
as otherwise it would, and by consequence makes it the more obvious to the
Weather.

If the Weather be never so dry when you Sow Seeds, do not Water them until
they have been in the Ground some Days, and the Ground be a little settled about
them.

Pond, or Rainwater, is esteemed the best for the Watering Plants, or Seeds,
and is preferred far before Spring, or River Water.

Many curious Plants and Seeds would suffer, were they not carefully Watered at
the first Removal, or in the dry Seasons; therefore it is not to be neglected:
Early in the Spring (whilst the Plants, only wet the Earth about them: When the
Plants, or Seeds, are more hardy, and the Nights yet cold, Water them in the
Foren^on; but when the Nights are warm, or the Days very hot, then the Evenings
are best.

Directions for drying Herbs, and preserving Seeds.
GAther them in their Prime, pick them clean from the withered and rotten
Leaves; then tie them up in small Bunches, and hang them on Lines in the Wind
and Sun to dry, but where no Rain comes, for that will make them look black,
and also take away their Scent: When they are sufficiently dried, put them in
brown Paper-Bags, and so hang them up in convenient Walls to keep for your use;
and if you lay them before the Winter comes in, the Sun for a few Hours will
much refresh them.

Then for the preserving the Seeds, let them be gathered when they are through
Ripe, and laid to dry in the Sun; then rub them out, and cleanse them from the
Dust, and so preserve them for use.

Besides, the aforesaid Herbs raised from Seeds, there are diverse raised from
Sets, or Slips, and such are Mint, Sage, Hysop, etc.

Of Goosberries, Cu^rans, Rarsberries, and Strawberries.
GOOSBERRIES and CVRRANS are much of one nature, and the same Husbandry that is
required to the one is to the other: They must be planted in good rich Ground,
and of a deep and light Mould. You must keep the Ground in good heart, by
Soyling it at least every third Year, and keep it dug, and well Hoed, to be
free from Weeds, which are great Enemies to them: Also keep the Trees clear
from Succors, or young Shoots, by cutting them off close to the Root; and
suffer not a Bushy thick Head, for that will hinder the Suns influence to Ripen
the Fruit, nor will they bear so well, nor the Fruit be so large as if thus
trimmed and ordered.

If you plant either Goosberries, or Curran-Trees, for a full Crop, four or
five foot square is enough, and be sure to plant them in even Ranges, which is
better for the Digging, Hoing, Gathering, and all occasions.

There are several sorts of Goosberries, as the English, both White and Red;
the Yellow and White Dutch Amber, which are the best and fairest Fruit.

CVRRANS are of three sorts, the Red, the White, and the Black, which as yet is
not common.

RARSBERRIES are an excellent Fruit; They delight in a good stiff Ground, and
will grow in the Shade, but then the Fruit is not so good and pleasing to the
Palate, being more waterish. They are best set in Beds; and if the Plants are
set about a foot asunder they will soon be too thick, by reason of the great
store of Shoots that spring up.

In the Winter let the Borders be Pared, and the Earth cast up on the Beds,
with Dung over them, which will very much nourish the Plants, and cause them to
bear the better, and keep the Beds clear from Weeds.

STRAWBERRIES are also of several sorts, viz. the great White Strawberry, the
ordinary Red one that grows in the Woods, and the Virginia Strawberry of late
years brought into England, being a large Berry, and of a delicate taste, far
exceeding the English.

They delight to be set in new broken Ground, or at least where they have not
grown before, and should be removed every third Year, otherwise they will decay
and cease bearing, so that they must be removed into fresh Ground well
prepared, and rich: But Wood-Strawberries are found to prosper best in Gardens.
The Beds may be about four Foot broad, and not too thick set, for they will
soon spread: Let them be kept clean Weeded, and in the Winter pa^e the Borders,
and cast the Earth on the Beds, with some Dung, as before directed, for
Rarsberries to nourish them.

Watering them, especially in the hot, dry Weather, does cause a great
Increase, and makes the Berry the larger.

If you would have Strawberries in Autumn, cut away the first Blossoms that
they put forth, to hinder their timely Bearing, and they will Blow anew, and
Bear in Autumn.

Thus having treated of the Kitchin-Garden, Garden of Delight, for Flowers,
Greens, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Of Flowers, and how to Raise, and
GArdens for Delight are of two sorts, viz. producing Flowers from Stalks, and
Flowers from Trees; under which Head all Greens are comprehended.

The most graceful Grounds for the Garden is a Level; and for a Soil, neither a
Sand nor a Clay, but a good deep light Black Mould, which Walks, Beds, and the
like; If your own Ingenuity will not perform the said Undertaking, it is
convenient to have the assistance of one Expert therein, to the end your cost
and labor may be effectual, and that you may not wish it were to do again.

These Gardens are not good to be too big, for then requiring so much Cost and
Attendance to look after carefully, it is probable many things will be
neglected; which if but small, would be exactly kept, and according to the
Proverb, A little well done, is better than a great deal ill done. Also great
care ought to be taken in the Walks, that they be of good Workmanship, have a
good Foundation and Thickness, that the high Wind may not blow them down; and
for foot is sufficient, and under is too low: And Brick is far better than
Stone, which is too cold for Fruit to ripen against (to that perfection) as
against a Brick-Wall. Pailing (provided the Boards are whole Deals, and laid
over one another Featheredg-wise) is very good, and more kindly than a
Stone-Wall.

Fruits proper to be planted against the Walls, are May-Cherries, Apricots,
Peaches, Nectorins, Pears, and Vines; all which require a South Sun, so that
the North-side is best next to the East; the West is indifferent good, as
having the Morning Sun; but most fit for Plumbs, as the South Side is, which is
fit for nothing else.

These Trees may be planted at about ten foot distance, and between each may be
set Curran-Trees, to fill up the vacant places until the Trees spread forth,
and require the said place, and then they may be cut up; and in ordering the
Branches along the Wall, lay them low within a foot of the Ground, for when the
Boughs, or Branches are well dispersed, and that there is no vacant places, it
is an handsome sight to look upon; and above all things be sure to make the
Borders (where you plant the Trees) very rich, which will extremely bring
forward the Trees.

To fill up the Borders set Auricula's, Wall-flowers, Stock Gilly-flowers,
double Violets, Hipaticaes, double Pinks, etc.

As for the laying out your Garden into Walks, Borders, and Grass-Plats, some
few Directions shall suffice, every one having a Form to his own liking.

For Grass-Plats, let them be of Turf, and taken from the Barrenest and
Hungryest Ground, provided the Grass is thick and short, for that which grows
Rank is not so good. Let the Ground be exactly made Level, then lay the Turf
close together, beat it well with a heavy Beater, and be not slack in Watering
it for some time, until it is settled to the Ground.

For GRAVELLING the WALKS, lay the Gravel thick, the Coursest at the Bottom,
and the Fine at the Top, which should be Screned, and let the Middle be
highest, with a gentle descent on either side. It is now the fashion to lay on
the Top of the Walks Cockle-shells instead of Gravel, which is far better, and
not very chargeable.

The Walks must be kept well Rolled, and the Grass-Plats well Mowed and Rolled,
to keep them smooth and handsome.

Worms are great Eye-sores to Walks in casting up the Earth, for preventing
which, it is good to strew amongst the Gravel good store of Bay Salt.

It is now customary to set in the Borders that encompass the Grass-Plats Dwarf
Fruit Trees, as Pears, Apples, and Cherries, which are generally of the best
and choicest Fruits growing, and you may have two or three sorts upon one
Stock. They may be planted about ten or twelve foot asunder, with an Apple, or
Pear Tree, betwixt a Cherry; and betwixt the said Trees may be planted Roses,
Currants, Gooseberries, Cypress-Tree, Miszerions, and the like; and the rest of
the Beds may be set with Tulips, Daffadillies, Lillies, Pionies, Martagons, and
the like; and about the Edges of the Beds double Pinks; or else Box, which
being always Green is pleasant to behold; the only fault is, it eats out the
heart of the Ground, so that you must keep it always Soyling.

EVER-GREEN HEDGES are very Ornamental; the best are made with Pyracantha and
Phillirea, as much of the one as the other, equally dispersed; and for lower in
small Gardens, Celastrus and Alaternus. For the raising and setting of these
Plants more anon. These Hedges must be kept orderly, cut Even on the Top and
Sides, and not too Broad.

FLORA

To the Rt Honble: Richard Lord Maitland Lord Justice Clarke of the Kingdom of
Scotland one of the Lords of his Man most Honble: privy Council in that
Kingdom and eldest son to the Rt. Honorable Charles Earl of Lauderdale

This Plate is humbly Dedicated by Richard Blome



Your Garden cannot be complete, if the Borders are not bounded in with
Border-Boards, which should be laid in Oil for lasting, and Colored for
Ornament, with handsome round Balls placed at equal distances on the said
Border-Boards, which may be colored Black, and the Boards White.

A Summer House is requisite to be erected in some convenient place of the
Garden, which may be made of Framed Timber-Work, covered Carving and Painting,
it is left to your discretion.

The Summer Season being generally dry, the Flowers require frequent Watering,
so that there should be the convenience of a Well, or Fountain, and if Pumped
out of a Well, a Cistern is necessary; for the Water should stand some time in
the Sun before it is fit to be used on tender Plants and Flowers.

For the maintaining and keeping up your Garden, a Nursery must be in some
convenient place adjoining to your Garden, where not only Stocks for Fruit, but
Flowers raised by Seeds, Slips, and the like: And here your Hot-Beds should be
for the Raising of choice Annuals, to be transported into your Garden.

In this Nursery should be some convenient House raised against the Side of the
Wall for the Housing your Greens, and tender Plants Pots, as Gilly-flowers,
etc. which the cold Winter will kill; as also to keep your Garden Tools in that
they may be ready at hand on occasion, as Hoes, Rakes, Spades, Shovels,
Garden-sheers, Pruning Hooks, Grafting and Inoculating Knives, Trowels, Saws,
Chissels, Mallets, Hammers, Nails, Garden Reel and Line, a Screen, a fine Wire
Riddle, Brooms, Watering Pots, Wheel-Barrows, and the like Tools.

In your Nursery there should always, be a Dung of several sorts, each laid by
it self to be used as occasion requires; for if the Ground be Hot and Sandy,
Cow Dung mixed with Lime is best; and if cold and Clayey, then that of Horses,
Pigeons, or Poultrey.

Now forasmuch as laying of Branches, planting by Cuttings, Budding, and the
Hot-Bed, are in great use: It will be necessary to speak a word or two of each.

Laying of JVLYFLOWERS is thus Slips that are strongest, prune off the ends and
sides of the Top Leaves, and under the middlemost joint cut the Stalk half
through, and slit it upwards to the next joint; then make a Hole in the Earth,
and gently bend it down thereunto with a small hooked Stick to keep it from
rising; then turn up the Head of the Slip, that the slit may open, in which
posture hold it with one Hand, and Earth it up with the other, pressing it down
to keep the slit

There are some good Slips that grow so high from the Ground, that they cannot
be laid; in such case you must make use of small Pots, that have slits in one
side made on purpose, and sold by Potters. These Pots are to be fitted with
good Mould, and kept well watered.

The best Season for laying of Julyflowers is from Mid June to Mid July, and
about the beginning of September they may be taken off with the Earth about
them, and set in Beds or Pots fitted with good Earth. Place these Pots in the
shade, sometimes gently watering them, but not too much; and to preserve them
from great Rains, shelter them in Paint-Houses made of Boards for that purpose.

For the laying of Jasmines, Roses, Greens, and other Woody Plants after
directed to be raised by Layers, make choice of such a Branch or Lance, that
may easily be bended to the Ground; the same Years Shoots are the best for
Rooting; cut it half through on the underside at a Joint, or Knot, if it have
any, then slit the same upward two or three Inches long, and prick the Bark
through with a blunt pointed Awl in diverse places about the slit: Take off the
Tops of all Laid Plants except Greens, then make a wide Hole to hook it down,
and follow the Directions as for Julyflowers.

Such Plants that will not take Root, let the upper end of the slit be bound
very hard with Wire, or Packthread, which will stop the Sap, and cause it to
grow; and put some Rich Fat Earth about the place where they are laid

The best time to lay Greens, or other Plants is about Mid August, that they
may have taken Root by the Spring, and the next Year will be fit to take off,
as being well Rooted; and to cause them the better to Grow, water them often.

CVTTINGS are to be taken as soon as the Sap begins to rise: They must be cut
slooping from a Joint or Knot at the lower end, and left about a Foot long:
Make a deep Trench and lay them therein a little slooping, fill the Trench with
good Mould, and press it hard down, and often watered.

As for Budding, or Innoculating of Roses, it is performed after the same
manner as for Fruits, of which more hereafter.

HOT BEDS are used for raising up of forward Plants, etc. and how to make the
Beds is already Treated of in the fifth Chapter, concerning Mellons.

If you remove any Rooted Plant of Flower or Herb, although it be in the midst
of the Summer, if you remove them in the Cool of the Evening, and well water
them, taking all the Earth about the Root, without loosening it from them there
is no danger.

Should I make a Discourse of each particular Flower, and the great Variety of
each sort, it were enough to make a Volum of it self. Mr. Rea, a great Florist,
has Published an elaborate piece of this kind, Entitled Flora, Ceres and
Pomona, wherein he has Treated of each particular Flower, as also of the
Greens, as well those bearing Fruits and Flowers as otherwise. I shall
therefore give a short Account of the Names thereof, and refer you to the Book
it self.

Mr. Rea begins his Discourse of Flowers, with those that have either Scaly,
Bulbous, Grumous, or Tuberous Roots, from whence the Leaves, Stalks and Flowers
do annually Spring, most of them dying even to the Root soon after their
Flowring. And first with the Lilies and Martagons.

Of LILIES.
THe Crown Imperial, the Double Crown Imperial, the Yellow Crown Imperial, the
Narrow Crown Imperial, with a reddish Flower. Persian Lily, the red Lily, the
fiery red bulbed Lily, the double red Lily, the yellow Lily, the white Lily,
the white Lily of Constantinople, the double white Lily.

MARTAGONS.
THe Mountain Lily or Martagon, the Martagon Imperial, the white Martagon, the
white spotted Martagon, the spotted Martagon of Canada, the Martagon of
Constantinople, the red spotted Martagon of Constantinople, the Martagon of
Hungary, the Virginian Martagon, the Martagon of Pompony, the yellow spotted
Martagon, and the yellow Martagon without Spots.

All these sorts of Lilies and Martagons flower in and about June, and are all,
except those of Canada and Virginia, strong and hardy Plants and great
Encreasers.

FRITILLARIES.
THese are of two Species, the one with small Roots, sharp pointed green
Leaves, and large Flowers; and the other with bigger Roots, round pointed
whiter green Leaves, and different fashioned smaller Flowers, and of each kind
there are several sorts, viz.

The Common Chequered Fritillary, the double Bush Fritillary, the white
Fritillary, the yellow Fritillary, the darkred Fritillary, the great red
Fritillary, the great yellow Fritillary, the spotted yellow Fritillary, the
great yellow Italian Fritillary, the small Italian yellowish green Fritillary,
the exotic narrow leaved Fritillary, with a whitish green double Flower, the
small yellow Fritillary of Portugal, the black Fritillary.

These do Flower about the end of March and beginning of April. The Roots lose
their Fibers August be taken up, and kept dry for some time; but not to be kept
longer out of the Ground than Mid August.

TVLIPS.
THere are innumerable many sorts of Tulips, viz. the Early, the Middle, and
the latter Flowring Tulips, of which in order.

The Early Flowring Tulips are the Winter Duke, General Duke, General Brancion,
pretty Betty, Duches Brancion, Lac Varine, Violet Ratgans, Violet de Remow or
Purpure Lisse, Palto van Leyden, Florisante, Religious, Blindenburgh, Nonsuch
petits late, the Corn Heart, Admiral Crinki, General Molswick, Cleremont,
Paragon-Cleremont, Admiral Encusen, Morillion Cramosine, the Noble Aurora, the
Early perfect, Pirishot, Princess, Fair Ann, the Omen, the Marquess, Viceroy,
Galatea, Maria, the Superintendent, Auraro van Bart, Paragon Greberi, Gilden
Blome Brentel, Gilden Blome Seonie, Alcetus, Unique of Delfe, Vgenia, Climene,
Clitus, Venetian, Retrocede, Dorade, Witten Root Hodie, Bonaventura, dos de
Chamoy, Paragon Iserant, purple and white Evers-Wind, Bran Moresco etc.

The Middle Flowring Tulips are, the Swish of Portugal, Munera, Semper
Augustus, the Prince of Orang, General Essex, Pluto, Pass Endinard, Paragon
oudinard van Bole, Agot Morine, Agot Robine, Agot Robine Paragon, or Robinet,
the white Agot, Tudart, Jasper Tudart, Harvy, Admiral vander Pool, Morillion,
Nacarat, Cardinal Flambiant, Prince Cardinal, Morillion de Anvers, Orient
Virgin, General Gowda, Envy, Triumphans, B^w Turnier, Bell la Bar, Bell Breire,
Bell Brune, the Cardinal, Vesta, Royal Vesta or Non pare, Mazarine, Sattine,
Morillion de Argiers, the Pearl, Bien venu, Admiral Cataline, Susanna, the
Pelican, Belline, Pass Belline, General Sweman, Camusetta, Paragon Franswise,
Admiral of France, Benedictine, Paragon Blackbam, Paragon de Gildon, Dautile de
flure, Pass Rosy, Rosilliante, Holofernes, the Chimney-Sweeper, Turban,
Admiral Heart, Zeablom, Cedo Nulli, Lauscot Bole, Altes Royal, Zweman, John
Garet, or Chamolet, Paragon Lisgen, the Parot, the Rich Parot, Agot Rampard,
Agot Gekeire, Star de Man's, Marvelia de Quacle, the President, the Royal
President, Nofte la perfeit, Pompeza, the Eagle, Eminentissime, the Royal Agot,
Agot Oriental, Paragon-Florison, Morillion-Curtiis, Admiral de Man's, Jacobea
rectified, Paragon de Costa, General of Holland, La Towers, Bell pallas of
Paris, Pass bell Tew, Marbre Jesper, Agot poit vin, white pass Citadel, Dorile,
Carthage, Diana, Dispute Doria, General Doctor Bolesom van Bole, Otter, brown
Purple Cataline, Pass Heron, Violetta, the Flanders Widow, Princess Royal, the
White Widow, Prince of Wales, Princess, Turgiana, Ariana, Rundelo, Brown
Anvers, Bew Anvers, General Anvers, General Bole, Paragon Geron, Dorothy of
Holland, Carolus, Volverte, Pass Zeablon of Paris, Brown Purple de Marris, Agot
Hanmer, Agot St. Dennis, Brabazon, Hispaniolet, Agot de Gorier, Arch Duke
Imperial, Le Arch de Auckre, Amphitrio, Armiante, Consiergi, Althea, Atlas,
Paragon Alette, Sigismond, Vnick la Croy, Jacobine, the Brown Purple of Marris,
the Brown Purple Paragon, the Brown Purple Blassack, the Brown Purple King, and
the Brown Purple Prelate.

Other good Tulips, viz. Amarantine, Atlas Aurora Celeste, Bellincourt,
Borimda, Brabazon Elserier, Brabazon Hugh van Hij, Cardinal Mazerine,
Celestine, Dulcina, Duchess of Venice, Eliza, Faustina, Finetta, Flenricourt,
General Picot, Hercules, Jasper Angloice, Jacobine, Imperial, la Constante, la
valles Mahomet, Melinda, Mirandola, Morillion Chirar, Monster Cytroon Parat,
Morine, Oriental, Non plus bella, Paragon Aletta, Paragon, Hellena, Paragon
Bush, Paragon Quacle, Paragon Gowda Quacle, Richmont, St. Nicaise, Sigsmont,
Speciosa, and Turney Dolphin.

Admiral de Groot, Admiral van Zierchee, Admiral Lifebrews, Admiral Sierchee,
Beline, Camillus, Dorillies, Daphne, Dorothea Paragonee, Duke of General
Hanniball, General Pump, Harders, Jacasta, Keremi, Luxemburg Paragonee,
Metander, Nonsuch, Orinda, Paragon Vesta, Paragon Orant, Paragon Sheldenburg,
Paragon past Marmillion, Queen Elizabeth, Queen of France, Rechelu, Shoon
Hellena, Timon, Victoria, Venus, Wiggons, Paragonee, Xenophon, Youngster,
Zeablon, King, Zelot, and Zacaria.

Other sorts Tremontane, Proteus, Amidore, the Curle, Eremanthe, Cleomedon, la
Billy, Clelia, Zelinda, Phoenix, Charmante, la Fine, Amazon, Swissisis, and
Philadelphia.

The latter Flouring Tulips, viz. Pato Madam, the yellow Crown, Prince de la
More, the Zerotine Zeoblom, Gresound, Star of Venus, Paragon Mullen, Agot
Roman, Marbre Harlus, Tenebris, etc.

The Roots of all Tulips lose their Fibers every Year, and are to be taken up
so soon as the Stalks are dry, which is about Midsummer, and must be kept dry
on the board of some Room until setting time, which is about the beginning of
October.

The Roots in light Ground may be taken up with the Hand, but in stiff you must
use a Trowel; and those that are curious, lay every sort by it self on Papers,
and write the Names thereon; Fibers, and the loose outward Skins, as also the
Off- Sets or Roots to set again.

The best Tulips should be set by themselves in good prepared Beds, and the
ordinary ones may be disposed of in Borders; but so disperse them that there
may be a handsome mixture of Colors.

After the Flower is shead break off the Head, or Seed-Pod from the Stalk,
unless of such that Seed, which will cause them to dry down the sooner, as also
to fortify the Roots.

Those that are designed for Seed, are to be made choice of when in the prime
of Flower; choose the strongest Stalks, such as have the most benefit of the
Sun, and such as have the Bottoms, and Tamis, either blew or purple.

When the Seed is ripe the Pods will open, and the Stalks will be dry; then
gather them off, but Seed out until about the end of September; then sow the
Seed in Beds of fine Mould; In April the Seeds will come up high enough to
Weed, and about Midsummer (two years after the sowing) they may be taken up,
the Roots cleansed, and set in Rows at a wider distance; and so every year
until they come to bear Flowers, still altering the Ground with rich, and fresh
Earth; Those that prove excellent, keep, and the common ones cast away; but
although they come up at first of one Color, if they be Brimstone, Dove,
Orange, Hair, Isabella, Gredeline, Shamway, or any light and strange Color,
cast them not away, for in a Year or two many such have changed into good
marked Flowers.

NARCISSUS or DAFFODILLS.
THere are diverse sorts of Daffodills, as well single as double, some with
broad, and some with narrow green Leaves; some bearing one, and others many
Flowers on a Stalk. And amongst the great variety, these sorts following are of
chief esteem amongst Florists.

Narcissus Non parel, or the Incomparable Daffodil; the Incomparable Daffodil
with a double Flower or Cup; the great double French Daffodil; the lesser
double French Daffodil; the double white Daffodil of Virginia; the great
Daffodil of Africa; the great Brimstone colored Daffodil; the French Daffodil
with the yellow Cup; the white Daffodil, which many flowers; the yellow
Daffodil of Ciprus with many flowers; the great African Daffodil; the white
Junquilia, or Rush Daffodil, the white turning Junquilia, the yellow turning
Junquilia; the yellow turning Junquilia, with a white Cup; the white turning
Junquilia with a yellow Cup; the Junquilia with a great Cap; the double
Junquilia; the great Sea Daffodil; the Indian broad Leaved Daffodil; the Indian
broad Leaved Autemn Daffodil; the Indian Autumn Daffodil; the broad Leaved
Daffodil with Scarlet Flowers, called Jacobea; the broad Leaved Virginian
Daffodil, with a Purple Flower; the great yellow Spanish Bastard Daffodil;
Tuggies great double Bastard Daffodil; the lesser double Bastard Daffodil, or
Wilmores double Daffodil; Parkinsons double Daffodil; the double English
Bastard Daffodil; the white Bastard Junquilia; the Golden double narrow Leaved
Daffodil; the great yellow Bastard Junquilia.

The greatest part of these Daffodilis are hardy, great encreasers, except it
be those that bear many Flowers on a Stalk, as also the double white of
Virginia, the double yellow of Cyprus, and those of Canstantinople.

Not much unlike unto the Daffodills as to nature, are the greater early
Bulbous Violet, the lesser early Bulbous Violet, and the great late Flowering
Bulbous Violet.

These as well as the Daffodil^ are early Flowers, and do also much increase by
the Root, and very apt to off-sets, they lose their Fibers, and are taken up
out of the Ground, and ordered like unto Tulips.

The HYACINTD, or IACINTH.
THe sorts of most esteem of this Flower, are either the great Indian tuberous
Rooted Hyacinth, the great yellow Musk Grape Flower, or yellow Muscari, the
Ashcoloured Muscari, the red Muscari, the white Muscari, the fair haired
Jacinth, the fair curled haired Jacinth, the great Starry Jacinth of Peru, the
great white Starry Jacinth of Peru, the great blush Starry Jacinth of Peru, the
Sky-colored Grape-flower, the white Grape-flower, the blush Grape-flower, the
branched Grape-flower, the great Oriental Jacinth, the Celestial Hyacinth, the
early white Oriental Jacinth, the fair double blew Oriental Jacinth, the common
blew Starry Jacinth, the early Starry Jacinth.

All these lose their Fibers, and may be removed in June and July; they are
hardy, and Seeds, and are sowed as Tulip Seeds.

ORNITHOGVLVM.
THe Star of Bethlehem, the greatest white Star of Bethlehem, the Star flower
of Arabia, the Star flower of Naples, the yellow Star of Bethlehem, the
Star-flower of Aethiopia, the great white spiked Star of Bethlehem;

These aforesaid Flowers lose their Fibers, and the Roots may be taken up so
soon as the Stalks are dry, and may be kept out of the Ground until September.

MOLY.
THe great Moly of Homer, the Indian Moly, the Hungarian Moly, Serpents Moly,
the yellow Moly, the Spanish purple Moly, the Spanish Silver Cupped Moly,
Dioscorides his Moly, the Moly of Montpelier, and Homers Moly,

These lose their Fibers, and are to be taken up after the Stalks are dry; they
are hardy, and will thrive in any Soil.

The ASPHODIL.
THis bears a Star-like-flower; the chief sorts are the great white branched
Asphodil, the white unbraced Asphodil, the blush colored Asphodil, the great
white striped Asphodil, the little white hollow Asphodil, the small yellow
Asphodil, the yellow Lily Asphodil the Lily Asphodil, with a white Flower, and
the Lily Asphodil with a blush Flower.

The SPIDER-WORT.
OF this Flower, the best sorts are the Savoy Spider-wort, the great Italian
white Spider-wort, unbraced Spider-wort, and the Virginian Spider-wort.

The Lily Asphodils flower about the end of May, and the Spider-worts about the
beginning of June. They are both hardy, and will thrive in any Soil; the best
time to take them up and transplant them is in August.

PEONY.
THis Flower is Male and Female, and of Peony, the double Purple, the double
Carnation, the double Blush, or White, and the double Stripped Peony.

They generally flower in May, are very hardy and fit for any Soil. They are a
very spreading and ornamental Flower, and usually set at the Corners of Borders.

The MEADOW SAFFRON.
THe principal sorts of this Flower are the Party-colored Meadow Saffron, the
variegated Meadow Saffron, the dark Purple striped Meadow Saffron, the
Checkered Meadow Saffron of Naples, the Checkered Meadow Saffron of Chio, the
double Meadow Saffron, the double variegated Meadow Saffron, and the greatest
double Meadow Saffron.

When the Stalks of these are dry; take them up, and about the beginning of
September they may be Set again; they will suddenly put forth Fibers, and soon
after will flower; they are hardy, and will thrive in any Soil.

CROCVSES.
THis Flower is of diverse sorts, some flowering in the Spring, and others in
Autumn, and of this the true Saffron is a kind; the other chief sorts are the
great white Crocus, the white Crocus of Masia, the pale feathered Crocus, the
Imperial Crocus, the Royal Crocus, the smaller purple Crocus, the greater
purple Crocus, the blew Neopolitan Crocus, the purple feathered Crocus, the
purple striped Crocus, the great purple striped Crocus, the greater purple
flamed Crocus, the yellow Crocus, the yellow striped Crocus, the Cloth of Gold
Crocus, the Silver-coloured Autumn Crocus, the purple Mountain Crocus, and the
Autumn Mountain Crocus.

All these sorts of Crocusses both of the Spring and Autumn lose their Fibers,
with their Leaves, and may be then taken up and kept dry; those of Autumn until
August, and those of the Spring until October; they are hardy, and will thrive
in any Soil.

The IRIS, or FLOWER DE LIS.
THere are great varieties of this Flower, viz. the Persian Iris, or Flower de
Lis, the English blew bulbous Iris, the great bulbous Iris with a rich blew
Flower, the blew striped Iris, the great purple variable bulbous Iris, the
great Ash-colored striped bulbous Iris, the great variable colored bulbous
Iris, the great pale Red, or Peach-coloured bulbous Iris, the great white
bulbous Iris, the great white striped Iris, the great white bulbous Iris
striped with purple, and the great yellow bulbous Iris, or Flower de Lis.

The lesser bulbous Flower de Lis, or Iris, are also of several sorts, viz.

The Spanish narrow Leaved Iris, the narrow Leaved bulbous Iris with a spotted
Stalk.

Other sorts of Flawer de Lis in France; viz. the Agat Iris, the African Iris,
Aleppo Iris, Ambois Iris, Arabian Iris, the Iris of Avergne, Iris du Blois,
Iris de Bologne, Iris of Britany, Iris of Brie, Chamber Iris, Iris of Candy,
Iris of Castile, Iris of Damascus, Iris of Egypt, Iris of Florence, Iris of
Florida, Iris of Frontiers, Iris of Gascogny, Grand Signiors Iris, Iris of
Greece* Iris of Guiney, Indian Iris, Iris of Judea, Iris of the Levant, Iris of
the Lombards, Iris of Lorrain, Iris of Lybia, Iris of Macedon, Iris of
Maldives, Iris of Melinda, Iris of Me^ico, Iris of Milan, Iris of the
Moluccoes, Iris of Parma, Iris of Picardy, Iris of Poets, Iris of Poictou, Iris
of Portugal, Iris of Pay, Rochetain Iris, Iris Royal, Iris of Savoy, Iris of
Sicily, Iris of Siena, Swiss Iris, Iris of Syria, Iris of Tartary, Iris of
Turkey, Iris of the Valleys, Iris of Valois, Iris of Vandois, and the Venetian
Iris.

The Seeds of all these are sowed and ordered as Tulips.

Other sorts of Flower de Lis.
THe Tuberous or Flag-leaved Flower de Lis, the great and lesser Chalidonian
Iris, the great Flower de Lis of Dalmatia, the blew Flower de Lis of Asia, the
twice flowering Portugal Flower de Lis, the variable Purple Iris of Cameranius,
the blew Party-colored Iris, the white variable Flower de Lis, the yellow
Flower de Lis of Tripoli, the great blew narrow-Leaved Iris, the narrow-Leaved
variable Iris of Clusius, the greater double narrow-Leaved Iris, the great
white Dwarf Iris, and the Blush-coloured Dwarf Flower de Lis, or Iris.

All these Flowers are hardy, and will grow in any Soil.

CORN-FLAG.
THe chief sorts of this Flower are the Corn-Flag of Constantinople, the
Corn-Flag with a bright red Flower, and the Corn-Flag with bright Flowers.

These Flower about July, when their Stalks are dry they lose their Fibers, and
may be taken up, and ordered as Iris.

The BEE-FLOWER.
THe Bee-Flower, Gnats, Satyrion, Fly-Orchis, Dogs-Tooth Violet, Dogs-Tooth
with a white Flower, Dogs-Tooth with a pale Purple-flower, Dogs-Tooth with a
Red-flower, and Dogs-Tooth with a Yellow-flower.

The SOW-BREAD.
THese are also of several sorts, viz. the purpled Cyclamen of the Spring, the
white Candy Cyclamen of the Spring, the double white Spring Cyclamen of
Antioch, the pale Purple Cyclamen of the Spring, the Summer Cyclamen, the Roman
Cyclamen, the Ivy-leaved Cyclamen, the Narrow-leaved Cyclamen, and the
Double-leaved Cyclamen of Antioch.

The Roots of these Flowers do not lose their Fibers, and therefore are seldom
to be removed; but if transplanted, it is in June, of July.

ANEMONIES, or the WILD FLOWER.
THere are great variety of these Flowers, but may be reduced under these two
Heads, viz. the Anemone with broad Leaves, and the Anemone with narrow Leaves;
and both sorts bring forth diverse Slips of curious Flowers, viz.

The common great double variable Broad-leaved Anemone, the common Broad-leaved
scarlet Anemone, the Broad-leaved Anemone with a double scarlet flower, the
Broad-leaved double scarlet variegated Anemone, the double Broad-leaved red
Anemone, the Broad-leaved double purple Anemone, the double Broad-leaved purple
variegated Anemone, the Broad-leaved Anemonies with single flowers, the common
double Narrow-leaved red Anemone, the double Narrow-leaved variable Anemone,
the double Narrow-leaved scarlet Anemone, the double scarlet variegated
Narrow-leaved Anemone, the double Narrow-leaved Anemone with a Scarlet Thrum,
the double Narrow-leaved Anemone, called Nacara; the the double Brimstone
colored Narrow-leaved Anemone, the Narrow-leaved double green Anemone, the
greater white Narrow-leaved double Anemone, the Narrow-leaved blush Anemone,
called Colombina; the double Narrow-leaved Rose-coloured Anemone, the
Narrow-leaved double spotted blush Anemone, the Narrow-leaved double purple
Anemone, the Narrow-leaved double Lavender-coloured Anemone, the Narrow-leaved
Anemone with the Purple Thrum, the Narrow-leaved double Anemone with the dark
Purple Thrum, called Amarant; the double Narrow-leaved variegated Amarant
Anemone, the double Narrow-leaved Anemone of five Colors, and the Noble double
Anemone.

Besides these Anemonies already mentioned, which have been long in England,
there are abundance of other new sorts raised of Seeds in France and Flanders,
all bearing five double Flowers differing from each other both in color and
fashion, the Names of which are taken notice of in Mr. Rea's Book of Flowers,
fol. 123.

These Anemonies (both double and single) bring forth their Flowers in March,
April, and May, which for the generality are very beautiful; and for the
ordering them great care must be taken, as to the Soil of the Ground, the
Season, and manner of planting and taking them up, which Mr. Rea has largely
treated of.

RANVNCVLVS, or CROWFOOT.
THis Flower is of diverse sorts, those of most esteem are the double white
Ranunculus of Candia, the Cloth of Silver Crowfoot of Candia, the double yellow
Crowfoot of Asia, and the double red Crowfoot of Asia.

There are diverse other sorts of Ranunculus' s, or Crowfoot of Asia, with fine
double Flowers; viz. Bozvel or Plumash, Pianisco, Sang de ^e^f, the Monster or
Giant Ranunculus, the great Monster of Rome, Puvoin of Rome, Marvelia,
Sphericus, Fericus Trashe, Surifix, Turks Turvan, Marvellen de Paris.

Ranunculus of Asia with single Flowers are of diverse sorts and colors, which
with Direction for the ordering them are set down by Mr. Rea, Page 131.

WOLF-BANE.
THis is also of diverse kinds, the chief are the Winter Wolf-Bane, the pale
Winter Wolf-Bane, etc.

These bring forth their Flowers with green Leaves in January, which is the
chief Rarity in them.

HIPATICA, or LIVER-WORT.
THis is of two sorts, the one bearing single, Hipatica, the double Blew, the
double White, and the double Red.

These Flowers about Mid March are to be ordered as Auricula's.

HELLEBORVS, or HELLEBOR.
THis is of two sorts, viz. Black and White; Hellebor, called the
Christmas-Rose, the white Hellebor, with a Dark-red Flower, our Ladies-Slipper,
the small white Hellebor, and the small purplish Hellebor.

GENTIAN.
THe Gentian is of several sorts, the chief are the Great Gentian with a yellow
Flower, and the Gentian of the Spring.

BELL-FLOWERS.
THese are also of several sorts, and both double and single, the chief are the
Peach-Leaved Bell flower, the Steeple Bell-flower, the great Canterbury Bell,
the double Canterbury Bell, Giants Throat-Wort, and the Cardinals Flower.

All these Flowers are easily increased, and thrive very well in most Soyls,
provided they stand not Sun; but the Cardinals Flower is more tender, and
requires good care.

JVCCA INDICA, with other Indian Plants.
THe Indian Jucca, the Virginian Silk, the In^^an flowering Reed, and the
Indian Fig.

AVRICVLA's.
THis Flower is of several sorts and colors, as Purple, Red or Scarlet, Yellow
or Buff, and White: Most bear the Names of those that raised them, which are
taken notice of by Mr. Rea, fol* 142. together with Directions for the raising
and ordering them.

PRIMROSES, and COWSLIPS.
THese Flowers are of diverse other sorts, than those common to us in England.
Mr. Rea takes notice of these sorts, viz. the commou double Garden Primrose,
the Couslip Hose in Hose, the double green Couslip, the double green Primrose,
the Jack-an-Apes on Horseback, the Couslip with a Jagged Hose, the Red
Primrose, the double Red Primrose, the Red Couslip, or Oxlip, the Orange
colored Couslip, and the Red Couslip in Hose.

CHAMPIONS.
THese are likewise of several sorts, viz. the double Red Rose Champion, the
double White Rose Champion, the single Nonsuch, the Flower of Bristol, and the
rich Scarlet Nonsuch.

WALL-FLOWERS.
THe principal sorts of this Flower are the great single Wall-flower, the
double Wall-flower, the single White, and the double White; the double Red, and
the pale Yellow Wall-flower.

STOCK-GILLIFLOWERS.
THis Plant is of several sorts and Colors, and both single and double, viz.
the double stripd Stock-Julliflower, the yellow Stock, the blush Stock, and the
whiter Stock-Julliflower.

They are raised from Seed, and Slips; if from Slips, make choice of such
Branches that bear no Flowers, which cut off some distance from the Stock; then
slit down the Bark at the End of the Slip, about half and Inch in three or four
places, which peel as far as it is slit, and turn up; then cut off the naked
Woody part close to the Rind that is turned up; then make a pretty wide Hole in
the Earth to set it in about three Fingers deep with the Bark spread open round
about the end thereof; which done, cover it with good Earth, keep it in the
shade, and water it for some time, to cause it to draw Root.

Plants that bear double White-flowers.
DOuble Pellitory, double Feather-few, double Camomil, double Dog-fennel,
double Lady-Smocks, and double Daffies.

GILLI-FLOWERS.
THis Flower for its beautifulness and fragrant smell may deservedly have the
pre-eminence of all others. There are an innumerable many sorts both double and
single, amongst which these following are taken notice of by Mr. Rea, which had
their original from Holland, Flanders, and the Netherlands; viz. Achilles,
Acteon, Admiral of England, Admiral Young, Admiral Rowse, Admiral Lifgins,
Admiral of Spain, Admiral of Arragon, Ad^nis, Agot, Bertine, Ajax, Abertine,
Alcetus, Abiance, Imperial, Alexander the Great, Alexander of Holland,
Albertine, Amazone, Andronicus, Angelion, Approaching Sun, Apollo, Apelles,
Argus, Astrea, Attalanta, Augustus Caesar, Augustina, Aurora, Aure-stella;
Barnadine, Barkshire, Beauty of England, Baron of France, Bell Triumphant,
Bell-Montwas, Belvidere, Bell Curtisan, Bell Angloise, Bell Believer, Bell in
Younton, Bell Infanta, Bell Fra^sway, Bell Rose, Bell Gentoice, Bell Magdalen, the
Great, Charles the Fifth, Charles the First, Charles the Second, Crystal,
Chancellor, Cleopatra, Colusa, Count Mansfield, Count Lodowick, Count Florus,
Count of China, Count Henrick, Countess of Flanders, Covenant of England, Court
of Castile, Coridon, Crown of England, Cursella, Cupidon Royal, Cydonia,
Darius, Daris, Diana, Don Alphonso, Don Doria, Don John, Dolphin, Door, Dorothy
of Holland, Dorillisant, Duke of Anjou, Duke of Bucks, Duke of Burgundy, Duke
of Brunswick, Duke of Cambridge, Duke of Freesland, Duke of Florence, Duke of
Lorrain, Duke Phillip, Duke Victor, Dutch Royal Dunkirk, Duchess of Brabant,
Duchess of Cleaveland, Duchess of Monmouth, Duchess of York. Eagle Royal,
Eaglet, Emperor Constantius, Dalfast, Empire of Russia, Emperor, Emperors
Court, Emperor Rodolphus, Emperatoria, Emillai, Fair Duchess, Fair Flora,
Fair Frances, Fair Hanna, General of Austria, General de Dorne, General Gouda,
General of Holland, General of the Indies, General Lambert, General Monk,
General Palmer, General de Pike, General Rowse, General Tuest, General Wigons,
German Empire, Giants Head, Giganti^k, Glistering Star, Golden Crown, Golden
Piece, Grand Duke Royal, Grave Earnest, Gray Florist, Gray Hulo, Grand Britain,
Grand Great Boor, Great Captain, Great James, Great Monarch, Great Prophet,
Great Seneca, Great Tamberlain, Great Turk, Grotius, Halsion, Harison, Heart of
Oak, Hecuba, House of Peers, House of Commons, Host of Bohemia, Honora,
Hugonot, Imperial of Holland, Incarnadine-Corinthi, Incarnadine de Bezond*
Incarnadine de Blan, Joyesse, Issabella la bella, Jupiter, Juno, Kereme,
Kill-all, King of Assyria, King of Bohemia, King David, King of England, King
of Aethiopia, King of France, King of Naples, King of Poland, King of Portugal,
King Rehoboham, King of the Romans, King Solomon, King of Spain, Kings Court,
La Croy, La Morisco, Land of Promise, Lackerbet, La Joyesse, La Perle de
Dennis, La Placidia, La Super Bona, Last Hope, Latisson Door, Leviam, Le^nt de
Scemes, Leo, Linne Frecal, Lord of the Camp, Loofte, Lorea, Loyalty, Lord of
Gaunt, Lord Frances, Lord Pleasure-Boat, Low Haule, Lusty-gallant, Master de
Camp, Mamada, Marvel de Mundi, Martin Grim, Marble-stone, Marble-Rose,
Mearmaid, Minerva, Mirabilia, Morillion-Nonparel, Monstrum of England, Monstrum
of Holland, Morillion-Triumphant, Morning Star, New St. George, New
Bonaventura, New Hogonet, New Appollo, New Boore, New Cook, Covenant, Nesarial,
Nymph Royal, Non-parelia, Non-such, Olimpia, old Vestal, Omega, Oriental, Ovid,
Oxenar Oyleman, Pass Monarch, Pass Imperial, Pass Tout, Painted-Lady,
Pantelece, New Paragon Aleto, Paragon Rike, Philomel, Phillis, Piramid,
Pico^omine, Polidore, Prince of Tire, Prince Henry, Prince Rupert, Prince
Thomas, Prince of Wales, Prince of Orange, Princes Court, Princess of Savoy,
Purple Paragon, Purple Imperial, Purple Royal, Queen Elizabeth, Queen
Katherine, Queen of France, Queen of Sweden, Queen of Portugal, Queen of
Persia, Queen Hester, Queen Hellena, Queen Cleopatra Queen, Biddia, Ravisant,
Regent, Reutineere, Remus, Romulus, Rosilliante, Rosamond, Rose of Jerico,
Royal Match, Royal Oak, Royal Jeremy, Royal Exchange, Roxalana, St. John, St.
Joseph, St. Michael, St. George, Salamander, Salisbury, Soliman, Summer Fair,
State House of Amsterdam, Super Bonerges, Susanna, Super Eminent, Tapisere,
Thodesier, the Jewel, the Cook, Thomulin, Tiberius Caesar, Triumphans, Tribune,
Triumph of Sapin, Tricolor, Troops, Validdi, Van Velson, Vetonica, Vestina,
Virgin of England, Virgin of Middlesex, Virgin of Orleance, Virgin of Lile,
Virgin of Cullen, Vice Admiral, Vice Roy, Victoria, Ulysses, Vnick de Lovel,
Vtrick Duny, Vterpendragon, Warwick Hero, white Diana, white Nobless, white
Hugonet, white Lady, Witties Rich Scarlet.

By this Catalogue the great Variety of Dutch Julyflowers does appear, which by
them are Yearly raised from Seeds, but it will not be so with us in England, as
Mr. Rea notes, for they will soon degenerate, and become single, nor will they
be so large, thick and double, neither of such well intermixed, striped, and
flaked Colors; And all the best Dutch Flowers may be comprehended under these
three Heads, viz. Red and White, Purple and White, and Scarlet and White.

And amongst the great Variety of Flowers, these following are now in most
esteem.

Red and White JVLYFLOWERS.
AChilles, Ajax, Alcetus, Approaching Sun, Argus, Barkshire, Bell Infanto, Bell
Joy, Bel-Fransway, Bella de Bruxels, Bella Brunetta, Bohemia, Crown, Coridon,
Count of Lodowick, Cydonia, Duke of Lorrain, Duke of Bucks, Duke of Anjou, Duke
of Florence, General of Holland, Great Turk, Grand Duke Royal, King Charles the
Second, La Super Bona, Low Ha^le, Marble Stone, Monstrum of England, Monstrum
of Holland, Polidore, Prince Henrick, Queen Katherine, Queen Hellena, Super
Eminent, Virgin of England, Virgin of Cullen, Virgin of Middlesex.

Purple and White JVLYFLOWERS.
ADmiral of Spain, Aliance Imperial, Andronicuus Beloved, Brown Purple,
Cleopatra, Court of China, Crown of England, Darius, Dolphin, Duke of Burgundy,
Fair Hellena, General Wigons, Grave William, Great James, King of Spain, King
of Assiria, King of Naples, La Placidia, New Appollo, New Hugomot, New St
George, Prince of Tire, Purple Imperial, Purple Paragon, Queen of France, Queen
Elizabeth, Queen of Portugal, Queen Biddia, Salisbury, Tapisere, Ulysses,
Warwicks Hero.

Scarlet and White JVLYFLOWERS.
ALbertine, Attalanta, Aurora, Baron of France, Bell Gentoice, Beauty of
England, Blazing Star, Brewers-Paragon, Pride of Holland, Duke of Cambridge,
Duchess of Cleaveland, Duchess of Brabant, Emperor Constantius, Fair Flora,
Golden Crown, Golden Piece, Isabella, Labella, Juno, King of France, King of
Poland, Land of Promise, Lord of Gaunt, Mirabilia, New Cook, New Paragon,
Aletta, Paragon Rike, Remus, Romu-lus, Rosamond, Royal Exchange, Somerfair,
Tiberius Caesar.

These Julyflowers are in their pride and glory July, and so continue till the
middle of August.

For the Raising and Ordering these choice Flowers, take these following
Directions. Besure to make choice of a good S^^l, neither too stiff, nor too
light; and withal that it is very rich by mixing good store of old rotten Dung
amongst the Earth, This Earth put into your Pots designed for your Flowers, and
therein set the Layers, either as you take them off in September, or else in
March Scissers from the Layers all the Dead Leaves, and the Tops that are too
long; and when you take them up to set into the Pots, let the Earth be about
the Roots, and give them convenient Watering, but not too much whereby to rot
the Roots. Let the Pots be so placed to have the Morning Sun only, for that of
the Afternoon does more hurt than good; until mid April water in the Morning,
and after Sun grows hot, in the Evening; and the Pots with Flowers so soon as
the Sun is gone off them.

The Fat and Richness of the Earth in Pots, is sooner waisted than in Beds, so
that every Year there should be a new supply of fresh and good, by taking away
as much of the old Earth, as you can without hurting the Roots, and putting in
more i^ the room; and also take away those Roots that are killed by the Cold.

When the Flowers begin to Spindle, nip off such that are smallest, leaving one
or two of the biggest at each Root to bear Flowers, by which means the Flowers
will be fairer.

From mid June to mid July is the best Season for laying Julyflowers, and if
well watered, they will take Root in about six or eight Weeks, and be fit to
remove if occasion requires; but the best Season to remove them is in March.

When the Flowers are Spinled, tie them to Sticks, and let all the Superfluous
Buds be nipt off to make the Flower the fairer. When the Flowers begin to
appear, open the Tops of the Pods a little, to give the Flower liberty to come
forth. Those Pods that break through the largness of the Flower, may be neatly
bound about with a Thread, or Wyre.

Your great care to preserve these tender Plants is in Winter, from Rains,
Snows, pinching Frosts, and cold North and East Winds; therefore be provided
with a Winter House, to set them in, as before advised; and in February and
March when the Days are Fair and Warm, set them abroad a little to Air; and now
and then a gentle shower of Rain to fall upon them, would much refresh them;
but be sure to take them in at Nights; and in April you may set them abroad
where they are to stand, filling up the Pots that want Earth, and cutting away
the dead Leaves.

But those that have not the convenience of a House, may place the Pots close
to a South, or West Wall, where with Boards made Penthouse-wise, they may be
defended from the aforesaid injuries of the winter Weather, which Boards may be
to take off at Pleasure to Air them; And this way by some Florists is esteemed
better than to put them in Houses.

Julyflowers or Cornations are also raised by Seed, for which observe these
Directions; about October cut off the Stems with the Cods of those Flowers you
design for Seed, which hang up in some dry upper Room until Spring, then rub
out the Seed, and Sow it, which will bear in the Flower Season.

CLOVE JVLYFLOWERS.
THe Clove is a more hardy Flower, and will endure to grow in Beds well enough,
but in the Snowy Frosty Weather shake off the Snow from them, and lay about the
Roots some moushy Straw, which is a great preservative of them. They are
increased by Layers, as other Julyflowers; but not by Seed.

PINKS.
THis Flower is of several sorts, and both single and double, the latter being
the best; and of those the double Feathered Pink of Austria is of most esteem,
being of different colors, but generally White and Reds. They are increased by
Slipings, and are most used to set on the edge of Borders, for which use is
also the Matted Pink.

SWEET JOHN'S, and SWEET WILLIAMS.
THese are of several sorts, and all bear many Flowers on one Head or Stalk;
and of variety of Colors; but generally white and red, with a mixture of both.
They Flower in June before Pinks; they are raised by Seeds, and the Slipings
also will grow.

The double Sweet John's, and the Velvet Williams are pretty Flowers.

Colombines.
THese are of many sorts, differing in Form as well as shape, being raised from
Seeds; the double are of most esteem, and are generally White, Blew, Murrey,
Red or Purple, or a mixture of some of these. Those of most repute Colombines,
the double Rose, the Degenerate, and the Virginia Colombine.

They Flower about the end of May, when Tulips go out. The Seeds are Sown in
Beds in April, and from thence Transplanted, so that it will be the next Year
ere they bear Flowers, nor will they continue double well above three years
without Degenerating, or turning single.

SNAP-DRAGON.
THis is a common Flower, and chiefly differs in its colors; the best sorts
are the white, the white Variegated, the red and the yellow Snap-Dragon.

THey are raised from Seeds, and bear Flowers the second Year after Sowing;
also the Slips taken off and ordered as the double Stock-Julyflowers, Flowers.

FOX GLOVES.
THis Flower is of several sorts, as to the size and color, the chief are the
Dun colored, the Orange Tauny, the great white, and the great Yellow Fox
Glove. All which are raised by Seeds, and bear Flowers the second Year.

Corn Flowers and Blew-Bottles.

This is a common Flower, and grows in Fields.

FLOWER GENTLE.
THis is of two sorts, the greater and the lesser, and of each many Diversities
and Colors. They Flower in August, and are raised by Seeds as others are.

SCABIONS.
THis Flower is of several sorts and Colors, the chief are the white Flower
Scabion, the red Scabion of Austria, and the red Indian Scabion. They are
raised by Seeds, and ordered as other such like Flowers.

LARKS HEELS.
THis is as well double as single, being also of several sorts, and raised from
Seeds usually sown in April, the chief sorts are the double upright Larks Heel,
and the Indian Cresses, or yellow Larks Heel.

DOUBLE POPIES.
THis is a very common Flower, and almost in every Country Garden; it bears
Flowers that are Red, Purple, Scarlet, Leadcolour, Blush or White, and one sort
that is very small, with the Flowers very double, they Flower in June.

MARYGOLDS.
THis is a Flower of a great Increase, and when once Sowed in a Ground, will
preserve it self being hardy to endure the cold Frosts, the Seed lying in the
Ground all the Winter. There are several sorts, the chief of which are the Corn
Marigold of Peru, called the Flower of the Sun, the double Garden Marygold, the
African or French Marygold, and the less double French or African Marygold.

BLEW BINDWEED, or the BELL-FLOWERS.
IT is so called by reason of the Flowers coming forth from the long Stalks,
and for shape (when blown) resemble Bells, one sort being called Canterbury
Bells.

Not much unlike these in the manner of growing is the Mervil of Peru, but the
Flowers of different Colors; they are raised from Seeds Sown the beginning of
April, in Hot Beds, and from thence Transplanted.

APLES of LOVE.
THese are received more for the beauty of the Aples, or Berries, than for
their Flower; which are of a Yellow Color.

GARDEN LVPINS.
THese are of four sorts, one with yellow Flowers, another with white, and two
with blew; they bear Pease like Blossoms of a blew Color; and are Sown in
April.

Not much unlike these are the Scarlet Kidney Beans, which of late Years are
very common in Gardens.

Thus having given you a Summary of the Flowers mentioned by Mr. Rea, with some
short account thereof; In the next place, I shall observe the same Method in
giving an abstract of Greens; refering the most curious Florists to the Book it
self.

CHAP. VII.
Of Greens, to wit, Ever-Green Trees, that bear Flowers, Fruits, or Berries.
THe BAY TREE is of several sorts, viz. the Common Bay Tree, known to all; the
Bay-Cherry, growing about ten or twelve foot high, as it were with a thick Bush
full of Boughs, adorned with bright shining green Leaves with whitish flowers,
which are succeeded by small Cherries, black when ripe.

The Wild-Bay is most proper to spread against a Pale, or Wall; It bears dark
green Leaves, with great Tufts of small white flowers with Blush-edges on the
Tops of the Branches, and has also small blew Berries that succeed the flowers.

The Rose Bay Tree is of two sorts, the one bearing red flowers, and the other
white, and both with small Stems.

The Indian-Bay seldom grows above four foot high, and has a thick Bush well
Leaved, with flowers of a greenish white, succeeded by Berries like small
Olives: It Is a fine Plant, and by careful keeping in the Winter may be
preserved; it is increased (as most others are) by Layers, every Slip having
the great Leaves stripped off, and set in March will grow.

The Wild-Bay of Portugal is much different from the former Wild-Bay, the
Leaves being browner, and the Flowers inclining to purple, but the Berries are
not unlike them.

The Cherry-Bay flowereth in May, the Wild-Bay in Winter; but most beautiful in
March and April; the Rose-Bay, and Indian-Bay in July.

The ORANGE TREES is a very tender Climate, and must be set in Cases, so that
they may be Housed in the Winter, as other Greens must be; and by careful
tendance it is of great Beauty, there being at one time flowers and fruit both
green and ripe; but with us it is in its greatest Beauty in the Spring. Young
Plants may be raised from the Kernels, set in rich Mould in Cases in March, and
tenderly kept; they may also be grafted in the Bud.

The STRAWBERRY-TREE is a slow grower, seldom exceeding five foot in height;
the Leaves are Green, like the Bays, and on the End of the Branches grow the
flowers with long Stalks, being little white Bottles like those of the Lily of
the Valley, which are succeeded by red Berries, which are ripe in October and
November; this Tree being then in its greatest Beauty.

This is a choice Plant to raise either from Seed, or Layers; but being past
their tender young Age, are hardy, and will grow very well under any warm Wall.

The MYRTLE-TREE is a very tender Plant, but by careful Housing may be
preserved in our old Climate. There are several sorts; The Broad-leaved Myrtle
grows in a thick Bush about four or five foot high, full of Branches, with
sweet and fine bright shining Leaves, with Flowers at the Joints of the
Branches.

The Lesser-leaved Myrtle grows like the former, but not so high.

The Box-leaved Myrtle differs only but in the Leaves, which are like to
those of Box.

The Double-flowered Myrtle differs not from the Broad-leaved Myrtle, only it
is not so large and tall; and the Flowers are white, very thick, and double,
and of a delicate sweet Scent.

The Great Spanish Laurel-leaved Myrtle is larger than any of the former; the
Leaves are of a whitish Green, and for flowers and fruit little differing from
those of the Broad-leaved Myrtle.

The sweet Indian yellow JESSAMIN is not above two foot high, adorned with
fair, shining Dark-green Leaves, with fair yellow Flowers of a sweet Scent,
like unto the white Jessamin.

The Variegated, or Striped PHILLIREA is a curious Plant, far exceeding the
ordinary ones, used for Ever-green Hedges: It will grow to the height of a Man,
and thick with small Branches, and Leaves, edged or striped with white.

These and the like Greens must be set in Cases, or Boxes, and carefully Housed
in your Conservatory at the approach of the cold Winter; but at first set them
in only in the Nights, and about March, when the Frosts are past, open the
Doors, to give them Sun and Air to refresh them; and about the end of April set
them out, washing them clean from the Dust and Cob-Webs, which they did
contract in the House. In the hot Season cover the Earth with Moss, to keep it
moist, watering them as occasion requires; and whilst they are in the House
forget not to Water them gently, especially in November, and after long Frosts;
but let not the Water touch the Leaves.

Also every Spring and Autumn, that is, before the setting the Plants forth and
Housing them, you take some Earth out of the Cases, opening the rest with a
Fork, or Tool, not hurting the tender Roots, supplying the place thereof with
good rich Mould, that is one part Earth, and two parts rotten Dung.

The Layers of the hardiest Greens are to be transplanted about Mid March, and
the more tender about the end of April: Let the Earth be very rich and fine
sifted before it is put into the Cases for the setting the Layers; and at the
bottom of the Cases put some small Stones, pieces of Brick, or the like, to
draw away the Moisture from the Earth, which will else prejudice the Roots; and
set not the Plants too deep in the Earth: When they are set, water them, and
keep them sheltred from the Sun and Wind until they have taken Root, which will
be about a Fortnight, and after that they may stand in the Air and Weather.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Flower-Bearing Trees, and Shrubs, that fall their Leaves in Winter, and
renew them again in the Spring.
THe Double-Flowered CHERRY is in all parts like the common English
Cherry-Tree, only in the Flowers, which in this are large, thick and double; of
a fine white Color, many growing together, which fall off without bearing
Fruit.

There is another Double-Blossom'd Cherry, called in France Merisziere, of the
common Black-Cherry, flower, as big as the lesser Double white Rose.

The Double-flowered PEACH-TREE is not much unlike the common Peach-Tree, only
its Flowers, which are double, consisting of three or more rows of Leaves of a
redish Blush-colour.

The Double-Blossom'd Wild POMGRANATE-TREE grows, if pruned up, about seven
foot high; otherwise is a thick Bush full of small Branches with some Thorns
thereon, and many shining green Leaves, and at the sides and ends of the
Branches come forth diverse hard, hollow and reddish Cups, and out of them
beautiful Flowers of a bright Crimson color as big as Province Roses.

The Double White PIPE-TREE, or JASMINE of Arabia, is a rare but tender Shrub,
having diverse long, slender, yet stiff Branches, whereon grow fair long Leaves
of a fresh green Branches shoot forth diverse Flowers, each in an Hose, like
those of the common white Jasmine, and of an excellent scent.

The PERSIAN JASMINE comes up with many small Woody Branches, bedecked with
fine small Leaves, and purplish blew Flowers, of a sweet scent.

The Tree of PARADISE of a dark yellowish Leaves, bearing along the Branches
diverse small Flowers of a greenish yellow.

The Tree of NIGHTSHADE is about a Yard high, with a Woody Stem, with many
green Branches, beset with small long Leaves, and at the Joints thereof it
puts forth two or three Flowers together of a Star-like form, and upon the
decay of the Flowers come small green Berries, that in December are red.

The Shrub SPIRAEA rises up with diverse Woody-stalks about a Yard high, and at
the Tops of the Stalks come forth diverse pale Peach-coloured Flowers thick set
together. It flowereth in August, endures the Winter, and is increased by
Layers.

WOODY St. JOHN's- WORT grows about a Yard high, is beset at certain
distances with Tufts of small green Leaves, and amongst them many small white
Flowers with purple in the midst. It flowereth in and about the end of April,
is hardy, and is increased by Layers.

The MIZERION, or Dwarf-Bay, grows in a thick Bush full of Branches, with
Leaves and small Flowers growing thick together; some of a pale blush Color,
others of a white, and others of a red; and when these fall off, small Berries
come forth, which when ripe are red. These Blossoms begin about the end of
January, and continue till the end of March. It is an hardy Plant, is raised by
sowing the Berries, which lie long in the Ground, not coming up till the next
Spring, and the Year following may be transplanted.

ROSE-TREES.
THere are diverse excellent sorts of ROSES, which former Ages were Strangers
unto. An Account thereof is as follows:

The English Red Rose, common to all; the Rose of the World, of a pale Blush
with red Spots; the Hungarian Rose, which is of a paler red than the common
Rose, and has many faint Spots in the Leaves; the Red Province Rose, which
has its Flowers large, thick, and double, with no great Scent; the Red
Belgic Rose, of a fine deep Red, with the Flowers very thick and double; the
Dwarf Red Rose, called by some the July Flower Rose, which grows low, with
the Flowers thick but small, and is of a pleasant Carnation Color, and well
scented; the double Velvet Rose, which has two or three rows of Leaves of a
dark Velvet-red Color; the Marble Rose, much of the nature of the Velvet Rose,
as to its growing; but different in Flower, which is larger, more double, and
of a lighter Red; the Rose without Thorns, or the Virgin Rose, much like the
Marble Rose, only without Thorns, and the Flowers are not so thick and double,
and of a pale Color; the Frankford Rose, which has large thick vvhitish
green Leaves, with the Flowers very thick and double, which are of a bluish
red, and very strong Scented; the Cinnamon Rose which is very early, coming in
May; it is but small, and of a pale red; the Damask Rose well known to all,
none being so common nor of so much use, especially for making Rose Water; the
party Colored Damask Rose commonly called York and Lancaster, differs in
that the Flowers are parted and marked with a pale blush, inclining to a white
upon the Damask Color; the Crystal Rose little differs from the York and
Lancaster only it is better marked; the Damask province Rose is very large,
thick and double, and of a deeper blush; the Monthly Rose, much like the Damask
Rose, but not so sweet, it commonly bears three times a year, viz. in June,
about mid August, and about the end of September; the Blush Belgic Rose, or
the white Province as being of a pale blush. Thus much for Red Roses.

The Single Yellow Rose, by some Florists esteemed but a wild Rose; The Scarlet
Rose of Austria grows much like the former, with single Flowers, which within
are Scarlet, and without side of a pa^e Brimstone Color. The double yellow
Rose has its Flowers of a pale yellow, and grows something like the Damask
Province Rose.

The common white Rose is of two sorts, the one double, the other single, and
both well known.

The Blush-Rose differs nothing from the White but in Color, which is a very
pale Blush.

The double Musk-Rose has its Flowers, that come forth on long foot Stalks at
the End of the Branches many together in a Tuft, not very double, and of a
whitish Color and strong Scented; They Flower in August.

The Ever-green-Rose, so called by reason the Leaves fall not off in the
Winter, but stay on until thrusted off at the Spring by the new.

The Great Apple-Rose has a great Stock, and many Branches, with the Flowers
small and single, Flowers are fallen, grow great, red, and of the fashion of a
Pear.

Mr. Rea says, that Roses are increased by laying of Layers, that is, the
Branches put in the Earth with good rotten Dung about them to grow the faster;
or by Inoculating the Buds of them in other Stocks; and the best Stocks are
those of the Damask, the white and the Franckford; and about Midsummer, or when
good Buds can be got. Stocks of Budded Roses must be carefully kept from
Suckers. But the best Stocks for the Musk and Yellow-Rose, and all those double
and Centiple-Roses are the sweet Brier.

When the Roses have done bearing, the Tops should be cut with your
Garden-Shears something near, and three or four days after the change of the
Moon, and then they will bear again about Michaelmass; and toward the Spring
each Branch should be cut again with a Pruning-Knife close to Leaf-Bud, and
what is dead or superfluous should be taken away.

JASMINES, HONISVCKLES, and some other woody Flower-bearing Trees.
JAsmines are of several sorts, the white Jasmine sufficiently well known and
much esteemed for its pleasant Scent; The Catalonian or Spanish Jasmine, has
its flowers much larger than the Spanish Jasmine much like the first, but the
Flowers double; The Yellow-Jasmine is a great encreaser, bearing small long
hollow Flowers. The Indian Scarlet-Jasmine has its Flowers, that come forth at
the ends of the Branches many together, which are of a deep Scarlet, veined
with small yellow Lines.

The double Honisuckle is so common, that every one knows it, nevertheless it
is to be esteemed, Flowers. The Italian Honi-Suckle is a very great spreader
and bearer, but not of so sweet a scent.

Virgins-Bowe^ is much of the nature of the Honisuckle; The Flowers are some
Red, and others Purple; some double, and others single.

Bastard-Dittany is a small Woody Plant that grows not above two foot high; It
is of several sorts, some bears a reddish Flower; some a white and some an
Ash Color Flower, they are all strong scented.

The Cistus is also a small Woody Plant, and is of two sorts, the Male Cistus,
and the Gum Cistus, which is the biggest and greatest spreader. This is a
tender Plant not enduring the cold Winter, which the Dittany will.

Other Flower-bearing Trees, and Shrubs.
THe Horse Chestnut, of some esteem for its beautiful fair green Leaves, as also
for its Flowers in May.

JVDASTREE has its Flowers before its Leaves, three or four standing together
like Pease-Blossoms, of a fine purplish bright red, which are succeeded by long
flat^ Cods; This is apt to put forth Suckers, by which as also by Layers it is
increased; It seldom grows above six foot high.

BEAN TREFOILE is of two sorts, the greater and the lesser, and both put forth
yellow Flowers, much like those of Broom, but lesser and pailer, which are
succeeded by flat thin Cods.

The great Bastard Sena^ with Bladders, has its Flowers in May, much like
those of Broom, after which appear clear thin and transparent Bladders with
black Seeds.

Spanish Broom puts forth its Flowers toward the top of the Branches in May,
which are much like the common Broom, but larger, and the Cods are long and
small. There is another kind that bears white Flowers.

The BLADDER NVT, if pruned up, and kept from Suckers, will grow to about six
foot high; its Flowers are white and sweet, many hanging down on a long Stalk:
after them greenish Bladders, each containing one smooth small Nut with a green
Kernal; the Leaves are like those of Elder. It is increased by Suckers.

The GILDER, or GILDERLAND ROSE; is a pretty larg spreading Tree, at the top of
the young Branches comes forth a round Ball of many single white Flowers close
set together. It is a hardy Plant, and is increased by Suckers.

The SPRINGA, or PIPETREE is of several sorts, but none very tall; the chief
difference is in the Flowers, one putting forth blew Flowers, another white,
and another a kind of a fair Purple Flower, at the end of the small Branches
many together.

CHRISTSTHORN grows about five or six foot high, has many slender Branches,
set with broad and round Leaves veined, also thick set together on a long
Stalk; This is that with which our Savior was said to be crowned. It is
increased by Layers.

The MYRTLE^LEAVED SVMACH rises from the Root yearly, with many small Branches
about four or five foot high, and at the top of the Branches come forth diverse
Flowers, which are succeeded by small black Berries.

The LARCH TREE is a very slow grower, and not common; bears amongst its
green Leaves beautiful Crimson colored Flowers, very pleasant to behold.

POMONA

To the Rt. Worshipful Sr. Robert Clayton of ^ Harden in Surry and of the
City of London* Knight and Lord Major there of Anno ^680.

This Plate is humbly dedicated by Richard Blome



I shall conclude this Chapter with some Ever-Green Trees worth the taking
notice of.

EVERGREEN TREES.
The CYPRESS TREE grows pyramidical, and is much used in Gardens; it is propt
up by a Pole which runs up in the midst, to which it is bound about with Wire,
but being a Tree so common, is known to all.

The TREE of LIFE is a slow grower, yet has many hanging-down Branches, on the
tops of which in May are small downy yellowish Flowers with standing small
scaly heads. This Plant is increased by Layers.

The EVERGREEN OAK is of a slow growth, and not very large; It bears small
Mossy yellowish Flowers in the Spring, and in some places small blackish
Acorns. This is increased by Layers.

HOLLY is common every where, but there is a sort that has Green shining
Leaves, varioly marked with a yellowish Color.

BOX is of several Sorts, the common English sort is known to all; the Gilded
Box, whose Leaves are edged with yellow, and the Dwarf Box, which is much
smaller than the former; and of this there is a gilded kind esteemed the best
of all. All Sorts are easily raised; for every Slip set in March will take root
and grow.

PYRACANTHA, or the Ever-green Hawthorn, if permitted to grow, will be about
six foot high, full of Branches, beset with Leaves snipt about the Edges, and
long sharp Thorns; The Flowers come forth in the Spring in Cluster, together,
as the Berries are that succeed, being of a bright red: It is increased by
Suckers, Layers, and by sowing the Berries like as you do Haws. This Green with
Phyllirea or Privet, makes a very good Ever-green Hedge.

The STAFF TREE is a small grower, and bears on a little Stalk four or five
yellowish green Flowers, which turn into small Berries, like Black Cherries;
it is of chief use for Hedges mixed with Pyracantha, and is increased by Layers.

The Ever-Green PRIVE^ grows low in a thick Bush full of Branches, and
Leaves; the Flowers come forth many of them together at the Joints, being small
and white, which are succeeded by little Black Berries.

PHYLLIREA or Mock Privet is of several Sorts, and all very good; the Flowers
which are many together, are of a Greenish yellow, after which come small black
Berries.

This Green, as also the Ever Green-Privet is excellent for Hedges in Gardens,
by reason they may be cut, and brought to carry to any Form by the Garden
shears, and so kept in any compass by Laths or Rods.

The LAUREL and the BAY are very common, Houses. They grow best against the
sides of Pales, or a Wall, or a House, and in the Shade.

CHAP. IX.
Of FRVIT-TREES, and how to propagate and manage them, as to Planting,
Grafting, Inoculating, Pruning, etc. with an Account of each sort of Fruit.
THere is no greater Improvement to be made on Ground, than the planting it
with Fruit Trees, especially if rightly ordered, and good sorts of Fruits made
choice of, which for the generality should be those that are durable, and will
keep the Winter Season: and also such that are most fit to make Cider and Perry
of* The charges and trouble of planting is inconsiderable to the great profit
accrewing thereby. But the Rustic People will not easily be persuaded to go
out of their old way, nor be at one Penny charge in expectation of a future
Gain; Therefore it were to be wished that when any Landlord lets a Lease of any
Ground, he would tie the Tenant by Covenant strictly to plant such a quantity
of Fruit Trees on the Premises every Year in his Hedge Rows, or such like vacant
places that will be no way prejudicial to the management of his Crops, were it
but four Trees to an Acre, which is but an inconsiderable charge; and they are
easily preserved from the Injury of Cattle by bushing or railing them about,
which may be done by his own hands at spare Hours. But to proceed to the
ordering and Raising them.

How to propagate Fruit Trees.
Diverse ways may be used for the raising of Fruit Trees, as by Grafting,
Inoculating, or Budding; also by Layers, Suckers, and Slips; and likewise from
the Seed, Nut or Kernel.

GRAFTING.
THe Art of Grafting, as also Innoculating does preserve the Species of the
most curious Fruits, and meliorates their Gusts or Tastes; for Fruits that are
raised from the Kernels do produce most commonly a kind of wild Fruit
^ngrateful to the Palate, participating of the wildness of the Stock, on which
the Tree was Grafted.

Sometimes Apples, and Pears may happen to be good, being raised from the
Kernel; but for Cherries, Plumbs, Aprecocks, Peaches, etc. produced from the
Stone, or Kernel, unless Grafted, or Inoculated* are esteemed but of small
value.

Things to be observed in Grafting.
YOur first business is to be provided with Stocks, which must be according to
the nature of the Tree, you intend to Graft; for Apples the Crab stock is the
best; also Stocks raised from every sower Fruit may do, for they bear the best,
and soundest Fruit, and the Tree will be the larger, and grow freer from the
Canker.

If you would have Dwarf Trees, make choice of the Paradise Apple, either
raised from the Kernels, or Layers, for the Branches are as apt to take Root as
those of Codlins; But by reason the Paradise Apple is a slow grower, you may
graft the Cyon thereof on a Crabstock close to the Ground, Inches higher
thereon, such Fruit as you would have, which will quicken the growth of the
Paradise Apple, and cause the Fruit to be better.

PEARS are to be grafted on Stocks raised from the Kernel, the White Thorn
commonly used is not good.

PLVMS are to be Grafted on Plum Stocks raised from Suckers, or the Stones, of
which Pear-plum is esteemed the best; and indeed any that have very large
Leaves and Shoots, are good either to Graft any choice Plums upon, or for the
Budding of Peaches and Aprecocks.

CHERRIES are best to be Grafted on black Cherry Stocks; but Stocks of a better
Nature may be raised from the Stones of the Black-Heart, the Duke, the Amber,
and the Morello-Cherries. For the Grafting the May and Early Cherries, the
Stocks of the common English Cherry is said to be the best, but it is not so
good for a Wall as the Morello, or other sorts, as growing too high.

MEDLERS are best to be Grafted on Pear-Stocks.

QVINCES are raised by Cuttings, or Suckers, which being set in good Earth, and
kept watered if the Season proves dry, will not fail to grow; and when they
have taken Root in Winter, remove them into your Nursery; and in a Year or two
Graft Pears on for Wall-Fruit, being esteemed better than Pearstocks, as not
growing so high.

APRICOCKS, PEACHES and NECTERINES are usually Innoculated in Plum-stocks
raised from Suckers, or the Stones; and those of the white Pear-plum, as
aforesaid is the best, as also for Budding of Apricocks, and Peaches; but for
the Necterine a Pear-stock is most proper.

GOOSBERRIES and CVRRANS, as also Services Innoculated on their own kind.

FILBERTS are raised from Nuts of their own kind, the like are Walnuts.

For the raising Stocks.
BBeing provided with what quantity of Stones and Kernels you design to Sow
about October (being then a good Season) let there be a Bed Earth well prepared
and dressed, and therein Sow the Kernels of Crabs or such like Apples, and
cover them with fine Mould sifted over two or three fingers thick. And for
Fruitstones you may prick them down in Rows two or three Fingers deep, with the
sharp ends downwards; and in the Winter cover the Beds over with long Dung to
preserve them from the cold Frosts, which when the Weather grows warm, as about
April, must be taken off. You must keep them clean from Weeds, and in two Years
they will be fit to remove into other Beds, to be Planted at greater distances
for the convenience of Grafting.

Cherry-stones are to be Sown, and ordered as Apple kernels: But before you
Transplant any of these Stocks, you must cut off such Roots as run down, as
also the Tops and side Branches, placing them in Rows, closing well the Earth
about them; and be sure to set each kind apart, for the knowing what Fruit it
is. When they are grown to a sufficient bigness, of about an Inch in Diameter,
they may be fit to Graft in the Cleft; and set not the Roots too deep, as being
more Troublesome to remove.

Crab, or Apple-stocks thus raised, are better than those that come from the
Wood, or any other ways.

The Nursery thus set, may be ready after one Year to Innoculate, and after two
or three Years to Graft.

Trees Grafted on a Gennet Moyl, or Ciderstock, preserve best the taste of a
delicate Apple, especially the Pippin; but on a Crabstock the Tree lasts
longer, and has a more tart palatable relish; the same Rule may be observed in
the choice of Stocks for Pears, Plums, Cherries, Aprecocks, etc. for the more
Acid the Stocks are, the more life it gives the Fruit.

Although the Fruit does generally take after the Graft, yet it is somewhat
altered by the Stock, either for the better or worse.

The Pear Grafted on a Quince-stock, produces its Fruit better than the same
kind upon a wild Pear-stock, and fairer, much better colored; and causes the
Trees to bear sooner, and more Fruit.

The Soil of the Ground designed for the Nursery, ought to be considered, which
should be a light Mould, not too rich, nor too barren, and that which lies
warm, will cause the Stocks to thrive the better.

Gather your Grafts of Plums, Pears, and Cherries from mid January, to mid
February, but those of Apples may continue till March.

Choose such as are of two Saps, that the old Wood to the knot may be placed in
the Stock; those of one Years Shoot will serve in default of the other; but
such will be longer before they come to bear. Make choice of such Grafts that
are strongest, and from such Branches that are fullest of Fruit Buds, and
aptest to bear; and bind every sort of Graft in bundles by it self, with the
Name of the Fruit writ on a Parchment L^bel, lest you should forget the sort;
and for your greater care a Book should be kept, where each sort is entered
down. These Grafts should be put in the Earth by themselves about half ways,
for preserving them fresh until you shall use them.

Grafting is an Artificial placing the Cyon, or Graft of one kind upon the
Stock of another, so as the Sap of the Stock may without Impediment come to
nourish the Graft. It is therefore necessary (the Sap passing betwixt the Bark
and the Wood) that they be exactly joined, and well bound together, which may
be thus done.

The time and Manner of Grafting.
THe best time to Graft is in February, and March, but forward Fruits may be
Grafted in January; and some backward Fruits in the beginning of April,
provided the Spring be not Graft, as mild Weather in December, or January may
be better than Frosty Weather in February; and indeed such kind of Weather is
not fit to Graft in.

Grafts of any kind being cut before they begin to Spring, may be kept many
Days; and carried a good distance, being bound up in bundles in Moss, and the
ends wrapped up in Clay, or Turnip; and although they are a little withered, yet
they will prove not the worse.

Having your Stocks or Grafts in readiness, as also all your Tools and
Materials, as the Pruning-Knife, Penknife, a fine Saw, a Mallet and a Wedge,
also Rushes, strong soft Flags, or Woollen Yarn to bind the Graft and Stock
together; and Clay well tempered with Hors-Dung, to keep it from Choping in dry
Weather, or soft Wax for smaller Trees, you may proceed to your work,

The first and most usual is Grafting in the Cleft, especially for the middle
sized Stocks, and after this manner; First saw of the Head of the Stock in a
smooth place, which for Wall or Dwarf Trees should be within four Fingers of
the Ground, and for Standards much higher according to the growth of the Stock;
then pare away with your Knife the Roughness that the Saw has left on the Head
of the Stock, which done, cleave the Head a Pith, and put therein a long Wedge
of hard Wood to keep the Cleft open; which cut smooth with the point of your
Knife, that the sides may be even; then cut the Graft on both sides from some
Knot or Bud in form of a Wedge, in length proportionable to the Cleft with
shouldrings; which Graft being so cut, place exactly in the Cleft, that the
inward Bark of the Cyon may closely join to the inward part of the Rind, or
Bark of the Stock, in which lies the Grafter; then draw out the Wedge: But if
the Stock pinch hard, lest it should endanger the dividing the Rind of the
Graft from the Wood, to the spoiling the Graft, let the inward side of the
Graft that is within the Wood of the Stock be left the thicker, that so the
Woody part of the Graft may bear the Stress; or there may be a small Wedge left
to keep it from pinching the Graft too hard; and likewise leave the outside of
the Graft a little the thicker; and in this business great care is required.
The Graft Stock, your next and last business is to cover the Head of the Stock,
with the Tempered Clay or soft Wax for the small Grafts, and leave not the
Grafts too long.

There is another way of Grafting much like the former, which is Grafting in
the Bark or Rind of the greater Stocks, and differs only in this, that where
you cleave the Stocks and fasten the Grafts within the Cleft in the other way,
here with a small Wedge made of Ivory, Box, or some hard Wood cut Taperwise,
with a thin point you force into the Stock between the Rind and the Wood after
the Head thereof is sawn off, and the roughness pared away. Then take the
Graft, and at the shoulder or grossest part thereof, cut it round with your
small Grafting-Knife; and take off the Rind wholly downwards, preserving as
much of the inward Rind as you can; then cut the Wood of the Graft about an
Inch in length, and take away half thereof to the Pith, and the other half
Taper it away, and set in the place you made with your Wedge, between the Bark
of the Stock and the Wood, that the shouldring of the Graft may join close to
the Bark, or Rind of the Stock, and then cover it with Clay, as before
directed. This way is best to be used when the Stock is too big to be cleft,
and where the Bark, or Rind is thick; and here you may set into one Stock many
Grafts, and that of several sorts, if you so think fit.

Your great care must be to keep the Top of the Stocks close covered for some
time, until the Bark it self has covered it; for otherwise the Rain will Rot
the Stock. And do not leave the Grafts above four or five Inches above the
Stocks, for if too long, they draw more feeble, and are more exposed to the
injuries of the Weather, neither do they prosper so well. And observe to Graft
your Cyons on the side of the Stock, that may receive the least damage from the
South-west wind, so that it may blow into the Stock, and not from it.

There is another way of Grafting, called Shoulder, or WHIP-GRAFTING fit only
for small Stocks, and to be performed somewhat later than the former; and this
may be done two several ways; first by cutting off the Head of the Stock, and
smooth it as in Cleft-Grafting; then cut the Graft from a Knot, or Bud on one
side sloping, about one Inch and a half long, with a shouldring smooth and even
sloping by Degrees* that the lower end may be left thin; place the shouldring
of the Graft upon the Head of the Stock, and mark the length of the cut part of
the Graft; and with your Knife cut away so much of the Bark, as the cut side of
the Graft did cover, but touch not the Wood of the Stock; then place both
together, that their Saps may exactly join; then bind them together with your
Rushes, Flags, or Yarn, and cover the Heads over with Clay, as before directed.

The other way of Whip-Grafting, is where the Grafts and Stocks are of an equal
size, the Stock must be cut sloping upwards from the one side to the other; and
the Graft after the same manner from the shoulder downwards, that the Graft may
exactly join with the Stock in every part; which done, bind them about with
your Flags or Rushes, and put Clay about them as aforesaid.

This way of Whip-Grafting is esteemed better than Grafting in the Cleft, and
for these Reasons, 1. This way requires smaller Stocks; 2. It is less injurious
to the Stock and Graft; 3. The Wound is sooner healed, and is better defended
from the injuries of the Weather; and 4. It is more easy to learn, and to be
performed.

There is another way of Grafting called Grafting by Approach, or Ablactation,
and this is done in April, sooner or later according to the State of the
Spring. It is to be performed where the Stock you intend to Graft on, and the
Tree from which you take your Graft or Cyon, stand so Sprig or Branch you
intend to Graft, and pare away about three Inches in length of the Rind, and
Wood near the Pith; cut also the Stock or Branch on which you intend to Graft
after the same manner, that they may join exactly together, and that the Sap
may meet; and so bind them about, and cover them with Clay, as aforesaid.

So soon as you perceive the Graft and Stock to Stocks, hitherto left on, about
four Inches above the binding, and in March following the remaining stub also
together with the Graft or Cyon underneath, close to the grafted place, that it
may only subsist by the Stock.

Some use to cut off the Head of the Stock at first, then join the Cyon
thereunto, after the manner of Shoulder-Grafting, differing only in not
severing the Cyon from its own Stock; both ways

This manner of Grafting is chiefly used in such nice and tender Plants, as are
not apt to take any other way, as Lemmons, Oranges, Pomegranets, Vines,
Jessamines, and the like.

You must remember that those Grafts that are bound you must unbind about
Midsummer, otherwise the Band will injure them.

There is a new way of Grafting, which is thus done; Take a Graft or Sprig of a
Tree you design Tree of the same kind, or very near it, and Whip-Graft them
together, and bind them well, and plant it where you intend it shall stand, or
else in your Nursery, which piece of Root will draw sap and feed the Graft, as
does the Stock after the other ways.

Be sure to untie the two But-Ends of the Graft and the Root, and that the Rind
of the Root join to the Rind of the Graft. By this means the Roots of one Crab
or Apple-Stock may serve for twenty or thirty Apple Grafts. In like manner you
may do for Cherries, Pears, or Plums.

And thus you may raise a Nursery of Fruit Trees instead of Stocks; and it is
esteemed better for the raising of Tender Trees, that will hardly endure the
Grafting in the Stock; for here they are not exposed to the injury of the Sun,
Wind, or Rain; Also Trees, thus Grafted will bear sooner, and the better for
Dwarf-Trees.

This way is easily performed, and may be done in great quantities in a little
time within Doors, and then planted in the Nursery in Rows and Beds, as you do
your Stocks.

Of INNOCVLATING, or BVDDING.
THis way of Innoculating, or Budding is by many preferred before Grafting, by
which means several sorts of delicate Fruits are propagated and meliorated,
which cannot be done by Grafting in the Root; as the Peach, Aprecock or
Nectarine rarely thrive any other way than this, because few Stocks can feed
the Graft with Sap so early in the Spring as the Graft requires; but being
rightly Innoculated in the fullness of the Sap seldom fails.

The Stocks to Innoculate on are to be the same kinds, as directed to Graft on,
but the Peach takes best on its own kind, and the Nectarine on a Peach Stock.

The best time for this business is from Midsummer to mid July, when the Sap is
strongest in the Stock, and bark easiest to be raised, and it is best to be done
in a dry Season, and in the Evening, for Rain is very pernicious to the Buds;
also the Buds must not be too young nor tender, but sufficiently grown. Those
of the Aprecock are the soonest ready, and must be taken from strong and well
grown Shoots of the same Year.

The Tools, or Instruments required in this curious Art are the sharp pointed
Penk-nife, a Quill cut half away and made sharp and smooth at the end, to
divide the Bud and Rind from the Stalk, and Woollen Yarn, Flags, or the like to
bind them with all.

Having your Instruments and Buds in readiness, you may proceed to your Work
after this manner, on some part of the Stock, either near or further from the
Ground, according as you intend it, either for a Wall, Dwarf Tree, or Standard,
and from the middle thereof gently Slit the Bark, or Rind, about an Inch long
in form of a T, not wounding the Stock; then nimbly prepare the Bud by cutting
off the Leaf, and leave only the Tail, about half an Inch from the Bud; then
Slit the Bark, on each side the Bud, a little distance from the Bud, and take
away the Bark, above and below the Bud, like a Shield, that it may the more
easily go down, and unite between the Bark, and the Stock; then with your Quill
dexterously take off the Bark and Bud, that you leave not the Root behind; for
if you see a Hole under the Bud on the inside, the Root is gone; cast it away,
and prepare another. When your Bud is ready, raise the Bark of the Stock on
each side in the Slit (preserving as carefully as you can the inner thin Rind
of the Stolk) put in with care the Bud between the Bark and the Stock,
thrusting it down until the top join to the cross Cut, then bind it close with
your Yarn, or Flags, but not on the Bud it self.

There is another way of Innoculating which is more easy, and successful than
the former, from which it differs only that the Bark is Slit upwards, from the
cross Cut, and the Bud put upwards, leaving the lower end longer than may
serve, and when it is in its place, cut off that which is superfluous, and join
the Bark of the Bud to the Bark of the Stock, and bind it as before directed.

There is also another way, which is to cut the Edges of the Bark about the Bud
Square, and cut the Bark of the Stock fit to receive it binding it fast, and
this is a sure and easy way.

About three Weeks, or a Month after Innoculating unbind the Buds, and in the
unbinding them you may see which are good by their lively appearance. In March
following cut off the Stock about three Fingers above the Bud, and the next
year cut it close, that the Bud may cover the Stock Grafts usually do.

Fruits raised from Seeds, Stones, Nuts, and Kernels.
SUch Fruits that are raised from Seeds, Stones, Nuts and Kernels, are Almonds,
Services, Chestnuts, Walnuts, Filberts and common Nuts; likewise Oranges and
Lemmons; all which are to Beds, and from thence transplanted into your Nursery
at convenient distance, where they are to stand until fit to be transplanted.

The best way to raise WALLNVT-TREES is from the Nut; which from the time of
gathering you may keep in a Bed of Sand, or Earth, until March, and then plant
them; and if you can, in the places where you intend they shall grow, (for
transplanting them does much check Mice which are great destroyers of them.

FILBERTS and NVTS are raised also from the Nut the same way as Wall-Nuts; the
like are Chestnuts, etc.

Fruits raised by Layers, Slips and Suckers.
THere are several sorts of Fruit Trees raised with more ease from Layers,
Slips and Suckers than by Grafting, Innoculating, or from Seed, and such are
Vines, Figs, Malberies, Barberies, Currants, Rasberys, Goosberys, Quinces,
Codlins, Gennet-Moyls, etc.

For VINES any shoot of the last Year (especially if a short piece of the
former Years grows be cut with it) will grow, being laid in February about a
foot and a half within the Ground long-ways, and not above two or three Buds at
the most out of the Ground; but you must be very careful to keep them watered
in the heat of the Summer.

The FIG TREE yields Suckers, which is the usual way to increase them.

The MVLBERRY-TREE is very difficult to raise; it is best thus done. Cut a Bough
off, as big as a Man's Arm, which cut into pieces Roots fit to transplant, and
the old Roots will yet send out more.

The BARBERY Tree is raised from Suckers laid into good Earth, as before
directed.

RASBERRYS, GOOSBERRYS and CVRRANS are also raised from Suckers, being all
great encreasers.

The CODLIN, as also the GENNETMOIL are easily raised by Suckers, and Slips,
being apt to thrive in any Ground, but that which is moist is best agreeable
with their nature.

QVINCES, like unto Codlins, are easily propagated from Suckers, which being
set in any moist place, will soon draw Root.

Of Transplanting Trees.
THe best Season to Transplant and set Trees is from Mid^ October to the end of
January, if the Weather be open; and if the Spring is not too forward in
February.

In taking them up out of your Nursery be careful that the Roots be not cut, or
broken, especially the Spreading Roots, and let the Roots be left longer than
the Heads, and the more vvays they Spread, the better; but such Roots as run
downvvards may be taken off; likewise the ends of those that you find too long,
as also most of the small Threads where they grow too thick: you must
likewise prune as well the Branches as the Roots.

The Ground being prepared where the Trees are to be set, raise a small Hill
in the Center of each Hole, which should be vvide made, and thereon set the
Tree, opening and spreading the Roots round about it, and cover them with the
best Earth, and shake the Tree, that the Roots lie not hollovv, treading it
down to fasten them.

Plant not too deep, especially in such Ground that is clayish, over-moist or
spewy; as also Gravelly, or Chalky; but as near the surface as you can, or
above it, raising the Earth about the Tree; which way one Sr. Josias Child or
Wanstead in Essex a great Planter has observed (to the admiration of
Beholders) his Ground lying upon a Gravel; for if Trees are too deep planted,
they generally pine away.

It is very necessary to be observed that the Ground where you plant your
Trees should be of a richer, and higher Mould than the Nursery from whence you
take them; otherwise they will not thrive so well. It is also a great check
to take them out of a warm Nursery and transplant them in an open vvide Field
free from shelter.

As near as you can, choose young thriving Trees, rather than those that are
large, for an Orchard of such young ones will soon overtake one planted with
larger Trees at the same time.

The Mode of planting is now upon a Square, so that you have a Row, look
which way you will; and for distance thirty or forty foot is very well, for
then you may make some benefit of the under Ground, either by Grass or Tillage,
Likewise the Trees will have more benefit of the Sun and Air than when
planted to near or irregular, and by consequence will thrive the better, and
the Fruit will be the fairer and better tasted.

You may set your Apple Trees at thirty foot distance, and between every Tree
set a Chery Tree, which Method is now much used; for by the time that the Apple
Trees will spread to require the place of the Chery Trees, the Cheries will
have done bearing, which will be in about Twenty Years time; and then they may
be cut down and grubbed up, so that you have then a sine Apple-Orchard. And be
sure let the Rows be of one entire sort of Fruit and not mixed, which is very
convenient for the gathering the Fruit, and laying them together in sorts.

PEARS are to be set as Apple Trees, with a Chery betwixt; But for Plums they
may be set in the Angles of the Ground, or in Hedgrows.

FILBERTS are best to be set to make a Walk, the like may Walnuts; and Codlins
are set at a closer distance, being good to make H^d^rows.

WALLFRVIT are to be Planted at such a distance as the hight of the Wall, and
the Nature of the Fruit requires; for the higher the (...) the nearer together,
and the lower the farther, that they may have room to spread in breadth, which
they want in height.

Of Pruning, Plashing, and ordering of Trees.
IT is found by Experience, that the Pruning of Trees, and taking away their
dead and unnecessary Branches, does much better their growth.

If you would not have the Grafts and Twigs to mount up too high, you may pinch
off their tender Tops, which will cause them to put forth side Branches.

In March is the best time to take away the small and Superfluous Branches,
giving them a ^^nce close behind the Bud, which is much to be Pruning.

The old Trees may be Pruned in October, and November; and thence forward until
the rising of the Sap.

Wall-Trees are to be pruned in Summer, taking away those Superfluous shoots of
the same Years growth, that hinder the ripening of the Fruit; and in the Winter
after the Fall of the Leaf you may prune and take away the residue of the
Branches that are unnecessary, placing those that

Some are of Opinion that the best time for this business, and to nayl the
Boughs to the Wall, is in February, after the great Frosts are past, except
Peaches and Ne^^^rines, which must be pruned when the Buds begin to put forth;
for if sooner, it will endanger the killing them.

In pruning of Trees (especially Wall-Trees) be sure to leave the small Twigs
that are short and knitted to Blossom the succeeding Year; for if Twigs have
the most Fruit, being usually of two Years growth. But cut off all gross Shoots
that will not be easily brought to the Wall.

In Pruning the VINE leave some new Branches every Year, and take away (if too
many) some of the old, which will much further its bearing; And when you cut
your Vine, leave two Knots, and cut at the next Interval; for usually the two
Buds yield a Bunch of Grapes, and when (through Ignorance) they are close cut,
as for Beauty sake, they commonly bear few or no Grapes.

The Pruning of Trees does much depend on the Discretion of the Person, who is
to consider the growth of every Tree; and what may most conveniently be taken
away without leaving the Walls bare.

Diverse necessary things to be observed about Fruit Trees.
THe Roots of such Trees that Thrive not, nor bear well, may be laid open about
November; and if the Ground be poor in the Spring, lay thereto good Fat Mould;
but if the Ground be too rich, so that the Tree spends it self in Leaves and
Branches, and bears but little Fruit; then put to the Roots, Lime, Ashes, or
any Manure that is Hot, Salt and Dry, being mixed with the Earth.

Digging about the Roots of the Trees, adds much to their Fertility, and
prevents Moss.

Stones laid in heaps about the Roots, preserve them cool and moist in Summer,
and warm in Winter; and cause great Fertility.

If your Orchard is not Naturally warm Seated, and defended from Winds by
Woods, Hills, or the like; I would advise you when first you Plant your
Orchard, to raise about it a good White-Thorn Hedge, which in a few Years will
be a good shelter. Also at some distance beyond the Hedge Plant a Row of
Wal-Nut, Chestnut, Popler or Lime-Trees, which growing higher than the Hedge,
will the better break off the Wind; But Plant the Trees at such a distance from
the Hedge, that the dropings of the Leaves may not fall upon it, which will
spoil its growing.

If the Tree be Bark-bound, and does not thrive, slit the Bark down the Body of
the Tree with your Knife in April or May, which will cure it.

If the cleft where the Tree was Grafted, or any other wounded place be
neglected, the Rain is apt to engender the Canker, which is hard to cure, if
far gone; and if cutting off the Cankered Branches will not do (it being so
much infected) the best way is to cut it down for the Fire, and Plant another
in its Room.

In Dunging of Fruit Trees, the Soil should be laid not close to the Body, but
at some distance where the Roots run; and strong and hot Dung is not so good,
as that well rotted and cold, especially for hot Grounds, but the Soil of the
Streets is far better.

For causing old decayed Trees to bear well again, about the end of October, or
beginning of November, Prune the Trees from their decayed, bruised, and
Superfluous Branches; also scrape off the Moss, which is as bad as Ivy is to
the Oak; then dig the Earth about the Trees at least a Yard round, and about a
Spit deep; and let it lie open all the Winter until mid- March, then give the
Trees a good Watering, at least a Barrel to a Tree, then lay on some good
rotten Dung, and cover it over with the Earth, then about the end of May give
each Tree the like Watering, and this will cause them to bear to Admiration.

To prevent the Bliteing of Fruit, when you find there is an Easterly, or a
Northeasterly Wind, take three or four Armfulls of Musty Straw, or Fern, and
that side of the Orchard that the W^^d blows on, lay the said stuff in three or
four places, according to the bigness of the Orchard, and so set Fire to it;
and the Wind will drive the Smoke and smother through all the Trees; and thus
do every Day so long as the Wind continues in that quarter; and it will prevent
all Blites, and all manner of Flies and Catterpillers that these Winds bring.

Orchards that lie low, and near Rivers, have Fruit waterish, puffy, and
subject to perish; to prevent which, in October or November lay open the Roots
of the Trees about a Yard and a half in compass, and at least a Spit deep, then
fill up the place with Chalk, and let it lie open all the Winter for the Frost
to chasten it, and to Incorporate the better with the Earth; and about the end
of March throw the Earth upon the Chalk, and give each Tree a good Watering,
and your Fruit will be of another taste for goodness;

Having given you sufficient Instructions for the Ordering, Grafting, and
Innoculating of Fruit Trees, I shall conclude this Chapter by giving an Account
of the several sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, etc.

Sorts of APPLE TREES.
GReat are the Variety of Apples, as indeed of all other Fruits, some coming
early for Summer Fruit, and others late for Winter Fruit. A Catalogue of the
choicest is as follows.

The Juniting. The King Apple. The Margaret or Magdalen. The Famagusta. The
Giant Apple. The good Housewife. Pome de Rambures. The Winter Queening. The
Quince Apple. The Carlisle Pepin. The Bridgwater Pepin. The Kirton Pepin. The
Golden Pepin. The Kentish Pepin. The Holland Pepin. The Green Pepin. The Roman
Pepin. The French Pepin. The Italian Pepin. The Black Pepin. The Russet Pepin.
The Summer Pepin. The Beauford Pepin. The Lincoln Rennet. The Golden Rennet.
The Great Rennet. The Kentish Rennet. The Russet Rennet. The Red Russet. The
Round Russet Harvey. The Harm Russet. The Nonsuch. The Royal Pearmain. The
Summer Pearmain. The Winter Pearmain. The Lowins Pearmain. The Apple Royal. The
Darling. The Angels Bit. The Blandril. The Year Apple. The Marygold Apple. The
Palman Apple. The John Apple. The Pomewater. The Sage Apple. The Marygold. The
Marygold Stocken. The Rose Apple. The David Apple. The Davy Gentle. The Flower
of Kent. The Henrietta Maria. The Old wife. The Gillyflower. The Gaunt Apple.
The Kitchen Apple. The Powel Apple. The White Coster. The Gray Coster. The Red
Coster. The Violet Apple. The Cotton Apple. The Pome Roy. The Boughton
Greening. The Harvy Apple. The Summer Belle Bon. The Winter Belle Bon. The
Breading. The Spising. The Master John. The Master William. The Bardfield
Queening. The French Goodwin. The Worcester Apple. The Sugar Apple. Sops in
Wine. The Paradise Apple. The Fig Apple, which is without Core, or Kernel, and
without Blossom, the Fruit coming out of the sides of the Branches, as big as a
Pepin.
Several sorts of PEARS.
For the Table.
The Summer Bon Christien. Burgomet de Buga. The Great Burgomet. The Summer
Burgomet. The Winter Burgomet. The Orange Burgomet. Brezid Heri. Baeure de Roy.
The Green Baeure Pear. The Violet Pear. The Binfield. The Greenfield. The Great
Musk Pear. The Great Russet of Renes. The Amodotte. The Bloody Pear. The
Rousellet. The Winter Bon Christien. The Pourtail. The Dead Man's Pear. The
Winter Musk. The Dionier. The Double Flowered Pear. The Dutate. The Primating
Pear. The Red Geneting. The Diego Pear. The Green Chissel. The King Katherine.
The Queen Katherine. The Russet Katherine. The Anthony Pear. The Berry Pear.
The Morley Pear. The Windsor Pear. The Musk Pear. The King Pear. The Summer
Poppering. The Green Poppering. The Royal Pear. The Pinp Pear. The Prick Pear.
The Whorwood Pear. The Colveil Pear. The Tradescans Pear. The Slipper Pear. The
Twelve penny Pear. The Inglefield Pear. The Norwich Pear. The Orang Pear. The
Swai^e Pear. The Nonsuch Pear.
The Pears for Baking.
The French Warden. The Spanish Warden. The Great Warden. The Red Warden. The
White Warden. The Green Warden. Parkinsons Warden. Godboults Warden. The Red
Roman Warden. The Quince Pear. The Painted Pear. The Tunip Pear. The Canterbury
Pear. The Bell Pear. The Black Pear of Worcester. The Winter Katherin. The
Baking Greenfield. The Great Surrein.
Other choice Pears brought out of France.
The Ambrette. The Averac. The Amadote. The Burgomot de la Grilliere. The
Burgomot de Suisse The Burgomot de Bugi. Baeurre de Autumn. Baeurre d' Hyver.
Bezidery. Bezideraisson. Bon Chretin d' Espagne. Bon Chretien d' este Musque
Bourdon Musque. Brouta Bon. Petite Cuisse Madame. Double Fleur. Epine d' Hyver.
Frondente de Bresse. Lansac. Martinsec. Monsieur. Petite Musquat. Roy d' Este.
St. Michael. Virgouleuse. Vert Longue. Messire Jean.
Several sorts of PLVMS.
Yellow and white Plums The Amber Primordian. The Prunella. The Diapered Plum.
The Marbled Plum. The Peascod Plum. The White Date. The Yellow Date. The White
Pear Plum. The Dutch Plum. The Apricock Plum. The White Mirabolin. the Red
Date. the Nutmeg Plum. Blew Plums. the Violet Plum. the Primordian. the
Perdrigon. Greenish Plums. the Damosine. the Green Osterly. the Green
Perdrigon. the Verdoch. the Peascod Plum.
Red Plums.
The Red Primordian. The Red Muskle Plum. The Cheston Plum. The Kings Plum. The
Queen Mother Plum. the Damasco Plum. the Foderingham Plum. the Imperial Plum.
the Gaunt Plum. the Red Peascod Plum.
Black Plums.
The Morocco Plum. the Barbary Plum. the Black Damosine. the Black Prunello.
the Muscle Plum. the Catalonian Plum. the Pole Plum. the Turkey Plum. the Black
Year Plum. the Pruine Damson.
Several sorts of CHERIES.
The May Chery. the Early Flanders Chery the Latter Flanders Chery. the
Flanders Cluster Chery. the Preserving Chery. the Morello. the Duke. the Arch
Duke. the Carnation. the Lukeward. the Black Heart. the White Heart. the Red
Heart. the Black Spanish. the Bleeding Heart. the Prince Royal. the Portugal
Chery. the Kings Chery. the Corone. the Biquar. the White Spanish. the Amber.
the Hungarian of Zwerts. the Ciliegi Birrielone. the Dwarf Chery. the Black
Chery of Orleance.
Of several sorts of QVINCES.
the English Apple Quince. the Barbery Quince. the Brunswick Quince. the Lions
Quince. the Portugal Pear Quince. the Portugal Apple Quince.
Several sorts of APRICOCKS.
THe common sorts known to all. The Algier Apricock is a small forward Fruit.
The Masculine Apricock also an early Fruit. The Long Apricock much like the
Masculine. The White Apricock better than the common sort. The Orang Apricock,
so called from its deep color. The great Roman Apricock, a fair Fruit good to
preserve.
Several sorts of PEACHES.
THe Nutmeg Peach is of two sorts, one white and first Ripe, the other red on
the side next the Sun.

The Troy Peach, also an early Fruit, and larger than the Nutmeg-Peach.

The Savoy Peach has a fair Fruit, is early Ripe, and of a redish yellow
color.

The Modena Peach comes from the Stone, is of a yellowish color, and excellent
tasted.

The Orleance Red Peach leaves the Stone, being a fine Stone.

The Morello Peach cleaves from the Stone, and is a fair redsided Fruit.

The Navar Peach cleaves from the Stone, and is of a whitish color.

The Magdalen Peach is much of the Nature of the Navar.

The Carnation Peach is a very good Standard.

The Alberges Peach leaves the stone, and is a fair yellow Fruit.

The Violet Musk Peach is red on the out side, and yellow within.

The Persian Peach is a fair yellow Fruit, but cleaves to the Stone.

The white Monsieur is red within, and white without.

The Bordeaux Peach is a large Fruit of a dark yellow, but red at the Stone.

The Verona is a very good red Peach.

The Smyrna is a very good yellow Peach.

The Rambovillet is a good dark yellow Peach.

The Peach de Pavie is a good yellow Peach.

The Slane Peach is a good yellow large Peach.

The Friars Peach is an excellent Fruit.

The Crown Peach is a fair Fruit.

The Newington Peach is a fair and excellent Fruit, of a greenish white, and
red next the Sun.

The Billice Peach is something of the Nature of the Newington, as is the Crown
Peach.

The Queens Peach is a good large Fruit, of a redish yellow color.

The Isabellaa Peach is a very good tasted Fruit, of a fair redish yellow
color.

The Violet Muscat of a fine Violet color, and is a good Fruit.

The Colrane Peach is a good red colored Fruit.

The Roman Peach is a fair yellow colored Fruit.

The Man Peach is an excellent tasted Fruit.

The Musk Peach is a large beautiful and good tasted fruit.

The Quince Peach so called as resembling the Quince.

The Portugal Peach is a good redish colored Peach.

The Lavar Peach is the same with the Nevar Peach.

The Peach Despot is yellow spotted with red.

The Royal Peach is a large fruit like the Queens Peach.

Several sorts of NECTORINES.
THe Green Nectorine is of two sorts, the bigger and the lesser, which is of
small esteem.

The Yellow Nectorine is also of two sorts, the large and the small, which is
the best, and comes from the Stone.

The White Nectorine is not much better than the great yellow.

The Paper White Nectorine is a smaller fruit White, but better tasted.

The Painted Nectorine is of a good taste, and is full of red Spots.

The Red Roman Nectorine is a fair and well tasted fruit, of a Musky scent, and
of a fine red color on the out side.

The Red Nectorine is an excellent fruit, and leaves the Stone.

The Murrey Nectorine is of a yellowish color, and not so good as the Roman.

The Tawny Nectorine is an excellent fruit, being red on the outside, and
yellow within.

The Russet Nectorine is of a Brown Russet color on the outside, and red at
the Stone.

The Orbine Nectorine is a well tasted fruit, being red on the outside.

All these aforesaid Nectorines and Peaches are treated of by Rea, fol. 210,
and 212.

Peaches and Nectorines are more tender then Apricocks, and the fruit requires
more the Sun Wall, that is, such that has the most influence of the Sun.

If you suffer the middle Stem to grow upright, the side Branches will not
prosper, but decay for want of Nourishment, the top drawing away the Sap.
Therefore when the Tree is young bow down the Head, and so Nail it to the Wall,
which will stop the Sap and cause the Tree to put forth side Branches.

Such Trees that are old, and decaying, cut down in March as low as convenience
will allow, leaving some Branches to draw up the Sap, and cover the Wound with
Clay; and the Stock will put forth new Lances, and in a Year or two come to
bear fruit again very plentifully.

Of VINES, and the several sorts of GRAPES.
THe small Black Grape is first ripe, it is a well-tasted Fruit, and set thick
on the Bunches.

The White Muscadine Grape bears large Bunches of great Grapes, both of a
sweet and pleasant taste. Of this Grape there are two sorts; of which one more
sweet and pleasant than the other.

The Canada Grape, or Parsley Vine. so called as having its Leaves much like
those of Parsley; it is a White Grape, thinly set on Bunches, and late ripe.

The Blood-Red Grape is very good for our Clime. Of which there are several
sorts; viz, the sweet Alicant or Spanish Tint Grape, the great black Orleance,
which is a very harsh and restringent Grape; which is usually mixed with the
White Grape, to give its color for the rough Claret.

The Red Muscadine requires much Sun, and is a large Grape.

The Raysin of the Sun Grape requirs also much Sun, and when ripe, is a Red,
large, and good tasted Fruit, but has little Juice, being very fleshy; it is
excellent to preserve and pickle.

The Bursarobe Grape requires also very much Sun, otherwise it will not ripen
with us: It is an excellent large white and well tasted Grape.

The Frontiniack is a white Musky sweet Grape, and requires so much Sun with
us, that it seldom comes to perfection. There is also the Red Frontiniack
which is much of the nature of the white.

The Muscat Grapes are very good, and great bearers, but require so much Sun
that they ripen very late.

The Burlet is a very large White Grape, chiefly fit for Vinegar, as seldom
being here ripe.

There are diverse other sorts of Grapes found in France, Italy, and other
Countries, which are not fit for our Climate; as indeed many of these
aforesaid, so that it is unnecessary to repeat their Names.

Vines prosper best in a dry, gravelly, or stony Ground; the wet, stiff or
clayish Soil being not agreeable to their natures; but the sandy light Soil is
the best. They affect much Sun, and delight to be sheltered from the cold
Winds. Every Winter the Roots should be opened, and Ashes or good rotten Dung,
put thereto, being well mixed with the Earth. From Christmas to the end of
February is the Season to prune the Vines, as before directed; but not until
they have had two Years growth. About the end of August clear the Vines from
those Superfluous Leaves and Branches that obstruct the ripening of the Grapes.

Vines are easily increased by laying the new Branches in the Earth, or by
Cuttings, which within a Year or two will be fit to transplant, as occasion
requires; and whilst they stand unremoved, they must be yearly pruned, as the
Vines.

Thus much may suffice concerning the planting of Vines about your House and
Walls. It will not be amiss, since I am entered on this Fruit, to lay down some
Rules for the ordering a Vineyard. And the rather for that it is now coming
into fashion amongst the curious of our Gentrey; All which I shall set down, as
received from the hands of that Honorable, worthy, and truly experienced
Person in these, and the like affairs, Charles Howard Esquire, Brother to the
late Duke of Norfolk.

First, You must be provided with a dry piece of Ground, of a Chalky bottom,
covered with a light Mould on the Top, but a fat sandy Soil is best; which
should be on the side of a Hill, exposed to the South Sun. Let the Ground be
well dug, broken small, and cleared from Weeds in the Summer before
Michaelmass; then from November to March, when the Weather is fair and open,
plant your rooted Vines of a years Weeds, and set Stakes close to each Root
about a foot high, to which fasten the strongest shoot, and let the other
branches fall down as they will. In April, or the beginning of May following,
just as they begin to bud forth their Leaves, bow the top of each Vine archwise
to the next Stalk, and there Branch will come out new Shoots, which will
produce Grapes that will hang down to the Earth, which will be the sweetest.
And this is all that is done to them until pruning time, which is from the end
of January till March; and then cut away the Branch that was tied the last year
to the Stalk, and arched down as low as an Eye, but one or two at the most, and
tie up another of the strongest Branches for the Stock, instead of the former,
pruning Branches within an Eye or two of their Bottoms; for the fewer Branches
you leave to the Root, the more Grapes you shall have the following Year.

Every Year the Ground in your Vineyard must be well diged, but not very deep,
and cast the fresh Mould in the Paths to the Roots of the Vines, laying all
plain and even and free from Weeds: Also in Summer you must Hoe up the Weeds,
for the barer the Earth is kept in the Alleys, Roots the Earth must not be
stirred in Summer, nor in the bearing time; but the elder the Vineyard is, the
deeper it should be diged, and turned up yearly, and old rotten Dung or Ashes
should yearly in February or March be mixed with the Mould; but use not too
great a quantity of Dung.

The best kinds of Vines to be planted in our Clime for a Vineyard, are the
white and red Muscadine, and the Frontiniack.

When your Vines begin to decay through age, plant Young ones in their rooms;
but they will continue a great while before Age decays them.

Keep the Vine-stocks about a Foot high, from whence let the Shoots yearly come
forth, pruning all the Branches, except one or two of the strongest, within an
Eye or two of the head of the old Stock; but prune not close to the Stock,
except such Branches that you would have to shoot again; for too many Shoots
from a Stock will hurt the Root; therefore leave but a few; and the best
Cuttings are from a Branch that spreads most in the midst of the Tree, and not
from the lowest or highest Branch, having five or six Joints from the old Stock.

Of the FIG TREE.
THe Fig Tree is of several sorts, and all most fit to be planted against the
Wall, where they may have the benefit of the Sun. These following are the chief
sorts.

The great blew Fig; The Dwarf blew Fig; The flowering Fig; the white dwarf
Fig; the Languedock Fig, and the Marcelles Fig; of all which the great blew Fig
is most fit for our Clymate, and is easily increased from Suckers and by Layers.

Of the SERVICE TREE.
THe common Service-Tree grows wild in many places; but there is a kind like
the Hors-Chesnut, common in France, whose Fruit is much larger and better than
the common sort. They are raised from the Berries which must be sown as Haws in
Beds; they are also increased by Suckers or Sets.

Of the MVLBERY-TREE.
THis Tree is of several Sorts; the Fruit or Berries being of three colors,
viz. black, white and red.

The Black grows to a large well Spread Tree, whose Fruit at first is green,
and when ripe, is black.

The White Mulbery grows not so large, is thiner set with Branches, and the
Fruit is smaller, and of a sweet taste.

The Virginian Mulbery grows to a large Tree, the Fruit is long and red, and
of a pleasant taste.

The CORNELIAN CHERYTREE.
THis Tree has its Flowers, or Blossoms small, yellow, and comes early, but
the Fruit is late ripe being shaped like a small Olive; and for color some are
of a shining red, others yellow, with red Sides, and some almost white. The
Fruit is chiefly used Phisically, being preserved.

The BARBERY-TREE.
THis is a common Tree, but there are two sorts something rare; the first has
many Branches of Berries that are without Stones, and some on the same Bush
with Stones. The other differs from the common, in that the Berries are as
large again, and far better for preserving. These Plants, are exceeding great
encreasers from the Suckers.

The MEDLER TREE.
THis Fruit is of no great Esteem, and would be less did it not come when all
others are gone. There are said to be in France, Medlers without Stones; and
had we this sort, it would be of some Esteem.

The FILBEARD TREE.
THis Tree is well received amongst all; there are three sorts, more rare than
the common known amongst us, viz.

The White Filbeard is the most common.

The Red Filbeard also common.

The Filbeard of Constantinople, which is much like the White, but has its
Kernel larger and better.

The NVT TREE.
THe great round Nut which is thicker shelled and bigger than any other sort,
the Kernel being as big as other Nuts, with their Shells on.

The great long Soft-shell'd Nut has its Kernel as big as an Almond, and very
well tasted.

All these sorts of Nuts and Filbeards are plentifully raised from Suckers, as
well as sown of Nuts.

Goosberry Trees.
THese are common in all Gardens, and easily increased from Suckers; the best
sorts are the Yellow and White Dutch Amber. There is a sort which is a small
Red Berry, of no great Esteem, but the large preserving Goosberry is of Esteem.

Curran Trees.
THese like Goosberrys are common, and easily increased from Suckers; the best
sorts are the large Red and White. There is also a Black sort, which as yet is
something rare, and indeed is like so to continue, as not being much received,
only for a curiosity more than for use, as the others are, which makes
excellent Wine, if well

Having treated of the several sorts of Fruits, in the next Chapter I shall
apply them to use; laying down some Directions for the making Wines, Cider,
Perry, etc.

CHAP. X.
Of the use and benefit of Fruits for the making of WINES, CIDER, PERRY, MEAD,
etc.
THe Planting of Fruit Trees is without doubt one of the greatest Improvements
that can be made of the most part of our Ground, the Fruit serving both for
Meat and Drink, especially Apples for the making Cider, which if well prepared,
and rightly made of Cider Fruits, is a most delicate Liquor, not much inferior
to Wine, and is more agreeable to the Constitutions of the English Bodies.

CIDER next to Wine may justly claim the pre-eminence of other Liquors. There
are diverse ways used for the making it, and sundry sorts of Fruits of which it
is made.

The Fruits most fit for this Drink, may be comprehended under two sorts, or
kinds, viz. either curious Table Fruits, as Pippins, Pearmains, Codlins, and
the like, or the wild, harsh, and common Apples fit only for Cider, as the
Red-Streak, the White Must, the Green Must, the Gennet-Moyl, ^liots,
Summer-Fillet, Winter-Fillet, Stocken Apple etc. The greater part of which are
so harsh and unsavory, that Swine will scarce eat them, yet affords an
excellent tart and winy Liquor, far exceeding the Pippin and Pearmain; and are
also of so strong a Body that the Cider will keep, being well preserved, seven
Years.

But there are some that prefer the Pippin, Pearmain, and the like curious
Table Fruit, to make the best Cider, as having in them a more Cordial and
Pleasant Juice, than the harsh Apples.

By observation it is found, that the more Red is in the Rind of an Apple, the
better it is for Cider, and the Paler the worse; and no sweet Apple that has a
tough Rind, is bad for Cider.

For the making of Cider let your Apples hang on the Trees until they be
thoroughly ripe, gather them without Bruises, and before you make Cider of them,
lay them in heaps in convenient places, free from Rain, or Dew, where they may
sweat for about a Fortnight, and the harsher and more solid the Fruit is, the
longer they may ly. This Sweating takes forth their Aqueous Humidity which is
injurious to the Cider.

Such Fruit that are Unripe, Wind-falls, or any ways injured or bruised, divide
from the sound, for it is better to have two sorts, the one excellent, and the
other indifferent, than both ordinary. And be sure to take away all the Stalks,
Leaves and Rotten Apples from either sort; for the Stalks, and Leaves will
cause an ill Taste, and the Rotten Apples make it deadish.

About twenty four, or twenty five Bushels of good Cider Apples thus sweated
will make a Hogshead of Cider, and if taken from the Tree, about twentytwo
Bushels.

These Apples thus prepared, may be either ground in a Horse Mill, like as
Tanners grind their Bark, or else beaten in a Trough with Beaters of Wood
rather than Stone; and the more they are ground, or beaten, the better; but the
Grinding is perferred before the Beating them.

After the Grinding, the Pulp should be put into a hair Bagg, or Baggs, and so
put to the Press, of which there are several sorts, but the Screw-Press

Being Pressed, strain it, and put it into your Vessel, which must be so placed
that it may stand to ferment, allowing but a small Vent-hole that the Spirits
wast not; fill not the Vessel quite until it has done working; then fill it of
the same sort, which must be kept for that purpose, and stop it well, only with
caution at the first, lest it break the Vessel.

The best Vessels for the Tunning up the Cider and to preserve it, are these;
the Barrel-Bords Bung-hole on the top; the reason is, that the drawing the
Cider through but slowly, the Skin and Cream contracted by its Fermentation,
descends and wholly covers the Liquor by the tapering of the Vessel, and
thereby preserves the Spirits of the Cider to the last, which otherwise would
wast and expend themselves.

Some Cider will bear a mixture with Water, Fruit before such a mixture is
made; and be sure let it be done in the grinding, and not afterward; for then
it will better incorporate with the Cider.

Some are of opinion, that before you press the Cider, after it is ground or
beaten, the Liquor and Must should ferment together in a Vat for that purpose,
close covered, for about twenty-four Liquor.

The other sorts of Fruits for the making the Cider, as the Pepin, Pearmain,
Gillyflower, Codlin, and the like Summer or Table-fruits, are very good
palatable Cider for a Year, but will not last good longer, as wanting the
strength of body that the others have.

In the Pressing, as also in the Grinding or Beating these Fruits, the same
Method is used as before Cider or Must is not to be immediately Tunned up, but
should stand in the Vat at least twenty four hours, or more, according as the
Apples were more or less pulpy, and must be close covered with Hair-cloths or
Sacks, to hinder too much evaporation of the Spirits; nor must it be kept so
close in as to cause Fermentation, in which time the more gross part of the
Feces will precipitate or fall to the Bottom, which otherwise would have
prejudiced the Cider Fermentation, and have made it flat and sour.

Then at a Tap, three or four Inches from the Bottom of the Vat, draw forth the
Cider, and Tun it up, wherein is yet a sufficient quantity of the gross Lee or
Feces to Fermentation; the want of the right understanding whereof is one of
the main causes of so much bad Cider in this Kingdom.

PERRY.
PErry is a Liquor not so generally received as Cider, nor indeed is it so
grateful to the Palate.

The best Pears for this Liquor are such that are not fit to be eaten for their
harshness, and therefore are commonly planted in Hedge-Rows, as the Bosbury
Pear, the Horse Pear, the Bareland Pear, and the Choke Pear; and the redder
they are the better they are.

Pears must be through ripe ere gathered; they must be laid on Heaps to sweat
as the Apples; and for the grinding or Beating, Pressing, and Tunning them up,
you must observe the same Rules as for Cider.

Crabs and Pears ground together make a good Liquor, for the Crabs help to
preserve the Perry.

Some Observations concerning Cider and Perry.
PEarmains make but a small Cider of themselves.

If the Vessel be tainted, boil an Ounce of Pepper in Water, enough to fill the
Vessel, and let it stand therein two or three days.

New Vessels give the Cider or Perry a deep Color, and an ill Taste; therefore
Wine-Cask are esteemed the best: But for want of such, put a little
Mustard Seed ground with some of the Cider into the Vessel, and it will help it.

Two or three Eggs put into a Hogs-head of Cider that is sharp, sometimes helps
it; and two or three rotten Apples put into the Cask will clarify thick Cider.
Also thick Cider or Perry by a second Fermentation may be made good and clear;
but that which is acid is seldom recovered.

Ginger helps Fermentation, promoteth its duration, and gives a more brisk
Spirit.

Boil Cider immediately after the Press, before Fermentation.

The Cider that runs from the Ground, or beaten Apples before they are in the
Press, are much the best.

Fill not the Vessels quite full, that there may be room for the Cider to
gather a Head.

The mildness and temperature of the Weather is of much concernment in the
Fermentation of Cider.

Wheaten-Bran cast in after Fermentation, thickens the Coat or Cream, and is a
great preservation to it.

Cider that is in danger of being spoiled, may be preserved, or recovered by
putting into a Hogs-head about a Gallon of unground Wheat, or some Mustard Seed
ground in about a Pint of Cider, or Sack, which is better.

Stone Troughs are not good to beat or grind Cider in, because they bruise the
Kernels too much, which gives an ill Taste to the Cider. And after they are
ground or beaten, let them stand a Day or two before they are pressed, which will
cause it to have a better Color, and does also cause it a little to ferment
and maturate in the Pulp. Also after it is pressed it is good to let the Cider
stand in a Vat covered, to ferment about twenty four Hours, before it is tunned
up, and then draw it by a Tap from the Vat within about two Inches from the
Bottom, leaving the Feces or Dregs behind, which will not be lost, Chaff, for
then it meliorates the Pur, or Water Cider, if you make any.

Your Cider, or indeed Perry, being Tunned up, leave a small Vent open for some
Days, until its windy Spirit is spent, which otherwise will break the Barrel,
or find some other Vent that will always abide open, to the spoiling of the
Cider, if you find it not out and stop it.

If Cider or Perry proves thick and sowrish, put into the Cask at the Bung-hole
some Apples, Cider, provided you draw it off into another Vessel within a few
Days after. But if it be only a little sowrish, or drawn off in another Vessel,
the way to correct or preserve it, is to put about a Gallon of Blanched-Wheat
into a Hogshead, and so according to that proportion into a greater or lesser
Vessel.

Mixture of Fruits makes good Cider or Perry, provided they be of an equal
ripeness, and well

The best way to preserve Cider long, is to Bottle it; in doing which observe
these Directions; You may Bottle it in two or three Days after it is well
settled, and before it has thoroughly fermented; or you may Bottle it in March
following, which by the curious is adjudged the best time. After it has been
botled a Week, provided it be new, put into each Bottle a Piece of fine
Loaf-Sugar, March, then you may put in the Sugar at the time of the Botling.
Your great care is required in the well Corking them, for if they take vent
your Cider or Pery (and indeed any sort of Liquor whatsoever) will be dead, and
by consequence spoiled. Therefore choose your soft spungy Corks, that will
swell, and to prevent their flying tie them about the Neck of the Bottle with
Pack-thread.

In Summer you may keep them in cold Fountains, or in your Cellers covered over
with Sand, and in Winter to prevent their breaking with the Frost, cover them
with Straw, and by this good ordering them you may keep them many Years,
provided the Fruit be good, and of a strong Body.

Of Wines made of the Juice of Fruits.
CHerries make a fine, cool and pleasant Drink for the Summer Season, but being
of no strong Body, will not keep long; yet the Morello Cherry will keep, and
for Brandy this does far exceed the Black Cherry, being of a curious Taste and a
great Cordial; for the making this Wine gather such Cherries that are ripe, and
not rotten or bruised, and press them in a Hair Cloth as your Apples, or Pears,
after their grinding or Beating. Let the Liquor stand in the Vat to settle, and
then draw it off into Bottles, which must be ordered as for Cider and Perry,
and well stopped with good Corks.

PLVMS make a good Wine, but not so brisk and fine as the Cherries; the Black
Pear-Plum is the best.

MVLBERRIES make a rich, and high colored Wine, and of a strong Body; It is
very good to put to small or pale Wines to add a Tincture.

RARSBERRIES is an excellent pleasant Wine; and if mixed with other Liquors,
adds an excellent high Flavor and Gust unto them. The usual way to make this
Wine, is to boil up the Juice with Sugar, and put it up in Bottles. Of this
Juice two or three Spoonfuls are sufficient, to put into a Bottle of Claret,
which will give it the Gust of Rarsberry Wine.

GOOSBERRIES extracted in their due time, being neither too ripe nor too green,
and mixed with Water and Sugar, make a palatable Wine; it is usually made
without boiling, because that contracts a brown Color, and Water is added to
it, to mitigate the strength. After prepare it thus; Let the Goosberries be
bruised, but not too much, which force from the Pulp through a Hair-cloth: The
Juice that comes out put into an Earthen Pot, the which let stand for four or
five days to settle, then draw it clear off into Bottles, putting to each
Bottle two Ounces of fine Sugar, and so Bottle it up.

CVRRANS are also a strong Wine; It is to be mixed with some Water and Sugar,
and is best to be boiled; when it is well settled, let it be put up into
Bottles, and well Corked.

QVINCES make a strong and excellent Wine, which is thus made; Slice them, then
press them in a Hair-cloth; the Juice must stand in a Vat, or Vessel, to settle
as the other Liquors, before it is Botled up. If Sugar, and some Aromatic
Spices were put in, it would much add to the pleasantness of the Taste.

MEAD or METHEGLIN being rightly ordered, is an excellent Liquor, the pureness
and whiteness of the Honey is the chief cause of its clearness. It is made
several ways.

I shall give you Instructions for the making it two or three ways, which are
adjudged the best.

Take one part of Clarified Honey, and eight parts of pure clear running or
Spring Water (but for weak Mead a far less quantity of Honey,) boil them well
together in a Copper or other Vessel, until good part be consumed; then take
it off the Fire, and when it is almost cold Tun it up, and it will work of it
self; Then so soon as it has done working, stop up the Vessel very close, and
if you have convenience, bury it under Ground for about two Months; if not,
keep it in a low place, and this will take away the taste and smell of the Honey
and Wax, and give it a Flavor like Wine.

If you would have it of an Aromatic Taste, to about 12 Gallons you may add
these Ingredients, viz. Flowers of Rosemary, and Margerom, of each a small
Handful; a Handful of Mother of Thime, one Ounce of Nutmegs and Cloves, an
Ounce of Cinnamon, and of Ginger, and Cardimum of each two Drams; slice the
Nutmegs, and Ginger, and bruise the Cloves.

Another way is, To twelve Gallons of scum'd Must or Liquor, as aforesaid, take
one Ounce of Ginger, Ounce of Cinnamon, of Cloves, and Pepper of each two Drams;
let all these be gross beaten, the one half sowed in a Bag, and the other
loose; and let them boil in the Liquor about

Some mix their Honey and Water until it will bear an Egg, by which rule you
may make it stronger or weaker at your pleasure.

Another way is, To sixteen Gallons of Must take one Ounce of Thime, one Ounce
of Eglantine, an Ounce of Margerom, and as much of Rosemary; 2 Ounces of
Ginger, one Ounce of Cinnamon, and of Cloves and Pepper of each an Ounce, all
gross beaten; of these Ingredients let

Another way, To about eight Gallons of Water, and one Gallon of Honey, as
aforesaid, add three or four li. of Reasons of the Sun, stoned, without any
other Ingredients or Spices.

Note that all Green Herbs are apt to make the Metheglin or Mead flat or dead,
and the Cloves make it high colored. The scumming it in the boiling is
injurious, for that being of

CHAP. XI.
Of the Benefit by Raising and planting of Timber Trees, and other Trees useful
for Building, Fuel, and other Mechanic Uses.
MAny and considerable are the advantages Wood and Trees, for it is
experimentally known that an Acre of Mountainous and barren Ground not worth
cultivating, being planted with Trees, and Coppices, will be worth an Acre of
indifferent good Ground well Husbanded; Also it improves and meliorates Ground,
if cleared and ploughed: And Trees being planted in Hedg-rows are very
commodious to keep off cold Winter Blasts that nip the Corn, and pinch the
Cattle; and also qualify the dry Summer. It also affords Timber for the
building and reedifying of Houses, and Outhouses; as also for the making of
Carts, Ploughs, and other Utensils, together with a supply of Fuel, so
deficient in many Champain Countries.

And besides these, and many more Advantages, nothing can render a Seat m^re
delectable than when situate amongst pleasant Trees and Groves, without which
it lies unpleasant, and naked, as being exposed to the Winds, and Weather.

There are several Sorts of Trees, very useful and profitable, as well as
ornamental; most of which I shall treat of: And first with Timber Trees.

TIMBER TREES.
THe Trees reckoned for Timber are the Oak, the Elm, Ash, Beech, Walnut, and
Chestnut.

The Oak has the pre-eminence of all others, for its strength and Durableness;
and for that reason is made use of for building of Ships, for which the English
Oak excels all other Nations. It is a Tree that will grow and prosper in any
sort of Land, either good or bad, as on Clayey, Sandy, or Gravelly Ground,
whether dry or moist, warm or cold; but that which is most agreeable, is the
black, deep and fast Mold, and rather dry, and on a rising Ground, than low and
moist. They will also grow on hilly and stony Ground, though but slowly.

For the Propagation you may sow Acorns in Beds well dug and prepared; the
Season for which is soon after they are full ripe; for they must not lie long
after they are gathered, for the withering Spoils them. The Spring following
they will come up and be fit to transplant into your Nursery at convenient
Distances, until they are fit to plant into your Grounds: But it is, and has
been the common Opinion, especially amongst the Country People, whose Custom
is to follow their Predecessors Footsteps, right or wrong that the Oak of all
other Trees will not grow, if set; but it is a vulgar Error, for they will grow
and thrive as well as any other sorts of Trees, as has experimentally been
found, not only by those raised from the Acorn, as aforesaid, but also by Sets
drawn up in Hedg-rows, or other places, and transplanted; but these prove
generally crooked, so that you should cut off the Shoot close to the Ground
when you plant it, and in the place thereof will shoot up another that will
grow straight.

Besides the great benefit by the Wood for Buildings, Pails, Rayls, Mills,
Sluices, etc. enduring both wet and dry, Wind and all Weathers, it is of such
use, that Tanners cannot dress their Leather without the Bark; likewise the
Mast, that is, the Acorns, are of great advantage for the fatning of Swine, and
that Bacon so fed (especially if they are fed with Pease some time after) is of
a delicate sweet Taste; and if salted with Saltpeter instead of Bay Salt, will
be little inferior to the Westphalia Bacon, so highly esteemed. Acorns are also
very good feed for Rabets.

The Elm is a Tree easily propagated, growing in most sorts of Ground; but it
most delights in light, loose, and moist Land, and on the Banks of such level,
and fertile Grounds, whether gravelly or chalky, it prospers well.

This Tree is raised from Suckers, which shoot from the Roots in great plenty,
which may be slipped off, and transplanted; or if the Roots of an Elm, that is
felled, be cut into pieces, and put into Earth, they will send forth Suckers.

It is a Tree very fit for Avenues, or Walks, by reason of its growing so
straight, upright and high, over-topping all others, as also so near together;
and is of that flexibleness that it may be

If it is felled between November and February, it will be all heart, or Spine,
having little or no Sap; and is of great use for making all things that lie
always wet, or always dry.

The ASH is a quick growing Tree, thriving in any sort of barren, montainous
and dry Ground, but not so well for Timber, as in Coppice-Woods, nor will it
thrive so well as on good Ground, or such that is of a chalky, and white

It Is raised from the Seed, or Keys, which must be gathered when they begin to
fall about October, and so sown in Beds, as you do your Acorns or Haws, and the
next Spring come Twelvemonth they will appear, and thrive very well; but they
must be removed, and set thinner whilst they are small, by reason of their
speedy deep rooting. You must not cut off the Tops of the young small Ashes, by
reason it is a sappy Sets it is good to cut them near the Ground, for then they
will send forth new Shoots that will be better and larger. You may also have
Plants drawn by those that draw Quick-setts, which will prove very good; but
not like unto those that are raised in a Nursery, as aforesaid.

If you would raise these Trees on Hills or open Grounds, the best way is to
sow the Seeds in the place, either before, or after the Plough; Coppices, or in
such places where the Plough cannot pass, then to prick in amongst the Ridges
of Hasel, or the like shruby stuff, which will defend it from Cattle until the
Trees are grown up.

The Season for setting the Ash for use, is from November to February; for if
the Sap be but a little in the Tree the Worm takes it, and soon Spoils the Wood.

The Ash is a speedy grower, and is of general Carpenters, Joyners,
Wheelrights, Coopers, Turners, and other Artificers, and is also much used by
Gardiners for Arbours, Palisado-Hedges, Hop-poles, etc. and for firing no Wood
is comparable to it, either green or dry.

The BEECH delights to grow in gravelly, stony, sandy and warm Ground; and on
the sides and Tops of high Hills, and chalky Mountains.

This Tree will grow to a great bigness, and is Mast, as the Oak; as also from
young Plants drawn up, and Planted as before directed; for the Oak, whilst it
is very young it grows but slowly, but when it is gotten out of the way, no
Tree thrives better; and although it be crooked, knotty and ill shapen, whilst
it is young, yet it will be otherwise when it comes to its full growth.

It is a Wood of a fine, clean and white Grain, and not apt to slit or rend,
which occasions it to be so much used by Turners, Joyners, Vpholsterers, and
the like Handy-crafts. The Mast is very good and sweet Feed for Swine, Deer,
Pheasants, etc.

The WALNVT-TREE is a Wood of a fine Grain, and of a curious brown Color,
being of excellent use for curious Works, and therefore much used by the
Cabinet-makers, Gun-smiths, and such like Artificers. It delights in a good
deep Mould, and is raised from the Nut, as before directed in the Chapter of
Fruit Trees.

The CHESNVT delights in a light Ground, or in a moist Gravel, but will grow in
any Soil; It is also raised by the Nut as the Wal-nut: it is a durable Wood for
Building, and its Fruit is good for the Table, especially roasted in the
Embers; and is esteedmed excellent for the Fatning of Swine.

Of Trees for Fuel, and other uses.
THe BIRCH is a Tree that will grow and thrive in any place, as well on the hot
Gravelly and sandy Ground, as on the cold, wet, and moorish. It Is raised from
Suckers, planted at convenient distances, five or six Foot asunder, which soon
will grow up to Trees. After the first Year they should be cut within an Inch
of the Ground, which will cause them to shoot out the stronger.

The Wood is useful for Turners, and makes good Charcoal.

This Tree yields the best Sap, and most in quantity of any in the Kingdom,
which being prepared, either with Sugar or Honey, makes a pleasant Liquor,
which now bears the name of Birch-Wine. It is thus to be drawn from the Trees;
Cut off some of the small Branches, and hang Bottles with the ends of the
Branches so cut put into their months, into which the Christallin Liquor will
distill. You may also bore a Hole into the Body of the Tree, putting therein a
Tap, to which hang a Bottle to receive the said Liquor. And by either of these
ways good quantities thereof may be extracted in the Months of February and
March when the Sap ascends, and before the Spring of the Leaf. It will run best
when the Sun shines warm, or when the Wind is South, or West. This Liquor thus
extracted, and well prepared, makes a very good and palateable Wine.

The MAPLE delights most in a sound and dry Soil, either in Woods or Hedgrows.
It is raised from the Keys, as the Ash. The Wood is very good for Turners and
Joyners, being of a fine, light, and white Grain.

The QVICK-BEAM delights in a light Ground, in Mountains and Woods. It Is a
quick growing Wood, of chief use for Fuel, and is raised from the Setts; or
the Berrys, which when ^ipe, may be sown.

The HORN-BEAM agrees best with Barren, cold and hilly Grounds; it is to be
raised by Sets, which when set, must be cut within half a Foot of the Ground,
and from the Seds sown in October, which are ripe in August. It is a very hard
Wood, and fit for Mill-wrights. If planted at about a Foot or eighteen Inches
asunder in a single Row, it makes a fine Hedge, for it grows tall, with Leaves
to the Foot of the Stems.

The HASEL grows in any kind of Ground, and chiefly in Coppices; it is raised
from the Nut, or from Sets, as the Filbeard, and is of principal use for Fuel.

Of Aquaticks, or Trees growing in watery places.
THe POPLAR thrives best on the Banks of Rivers, or Ditches, but not in the
Water, as the Willow; It Is raised from the Branches cut off, and thrust into
the Ground; but cut not off the Top, until they have stood two or Foot high; or
you may let them run up without topping, which is more ornamental, but not so
profitable. They may be planted at three or four Foot asunder, and will grow
very well.

The Wood is good for Turners, as well as for Fuel, being very profitable, and
a great grower.

The ASPEN TREE little differs from Poplar; only it will grow in dry places,
and not in wet; it is raised by Suckers, and must be ordered as the Poplar, not
cutting off the Head, the first or second Year.

The ABELE TREE is a kind of white Poplar, but of a finer Grain, it is raised of
Slips from the Roots, as also from Layers, and Cutings; it is a speedy grower,
and therefore very profitable to Plant.

The WILLOW delights in wet and moorish Canker. They are to be cut Taperwise,
at the lower part, which is to be thrust into the Ground, a deep Hole being
made in the Ground by an Iron Crow, and the Set being thrust down therein,
great care Cattle, to loosen them for two or three Years, and afterward they
are past all danger: You must also keep them clean from Suckers, which draw
away the Sap that should ascend to the Branches for their nourishment, and at

The Willow is of great profit, and useful for diverse occasions, besides for
Fuel; so that it is observed that a Willow will buy a Horse, before an Oak will
buy a Saddle.

The WITHY is a larg Tree, and should be planted on high Banks, by reason their
Roots run very deep in the Earth.

The SALLY is a very quick grower, and delights in Moorish Grounds, as the
Willow.

The OSIER requirs constant Moisture, and therefore must be planted in such
places that are subject to frequent overflowings. They are raised from the
Shoots or Sets that should be cut about February, and thrust into the Ground,
much after the way as the Willow-Sets. They are very profitable and used by
Basket-makers, Gardiners, etc. an Acre being esteemed to be worth as much as an
Acre of Wheat.

Of TREES for FENCING.
FEncing and enclosing of Ground being of such great benefit as already has
been discoursed, it will be necessary to treat of such Trees as are requisite
for the same, with Directions how to raise, and order them; and first of the
White-Thorn.

The WHITE-THORN is esteemed the best for Fencing, being a strong and durable
Hedge; it is to be raised from Plants, or by sowing the Haws in Beds dug and
prepared, as before directed, and from thence (when sprung up) to be
Transplanted, which is the surest and best way; for the Garden-Quick (being
that which is sown) is esteemed far before the Plants drawn up in Hedg-rows
and Fields, and will thrive much beter, as being young and not stunted. The
best way to set your Quick sets is on the flat, the Ground being well dug and
finely ordered, and let the Bordure consist of three Rows, and your Sets
planted at about nine Inches distance, which will make a stout Hedge; If you
are not well stored with Quick sets, two Rows may serve. Be sure to keep the
Bordure clean weeded, and hoed, which is a great furtherance to their growing;
otherwise they will be choked up. After two Seasons you may cut them, which
will cause them to shoot out the better, and thicker; and if the Season is dry,
forget not to water them, which is a great preserver. And lastly provision,
must be made to preserve them from the Injuries of Cattle, by raising Fences on
each side, if it so requires. The common way to plant Quick is on the Bank, and
a Hedge on the Top, which is not so good, for these reasons; First, being on
the dry Bank the Sun has more power, and so siccicates the Earth, that there
is not that Moisture to nourish the Quick, as that planted on the Flat.
Secondly, The Bank being shelving, that Rain in the Summer Season that should
refresh it, falls away into the Ditch; and Thirdly, In the Winter Season,
which generally is wet, the Drippings that fall from the Hedge planted on the
Top of the Bank, do kill it; And these are the Reasons why there is so many
Gawls in those Hedges, which are not to be seen in those planted on the Flat.

The BLACK-THORN is a good Fence, and raised as the White-Thorn.

The HOLLY, for sight, ornament and defense, is by many preferred; before the
White-Thorn, being always green, and so thick that it is not to be seen
through; the only fault is, it is very slow in growing. It is raised of the
Berries, and of Sets, as the White-Thorn; but the Sets are more difficult to
grow, unless they are planted late in the Spring, and well watered.

The PYRACANTHA is an excellent Fence, having strong prickly Branches, and the
Leaves are always green. It is quick of growth, and Coralline-Berries, which
hang most part of the Winter on the Trees, or from Suckers or Slips. The
Berries lie in the Ground as long as those of the White-Thorn.

The ELDER makes a good Fence for a Shelter, but not for Security, as not being
so thick: the Cuttings set will grow, being kept watered.

The FVRZES, called Devonshire Furzes, Rill-Plough, or with a Hoe; three or
four Rows are sufficient. This will grow upon a dry Bank, and be far better
than any dead Hedge.

If you have any barren Ground, not worth Plowing and Sowing, it is good
Improvement to Plow and Sow it with Furz-seed for Fewelling, Brewing, Baking,
or the like uses.

All these sorts of Hedges are to be ordered and kept, as before directed for
the White-Thorn.

Of Trees for Ornament of Gardens, Avenues, Parks, and the like.
THe LIME is of all Trees the most beautiful Walks, and most uniform both as to
its height and spreading Branches; and if set near together, affords a pleasant
dark Shade; Its Blossoms in June and July are very fragrant and pleasing to the
Scent.

It delights in a good rich and deep Soil: It Is raised from Seeds or Berries
that drop from the Trees in Autumn, as also from Suckers, as the Elm-Tree is.

For the greater Ornament they are Cut or Trees may be of an equal Height; but
it suffered to mount up without checking, they will become very tall in a short
time, being quick growers.

The SYCAMORE is a Tree that delights in any indifferent or light Ground, but
rather in a moist than dry. It is raised of the Keys, and sown in Autumn, when
they fall from the Trees, which will come up the next Spring, being of a Sets
out from the Trees will grow, if set in moist Ground, and kept watered.

The FIR, PINE, PINASTER, and PITCH-TREE, delights in cold, high, and rocky
Mountains; but Ground that is hot, dry, and sandy, is not good; they are raised
of the Kernels taken out of the Clogs, which being laid in Water some Days, and
then laid before some gentle Fire, will open so that you may get out the Seeds,
which must be sown in Beds, as before directed for other sorts.

The Fir may be raised from Slips, it grows lofty and straight; but the
Pinaster bears the proudest and stateliest Branches, and has a fairer and more
beautiful Leaf.

Out of these Trees are made Turpentine, Rosin, Pitch, and Tar,

The HORSE-CHES NVT prospers well in England, delighting in Ground that is not
too dry; the best is a rich Garden-Mould. It is a quick grower, being raised by
Layers, and affords a pleasant sight in the Spring, when its Turpentine Buds
put forth into curious Leaves, and bears a Cluster of fine Flowers.

The LOCVS, LARCH, and PLANTANVS, are not in much esteem amongst us; but afford
an excellent Shade.

The CYPRESS is a curious Tree, and delights most in a warm and dry Ground. It
is raised from the Seed, sown in March, and well endures removing, and may be
brought to grow in any fashion, either Pyramidal, which is the usual way, or in
Hedges kept clipped.

The CAEDAR is a Tree not common amongst us, but grows in great plenty in
America. It is raised of the Seeds, and may grow in our Climate, being a
beautiful Tree.

The EVGH-TREE is an Ever-green, most commonly growing in Churchyards. It Is
raised from the Seeds sown in Beds, which will not come up till the second
Year. It is also raised of Suckers or Plants, but is difficult to grow. The
Wood is very hard, and fit for diverse curious Works.

The BAY TREE delights to grow best in the Shade, like unto the Laurel; yet it
will grow in most Places and Soils. It is raised from Seeds, Suckers, Sets, or
Layers, as the Laurel.

The PRIVET has been formerly more used than at present for Hedges between
Walks, as also for Arbors, being an Ever-green.

The PHILLYREA is a beautiful Plant, always in its Verdure, and now much used
in Hedges, Arbors, or the like, instead of Privet: It delights in a warm fertile
Soil; it is a very quick grower, and may be raised of the Seeds or Berries, sown
in the Spring; as also of the Slips, set like the Slips of Box.

The ALATERNVS prospers well in this Kingdom; It is very beautiful and useful
for Hedges and Arbors, being green, with an early Blossom. It Is raised from
Seeds, and is a swift grower.

Certain Rules to be observed for the better rasing the aforesaid Trees in way
of Nursery.
ALthough Trees may be raised by Suckers, Sets, Slips, and the like, yet the
best and surest way is from the Seed; for they take Root soonest, and thrive
far faster, which is contrary to most Fruit Trees, and make the streightest and
fairest Trees.

The best time for sowing your Seeds is in the Spring, for then neither the
Coldness of the Winter, nor the Mice and other Vermin will prejudice them; and
for the better preserving them from drying, rotting or decaying, you may put
them into Pots or Vessels, with a mixture of Earth or Sand not too dry, and at
the Spring you Autumn.

The Masts, or Seeds that you design to sow should be taken from good thriving
Trees, with sound Stocks; also the Seed should be weighty, clean, and bright.

The Ground for your Nursery should be well fenced in, and sheltered from the
North and East Winds, and of a Soil something dry; for Trees will better
thrive, being removed out of dry into Weeds. Being thus prepared, sow your
Seeds in small Furrows or Trenches, about five Inches deep, and about two Foot
broad, with a convenient distance betwixt, for the better wedding and dressing
the young Sets, and cover them over with Earth with a Garden-Rake, and let
every sort of Seed be sown apart.

The place where you sow your Firs, Cypresses, Pines, and other tender
Winter-Greens, should be sheltered from the cold Winds, and such Seeds should
not be sown above an Inch deep, and finely covered over with sifted Mould; and
for the more convenient removal of the Pine, you may set two or three Seeds in
an Earthen Pot without a Bottom, filled with rich Mould, setting them into the
Ground up to the Brims. When they grow, leave only one, which in two Pot.

These young Plants must be carefully kept from Weeds, and in a dry Season
water them. In the cold Winter Season you may lay over them some Bushes or
Furzes, with Straw scattered over to preserve them from the cold Winds.

For the raising a Coppice from Masts or Seeds, let the Ground be well
Ploughed, as if for Corn, and sow it with Winter Corn, mixed with your Mast,
Nuts, Berries, and Seeds that you intend to sow; Let the Corn be reaped high,
for the Stubble is a great preservative of the young Shoots in the Winter, and
so lay it up for a Coppice, fencing it about that Cattle annoy it not.

Concerning Transplanting Trees.
THe best Season for Transplanting of Trees, Leaf; but they may be removed any
time after in open Weather, until February.

Cut not off the Tops of the Ash, Lyme, Sycamore, and the like Trees that are
pithy, the first Year of their removal, because the Wet will be apt to perish
them; neither cut off the Heads, not too many of the Branches or Roots of the
Firs, Pines, or the like Trees, by reason of their aptness to spend their Gum,
which is very injurious to them.

In the transplanting of the Suckers Cions, Layers or Slips of the Lime, Elm,
Horse-Chesnut, Birch and such like Trees so propagated, you are to observe the
same Season, and Method as you do in the removal of the young Seedlings of the
other Trees; only that for the sliping or laying of such Branches of Trees that
had not before taken any Wet, the best time is in the Top of the Spring, when
the Sap is newly risen, and the Trees ready to Bud.

All Ever-Greens are to be removed in the Spring, for the Cold would kill them
before they come to draw Root.

All Aquaticks, as the Willow, Poplar, Osier, Alder, Aspen, Withy; and the
like, that are raised of Sets, are to be planted in the Months of January and
February.

In transplanting be careful to preserve the smallest Roots that gather the
Sap, and in filling the Earth about the Roots keep them to a Level, with Earth
between them; for the well settling these Roots conduces much to the thriving
of the Tree; and leave as much of the Root as you can, cuting only the
Top-Root, or down right Roots, spreading the rest every way, that they may the
better get nourishment for the Tree.

Plant not too deep, nor below the good Earth into Gravel, Clay, Sand, Water,
or the like, but rather very shallow, and raise up the Earth about the Trees in
Hillocks, and as near as you can transplant into better Mould, as before
directed; and the Holes ought to be made larger and deeper than the Tree
riquires, to the end it may be filled up with loose Earth, which is better for
the young Roots to Earth in.

In the setting your Trees, you ought to observe a Distance answerable to the
sort of Trees, as the Oak, Walnut, and such like spreading Trees should be
planted at greater distances, at least forty Foot asunder. The Chestnut, Ash,
Beech, Fir, etc. may stand something nearer, and the Elm, Hornbeam, as also the
Aquaticks, will grow very near, even to touch one another.

If you water your Trees soon after their Transplanting, it conduces much to
their growing, settling the Earth about the Roots, except it be in an extreme
cold Season, and the Plant of a tender kind; however be not wanting of watering
any Sort in a dry Season the first Summer after their planting. And if the
Trees have been carried far, and kept long out of the Ground, although bound
about the Roots with Straw Fern, Mat, or the like, as is usual; the best way to
revive them is to lay them in Water some time before their Planting.

For the preservation of your Trees from Cattle it is convenient to Fence them
about with Bushes, Boards, Rails or the like, with a Stake for keeping the Tree
fixed, that the Wind may not loosen it at the Root; and when you fasten the Tree
to the Stalk, fix some Moss, Hay, or the like to preserve it from gauling.

For the better preserving of your young Trees from the heat of the Summer or
of the Winter, lay about the Roots Fern, Mushy Straw, Hay or the like; also
Stones are very good for the same purpose, and keep the Trees fast at the Roots
from shaking with the Wind.

Of Pruning, Cutting, Shrouding and Felling of Trees and Coppices.
Pruning of Trees is the taking off all Superfluous, and dead Branches, which
is a great benefit to the Tree; for the doing of which the best Season is in
(and about) January, and rather whilst the Trees and Young, than otherwise;
this is to be performed with a Sharp Bill, or Ax, making your Strokes upwards,
to prevent the slitting of the Tree, or Bark, at the fall of the Branch, and be
sure cut it off clean, smooth, and close; Tree.

Those Trees not fit for Timber, but such that are designed for present use,
for Fuel, etc. may be Lopped, or Shrouded at convenient seasons.

The harder Woods may be Lopped at any time during the Winter season, but the
Elm, the Ash, and such like Pithy and soft Woods, are Tree; and it is not good,
to Lop them too often; once in ten, or twelve Years being sufficient; and for
preserving the Trees from decaying, cut the remaining Stumps aslope, and
smooth, as before directed, that they may cast off the Water which rots them.

Take not off the Head of any Aquatick, (before Unlopped) growing upright and
smooth after Tree.

These Aquaticks may be Cut, or Lopped every four or five Years, but cut them
not too near the main Stock, which often times occasions the dying of the Tree;
especially if too great Lops; also it hinders new Shoots. You may Lop them in
February, or the beginning of March, if designed for Sets, otherwise in the
Winter before the Sap

The Growth of Coppices is various, according to the Nature of the Ground, so
that no prefixed time can be set for the time of their standing betwixt Felling
and Felling, for in some Grounds the Wood will be at a good growth at nine
Years; in others at ten, eleven or twelve; whereas in others not until fifteen
or more, so that the bigness of the Wood must be your direction, which when
grown to an indifferent size, should be felled,

The Season for falling Coppices is from Mid- September to Mid- March, and let
no Carts and Horses come into the Wood after March, for fear of breaking, or
bruising the young Cions; and also let your Woods be fenced and preserved from
Cattle cropping the young Shoots in the Spring, which is a very great injury;
for it will Stunt them. Cut not above half a Foot from the Ground, and
slopewise, triming up such as you spare for Standards, which may be left at the
discretion of an understanding Wood-Man.

If any Coppice has been neglected and received injury by the browzing of
Cattle, or the like, so that you perceive the Wood to be stunted, the best way
is to fell it down, for let it stand never so long it will not thrive; and
after the felling by due care and well ordering, it will thrive as well as any
other.

For the Felling of Timber Trees you should consider if they are of full
growth; for after that it is ill Husbandry to let them stand, but for the
preservation of the growth, and increase thereof for future Ages, it is good
Husbandry to plant two young ones for every one felled. Next, the time of year
is to be considered; for if you design your Timber for Sale, then the best time
for Oaks is from Mid- April to Midsummer, the Sap being then up, so that the
Bark will run, which is considerable advantage, being bought up by Tanners: And
if I am not mistaken there is a Statute prohibiting the felling of Oaks but at
such a Season when the Bark will run, but for all Timbers Trees the Winter
season whilst the Sap is down is best.

If you would have Oaken Timber for your own use, then fell it in December, or
January, at which time it is clearest of Sap, so that it will not be so much
subject to the Worm, neither will it cast, twine, or rift, as if cut in the
Summer, and it will also last longer in any Building, and not be so apt to
yield under a burden, for the more Sap is in it, the sooner will it rot and
decay.

Fell your Timber Trees not in the increase not full of the Moon, nor in windy
Weather, for that often times Spoils the Tree.

If you design to reserve the Roots in the Earth, for a new increase of
Suckers, then fell the Tree as near the Earth as you can, for that is the best
Timber; otherwise grub up all the Roots.

CHAP. XII.
Of the several sorts of Beasts, Fowls, and Insects, necessary to be kept, and
the great Benefit accruing thereby.
THe Country Man's chief Benefit consists in the well stocking his Grounds, with
Cattle, Fowls, and Insects; I shall in this Chapter, take Notice of those of
most use and profit, omitting the Horse (which may justly claim, Pre-eminence
of of all others,) as having already treated thereof, more at large in the
Treatise of Horsmanship, and shall therefore begin with the Ox, and Cow;

The best Cows and Oxen are bred in the Counties of York, Darby, Lancaster,
Stafford, Lincoln, Gloucester, and Somerset, both for largness and neatness of
shape. Those bred in Yorkshire, Darby-shire, Lancashire, and Staffordshire
are generally black, with large well spread Horns; Those bred in Lincolnshire
are for the most part pide, very tall and large, and most fit for labor; Those
bred in Somersetshire, and Gloucestershire, are generally red, and for Shape
much like those of Lincon-shire; Wilt-shire breeds large Cattle, but ill Shaped
Horns and Heads. Now for the breeding of Store- Cattle, it is not good to mix
those that are Red with the Black ones, for their Shapes and Colors are so
contrary, that their Issue will be very uncomely to the Eye.

Now for as much as the Males of all Creatures are the principal in the Breed
and Generation, therefore great care ought to be taken in the choice of the
Bull, which for a curious Shape Horns the larger the better, his Neck fleshy,
with a broad and curled Forehead, his Ears rough within, with Hair like Velvet,
his Eyes black and large, his Muzel large and broad at the upper Lip, but
narrow and small at the nether, his Nostrils wide and open, his Dew lap
extending from his nether Lip down to his Fore-booths large, thin and hairy,
his Shoulders large, broad and deep, his Breast rough and Back strait and flat,
even to the setting on of his Tail, which should stand high, of a good Length
and bush-haired; his Ribs broad and wide, his Belly long and large, his
Huckle-bones round, making his Buttocks Square, his Thighs round and well
trust, his Legs strait and short joynted, his Knees round and big, and his
Hooves long and hollow. And having a Bull with these good Shapes, or as many of
them as you can, you need not doubt of a good Breed, Cows are tolerable good.

COWS.
The COW should be chosen of the same Country as the Bull, and as near as you
can of the same Color, only her Vdder should be white, with four Tetts and no
more, and not fleshy, but large and lank, and such a one will prove good to the
Pail; her Belly should be Forehead broad and smooth, with well spread Horns.
The Cow affords great profit, as well for the Darie, as for Breed to those that
have good store of Ground, and Fodder; for there is no greater profit to be
made than by Cows, either in raising and breeding them up, or by buying them
when in Calf, and selling them with their Calf by their sides, especially near
London.

The Dutch Cows are very good for the Pail, Ox, but ill shaped Heads and Horns;
they commonly bring two Calves at a time.

The Red Cows Milk is esteemed the best, but the Black ones brings the best
Calves. The younger the Cow, the better for Breed. That Cow that gives Milk
longest, is best both for the Dary, and for Breed; for those that go long dry
are not so teeming.

CALVES may be bread these too ways; The one to let them run with their Dams
all the Year, which makes the best Calves, but is not so profitable, as losing
the Cows Milk; The other to take them from their Dams after ten or twelve
Weeks; but for a Fortnight before you wean them, let them have some Water put
into Milk lukewarm to drink; then they are fit, if in the Spring or Summer
season to put out to Grass, which must be short and sweet, by no means rank;
But if in the Winter season, to be fed with fine, sweet and soft Hay, which put
into low Racks, that they may learn to feed thereon; and it were not amiss to
House your Calves the first Winter in the cold Nights. It is customary with
some to take the Calves from their Dams after the first sucking, and so to
bring them up by Hand with flit Milk, made only lukewarm; for to give them that
which is hot is very dangerous; but this way I hold troublesome. These Calves
that are Calved in four or five Days after the change of the Moon, are not good
to rear; but sell them off to the Butcher; and the best time to rear Calves, is
from Michaelmass to Candlemass. Those Male Calves that you intend for Oxen, the
best Season to geld them is in the old of the Moon, and when they are fifteen
or twenty days old, for then there is least danger; and the Ox is said to be
higher and larger of Body, and longer Horned.

The OX is a very profitable Beast; for besides the great benefit made by them
when fatted for the Butcher, they perform the Office of the Horse, both for
Ploughing and Carting, and therefore are much used in diverse parts of this
Kingdom; and those that once make use of them, seldom quit their Service, for
that of the Horse; for they require not that care and charge in keeping; and
when they grow old, are fatted for the Butcher, so that there is not that loss,
as by Horses, nor are they subject to so many Diseases; It Is true, they are
slower in their Work, but will perform as much with the allowance of more time,
and that fault may be easily born with. The larger your Oxen are, the better
both for Draught and Feeding. In matching your Oxen for the Yoke, they should
be as near as possible of an equal size, strength and Spirit; for the stronger
(without great care of the Driver) will wrong the weaker, and the duller will
injure the free spirited; and those Oxen are fittest for the Yoke which are of
the gentlest nature. By no means put your Oxen beyond their ordinary pace, for
that causes heat, which breeds Surfeits, which is found very prejudicial unto
them, even sometimes with the loss of their lives. Their Food is but ordinary,
Barley, Oats, or Peasestraw, will suffice them, and sometimes for change some
Hay mixed amongst the Fodder.

For the Oxen bred for the Butcher, see that they are always lusty and
healthful, which you may know by a good Tail, and a good Pyzle, for if the Hair
of one or both be lost, he is a waster, and will be long in feeding. If they
lick themselves all over, it is a good sign they are fit for the Butcher, and
will feed, showing soundness, and that they take joy in themselves; yet whilst
they so lick themselves they feed not, therefore if you lay their own Dung upon
their Hides, it will cause them to leave li^king, and fall to ^eeding.

For the knowledge of a fat Beast, handle his hindmost Rib; and if it be soft
and loose like Down, it shows he is outwardly well fed; the like does soft
Huckle-bones, and a big Neck round Cod be big and full, it shows he is well
Tallowed, and so does the Crop behind the Shoulders: If it be a Cow, handle her
Navel, and if that be big, round and soft, it is a sign she is well Tallowed.
Many other Observations there are to know fat Cattle, but these shall suffice.

Directions to keep Beasts and other Cattle.
FOr keeping of Cattle to the most advantage there should be several Closes of
Pasture Ground to put them in, which should be well enclosed and fenced about
with Ditches or Hedges, the better to sever and keep apart the greatest and
strongest Cattle from the weak and small ones, especially in the Winter, when
they are foddred; for if all sorts and sizes go together, the great Fodder than
they eat; And by being Foddred abroad, if severed as aforesaid, far less will
serve them than if kept at House, and the Cattle will thrive the better;
besides it is an improvement to the Ground.

How to dispose of Cattle at Pasture.
NEither Cattle, Horse, or Sheep put into a Field alone, will eat down the
Pasture even, except it be overstockt, and that is not good; therefore it is
convenient to put Horses and Beasts together, for there is some Grass that an
Horse will eat that a Beast will not: But Horses and Sheep will not agree well
together, both being sweet Feeders, and close Biters. Milch-Cows and
Draught-Oxen feed closer and barer than those that are Fat.

If a Milch-Cow have too much Meat, and grow Milk, and go to Bull; and if a Cow
be fat at her Calving it endangers the hurting her; and where there is too much
Grass the Cattle feed the worser, for a Bite to the Earth is sufficient; for if
it be long they will bite off the Top and no more, for that is sweet, and the
other lies on the Ground and rots, so that no Beast will eat it, but Horses in
the Winter.

Rules for Buying Cattle.
IF you would buy Oxen for the Plough, let them be young, and free from
Diseases, nor broken of Hair, Tail, or Pizle. If Cows for the Pail, let them be
also young, well shaped, thin Skinned, with good Dugs and Vdders. In buying Lean
Oxen for Graising, choose those that are young, or at least those that are well
Mouthed, and not wanting any Teeth; also such that have broad Ribs, a thick
Hide, and loose Skinned. Also in buying Cattle either fat or lean, endeavor to
know where they were bred; for if they come off from better Ground than that
you design them for, they will not thrive, but rather grow worse, and likewise
see if they are free from Murren, or any Disease.

Now for the preservation of Cattle in good health, it is good to let them
Blood (except the Calves) every Spring and Fall, the Moon being in any of the
lower Signs; and also to give them a Drench made of the Pickle of Olives, mixed
with an Head of Garlic bruised therein: And for your Calves, let them not go
too early to Grass. But Diseases being common amongst Cattle, I shall take
notice of some of the most common, with Directions for their Cure.

DISEASES.
Of the Fever.
THis Distemper proceeds either from a Flux of cold Humors engendered through
cold keeping, or from a Surfeit of Food that is raw and musty. The Signs of
this Disease are a foaming at the Mouth, a Trembling, heavy Eyes. and Groaning:
For Cure, First let Blood, then give a Drench of about a Quart of Ale, boiled
with three or four Roots of Plantin, and two Spoonfuls of the best
London-Treacle, and also sprinkle the Hay with Water.

Of any Inward Sickness in Cattle.
FOr any inward Sickness, or Drooping, Take a Quart of strong Ale, in which
boil an handful of Wormwood, and half an handful of Rue; then strain it, and
put therein two Spoonfuls of the Juice of Garlic, with the like quantity of
the Juice of House-leek, as also of London-Treacle, which give the Beast to
drink lukewarm in a Drenching-Horn.

Diseases in the Gats, as Costiveness, Cholick, Flux, etc.
FOr the Flux, Take an handful of Wood-Rose-Seeds, dried and beaten to Powder,
this brew in a Quart of strong Ale, and give it to drink; but if the Beast is
dry and costive, take an handful of Fenugreek, which boil in a Quart of Ale,
and give it him to drink lukewarm. And for the Cholick, Belly-ake, or Gnawing
in the Guts, boil in the Water that he drinks good store of Oil.

Pissing of Blood.
THis Disease proceeds either from over-labour, or sowre-feeding; for Cure,
Take Shepherds-Purse and boil it in a Quart of Red Wine; then strain it, and
put thereto a little Cinnamon, and so give it to drink.

Of any Swelling in a Beast.
FOr any outward Swelling, bathe the place with Oil and Vinegar exceeding hot,
which will assuage it; but if the Swelling be inward, then boil in the Water
round Aristolochia.

For a Cough, or Shortness of Breath.
GIve the Beast for several Mornings together, one or two Spoonfuls of Tar,
dissolved in a Quart of new Milk, with an Head of Garlic bruised therein.

Diseases in the Lungs.
THe Lungs of Cattle are much subject to Sickness, which does appear by much
panting and shortness of Breath, with a continual Coughing. This Disease is
cured by the aforesaid Drink, prescribed for a Cough.

Loss of the Cud.
TO recover the Cud, Take a little sour Leaven and Loam, of which make a
pretty big Ball, which cause the Beast to swallow.

To kill Worms.
TAke Savin, chopped small, and mix it with sweet Butter, and so give it in round
Balls. And if you give the Beast some sweet Wort, mixed with a little
Black-Soap, in a Drenching-Horn, it will cause him to void the Worms.

Vomiting of Blood.
THis Disease proceeds through rankness of Blood, got in rich Pasture after
hard keeping, insomuch that the Blood will be seen to flow from his Mouth. For
Cure, First let the Beast Blood, and then give to drink Bolearmoniack and Ale
mixed together.

To cause a Beast to Piss.
STeep Smallage, or the Roots of Raddish, in a Quart of Ale, and give it to
drink is present

The Overflowing of the Gall.
THis Disease is known by the yellowness of the Eyes and Skin. For Cure, Give
him a Quart of Milk, with Saffron and Turmerick mixed together, to drink after
letting Blood; and this do three Mornings together.

A Cow that is Whetherd.
THis is occasioned when a Cow after her Calving cannot cast her Gleaning. Now
to cause her to Cast it, take the Juice of Bettony, Mugwort, and Mallows, of
each three Spoonfuls, which mix in a Quart of Ale, and give it her to drink:
Also give her to eat scorched Barley, and it will cause her to void it.

Of Purging Cattle.
THere is no Medicine purges better than Tar, Butter, and Sugar Candy mixed
together, and given in pretty big Balls.

Of faintness in Labor in an Ox.
IF in the heat of the Day, or in his Labor he does faint, loose him, and
drive him to some running Stream to drink; then give him two or three Ospines
full of parched Barley to eat, and he will soon fall to his Labor again.

Breeding Milk in Cows.
IF after her Calving she cannot let down her Milk, give her a Quart of strong
Posset-Ale, mixed with Anniseeds and Coriander-seeds beaten to Powder every
Morning for some time, which will not only bring down her Milk, but much
increase it.

Of the Rot in Cattle.
THis Disease is known by their Leaness, and continually Scouring. Take
Bay Berries beaten to Powder, Ivy-Leaves, Featherfew, Myrh, and Elder-Leaves, a
good lump of dry Clay and Bay Salt; mix these together in strong Urine. Of this
give the Beast to drink lukewarm about half a Pint, and it will preserve them.

Of Wounds in Cattle.
TO Cure any Disease given by Edge-Tools, or otherwise, where the Skin is
broke; Take Hog's Grease, Turpentine, Tar, and Wax, of each a like quantity,
with a quarter so much of Verdigrease; melt all these together into a Salve,
which spread upon a Cloth, and lay to the Wound.

To Cure a Beast that is Goared by another, or by a Stake.
TAke Turpentine and Oil, heat them, and so Tent the Wound therewith.

To draw out a Thorn, or Stub.
TAke black Snails and black Soap, beat them to a Salve, and so apply them to
the Soar.

Diseases in the Eyes, as the Haw, a Stroke, Inflammation, Pin, or Web.
FOr any general Soarness in the Eyes, Take the Water of Eyebright, mixed with
the Juice of House-leek, and wash them therewith. If a Haw breed therein, then
cut it out, which is easy to do: But if for a Stroke, Inflammation, Pin, or
Web, take a new laid Egg, put out half the White, and fill it up with Salt and
a little Ginger; then Roast it very hard, and beat it to Powder Shell and all:
Of this Powder put into the Beasts Eye, and it will cure it.

Of Diseases in the Neck, as Bruised, Gauled, Swollen, etc.
IF any Oxes Neck has any of the said Infirmities, occasioned by the Yoke,
Take the Leaves of round Aristolochia, which beat in a Mortar with Tallow, or
fresh Grease, and anoint

Of Leaness of Cattle.
WHen Cattle fall away, which may be known by their Hair, First, let Blood;
then take sweet Butter, and beat it in a Mortar with a little Myrh and the
Shavings of Ivory, and cause him to swallow down two or three of the said Balls
fasting; and if it be in the Winter, feed sweet Hay.

The Murrain in Cattle.
THis Disease proceeds from diverse Causes, as from rankness of Blood, or
Feeding, from corruption of the Air, from Floods, Intemperateness of the
Weather, or from Infection of other Cattle. To prevent or cure this Disease,
give all your Cattle (as well the sound as sick) Urine a Quart, mix it with an
handful of Hens-Dung dissolved therein, and give it them to Drink.

Of the Worm in the Tail.
FOr Cure, wash the Tail in strong Lie made of Urine and Ashen Wood-Ashes.

Diseases in the Sinews, as Weakness, Stiffness, or
FOr Cure, Take Mallows and Checkweed, which boil in the Dregs of Ale, or in
Vinegar, and being very hot lay it to the place grieved.

Of Hide-Boundness.
THis Disease is occasioned through overmuch Labor, and ill Keeping: For Cure,
Blood, then give him to drink a Quart of Ale brewed with Myrh, and the Powder
of Bay Berries, or of the Leaves. You must keep him warm, giving him Hay that
is a little Mow burnt, which will cause him to drink, and Drink will cause his
Skin to loosen.

Of Biting with a Mad Dog, or any other Venomous Creature.
FOr Cure, Take Plantain, which beat in a Mortar with Bolearmoniack,
Sanguis-Draconis, Barly-Meal, and the Whites of Eggs; This make up into a
Plaster, and apply to the Soar, renewing it once a Day.

Of the Foul, or any other Grief in the Hoof.
TAke Mugwort, beat it in a Mortar with hard Tallow, and apply it to the Hoof.
Also cast the Beast, and with a Hay-Rope rub so hard between the Hoof that you
make it bleed; then anoint the place with Tar, Turpentine, and Kitching-Fee
mixed together; then bind up the Hoof, and keep him out of the Dirt.

Of Lice and Ticks.
BEasts that are bred in Woods under Dropings of Trees, or in barren unwholsom
places, are subject to Lice, and Ticks. For Cure, Anoint their Body with fresh
Grease, Pepper, Stavesacre, and Quicksilver, beaten together until the
Quicksilver be killed.

SHEEP.
SHEEP deserve the next place, if not the priority, for the great benefit
accuring thereby (especially if Fortune favors to keep them Sound) in a
threefold manner; First for Food, next by their Wool for Clothing, and thirdly
by Dunging and Manuring the Ground, being Foulded thereon, to the great
enrichment thereof.

Therefore if you will stock your self with good Sheep, you must have regard to
the nature of the Soil where you dwell; for according to the Earth and Air,
Sheep do alter their natures and properties; the barren Sheep becoming good in
rich Soils, and the good Sheep barren in ill Soils; so that if you would have
Sheep of a fine Staple of Wool, buy those of Herefordshire, about Lempster
parts; also in that part of Worcestershire bordering on Shropshire; yet these
Sheep are very little of Bone, are black Faced, and bear small Fleeces. The
Sheep about Cotsal-Hills are better Bond', Shape, and Burden; but their Staple
is courser and deeper. The Sheep in that part of Worcestershire joining to
Warwickshire, and many parts of Warwickshire, also all Leicestershire,
Buckinghamshire, with part of Northamptonshire, and that part of Notinghamshire
which is exempt from Sherwood Forest, are large Boned, are of a good Shape and
deepest Staple, especially if they be Pasture Sheep; but their Wool is courser
than that of Cotsal. Lincolnshire (especially in the Salt Marshes) have also
large Sheep, but not the best Wool. All these large sized Sheep (especially
Weathers) find good vent amongst the London Butchers, to the no small profit of
the Grasier. The Sheep in Yorkshire, and so Northwards, are of reasonable big
Bone, but of a Staple rough and hairy: And the Welsh Sheep are generally
esteemed the worst of all, for they are both little, and of a worse Staple; but
their Flesh is excellent for its sweet taste. The Sheep of Dorsetshire are
esteemed for bringing two Lambs at a time, and are a good sized Sheep.

Therefore the Natures and Properties of the Sheep of the several Counties
being known, when you intend to stock your Grounds be sure to bring your Sheep
from a worse Soil to a better, and not from a better to a worse; for the Ground
or Lear on which the Sheep lies, and gives him his Color, is much to be
regarded; the red Lear is esteemed the best; the Duskish that inclines to a
little reddish is tolerable good, but the white or dirty Lear is altogether
bad. In the choice therefore of your Sheep, choose the biggest Boned, with the
best Wool, provided your Ground be fit for them, as before taken notice

In the choice of your Sheep for Breed, be sure have good Rams, for they either
mar, or make a Flock; and for Shape, should be long and large of Body, with a
broad and well rising Forehead, a cheerful large Eye, broad Backed, round
Buttocks, a thick Tail, short joynted Legs, and his Body well covered over with
thick Wool; and above all, it is the Opinion of some to choose them without
Horns, for the Dodder Sheep Ewes in Yeaning, as the Horned Sheep do.

The best time for your Ewes to Lamb in (if they be Pasture Sheep) is about the
latter end of April, and so to the beginning of June; but if they be Field
Sheep, then from the beginning of January to the end of March, to the end their
Lambs may be strong and able before May Day, Dams over the Fallow Grounds: For
those that Lamb very early, require great care in looking after, with no small
charge to bring them up at House with good Fodder.

About Michaelmass is a good time to Geld those that you design for Weathers;
first making choice of the goodliest for Rams.

The best time to Sheer Sheep is from June to August, and always Wash them
three days before Shearing. Ewes are generally good Breeders from three Years
old, until their Mouths break.

For the preservation of your Sheep, feed them for the generality upon high or
Hilly Grounds, which are dry and fertile, with short but sweet Grass. But if you
are constrained to feed on low and moist Grounds which are Infectious, then
bring not your Sheep from the Fold until the Sun is risen, and that the Beams
begin to exhale the Dew from the Earth; and then suffer them not to feed at
first, but chase them gently up and down with your Dog until they are weary;
and Chasing not only beats away those Webs, Kells, and Mildews that hang upon
the Grass, which occasions the Rotteness of a Sheep, but also stirs up that
Natural heat in a Sheep, which drinks up and wastes that Moisture which
otherwise would turn to Rotteness; besides, a Sheep thus chased and wearied,
will fall to his food with more deliberation.

If your Shepherd once in about a Month, or when he has occasion to handle his
Sheep, do Bay Salt, it is a great preservative against Sickness. But forasmuch
as Diseases are common amongst them, I shall take notice of the Principal, with
Directions for their Cure.

Signs to know a sound Sheep, as also an unsound one.
IF a Sheep be sound and in health, his Eyes will be bright and cheerful, the
White pure without Spot, and the Strings Red, his Gums also will be red, his
Teeth white, his Skin on his Brisket red, his Skin in general will be loose,
and his Wool fast set on. But if unsound, his Eyes will be heavy, pale, and
spotted, his Breast and Gums white, his Teeth foul and yellow, and his Wool
easy to pull off; and when he is dead, his Belly will be full of Water, his
Fat yellow, his Liver putrified, and his Flesh moist and waterish.

Of Sickness in General, or the Fever amongst Sheep.
FOr Cure of this Distemper, change of Pasture is very profitable. Also, Take
Puliol Royal, stamp it, and mix the Juice with Water and Vinegar, and give each
of them about half a Pint in a Drenching-Horn lukewarm.

Of the General Scab, or Itch in Sheep.
THis is a common Disease, and proceeds from Wet and Rainy Weather, so that
if they be chaft or heated after the Wet has fallen upon them, they commonly
break forth into Scabs; and the usual Cure amongst Shepherds, is to anoint the
place with Tar and Grease mixed together. But if at the first coming you wash
their Skins with Puliol Royal steept in Water, it will prevent the running into
the Scab.

Killing Maggots in Sheep.
FOr Cure, Take Goose-Grease, Tar, and Brimstone, mixed together on the Fire,
and anoint the place therewith.

Diseases in the Gall, as the Jaundies, Choler, etc.
THese Diseases are known by the yellowness of the Sheeps Skin. For Cure, Take
Plantain and Lettuce, stamp them together, and mix the Juice with Vinegar, and
give to each Sheep about half a Pint to drink.

Of the Sturdy, Turning-Evil, or More-found.
THese Distempers proceed from rankness of Blood, which offends the Brain, and
other inward Parts. For Cure, Let them Blood in the Eye-Veins, Temple-Veins,
and through the Nostrils, and then rub the places with young Nettles bruised.

Of Broken Bones, or Bones out of Joint.
FIrst, Set it strait and right; then bathe it with Oil and Wine, and dip a
Cloth in moulten Patchgrease, which roll about it; then Splint it as occasion
shall serve, and so let it remain for about nine Days, and dress it again; and
at the end of the next nine Days the Sheep will be able to go.

Of the Tag'd, or Belt Sheep.
THe Cure of this is, with a Pair of Sheers to cut away the Tags, laying the
Soar bare and raw; then strew dried Earth upon it, and after that Tar and
Goose-grease mixed together.

Of the Staggers.
THis Disease proceeds by Surfeiting on Hawthorn Leaves, Oak Leaves, or the
like, which Lambs especially are very subject unto, and if not timely prevented
is Mortal. For Cure, Take Asafetida dissolved in Water, and Sheep, or Lamb.

Loose Teeth.
FIrst, let Blood in his Gums, and under his Tail; then rub his Teeth with
Earth, Sage, and Salt.

The loss of the Cud.
THat which restores the Cud to an Ox or a Cow, will do for a Sheep.

Of Worms in the Guts of Sheep, or Lambs.
THis Disease is known by their beating their Bellies with their Feet, and
looking upon it. For Cure, Take the Leaves of Coriander stamped, mix the Juice
with Honey, and give it him to drink; then chafe him a little, and keep

Of Lung-sick, or any Cough or Cold.
THis Disease is known by its Coughing, and shortness of Breath. For Cure, Take
Coltsfoot, and Lugwort stamped and strained, and the Juice mixed with a little
Honey and Water, which give the Sheep to drink.

Diseases in the Eyes, as the How, Dinness, or any Soreness.
TO Cure these Diseases, drop into the Eyes the Juice of Selandine.

To preserve Sheep from the Rot.
THis Disease is the worst of all, as being Infectious, therefore great care
ought to be Adraces, which is a certain Salt gathered from the Salt Marshes in
the heat of Summer, when the Tide is going off, and leaving certain Drops of
Salt Water on the Grass, which the heat of the Sun turns to Salt. With this
Adraces rub the Mouths of all your Sheep once a Week, and it will preserve them
sound. Of this Adraces great plenty is in Spain, England, where the Sea
overflows at Tides.

To cause Ewes to be easily Delivered.
TAke Balsa-mint, or Horse-mint, and put either the Powder, or the Juice
thereof, into a little strong Ale, and give it her to drink, and she will soon
Yean, or Lamb.

Of increasing Milk in Ewes.
NOthing increases Milk more than change of Pasture, driving them sometimes on
the Hills, and other times in the Valleys, and where the Grass is sweet.

To cause an Ewe to love her Lamb, or any others Lamb.
TAke a little of the Glean of the Ewe, and force her to eat it, or at least to
chew it in her Mouth, and she will fall to love it. But if an Ewe has cast her
Lamb, and you would have her to take another Ewes Lamb, take the Lamb that is
Dead, and with it rub and dawb all over the Live Lamb, and so put it to the
Ewe, and she will take it naturally, as if her own, provided it be not too old.

Of any Sickness in Lambs.
GIve them Mares-Milk, or Goats-Milk, or its own Dams Milk mixed with Water to
drink, and keep it very warm.

To know the Age of a Sheep.
LOok into his Mouth, and when he is one Shear he will have two broad Teeth
before; when he is two Shear, he will have four such like broad Teeth; when he
is three Shear, he will have six; and when he is four Shear, he will have
eight, and after those Years his Mouth will begin to break.

SWINE.
SWINE are of that great profit, that he that has Sheep, Swine, and Bees, let
him sleep or wake is sure to thrive, being a great support to a Family,
affording great variety of Meat, as Pigs, Pork, Bacon, and Brawn, besides their
Offal, which is very good food. And Hogs require the least charge in keeping of
any other Beast; for their Food is course and ordinary, being contented with
any thing, so that they have but their Bellies full, as Whey, Flit-Milk, Wash,
Grains, Offal, Corn, Carots, Parsnips, Coleworts, Cabage-Leaves, Bean-tops,
etc. And it were not amiss if a parcel of Land were planted with such like
Garden Food, on purpose to feed them.

Now for the Keeping them, some are of Opinion, it is better to have a Hog-yard
with Styes in it, and there to keep them penned up, than to have their liberty,
for then they wast their Flesh, and will not fat so soon. Yet after Harvest, to
let them have the benefit of eating up the Corn left on the Ground would be
profitable. And some are of Opinion, that it is better to keep all Boars and
Sows, and no Barrows; for a Boar will require as little keeping as a Barrow,
and is much better, having more Meat in him, and if you make it into Brawn is
far dearer; and for Sows, before they are fit to kill, may bring more Pigs than
they are worth, and notwithstanding be as fit for Bacon as Barrows, provided
they are not too old, for a Sow will bring three Litters a Year, and commonly
nine, ten, or twelve at a time; but the only reason against keeping too many,
is the great trouble attended with the charge of bringing up the Pigs, either
fit for the Market, or for Store.

For the choice of your Swine, both Boars and Sows that you design for a Breed,
let them be long and large of Body, deep Sided, and Bellied, thick Necks and
Thighs, short Legs and thick Chined, well set with strong Bristles; as to their
Color it matters not much, but the White, or Sandy are esteemed the best, the
Pide being held the worst, as subject to the Meazles.

A Sow will brings Pigs from a year old until seven; and the Pigs best to rear
are those sarrowed Lent, and in Summer, for in Winter the cold does much pinch
them and keep them back; then having chosen out the best for Boars and Sows to
breed on, Geld all the Males, and Spay the Females you design to Rear, for both
will make the best Hogs for fatning, and yield more Lard.

For Fatning of Swine it differs much, having regard to the Country where you
dwell; for those that inhabit near Woods, and places where Mast Mast for six,
or eight Weeks, by which time they will be much improved as to Flesh, and then
put them into Styes to fatten, with old dry Pease, which makes their Fat Firm
and not to wast away in boiling. But Swine fatned with Acorns, or Chestnuts, or
with Parsnips, makes the Flesh of an excellent sweet taste; and if in Salting
you use Saltpeter mixed with Bay Salt, the Bacon will imitate that of the
Westphalia.

Those that dwell in Champain Countries, or by Cities or great Towns, destitute
of Wood for Mast, do use to put their Hogs they design to fat into Sties, and
so feed them with Pease, Beans, Buck-Wheat, or such that they have; but
Buck-Wheat is not good, making the Fat soft and subject much to wast, without
they are kept some time before their killing only which Pease, or Beans; for
midling sized Pork, three Weeks is enough to fatten them, and four Weeks for
Bacon.

To cause Hogs to thrive.
IF your Hogs do not thrive (which is seen by the staring of their Hair, and
looking rugged) take half a Peck, or more of Ashes, boil them into Lie; then
cause such Hogs, to be laid upon a Form, and wash them with the Lie, and curry
them with an old Curry-comb until you find all the Scruf washed from the Skin;
then wash them with clean Water, and Strew Ashes over them, and this will kill
the Lice, and cause them to thrive extraordinarily. Now the greatest thing that
hinders Hogs from thriving, is to let them lie in the Wet.

There is no Creature so timorous in Sickness as the Swine, insomuch that he
forsakes his Meat, until he finds a Recovery. Now when you find your Swine to
droop and forsake their Meat, first let them Blood under the Tail, and Ears,
and if they Bleed not well, beat them about, which will cause them to Bleed;
the Wounds wrap up and keep warm, and give them to drink warm Wash, well mixed
with Bearly Meal, and red Oaker.

The Murren.
THis Disease is very common and dangerous, if not early prevented: For Cure
give them in their warm Wash, Hens-dung, and boyld Liverwort, with a little red
Oaker.

The Meazles.
THis is also a common Disease, and easily cured; Take Urine that has been
some time made, and mix it with red Oaker, until it be thick, and about an
Ale-quart; this mix with a Gallon of warm sweeet Whey, and give it them to
drink, after they have been kept all Night fasting.

Of Leanness, Scurf, and the Mange.
THese diseases proceed from corrupt Blood occasioned by scanty feeding, and
lying wet; for Cure first let Blood under the Tail; then with a Wool-Card, or
Curry-comb rub them well over to fetch off all the Scurf and Filth until they
Bleed; then take Tarr, Hog's Grease and Brimstone, well mixed together, and
anoint them therewith; then cause good dry, sweet Straw to be put into their
Stye, and let them have good warm Food, which will soon recover them, and canse
them to thrive.

To Cure Swine that are lugged in their Ears by Dogs.
Anoint the Ears with Vinegar, Soap and Tallow mixed together, and if through
want of looking after they Breed Magots, take sweet Wort, or Honey, and anoint
the Sore therewith, and the Magots will soon fall off and dye.

ASSES.
THe Ass is a very serviceable Beast for diverse affairs, and is kept with
little or no Charge, by reason of their hardiness, mean feeding, and worse
looking after; they patiently enduring Hunger, Thirst, Labor and Blows, and
were it not for their ill quality of Barking Trees, they would be more set by.
Asses Milk is esteemed an excellent restorative in a Consumption.

GOATS.
THis Beast is also very pernicious to keep, for their Barking of Trees, and
other mischeivous Tricks; so that I cannot recommend them to any to keep, but
to such that live in rocky, Mountainuos places, hardly fit for any thing else.

I should here treat of the Coney, which is a very profitable Creature, and a
great help to a Family; but having discoursed thereof in a Chapter at large in
the Treatise of Hunting, I shall omit it here, referring you to the same.

FOWL, or POVLTREY.
THere is no greater benefit than that which Fowl, and they are so absolutely
necessary, that a Country Habitation cannot be deemed complete that is not
well stored with them; and as to the charges in keeping them, it is
inconsiderable, if the great profit that may be made thereby (if well ordered)
be rightly considered, as well by their Eggs and Feathers, as by their Bodies,
and young Chicken to the Poulteres; besides the supplying your own Table
therewith; and to those that live within a Days Journey to London, for a quick
sale of them, there can be no greater benefit made than by Fowl, for they
always meet with good Markets; also the London Poulterers will be desirous to
take them off your Hands.

Of the Hen-house, and it Situation.
THe Hen-house should be large, but with consideration to the quantity of Fowl
you Thieves; and with Shuts to the Windows to keep out Vermin; let there be
dispersed about it Pens or Coops for the Fowl to be put in that are with Egg;
and those for Geese, and Turkeys must be larger and higher then for Hens; and
on the sides of the Walls, and thwart the House in convenient places should be
long Perches for Cocks, Hens and Turkeys to Roost upon. As for the Geese and
Ducks they sit on the Ground, or in the Pens; and to the end the Fowl may the
better get up to the Roosts, let there be Pins (that is short pieces of Wood)
drove into the Walls, with Steps, in imitation of Ladders, for them to hop up
to the said Roosts, which are very commodious, especially for the young ones.
Let not the Floor be paved, or boarded, but of Earth made smooth, and even like
a Barn Floor. And it were convenient to have a Hole made in the Groundsel for
the Chickens, and young Fowl to come in and our Vermin. The Coops, or Pens as
very convenient to put in those Fowl, that by the Servant that tends them are
found with Egg at night, to the end their Eggs may be preserved; for if they
should be suffered to make Nests, and to lay abroad, not one in Ten would be
found good, for they will be subject to Wesels, or the like Vermin; or if
found, may be stale and useless. Poultry in the House until all have laid, will
be a great prejudice to the rest, as being deprived of their early morning
feeding for Worms; But for Geese when they have once chosen their Nests, they
will always lay there, so that they need not be penned up.

But according to the opinion of the experienced Housewife, Fowl that sit, be
they Hens, Turkeys, Geese or Ducks, should have places apart, where other Fowl
cannot come to distrub them, which oft-times occasions them to forsake their
Eggs. It Is not material to direct what places, most Houses having that
convenience; if not, such places must be made; especially if great store are
kept.

The best way to keep Eggs long and good, is in a Heap of old Malt, close
covered over.

Feeding your Fowl.
FOr the feeding your Poultrey it is various; Buck, or French Wheat will soon
fat them; but it is a loose Fat, and will wast upon the Spit. Hemp Seed is good
to lay Eggs, the like does Nettle-seeds, a little being mixed with the Oats or
Barley; and it is convenient to observe set times for the feeding them, as
early in the Mornings, and just before their going to Roost, which will bring
them to a good order, and to become tame, and readily go to the Henhouse to
Roost; about the quantity of half a handful of Oats, or Barley, to each Fowl is
sufficient at one time, for if you feed your Store- Fowl too much, their
fatness will hinder their laying; besides they will lay their Eggs without
Shells. There are diverse other things very good to feed Poultrey, as also
Turkeys with, as Parsnips, and Carots, which must be washed, sliced, and so
boiled tender in fair Water; then mix them with Meal made up into a Past, and
feed them therewith, which is an excellent fat feeding; but not good for your
Store- Fowl, only for such as you design for the Spit. Sea-Bisket is very good
Food, being steeped in fair Water, over a gentle Fire until it is soft, and so
give it them; it is bought very cheap on Shipboard at their return from Sea.
Grains are very good Food for Ducks; and it is observed, that if you put into
the Past aforesaid, a little Sugar, it much quickens their fatning.

If the Range for Powltrey and Turkeys is large; they will get good part of
their living by Worms; the Seeds of Herbs, Bugs, and the like. Ducks feed much
on Duckgraves, as also on Frogs, Slugs, and such like things that are hurtful
to your Garden-plants, so that they are very necessary to be kept there; and
for Geese, their Food is much on Grass.

For fatning of Poultrey it is the opinion of some, that if they are kept in
dark places, they will fat the sooner.

Stubble-Geese, as also Green-Geese are best fatted if kept dark, and to be fed
with ground Malt mixed with Milk. On their Rumps there is a small Bunch of
Feathers which in the Nights they usually suck with their Bills, drawing out a
moisture thereat, which Bunch of Feathers, if cut away before they are put up
to fatten, they will fat much sooner, and with less Meat, so that it is said
that the Jews knowing of this inconveniency, use to tie them up in a Cloth,
hang them in a dark place, stop their Ears which Peases to hinder their hearing
any noise, and so feed them with Pellets made of ground Malt, or Barley steeped
in Water; as also to set Gravel and Water by them, which much whets their
Stomachs, and causes them to fat sooner.

For Setting of Poultrey.
THe best time for Setting Poultrey, to have the best, largest and most kindly
Chickens is in February, and in the Increase of the Moon, so that they may
hatch in March; one Brood then Hatched being esteemed worth two or three
Months; and it is observed to be best to Set them on odd Eggs. It is a great
advantage to Set Turkeys on Hen-Eggs, for they Set a Month with their own, and
in six Weeks they will hatch two Broods of Hen-Eggs; and the first Brood may be
put to such Hens that have but a few Chickens, or that have had some
Misfortune, by Adling their Eggs, or the like.

Be sure to Set your Poultrey with New-laid Eggs, which you may easily know by
holding them up against the Sun, for such will be clear; also they are heavier
than stale ones. And choose not the largest Eggs, for they take up too much
room, so that you cannot set under her so many.

The Hens having Hatched their Chickens, take them and the Hen to be kept in
some convenient place in the House, and after a Day or two give them small
Oatmeal, some dry, and some Milk; and when a little bigger, larger Oatmeal,
Crumbs of White-Bread, Curds, Barly-Meal soaked, and the like, until they grow
big enough to eat Oats, or Barley; also to chop green Chives amongst their Meat
is very good. Be sure let them not want Water, for that breeds the Pip.

If you would have Crammed Chicken, let them be put into the Coops so soon as
taken from the Hen, that is, when she forsakes them; and the Cram is
Wheat-Meal and Milk made into Dough, and the Crams steept in Milk, and so
thrust it down with your Finger in small Pellets. A Fortnight is sufficient to
fat them in.

Of Capons.
CApons, which are the gelt Cock-Chickens, should be gelt so soon as the Hen
has left them, if the Stones be so soon come down, or Crow; for the Art of
Gelding them is common, and soon learnt by seeing one or two gelt. As for the
Cramming them for the Table, Take Barley-Meal well sifted, mixed with New-Milk,
which make into good stiff Dough, and so into Pellets, and feed them therewith,
being wet in warm Milk; let them have their Crops full, and feed them three
times a day, viz. Morning, Noon, and Night, and in a Fortnight, or three Weeks,
they will be fat enough.

Diseases that Poultrey are most subject unto.
THe Pip is a white thin Skin, or Scale growing on the Tip of the Tongue, which
hinders their feeding, occasioned from drinking foul Water. For Cure, Pull off
the said Skin, and rub the Tongue with Salt.

LICE in Poultrey is chiefly from corrupt Feeding; the Cure is, by bathing them
in warm Water, with small Pepper mixed therein.

Stinging by Venomous Creatures appears by their swelling and drooping; for
Cure, anoint them with Rue and Butter.

Poultrey are often troubled with swellings in their Rumps, which in time will
corrupt the whole Body. The Cure is, to pull away the Feathers, opening the
Soar and thrust out the Core; then wash the place with Salt and Water, or Brine.

To cause Hens to SIT, bathe them often in cold Water, and thrust a small Feather
through their Nostrils.

Hens that CROW are very unnatural; to remedy which keep them from other
Poultrey, and feed them with scorched Barley, or small Wheat.

For Hens that are Crow-trodden, there is no remedy but to kill them. It is to
be known by the staring of their Feathers, and hanging their Wings.

GEESE.
GEESE, as aforesaid, are very profitable to be kept, their chief food being
Grass, and that the worst, as in Commons; they are not to be kept without the
convenience of Water.

They begin to Lay early in the Spring, and the sooner the better; before they
begin to Lay they will carry up and down Straw in their Bills, and when they
will Sit, they will keep their Nests, so that then put their own Eggs to them.
In about a Month the Eggs will be Hatched; then keep them some time in the
House, feeding them with Curds, Barley-Meal wet in Milk, ground Malt, or Bran
moistened in Milk or Water; and having gathered a little strength turn out the
Goose with her Goslings to feed, etc. still observing to feed them as
aforesaid, until they are fit to shift for themselves. In about a Month they
will be fit to put up to Fat for Green-Geese; and for their Fatting feed them
thrice a Day, that is, Morning, Noon, and Night, with plenty of Skeg-Oats
boiled, with Milk, or Milk and Water mixed to drink.

For the Fatning of Geese let them take the benefit of the Stubble after
Harvest, which will make them fleshy; and then put them up in Coops apart dark
kept, and let them have always by them good Oats, or spelted Beans, and for
their Drink, Water mixed with Barley-Meal, and this will fatten them in about
three Weeks, or you may observe the same Directions, as aforesaid.

For the pulling off the Feathers, as some use, I hold it not good, being
prejudicial unto them.

The general Infirmity that Geese are troubled with, is the Gargil, being a
great stopping of the Head. For Cure, Take three or four Cloves of Garlic,
beat them in a Mortar with sweet Butter, of which make little long Balls, and
give two or three of them to her fasting, keeping her shut up for about two
hours after.

TVRKEYS.
THis Fowl is very profitable, if you understand how to order them rightly. The
Young ones are very tender, and subject to the Cramp, especially if too
tenderly kept, not permitting them to go abroad with their Dams; so that it is
observed, that a Turkey that sits her self, and brings forth her Young without
Housing, Cramp, that so often kills those kept in the House, when they are put
out in the Dew. They are generally inclined to rove or stray from their Dams,
which are also very negligent of them; for if she has but one following her,
she will not regard the rest, which often proves the loss of them, without an Eye
over them.

Turkeys begin to Lay about March, and will Sit about April, and Hatch in about
a Month. Hen-house, Cooping up those that the Servant finds with Egg at Night,
as afore-directed.

The Young ones are fed with Curds, Milk, and Bread, and let their Drink be
Milk and Water. When they have got strength put them abroad in some warm place,
and turn them not out till the Dew is off the Grass, and so House them at
Nights.

For Fatting Turkeys, put them in Coops, and for the first Fortnight feed them
with sodden Barley, or Oats, and afterward Cram them as Capons, as before
directed.

DVCKS.
THis Fowl is no less profitable than the rest, and less chargeable in keeping,
generally being their own Purveyers; but it is good to House, so that when night
comes they will be drawing home; these, or indeed any other Fowl, may be called
home at any time when you desire, by a Pipe or any whistling Noise, and to
bring them to it, is always when you feed them, to make such a Noise, so that
when they hear your Pipe, or Whistle, they will immediately come in expectation
of Food; but never call them, but Grains is very good for them. They are great
Layers when they begin; they Sit about a Month, and the Ducklings must be
ordered and fed, as your Goslings, only giving them Clivers chopped in Water, or
Duckgraves, and when they are abroad will better shift for themselves than the
Goslings. Ducks, or Ducklings, are easily fatted, giving them good store of any
kind of Grain.

PEACOCKS.
THis Fowl is more for the delight of the Eye, than profit; however a few may
be kept. They are great Enemies to Fruit Trees and Gardens, pulling off the
Buds. They delight much to feed on Toads, New^s, and such Venomous things which
makes their Flesh unwholsom; The Pea-Hen loves to lay abroad in Bushes, Hedges,
and the like secret places that the Cock may not find her Eggs, for he will
break them. They sit a Month Feed her young with Cheese-Curds, and Barley Meal
mixed with Water. They are very tender until grown a little big, the least Cold
killing them, so that let them not go abroad, but in Sunshiny or Warm Weather.
This Fowl being not for the Dish, I shall not prescribe Rules to fat them; but
as for their keeping, any Grain serves them, and that they will get
themselves, if possible.

SWANS.
THis is a stately Bird, but seldom kept; for they require large Waters, and
then they will live on what they can get themselves; but in Frosty Weather they
must be fed. When they make their Nests, do not disturb them. For feeding the
Cignets for the Dish observe the same Rules as for Geese; or if you have the
convenience of a small piece of Ground with a Pond in it, which is encompassed
with a Pale, or Wall you may feed them there, putting two Troughs, one for old
dried Malt, and the other for Barley and Water, and this way they will be
sooner fatted than in a House.

Herns, Puets, Gulls, and Bitterns.
HErns, are nourished for too reasons, the one to make Trains for entering
Hawks, or else for the Table at Feasts. The way to bring them up is to take
them out of their Nests before they can fly, and put them in a large high Barn
that has many high cross Beams for them to Perch upon; and to have on the
Floor several Boords about two Yards square, with Rings in them, and there to
place round shallow Tubs of Water, and to the Boords ty great Gobbets of
Dogs-Flesh, according to the quantity you feed; and be sure to keep the place
sweet, and often shift the Water; and let the Roof be so that Rain may fall in
several places, which they much delight in; but if you feed any for the Dish,
then instead of Dogs-Flesh, give them Livers, or the Intrails of Beasts or
Fowl, cut in pieces. And after this manner you may feed the Gulls, or Bitterns.

To feed Pheasants, Partridges, and Quails.
THese may be kept, and fed in one large Room, where you may have in diverse
Corners, Boxes for them to run in to hide themselves, and in the midst of the
Room let there be placed three Wheat-sheafs, two with their Ears upwards, and
the other with the Ears downwards, and near unto them shallow Tubs with fair
Water, to the end they may eat and drink at pleasure, which will make them soon
fat.

As for the Quail, the best way is to keep them in long flat Boxes, or Coops,
with the Sticks or Wyers on the fore-side no wider than for them to put forth
their Heads to feed, or drink out of the Troughs; their Food is good small
Wheat, and fair Water to drink.

You have been told several ways how to take Phesants, Partridges and Quails,
in the Treatise of Fowling, to which I refer you; omitting it here; and having
so taken them, put them into your Room, as aforesaid.

To feed Goodwits, Curlews, Gray-Plovers, and Knots.
FIne Chiltern, or small Wheat is very good; let them be fed Mornings, Noons
and Nights, and to have fresh clean Water; but the quicker way is to Cram them,
and then use fine dressed Wheat-Meal, mixed with Milk, with some of the said
Wheat, and so made up into Past, and feed them with Crumbs thereof dipped in
Water, giving them their Gorges full; and so keep them feeding as often as their
Gorges are empty.

PIGEONS.
PIgeons either wild or tame are very profitable and serviceable for the Table,
but the wild affords the greatest, by reason they get their Food abroad, except
it be in hard frosty and snowy Weather, when nothing is to be got, and about
Mid-summer before Pease are ripe, this Season being called Benting-time, as
being then constrained to feed on the Seeds of Bent-grass; and at Food.

Pigeons are great lovers of Salt, so that it is very good to set a large
Salt-pot in your Dove-House, that is, temper up some Loom and Salt together in
a Pot, and the Pigeons will feed thereon with great delight, and occasion them
not to forsake your Dove-House.

Assafoetida being boyld in Water, and the Holes of the Dove-House washed
therewith, will cause a scent to be on their Feathers, so

Cumin Seeds boiled in Water and applied as aforesaid, will do the same, being
an excellent drawer.

But that which is adjudged the most effectual (were it lawful) is a Salt or
proud Bitch baked or roasted with Cumin-seeds, and set in the Dove-House.

OF BEES, and how to order them.
THere is no Creature so industrious, and takes such great pains as the Be,
going out early and coming Home late, never resting but in cold and wet
Weather; for Idleness is so detestable a Vice amongst them, that none are
tolerated thereunto but their Sovereign, every one being employed either
abroad in gathering Food, or at Home in building Combs, feeding their Young,

There is nothing more ad vantageous to be kept than an Apiary, and there must
be a convenient, and necessary place made choice of for that purpose, which
should be square, or rather more long than broad, and extending from East to
West, and facing the South, to the end that the Bees returning late Home at
Night may the better see their way in. But some are of another opinion, and
that is; to let them have the benefit of the Morning Sun, as much as possible,
that time being the best to gather Honey; but the surest way is to let them
have as much of both Morning and Evening Sun as the place will admit of; for
the Morning Sun makes them swarm early in the Day. Let the Apiary be well
defended from high Winds, especially toward the North; but let not the Fences,
be so high as to hinder the Sun, nor so near as to obstruct their Flight; also
let it be remote from ill Smells, and not frequented by Poultrey: Let the
Ground be kept mowed, not dug or pared if it be Grass, for in the Summer it
will be too hot, and in the Winter too cold; and let it not be too remote from
the House, that you may be often with them at Swarning time, or upon several
other occasions. Likewise it would be very necessary to plant at some
reasonable distance from the Bees, Fruit Trees, that they may pitch upon the
Boughs in Swarming-time near at hand.

The usual way to set the Stocks of Bees upon, are Stools, Benches, or Seats.

The Stools are placed at different Heights, but about a Foot is well. They
must be set shelving that the Rain may run off, and made two or three Inches
wider than the Hives, with a place before for the Bees to light upon. They may
be made of Wood, or Stone, but Stone is not so good, as being too hot in
Summer, and too cold in the Winter. The Stools ought to stand about five Foot
one from another; in a strait Rank from East to West; and if they are placed
one behind another, they should be eight or nine Foot asunder, and the Stools
of the one Rank to be placed against the open places of the other, and free
from all encumbrances to hinder their Flight.

Benches are the most common in use, and known to every one; but they are
nothing near so commodious as Stools, being subject to diverse inconveniences.

Seats are esteemed the best, for every Stock of Bees make a small House of
about two Foot Square, and something higher, which should be placed upon four
Legs about a Foot above Ground, and covered with Boards or Tyles, to cast off
the Rain, with the North side closed up, the East and West sides to be made
with Doors to open and shut at pleasure; and the fore part or South side to
have a falling Door to cover the one half thereof, which is to be raised up as
occasion requires: and it likewise serves in the Summer Season as a Pent House
to shelter them from the extreme Heat in the mid part of the Day, which is apt
to melt their Honey.

On these Seats may be placed any sort of Hive, whether of Straw, Board, or
Glass, which will preserve them to a longer continuance than if placed on
Stools or Benches.

Although in some Winter days the Sun shines seemingly warm and confortable,
yet it is not convenient to open the Doors to let them out, neither too early
in the Spring, before they can find employment for gathering of Honey.

The most usual Hives are the Straw; but of late there is a new invented one of
Wood made in Squares, and so ordered to be one Story above the other; I cannot
say much in praise or dispraise Stocks of Bees, and yet take the Honey, which
by the common way are smothered.

Glass-Hives suit the disposition and nature of the Be, who delights to see
their workmanship go forward, insomuch that by Observation they will be more
laborious, as it were endeavoring to out do one another in their diligence.
Also these sorts of Hives afford great delight to the

For the dressing the new Hives, the inside must be very smooth, and free from
Straws and Sticks, which much offends them. As for the rubing them with sweet
Herbs, and splending them, (that is setting up the Sticks) it is common and
well known to most Country People, so that I shall pass that by.

If you would have your Stocks to increase, Hives smaller; and if your design
be to have good quantity of Honey, make them larger; for a few Hives well
ordered and in a thriving condition, will afford Bees enough to Stock many of
the larger Hives.

As for the Swarming, if the Spring be dry, cold and windy, it will much retard
their Swarming, nor will there be many that Year; but if it be mild and calm
with gentle Showers, they will Swarm early and the oftener; about mid May in
Drones, and there will be a moistness upon the Stool. Also if the Weather be
hot and gloomy, and after a Shower or gloomy Cloud has

But on the contrary, if they continually lie forth, especially about mid June,
it is a Sign of their not Swarming; Also much stormy and windy Weather obstructs
their Swarming, although they are ready, and causes them to lie out; the like
does Weather that has been very hot and dry, for some continuance.

Now for the causing them to Swarm, keep Hives as cool as possible, by watering
the Ground near them, by shading the Hives, by enlarging the Doors to give them
Air, and by forcing them into the Hives gently with a Brush, suffering them not
to cluster together.

As concerning the Signs of After-swarming, there is more certainty to be
observed; for when the Prime Swarm is gone, about nine or ten Evenings after,
when another Brood is ready, the Hive being overcharged with them, the next
Prince begins to tune in a treble voice, and in a day or two after the old
Queen will make her reply in a base Note, as it were declaring her consent for
their Swarming. In the Morning before they Swarm they come down near the Stool,
and there call some what longer, and at the time of their Swarming they come
down to the Stool, and beginning their Notes more thicker and shriller, they
all come forth in great have.

If the Prime Swarm be broken, the second will both call and swarm the sooner,
probably the next day, and after that a third, and sometimes a fourth, and all
within a Fortnights Space.

Sometimes a Swarm will cast another that Year; but if late, it is not worth the
keeping, according to the old Rhyme,

A Swarm in July,
Is not worth a Fly.
It is customary when Bees Swarm, to make a tinkling Noise upon a Basin,
Kettle, Pan or the like, thereby the better to gather them to settle; but by
the Judicious and such as have made trials concerning the same, it is found very
idle and foolish, rather causing them to fly away; for all great Noyses are
offensive to them; therefore your business should be only to watch their
settling, and if they fly aloft and are like to be gone, then cast up Dust
amongst them to make them come down.

The Swarm being settled, as it were like a Cluster of Grapes, and the Hive well
rubbed with sweet Herbs, etc. shake them off the Bough into the Hive, which
should be of a fit Size answerable to the bigness of the Swarm to fill it that
Year; and having a Sheet, or such like Cloth spread upon the Ground, set the
Hive thereon, for some time, until the Bees are settled therein; or if the the
Bough is small on which they Swarm, you may cut it off, and put it into the
Hive under the Sheet, as aforesaid.

If the Swarm separate, and light in two places, but in sight of one another,
disturb the lesser parcel, and they will fly to the rest; but if not in sight,
then Hive them in two Hives; then bring them together, and shake the Bees out
of one of the Hives on the Sheet whereon the other Hive stands, and place the
other Hive on them, and they will take to it.

When Swarms come late, and are but small, it is convenient to unite them, by
which means they will be more industrious in their labor. The manner of
uniting them is thus; Place the Hive, whereing you have newly put your Swarm
you intend to drive into another, in a place that the Skirts may be uppermost,
and set the other upon him, binding them about the Skirts with a long Towel,
and so let them stand until Morning, and the Bees will all ascend, that you may
the next Morning set the Receiver on a Stool, and after this manner you may put
two or three Swarms together; but be sure to unite them the same Evening, or
the next at furthest that they Swarm.

For preserving your self from stinging in the time of Swarming, the best and
surest way is to be provided with a Net made of fine Thread or Silk, with a
close Mesh, which cast over your Head, Hat and all, compassing your Face; and
for your Hands have on Gloves. And if notwithstanding you happen to be stung,
pull out the Sting as soon as possible, and for the asswaging the swelling,
heat a piece of Iron red House-leek, Mallows, Mary-golds, Rue, Holly-hock and
Vinegar, or Salt and Vinegar; but none of these are so good.

As soon as a Swarm has entered the Hive, they lose no time, but begin to work
and gather Wax for the building their Combs, so that it is a Sight worthy to be
seen to observe how these poor Creaturs frame their curious Workmanship; which
may be done, if put into transparent or Glass Hives, or in Wooden Hives that
have Glass Windows.

The best Season to remove an old Stock of Bees, is about Michaelmass, that is,
a little before and a little after; also about the end of February, or beginning
of March at the latest. Let the Bees are quiet, and when the Weather is fair.
The Hive must be put on a Board, and gently carried to the place where it is to
be set, for jogging Spoils the Hive, loosning the Combs, and disturbing the
Bees.

It often times happens, that through a cold, dry and unseasonable Spring, as
also by a cold and early Winter, that Bees will not have a Stock of Honey
sufficient to keep them.

In this case they must be fed, and the best Food is Honey mixed with sweet
Wort, which must be conveyed into the Hives by small Canes or Troughs daily,
until the approaching Summer affords them provision abroad. Instead of Honey
you may give them Sugar. Some gives them Toasts of Bread sopt in Ale; others
dry Meal, or Flower of Beans.

There are several things very offensive and injurious to Bees, as Smoke, ill
Scents and Smells, Noise, ill Weather, as Winds, Cold, Heat, and Rain, which
may be prevented by well placing the Apiary; Noysom Creatures, as Spiders,
Snails, Frogs, Toads, Moths, etc. and devouring Creaturs and Insects, as Birds,
Mice, Wasps, and Hornets are also injurious to them.

CHAP. XIII.
Of External Injuries amongst Cattle, and other Inconveniences that happen to
the Husbandman, with Remedies for the same.
Injuries sustained by Beasts and Vermin.
FOXES are found very pernicious in killing and taking away Geese, Poultrey,
and often times young Lambs, especially near Woods and Forests; so that such
things can hardly escape them.

Now for the taking this subtle Creature diverse Inventions are used, as by
Traps, Gins, Snares, etc. as well as by Dogs, which having treated thereof in
Hunting, I shall omit it here.

POLE-CATS, FITCHETS, WEASELS, and the like Vermin, are great Enemies to the
Hen-Roosts, Dove-House, and Warren; for taking and destroying of all which
sufficient Directions are given in the XIX. Chapter in Hunting.

RATS and MICE are great Enemies, not only in the Houses, Granaries, Barns, and
Stables; but also in the Gardens, Orchards, and Fields.

For destroying them within-Doors, Traps are very good; also Baits of Arsenick,
or the Roots of white Hellebore, mixed with Sugar, and laid in their Holes or
Haunts are very good; but that which is more effectual, seldom or never
failing, is white Arsnick beaten to fine Powder, which use as follows: Take
Raysons of the Sun, split and dip them in the Arsnick, and so close them again.
Also, Take Apples Codled, and the soft Pap mix with the Arsnick together with
Sugar: Likewise, Take some Hogs-Lard, Flower of Malt and Arsnick mixed together;
to each of these three things put a little quantity into an Oystershell, lay
them in such places where the Rats come, and it will certainly destroy them.

For destroying Field-Mice, so injurious to Gardens in eating and spoiling the
Wall-Fruit, as also the Beans, Pease, and the like, observe these Directions:
Get a piece of a Deal-Board, which cut into thin slices, make them pretty
smooth; then cut twenty pieces six Inches long, and as many three Inches long,
and as many two Inches long; then cut a Notch in the side of that piece six
Inches long, about two Inches from the end, and a cross Notch upon the flat
side within half an Inch of the end; then the other of two Inches, to cut it
taper at one end, and a cross Notch on the Flat side made within half an Inch
of the end; then the Stick that is two Inches and an half must be taper at one
end, that so the cross Notch may in the Stick of two Inches rest upon the top
of the two Inches and an half; and then the two Inches must at the Taper end go
into the Stick that is six Inches, and the Notch of the side will be a stay to
hold up the Tiles; then take forty Tiles, and they will serve for the twenty
Traps, and fit them as near as you can to fall close together; Then take the
three Sticks, the six Inch, the three and the two Inch Sticks, and place the
three Inch Stick to the edge of the undermost bottom Tile; then take the two
Inch Stick, and Inch Stick, and set the Taper end of the two Inch Stick in the
Notch that is at the end of the six Inch Stick; then the Notch of the side of
the six Inches must hook into the side of the three Inch Stick, otherwise the
weight of the Tile will make the Sticks fly all apart; if it stand when it is
set exactly like a Figure of 4, you shall see every part in the Frontice-piece.
You Inch Stick with Lard, and dip it into Oatmeal, and bait but the uppermost
side; then having set them all along the Hedges, or Wall-sides, you will find
good store taken of them, for the Traps seldom miss: And in those Traps where
Mice are taken, when you set them again, you should Bait them afresh with Lard
and Oatmeal, as aforesaid.

These Traps are very good to take Titmice, which is a very destructive Bird to
the Buds of Trees, as also to Wall-Fruit.

MOLES, or WANTS, are great Enemies to Gardens, Meadows, and Cornfieldsd; they
are to be taken with Traps, which are to be placed in the Moles Road, Passage,
or Trench; and of these Traps there are several sorts, but the best is thus
made: Take a piece of Board about three Inches broad, and five Inches long,
with the ends made Taperwise; on one side six two small Sticks like round
Arches, at each end one, large Mole to go through; in the midst of the Board
make a Hole large enough to receive a Goose-Quill, into which a Peg of about
two Inches long is to be put. You must also be provided with a Hazle Stick, or
some other bending Wood of about a Yard and an half long, which is to be stuck
in the Ground with a Link of Horse-hair tied to it; and before you fix the Trap
into the Moles Passage, put the Hair-Spring through the Hole in the midst of
the Board, and place it round even with the Hoops, and with the said Peg
(gently put into the Hole to stop the Knot of the Hair-Spring;) then make the
Trap fast down by hooked long Sticks thrust into the Earth, to the end that the
Spring-Stick may not draw up the Trap; and the Trap must be exactly covered
over with Earth, that there may be no Light appear in the said Trench; And when
the Mole passes that way, by thrusting out the said Peg that hangs loosly
perpendicular Knot passing through the Hole, the Mole is become ensnared with
the Spring.

After this Method you may set what quantity of Traps your Ground requires,
which should be tended every day Morning and Evening at their Working times, to
see what are taken, and that the Traps may be set again, for in one Passage
seven or eight may be taken without removing the Trap.

Another way to take Moles.
HAving taken a Doe-Mole, get a large Earthen Pot, and having made a Hole in
the middle of the main Trench, or Passage; set the Pot that the top may be even
with the bottom of the Trench; then fill it about half full with Mould, and put
some great Worms therein for the Mole to live upon, and cover the Pot very
close that no Light come therein; and the Buck-Mole will not fall to visit the
Do in the Pot, especially if it be set about March, which is their
Bucking-time; for then it is said they will run about a quarter of a Mile after
a Do, and by this means (with the help of a few Pots) all the Bucks will be
taken.

If you Fume the Trenches with Brimstone, Garlic, and the like unsavory
things, the Moles will forsake the Ground. The like they will do, if you put a
dead Mole into their Trenches.

The usual places for their Beds and Haunts, are in Banks, and near Hedge-rows.

Mole-Ketchers are very expert in taking them in the Mornings and Evenings,
when they stir, only with their Paddle-Staves.

Injurious Fowl and Insects.
THe Crows, Rooks, and Daws; as also Sparrows, Titmice, Bulfinches, and the
like small Birds, destroy much Corn, as also Cherries; the like do Jayes and
Magpies. There are diverse Inventions to destroy them; which are taken notice of
in the Treatise of Fowling.

Kites and wild Hawks oft-times kill the Chickens.

Snails, Slugs, Wasps, Ants, Hornets, Ear-wigs, Caterpillars, Ants, Snakes, and
like, are also very pernicious to the Husbandman; but they may easily be
destroyed with a little care and pains.

Injuries sustained by the Heavens.
HIgh Winds are very pernicious to Fruits, Trees, Corn, Hops, Buildings, etc.
especially in plain, open, and high Countries; for a defense from which, the
Elm (or other high Trees) is a great shelter to Houses; and for Fruits and Hops
good Walls, Pales, and Hedges, are a Preservative; and for Corn, there is no
better way than good Hedge-Rows and Enclosures, as before treated of.

Thunder, Tempests, Hail and Lightning are great enemies to the Husbandman in
diverse respects, which being so well known are unnecessary to be named.

Blighting and Mildews prove often times fatal to Corn; but if a good Shower of
Rain immediately follows, or that the Wind blow stiffly, it washes or shakes
it off. But this Ill-conveniency does most attend Enclosures. Also the Sowing
of Wheat early is a great prevention of Mildews: And Bearded Wheat is not
subject thereto, as other sorts are.

Great and hasty Rains are very pernicious to Corn-Ground, especially to such
that lie low, and at the bottom of Hills, for which it is good to make
Watercourse, or Drains, to carry it away: And a wet Harvest is very bad, not
only as to Expenses, but as to the spoiling the Corn, which the better to
prevent observe the old Proverb, To make Hay whilst the Sun shines. And let the
Corn be well shocked up, which will very much preserve it from a Shower of Rain.

Violent and long Frosts are very prejudicial in several respects, especially
to forward Fruits, Seeds, and Plants in the Spring. Also some Lands (as cold
Clayey Ground) are more subject to suffer by bitter Frosts, than those that lie
on a warm Sand, or Gravel; also those that lie moist, more than those that lie
dry; and those that lie on the North and East sides of Hills, Enclosures are
very good, being a great preservative to Corn, Trees, Plants, etc.

Also Horse-Dung laid to the Roots of young and tender Trees, and Plants, is a
great preservative against pinching Frosts. Likewise Straw, Hawm, Fern, or
Furz, will very much defend any thing from Frosts. Also Mat, or Canvass, is
very good to preserve Beds of tender Plants, or Flowers, being arched over with
Sticks, and the said Mat, or Canvass, laid upon it. The like it is for
Hot-Beds, for the raising of Seeds in the Spring.

Fruit gathered into the House is subject to great damage by Frosts, so that to
prevent this mischief in a great measure cast Straw over them.

This Kingdom is much subject to Heat and Drought in the Summer Season, so that
to many Seats Water is much wanting, all standing Pools being then dried up,
insomuch that Cattle are drove to Water a considerable distance to some Spring
or River; and no Water for the Household Affairs, but what is brought by a Cart,
which is very troublesome. Now to prevent this, where no Springs can be found by
digging of Wells, make Cisterns which may be capacious enough to hold as great
a quantity of Water as you think fit, which will easily be filled, be it never
so big in the Winter.

For the making these Cisterns, make a Bed of good Clay, and lay thereon Bricks
for the Floor; then raise the Wall round about, leaving a convenient space
betwixt the Bricks and the Earth, to ram in Clay as fast as the Wall is made;
but be sure let the Bed of Clay be of a good thickness, and well tempered, that
the Clay chop not, for then it is spoiled, and will not hold Water.

CHAP. XIV.
A CALENDAR, or Monthly Directions to the Husbandman.
THere is a peculiar time to be observed for the most Affairs in the World, but
especially for such that depend upon the mutable Seasons of the Year, being the
essential part of AGRICVLTVRE, insomuch that every Husbandman should have his
Chart, or Draught, to steer by, and to reinforce his Memory, so that the
multiplicity of his Affairs may not occasion his forgetting those things that
are necessary to be undertaken, always observing the Proverb, To take Time by
the Fore-lock, for Time let slip cannot be recalled, so that it is a great
negligence to be too late; and you shall rarely find a thriving HVSBANDMAN to
be behind with his Affairs, for if you expect a Reward of your Labors, Plow,
Sow, and Reap in due Season. But to proceed to the Monthly Calendar, beginning
with January.

Sunrise. Sunset. JANUARY 31 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 New Years 2 Day. 3 4 8. 00
4. 00 Castor and Pollux rises in the Evening. 5 6 Twelf-day. 7 8 9 10 Sun in
Aquarius. Lucida Corona, or the Crown, is with the Sun. 11 12 The Dog Star
rises in the Evening. 13 14 15 16 7. 45 4. 15 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 7. 30.
4. 30. 25 St. Paul. 26 27 28 29 30 31 7. 15 4. 45

A Frosty January is seasonable, although it proves the Rich man's charge, and
the Poor man's misery.

Now it is time to Plow, or Fallow the Ground designed for Pease, Beans, or
Oats; and if the Weather be Mild, sow forward Pease, and set Garden-Beans,
digging or trenching your Garden Ground, December.

Now it is good time to water Meadows, and Marsh Grounds, and to drain Arable
Lands by cutting Water-Furrows.

If the Season be Hard and Frosty, carry out your Dung on your Land, laying it
on Heaps until the Weather be mild and open.

Lop and Top Trees, and cut your Coppices and Hedge-rows.

In open Weather remove and plant Trees and Vines, dig and trench Gardens, lay
up your Borders, uncover the Roots of such Trees that require it, putting Soil
unto them. Also Prune your Vines and Trees, Nail and trim Wall-Fruits, cleanse
Trees from Moss and Succors, gather Cions for Grafts, and stick them in the
Ground until Grafting time. Make Hot-Beds, and Sow your choice Sallads, also
Colly-flowers, etc. secure your choice Flowers and Plants from the Cold by
Covers, Straw, or Dung. Earth up the Roots of such Plants that the Frost has
uncovered. Set Quicksets. Hedge and Ditch; Cut away Ant-hills. House your
weanling Calves and Colts. Be careful of your Ews and Lambs. Set Traps to
destroy Vermin. Dig Weedy Hop-Grounds, remove Bees, and turn up Bee-Hives, and
sprinkle them with sweet warm Wort.

Sunrise. Sunset. FEBRUARY 28, or 29 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 Cor Leonis rises in
the Evening. 2 Candlemass 3 4 5 6 7 8 7. 00 5. 00 Sun in Pisces. 9 10 11 12 13
14 Valentine 15 16 6. 45 5. 45 Cor Hydrae rises in the Evening. 17 18 The
Lions Tail rises in the Evening. 19 20 Fomahant is with the Sun. 21 22 23 6.
30 5. 30 24 Matthias 25 26 27 28 29

This is a busy Month for sowing of Pease, Beans, Tares, and Oats, being the
principal Season for Lenten Grain. Carry out Dung, and spread it before the
Plough; but for Pasture Grounds that are wet, choose the hard Frosts. Make have
to Plant such Trees that your occasions would not permit you in January, for
now the Sap rises up, and then it is too late: You may also yet plant
Quick-sets. Set Osiers, Poplars, Willows, and other Aquaticks, this being a
very good Season. If the Season is mild sow Hemp Seed, as also Mustard Seed.
Cleanse your Ground from Moles before breeding time, which is March, and spread
the Mole-hills. This is seasonable for cutting Coppices, Lopping of Trees and
plashing of Quick-sets. If the Weather is temperate Graft your forward Fruits,
and cleanse Fruit Trees from Moss and Cankers. Cut not your tender Wall-Fruit
until the Frosts are over. Trim up your Pallisade-Hedges and Espaliers. Lay
Branches to take Root. Set Nuts, Fruit-Stones, and Kernels, with other hard
Seeds. Toward the middle, or latter end of the Month sow Carots, Parsnips,
Onions, Sallating, Parsley, Spinach, and other hard Seeds; plant Cabages,
Liquorice; plant out Colly-flowers into Warm-Beds. Make up Hot-Beds for
Cucumbers, Melons, etc. Sow Asparagus. Gather off the Snails from the
Wall-fruit, set Traps for taking Bull-finches that destroy the Buds of
Fruit Trees. Plant Hops if the Weather be mild, and dress them that are out of
heart. You may yet remove Bees, and half open their Passages. This Month is
good to few Fish Ponds, and to take Fish.

Sunrise. Sunset. MARCH 31 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 David 2 6. 15 5. 45 3 4 5 6 7
8 9 10 6. 00 6. 00 Sun in Aries. Aequinoctial. 11 12 Arcturus rises in the
Evening. 13 14 15 16 17 18 5. 45 6. 15 Calf of the right Leg of Boots rises
in the Evening. 19 20 21 22 23 Spica Virginis rises in the Evening. 24 25 5. 30
6. 30 Lady Day. 26 27 28 29 Second Star in the Left Wing of Virgo rises in the
Evening. 30 31

This Month ushers in the welcome Spring, and if it prove dry, is esteemed
ominous of a happy year for Corn. In this Mouth and the next sow all sorts of
French Grasses, or Hay-seed, and if the Weather be temperate Flax and Hemp. It
is Oats, Barley, Pease, etc. Also sow Carots, Parsnips, Turnips, Cabage-seeds,
Parsley, Skirrets, Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Spinach, Purslaine, Lettuce,
Raddish, Sallery, Smallage, Endive, Succory, Marygolds, with diverse other
Summer Herbs. You may transplant most sorts of sweet Herbs, and Summer Flowers.
Make your Hot Beds for Melons, and Cucumbers. Dress up and string your
Strawberry-Beds. Uncover Asparagus-Beds, and transplant them. Slip and plant
Artichoaks, and Liquorice. Plant all Garden-Herbs and Flowers that have fibrous
Roots. And such choice Flowers that are not natural for our Climate sow in
Hot-Beds. Now is a good time to plant Madder, and Saffron. As also Hops, and to
dress them up. Sow Pine-Kernels, and the Seeds of all Winter Greens: Also Pinks
and Carnations. This is the principal Season for Grafting all sorts of
Fruit Trees, and cover the Roots of such Trees that you laid open in the
Winter. Carry Dung into your Gardens, and Orchards. Destroy what Moles you
could not in February. It is yet seasonable to set Osiers, Willows, and the
like Aquaticks. Lay up your Meadows and Pastures designed to Mow, and keep up
your Fences. If the Weather be dry, Roll your Wheat. It Is a good Season to Lop
Trees, and fell Coppices And this is the best Season to raise the best Brood
Poultrey.

Sunrise. Sunset. APRIL 30 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 2 5. 15 6. 45 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 5.
00 7. 00 10 Sun in Taurus. 11 12 Canda Leonis Sets in the Morning. 13 14 15 16
17 4. 45 7. 15 18 19 20 21 22 23 St. George. 24 25 St. Mark. 26 4. 30 7. 30
Virgiliae, or the Pleiades, rises with the Sun. 27 28 29 30

If the Spring is forward, cleanse and rid away the Wood from the Coppices, and
fence them in to preserve them from Cattle. It is now seasonable to Fell such
Timber you intend to Bark. If the Season is dry Fallow your Ground, cleanse and
scour your Ditches, and make have to sow your French Seeds that you could not
do in March; and you may also sow Hemp and Flax in the beginning of this Month.
Now is a good Season to sow all Garden Seeds, if the Weather is dry: and when
it is wet, plant your Garden Herbs, and sow such tender Seeds that cannot endure
the cold Frosts. Sow Cucumbers and Melons; set Artichoaks, French-Beans, and
English-Beans. In the beginning of this Month Graft some sorts of Fruit in the
Stock Gather up Snails and Slugs after Evening Showers, as also early in the
Mornings. Sow your Annual Flowers that come of Seed, that you may have Flowers
all the Summer: Also sow the Seeds of Winter-Greens, and transplant such
Flowers with fibrous Roots that were left unremoved in March. You may now set
forth your tender Greens, that are kept in your Conservatory in the Winter,
except Orange Trees, and those bring not forth till May. Also transplant and
remove your Jasimines, Myrtles, and the like tender Greens: And toward the end
of the Month, if the Weather be mild, clip your Phillyrea, and transplantany
sort of Winter Greens. Plant Hops, and Pole them. Lay open your Bees to gather
the sweets of the Flowers.

Sunrise. Sunset. MAY 31 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 Phil. and Jacob Cor Scorpionis
Sets in the Morning. 2 3 The Great Dog Star in the Evening. 4 5 6 4. 15 7. 45 7
8 9 The Goat-Star appears. 10 11 Sun in Gemini 12 Aldebran Sets in the Evening.
13 14 Fomahant rises in the Morning. 15 16 4. 00 8. 00 17 Middle Stat of
Andromeda's Girdle Sets with the Sun. 18 19 20 21 22 Cor Scorpionis rises in
the Evening. 23 24 25 26 3. 50 8. 10 27 28 29 The Bulls Eye rises with the Sun.
30 31

This often proves the pleasantest Month in the Year; the Fields and Trees being
in their Summer Liveries, and Birds chant out their pleasant Notes to the
welcoming in the Spring.

If this Month proves seasonable and cool, it rejoices the Countrymans Heart
in expectation Autumn; but if hot, it denotes Sickness to ensue. If your Corn
be to rank, Mow it, or Feed it down, with Sheep.

It is a good time to wean Lambs, whose Ewes you intend to milk. Cutting or
Cropping of Trees, hinders them from thriving.

You may sow Buck-Wheat this Month, as also later Pease, and set later Garden
Beans. Weed your Quick-Sets. Drain wet and Marshy Grounds.

Turn out your weanling Calves to Grass. Twifallow Fuel, cleanse your Ground
from Broom, Furz, Goss, and the like: and grub up such Coppices and Hedgrows as
you intend should not grow again. Sell off your Winter-fed Cattle, look after
your Sheep if the Weather proves rainy, for fear of the Rot.

About the end of the Month Mow your Clover, St. Foy^, and other French
Grasses. Plant all sorts of Winter Greens.

Sow sweet Marjarom, Thime, Basil, hot Aromatic Herbs, and Plants, and such
like tender Seeds. Also set Sage and Rosemary. Sow Purcelain, and Lettuce; also
French Beans; and uncover your Melons and Cucumbers, excepting in Glasses.

Take up such Tulips that are dried in the Stalk. Watch your Bees ready to
swarm, and bind up the Hops to the Poles, and make up the Hills after Rain.

Sunrise. Sun Set. JUNE has 30 Days. H. M. H. M 1 2 3 3. 45 8. 15 4 5 6 7 8
The Head of Costor rises in the Morning before the Sun. 9 10 3. 43 8. 17 11
Barnabas Sun in Cancer Solstice. 12 13 14 Arcturus sets in the Morning. 15 16
17 Hydra's Heart sets in the Evening. 18 19 20 3. 45 8. 15 21 22 23 24 Jo.
Baptist 25 26 27 28 29 St. Peter The Right Foot of Gemini sets in the Morning.
30 3. 30 8. 10

This Month is the principal Season for washing and sharing Sheep: And now
begins the Husbandmans Hay-Harvest in high forward Meadows. Fallow your
Wheat-land, which will kill the Weeds, and mellow the Ground. And cleanse and
scower your Ponds and Ditches from the Mud, the Season being now warm to endure
the Water. Fetch home your Fuel before your Teem is employed in Harvest
affairs. Weed your Corn, sow Rape, and Cole-seed, as also Turnep-seed. Have a
great care to your Sheep for fear of the Rot, for Mildews, and Hony-dews begin
to fall. Gather Snails, Slugs, and Worms; and destroy Ants and other Vermin.
It Is a good time now to Inoculate, and to pluck off the Buds where you would
not have the Trees branch forth. Water such Trees that you planted late, laying
Weeds or Stones at the Roots to keep them moist. Plant July-Flowers, and
Rosemary, set Saffron, sow latter Sallading. Inoculate Jasamine, Roses, etc.
gather Seeds that are ripe, and preserve them that are cool and dry. Water the
dry Beds. Take up your Bulbous Roots of Tulips, Anemonies, etc. and transplant
them. Dig such Ground as you design for a Hop-ground, and bind such Hops to the
Poles that the Wind has shaken off. Be careful of yours Bees, this Month being
the principal time of their swarming. And now is the time to distill Waters, to
dry Herbs for the Winter; and to make Syrups, etc.

Sunrise. Sun Set. JULY 31 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 First Star of Orions Belt rises
with the Sun. 2 Visitation of Mary. 3 4 5 6 7 8 4. 00 8. 00 9 10 11 12 13 Sun
in Leo. Lucida Corona rises in the Evening. 14 15 St. Swithin 16 17 18 4. 15 7.
45 19 Dog Days. 20 Margaret. Lesser Dog Star rises with the Sun. 21 22 Mary
Mag. 23 24 25 St. James. 26 27 28 4. 30 7. 30 29 Greater Dog Star rises with
the Sun. 30 31 Syrius rises in the Morning.

This Month and August is the Husbandmans busy time, Hay Harvest admitting no
delay, especially if fair Weather offers.

Gather your earliest Hemp and Flax.

Sow Turnep-Seeds: Toward the latter end of Rye will be ripe, especially if
the Year is forward.

In this Month Wheat and Hops are much subject to Mildews.

It is now very good time to Inoculate choice Fruits, Roses, etc.

Cut off the Stocks of such Flowers that have done blossoming, and cover their
Roots with new rich Mould.

Cleanse your Wall Fruit from Snails.

Sow latter Sallading. Slip Stocks, and lay July-Flowers and Carnations for
increase, watering them, and keeping them from the hear of the Sun; also lay
Myrtle and other curious Greens.

Graft by approach, and Inoculate Jasimines, Oranges, etc. Transplant and
remove Tulips, and the like Bulbous Roots.

Streighten the entrance of your Bees, kill the Drones, Wasps, Flies, etc. that
annoy them.

Sunrise. Sunset. AUGUST 31 Days H. M. H. M. 1 Lammas Orion appears in the
Morning. 2 Day. 3 4 5 6 4. 45 7. 15 7 8 9 Cor Leonis rises in the Morning with
the Sun. 10 Laurence. 11 12 13 5. 00 7. 00 Sun in Virgo. 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 5. 15 6. 45 22 23 24 St. Bartholomew. Cauda Leonis rises in the Morning with
the Sun. 25 26 (end. 27 Dog Days 28 5. 30 6. 30 29 30 31

This Month is the Husbandmans great expense for the bringing in of his
Harvest; and if it prove dry and free from high Winds, great part of his
disbursments will be abated to Laborers; besides, the great advantage gained
by having the Corn dry cut and housed. You may yet Twy-fallow, and carry on
your Dung for your Winter Corn, laying it in heaps to be spread before the
Plough. This is a good Season for gelding of Lambs; and such Ewes and Cows that
you design not to keep for store, put to fatting. About the end of this Month
you may Mow your Rowen, or After-Marth Grass, also your Clover, and other
French Grasses will be fit to cut again. This is a good Month to make Cider of
Summer Fruits that will not keep. The beginning of this Month is very good to
Inoculate in, and to unbind the Buds of those before Inoculated, if taken Sap.
Pull up the Suckers from the Roots of Trees, prune away superfluous Branches
from your Wall Fruit Trees, but leave not the Fruit bare, except the red
Nectorine, which is much meliorated by its being exposed to the Sun. Set Slips
of July-Flowers; Transplant Flowers and Garden Plants as Herbs, Strawberrys,
etc. gather Seeds of Flowers and Herbs. Sow Cabages, Colly-Flowers, Turnips,
and other Roots and Plants for the Winter, and against the next Spring. Also
sow such Seeds that will endure the Winter. About Bartholomew-Tide is a good
Season to transplant all Bulbous Roots; as also Winter Greens. Gather Hops,
look after your Bees, and streighten their passages to secure them from Wasps,
and those that you intend not to keep, destroy for their Honey.

Sunrise. Sun Set. SEPTEMBER 30 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 2 3 4 5 5. 45 6. 15 6 7 8
Nativity of Virgin 9 10 Mary. 11 Arcturus Sets after the Sun. 12 13 6. 00 6. 00
Sun in Lira, Equinoctial. 14 Holy Cross 15 16 17 18 19 20 6. 15 5. 45 21 St.
Matthew 22 23 24 25 Spica Virginis is with the Sun. 26 27 6. 30 5. 30 28 29 St.
Michael Plejades Rises in the Evening. 30

Gentle Showers are now acceptable for the mellowing the Earth for the Plough,
the Wheat-Seed Season being now; but dry and calm Weather is best for the
gathering your Winter-Fruits now ripe; for according to Observation, Sow Wheat
in the Dirt, and Rye in the Dust. Geld Cattle; put your Boars up to fat: Sew
your Fish Ponds; beat out Hemp Seed; and Water your Hemp. Gather Masts; and put
your Swine into the Woods: Carry out what Dung you have to be spread on your
Wheat-Land before the Plough.

It Is a good Season to make Cider and Perry of such Fruits that will not keep,
or such that are bruised, or the like, in the gathering; but let your long
lasting Winter-Fruit hang on the Trees till Michaelmass. Sow Cabages,
Colly-Flowers, Turnips, Onions, etc. and transplant such Cabages, and
Colly-Flowers that were sown in August; also transplant Asparagus Roots,
Artichoaks, and Strawberries. Hoe your Turnips, plant Tulips and other Bulbous
Roots that you formerly took up; you may also transplant all Fibrous Roots. Be
careful of your choice Plants, and Winter Green, setting them in your
Conservatory.

This Month puts an end to your gathering and drying your Hops, cleansing the
Poles from the Hawm, and to set them up for the next Year.

Look after your Bees, destroy the Wasps, etc. streighten the Entrances into
their Hives, and destroy those that you intend not to keep, taking away their
Honey.

Sunrise. Sunset. OCTOBER 31 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 2 Spica Virginis Rises in
the Morning with the Sun. 3 4 6. 45 5. 15 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 7. 00 5. 00 13 14
Sun in Scorpio 15 16 17 18 St. Luke. Cauda Leonis sets in the Evening. 19 20 7.
15 4. 45 21 22 23 24 25 Crispine. 26 27 28 29 7. 30 4. 30 30 31

This Month proves generally Windy, and finisheth the Fall of the Leaf.

It is yet a good Seed-time for Wheat, and you may sow your Hotspurs on rich
and warm Ground for a forward Crop.

Lay up your Barly-Land dry, water-furrow, and drain your new sown Wheat-Ground.

The time is seasonable for sowing of Nuts, Acorns; as also other Berries, or
Masts for Coppices or Hedgrows.

Plant Quick-sets, and plash your Quick-set Hedges. You may also begin to set
Trees.

Wean your Colts foaled of your working Mares at the Spring, and fell off such
Sheep that you design not to keep.

This is a good time for making Cider and Perry of your Winter-Fruits, and
finish the gathering of such like Fruits.

Sow all sorts of Fruit-Kernels, Stones and Nuts, as well for Trees as Stocks.
Cut and prune Rose-Trees.

Plant your Bulbous Roots of any sort, and remove Flowers and Herbs with
Fibrous Roots, if the former Season was omitted.

Plant Hops, and bag up those you dried the former Month.

It Is a good Season for removing Bees.

Trench the stiffer sorts of Ground for Orcharding, and Gardening to lie mellow
in the Winter; lay open the Roots of old and unthriving Trees, or such that
spend themselves too much, or too soon in Blossoms.

Sunrise. Sunset. NOVEMBER 30 Days. H. M. H. M. 1 Alhallon day. 2 3 4 5 6 7.
45 4. 15 Leonard. 7 8 9 10 Virgiliae, or the Seven Stars, sets in the Morning.
11 Martinmas 12 Sun in Sagitarius. The Bulls-Eye sets in the Morning. 13 14 15
16 8. 00 4. 00 Edmund. 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Cor Scorpij rises in the Morning.
24 25 26 8. 10 3. 50 The Bulls-Eye rises in the Evening. 27 28 The middle Star
of Andromeda's Girdle rises in the Morning. 29 30

Seed-time is now well over, and the Markets begin to fill with Corn. Fat your
Swine for slaughter. Cast out your Mushy Straw in moist places to rot for Dung.
Plant Timber and Fruit Trees, if the Weather be open. Fell Coppices, and Lop
Trees; break Flax and Hemp; destroy Ant-hills; Gardens, and sow forward Pease.
Furnish your Nursery with Stocks against the Spring. Prune your Fruit Trees,
and cleanse them from Moss. Cider may be made of hard Fruits, that are not
pulpy. Sow Nuts and Fruit-Stones. If the Weather is open plant Tulips; also
Roses, and several other Plants and Flowers; and those Seedlings, or Layers
that are tender, should be covered with Straw, Matresses, Boxes, or the like.
Carry Dung into your Hop-Garden to mix Earth to rot against the Spring. Lay up
Parsnips, Carots, Cabbages, Colly-flowers, etc. either for use, or to
transplant for Seed at the Spring. Cover your Asparagus-Beds, Artichoaks,
Strawberries, and tender Plants with long Dung, or Horse-Litter, to preserve
them from Frosts. Now is a good time to dig up Liquorice.

Sunrise. Sunset. DECEMBER 31 Days H. M. H. M. 1 2 3 8. 15 3. 45 Right Foot
of Gemini sets in the Morning. 4 5 The lesser Dog Star sets in the Morning. 6 7
8 9 10 11 12 8. 17 3. 43 Sun in Capricorn Solstice. 13 14 Arcturus sets in the
Evening. 15 16 17 Cor Hydrae sets in the Morning. 18 19 20 8. 15 3. 45 21 St.
Thomas. 22 23 24 25 Christmas. Right Shoulder of Orion rises in the Evening.
26 St. Stephen. 27 8. 10 3. 50 St. John Evangelist. 28 Innocents. 29 30 The
Left Foot of Gemini rises in the Evening. 31

Now begins the Country man's chargeable time for Housing his Cattle, or
foddering them abroad. Lop Trees, and fell Coppices; plant all sorts of Trees,
as well Fruits as others, provided they are such as shed their Leaves. Let
Horses Blood; fat Cattle, and Swine. Destroy Ant-hills, overflow Meadows, and
drain your Cornfieldsd by cutting Water-furrows. It is a good time to Plow for
Pease, or Beans. Prune your Vines, if the Weather be open. Keep your Asparagus
Beds covered, as directed in November; the like observe for you Artichoaks, and
Strawberries. Trench and dig your Garden Ground to Mellow the Earth against the
Spring; and if the Weather be Mild sow Pease, and set Beans for forward Crops.
Set Traps for destroying Vermin, and pick the Snails away from your
Wall-Fruit-Trees. Dig up Liquorice, feed the Stocks of Bees that are weak, and
cleanse your Hop-Gardens from Weeds.

OF THE FIGHTING-COCK.
Which treats of the Choice, Ordering, Breeding, and Dieting of Cocks for
Battle.
FOR the perfecting of this Work, since many of the Nobility and Gentry delight
in this Noble Diversion, I shall conclude with a compendious Treatise thereof:

CHAP. XV.
Of the Choice of Cocks.
THe best properties for the choice of Fighting Cocks, is their Shape, Color,
Courage, and sharp Heels or Spurs; as to their Shape, the middle sized ones are
esteemed the best, as being soonest and easiest matched, as also the Nimblest,
and generally best of Courage; whereas the large Turn-Pock) is difficult to
find his equal; besides they are for the most part heavy, not showing that
sport in their Battle: likewise the small sized ones are weak, and tedious in
Battle.

The Shape.
HE should be of a proud and upright Shape, Head, a quick large Eye, with a
strong Beak, crook't and big at the setting on, the Beam of his Legs very
strong, and according to his Plume, Gray, Blew, or Yellow; his Spurs long,
rough and sharp, a little bending inwards.

His Color.
THe Gray pyle, Yellow pyle, or red with the Breast is esteemed the best; the
Pide is not so good, and the White and Dun worst of all: If he is red about the
Head like Scarlet, it is a sign of Strength, Lust and Courage; but if pale, it is
a sign of Faintness and Sickness.

His Courage.
HIs Courage is showed by his Walk, treading, and the pride of his going, and
in his Pen Crowing: For the sharpness of his Heel, or as Cock-masters call it,
the narrow Heel, is only seen in his Fighting; for that Cock is said to be
sharp Heel'd, or narrow Heel'd, which every time he rises hits, and draws
Blood of his Adversary, guilding (as they term it) his Spurs in Blood, and
every Blow threatening the others Death. And such Cocks are the best; for a
sharp Heel'd Cock, though he be a little false, is deemed much better than the
truest Cock that has a dull Heel, and hits seldom. But that Cock which is both
hard, and very sharp Heel'd, is to be esteemed above others; therefore in your
Choice choose such a one as is of a strong Shape, good Color, true Valor, and
of a most sharp and ready Heel.

Of Breeding.
FOr the Breeding these Cocks for Battle, it is much different from those of
the Dung-hil, for they are like Birds of Prey, in which the Female is of better
esteem than the Male; and so in the Breed of these Cocks, be sure that the Hens
are right, that is, they must be, of a right Plume, as Gray, Grissel, Speck't,
or Yellowish; Black or Brown is not amiss; their Bodies large, and well pouked
behind for large Eggs, and well tusted on the Crowns, which shows good Courage:
If they have Weapons, it is the better: Also they must be of a good Courage,
otherwise their Chickens will not be good. And it is observable that the
perfect Hen from a Dunghill Cock, will bring a good Chicken; but the best Cock
from a Dunghill Hen can never get a good one.

Thus having got a Breed of perfect Cocks and Hens, the best Season of the Year
to breed in, is from the Increase of the Moon in February, to the Increase of
the Moon in March; for one March Bird is of far greater esteem, than those bred
at other times.

Let the Pen where she sits be placed warm, with soft sweet Straw therein for
her Nest, they being much tenderer than the Dung hil-Hens; and permit no other
Fowl to come where she sits, for that will disturb her. You should observe, if
she be busy in turning her Eggs (being a good sign) if not, do it at such
times as she rises from her Nest; and be sure that she has always Meat and
Water by her, lest when she rises she should stay long to seek Food, and so
her Eggs would be chill and spoiled: Likewise in the place where she Sits, let
there be Sand, Gravel, and fine sifted Ashes to bathe and trim her self in at
pleasure.

In about three Weeks she will Hatch, and observe, that if she does not cover
and keep the first warm till the rest are Hatched, take those from her, and keep
them warm in* Wool by the Fire until all are Hatched; and then put them all Hen
and Chickens very warm, not suffering them to go abroad in the Cold for three
Weeks, or a Month, for they are so tender that Cold will kill them.

Let them have plenty of Food, as Oatmeal, Cheese-Par^ngs, fine small Wheat,
and the like, and a large Room to walk in with a Boarded Floor; for that of
Earth, or Brick, is too cold or moist. After three or four Weeks, let them walk
in your Courtyard, or Garden, to pick Worms, Sinks, or Puddles of stinking
Water, which is as bad as Poison for them to drink, engendring corrupt Diseases.

After this manner keep them until you can know the Cock-Chickens from the
Hens; and when you perceive their Combs, or Wattles to appear, cut them off,
anointing the Soar with sweet Butter until well; and this will make them have
fine, small, slender, and smooth Heads; whereas if you let the Combs grow to
their bigness, Heads, with great Lumps; neither is the Flux of Blood good, for
the least loss of Blood in a feathered Fowl is very dangerous.

Let the Cock-Chickens go with their Hens till they begin to fight with one
another; but then separate them into several Walks, and that Walk is the best
that is freest from the resort of others.

Let the Feeding place be upon soft dry Ground, Boards; for to feed them upon
Pavements, or on Plaister-Floors, will make their Beaks blunt and weak, so that
it will hinder their holding fast. Any white Corn, as Oats, Barley, or Wheat, is
good Food for a Cock in his Walk; so are Toasts, or Crusts of Bread steept in
Drink, or Wine; for it will both scowr and cool them inwardly.

If your Chickens begin to Crow at about six Months old clear and loud, or at
unseasonable Cock is very long before he can get his Voice, and then he
observes his Hours.

To one Cock four of five Hens are sufficient; for they are of so hot a Nature,
and will Tread so much, that they soon consume their Natural strength.

At two years old you may put a Cock to the Battle, as not being before perfect
and complete in every Member; for to suffer him to Fight when his Spurs are but
Warts, you may know his Courage, but not his Goodness.

You must also be circumspect about the Perch whereon he Roosteth; for if it
be too small in the gripe, or crooked, or so ill placed that he cannot sit
without strading, it will make him uneven Heel'd, and by consequence no good
striker. Seeing therefore that the Perch is of such consequence for the marring
or making them; the best way is to have a row of little Pearches, not above
seven or eight Inches long, and about a Foot from the Ground, so that with case
they may go up to them; and being set, must have their Legs close, the
shortness of the Perch not admitting otherwise: And it is a Maxim, That he
that is a close sitter, is ever a narrow striker.

You must also be careful, that when your Cock does Leap from the Perch, that
the Ground be soft whereon he ligheth; for hard Ground causes Goutiness.

Of Dyetting and Ordering Cocks.
FOr the Dyetting and Ordering a Cock for the Battle, which is the principal
thing; (for the best Cock Undyetted, is not able to encounter with the worst
that is Dyetted;) observe these Directions.

The best time to take up your Cocks is about the latter end of August (for
from that time to the latter end of May, Cocking is in request) and having
viewed them well, and that they are sound, hard Feathered, and full Summed, put
them into several Pens. Now for the true making them, it were convenient to
visit some Cock-Master; for an ocular sight is far better than a verbal
Direction; only let me tell you, it should be made of close Boards well joined
together, all but the Forefront, which must be made open, like a Grate; the
Bars about two Inches apart; and before the Grate two large Troughs of soft
Wood, the one for Water, and the other for Meat; the Door of the Grate to be
made to lift up and down, and of such largeness, as with ease to put the Cock
in and out, and to cleanse the Pen daily, to keep it sweet. The Pen should be
at least three foot high, and two foot square; of these Pens many may be joined
in one Front, according to the use you have for them.

For the first three or four Days that they are put into their Pens, feed them
only with old White Bread, the Crust pared away, and cut into little small
square Bits, with which feed them at Sunrising, Noon, and Sunset, giving them
about an Handful at a time; and be sure, let them not be without good fresh
Water.

After they have been thus fed four Days, and their Crops cleared of the Corn,
Worms, and other course Feeding, in the Morning take them out of their Pens,
and putting a pair of Hots upon each of their Heels, which Hots are soft
bumbasted Rouls of Leather covering their Spurs, that they cannot hurt or bruise
one another, and so setting them down (that is, two at a time) on the Green
Grass, let them fight, and buffet each other a good while, provided they do not
wound or draw Blood of each other, and this is called Sparring of Cocks. The
reason of thus exercising them is, to chase and heat their Bodies, to break the
fat and glut within them, and to cause it to come away.

Your Cocks having Sparred sufficiently, and that you see them Pant, and grow
Weary, take them up, and unty their Hots; then being provided with deep
Straw-Baskets, made for that purpose, with sweet soft Straw to the middle; put
into each Basket a Cock, covering him over with the like Straw to the top; then
put on the Lid close, and so let him stove and sweat till the Evening: But
before you put him into the Basket, give him a pretty big Lump of sweet Butter,
Sugar Candy, and some Rosemary finely chopped, and this Scouring will bring away
his Grease, and breed Breath and Strength.

In the Evening (about four or five of the Clock) take them out of the
Stoving-Baskets, and licking their Heads and Eyes all over, put them into the
Pens; then take a good Handful of Bread small cut, put it to each in their
Troughs, and Piss therein, so that the Cocks may take the Bread out of the warm
Urine, and this will Heads and Bodies extremely.

The Bread that you must now and afterward give them, must not be fine White
Bread; b^t a sort made for that purpose, after this manner. Take half a Peck of
Wheat-Meal, with the like quantity of fine Oatmeal; mix these together, and
knead them into a stiff Past with Ale, the Whites of twelve Eggs, and half a
Pound of Butter. This Past being well wrought, make Cakes, and being three or
four Days old, and the Blisterings cut away, cut it into little square Bits,
and so give it the Cocks. There be some that will mix in the said Bread
Licorice, Annice-seeds, with other hot Spices; but this is not good, as making
them too hot at Heart, so that when they come to the latter end of a Battle,
they are overcome with their heat.

Having fed your Cocks thus all the Night after their Sparring, the next day
let them rest, only Bread and Water; then the next day (which is the second day
after their Sparring) take them into a fair even green Close, there set down
one of them, and having a Dunghill Cock in your Arms, show it him, running from
him, enticing him to follow you; and so chase him up and down for about half an
hour, suffering him now and then to have a stroke at him; and when you see him
well heated and pants, take him up and carry him Pen, the like do with the
rest* and there give him this Scouring: Take fresh Butter (that is without
Salt) half a Pound, beat it in a Mortar, with the Leaves of Herb of Grace,
Hysop, and Rosemary, until the Herbs are incorporated therein, and that the
Butter is brought to a green Salve, and of this give the Cock a Roll or two, as
big as he can well swallow; then Stove him in the Basket, as aforesaid, until
the Evening; then take him out, put him in his Pen, and feed

The next Day let him rest and feed, and the Day following Spar him again; and
this Method observe every other Day for the first Fortnight to Spar, or Chase
him, as being the most natural and kindliest Heats; but forget not to give him
a Scouring after every Heat as aforesaid, for the breaking and cleansing him
from Grease, Glut, and Filth, which lying in his Body causes Pursiness and
Faintness, so that he cannot stand out the latter end of a Battle.

Thus having fed your Cock the first Fortnight, observe the same Rules the next
Fortnight; but for a Week do not Spar him, or give him Heats, above twice a
Week, so that three or four times in the Fortnight will be sufficient; and each
time Stove and Scour him according to the nature of his Heats, long Heats
requiring longer Stoving, as also greater Scouring. But if you find him in good
Breath, and requires but slight Heats, then stove him the less, and give him
the less Scouring.

For the third Fortnight, which compleats the six Weeks (which is sufficient to
prepare a Cock for Battle) feed him as aforesaid; but Spar him not at all for
fear of making his Head tender and fore, neither give him any violent exercise,
but only two or three times in the Fortnight, let him moderately be chaste up
and down to maintain his Wind; and now and then Cuff a Cock, which you must
hold to him in your hands; which done give him his Scouring well roul'd up in
Powder of Brown Sugar Candy; for the Cock being now come to his perfect Breath,
and clear from filth in his Body, the Sugar Candy prevents that Sickness which
the Scouring would then cause, and also strengthens Nature against the Medicine.

Matching and Fighting Cocks.
THe six Weeks Feeding being finished, and finding your Cock in lust and
breath, he is fit to fight; always observing that he have at least three Days
rest before Fighting, and be well emptied of Meat before you bring him into the
Pit.

Being brought into the Pit, your chief care must be in the Matching him, in
which consists the greatest glory of a Cock-Master; therefore in your Matching
there are two things to be considered, viz. the Strength of Cocks, and the
Length of Cocks; for if he be too strong, he will over-bear your Cock, not
permitting him to rise, or strike with any advantage; and if he be too long,
your Cock shall hardly catch his Head, so that he can neither endanger Eye, nor
Life. Now for the knowledge of these two Rules, as for his Strength, it is known
by the thickness of his Body, that Cock being held strongest which is largest
in the Garth, which may be easily known by the measuring him with your Fingers;
and as for his Length, it is as easily known by griping him about the middle,
causing him to stretch forth his Legs; but if you doubt loss in the one, yet
sure to gain in the other, you may venture a Match.

Your Cock being matched thus, prepare him to the Battle: First, with a pair of
fine Cock-Sheers cut off all his Main close to his Neck, from his Head to the
setting on of his Shoulders; then clip off all the Feathers from his Tail close
to his Rump, which the more Scarlet it appears, the better estate of Body he is
in: Then take his Wings, extending them forth by the first Feather, clip the
rest slopewise with sharp Points, that in his rising he may endanger the Eyes
of his Adversary; then with a sharp Knife scrape smooth, and sharpen his Beak;
and also smooth, and sharpen his Spurs: And lastly, see that there be no
Feathers about the Crown of his Head for his Adversary to take hold of, and
then with your Spittle moisten his Head all over, and so turn him into the Pit
to try his Fortune.

The Battle being ended, your first business must be to search his Wounds, and
such as you find, suck out the Blood with your Mouth; then wash them with warm
Urine to keep them from rankling, and presently give him a bit or two of your
best Scouring, and so Stove him up as hot as you can for that Night; and in the
Morning take him forth, and if you see his Head much swelled, suck them with
your Mouth as aforesaid, and bathe them with warm Urine. Then having Robert
well dried and finely sifted, Pounce all the Sore places therewith, and give
him a good handful of Bread to eat out of warm Wine, and then put him into the
Stove again, as before directed, being very careful that no Air come to him
till the Swelling is gone; but twice a day suck and dress his Wounds, feeding
him as aforesaid.

But if your Cock has received any hurt in his Eye, then take a Leaf or two of
right Ground Ivy, that is, such as grows in little Tusts in the bottom of
Hedges; chew this in your Mouth very well, sucking out the Juice, which
squirting into his Eye two or three times will soon cure it, provided the sight
is not pierced; and it will also preserve the Eye from Films, Haws, Warts, etc.

If your Cock has Veined himself either by narrow Striking, or other cross
Blow, find out the Wound, and presently bind unto it the soft Down of a Hare,
and it will both stanch it, and cure it.

After your Wounded Cocks are put forth to their Walks, as being fit to go
abroad, and when you come to visit them in about a Month or two after, if you
find any hard swelling Bunches about their Heads, blackish at one end, it is a
sign of unsound Cores; and then with a sharp Penknife open them, and crush out
the said Cores; then suck out all the Corruption, and fill the Holes with fresh
Butter, which will perfect the Cure.

And thus much for Cock-fighting.

The TABLE of the Contents of the several Things treated of in the respective
Chapters of this Treatise of AGRICULTURE.
Chap. I.
THe Introduction, showing its antiquity, use, worth, etc. 207
Chap. II.
Treats of Meadows and Pastures, with instructions for Improvement thereof by
Enclosures, Draining and overflowing by Engines; as also by Manuring and
feeding. Of the several sorts of French Grasses, with directions for sowing and
ordering them. 208 Of Meadow and Pasture Ground 209 Of Marsh and wet Meadow
Ground ib. The form and use of the Persian Wheel ib. Rules to be observed about
overflowing Grounds ib. Of dry Meadows or Pastures, and the Improvement to be
made thereon ib. The several sorts of French Grasses or Hay, as the Clover 210
The Sain-Foyn ib. The Trefoyl or Nonsuch 211 The Lucern ib.
Chap. III.
Treats of Arable Land, how to order it, with such Grains that are usually
sown, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, Beans. Tares, Lentills, Lupins,
Buck-Wheat, etc. 212 Of Hemp 213 Of Flax ib. Of Woad, or Wade ib. Of Madder ib.
Of Rape or Coleseed 214 Directions for the preparation of the Seed ib.
Chap. IV.
Treats of Manuring, Dunging and Soyling of Lands, with the several Sorts of
Soils, or Dungs, used for the same ib. Of Burning of Land 216
Chap. V.
Treats of Herbs, Roots, Fruits, Plants, etc. planted and propagated in the
Kitchen Garden, ib. Of Hops ib. Of Saffron 218 Of Liquorice ib. Of Tobacco ib.
Of Beans and Pease for the Garden ib. Of French Beans 219 Of Artichoaks ib. Of
Colly Flowers ib. Of Cabages 220 Of Savoys ib. Of Potatoes ib. Of Carots ib. Of
Parsnips ib. Of Turnips 221 Of Skirets ib. Of Asparagus ib. Of Mellons ib. Of
Cucumbers 222 Of Pompions, Meakins and Gourds ib. Of Onions, Leeks, Garlic,
Shalot, with Sallating and Potherbs ib. Direction for drying Herbs, and
preserving Seeds 223 Of Goosberries, Currants, Rasberries, and Straberries ib.
Chap. VI.
Treats of Flowers, and how to raise and order them, with instructions for the
ordering a Garden into Walks, Grass plats, Ever-Green Hedges, etc. 224
Martagons, Lillies, 226 Fritillarys ib. Tulips ib. Narcissus or Daffodills 227
The Hyacinth, or Jacinth ib. The Ornithogulum 228 The Moly ib. The Asphodil ib.
The Spiderwort ib. The Peony ib. The Meadow Saffron ib. Crocusses ib. The Iris,
or Flowerdelis ib. The Corn Flag 229 The Bee-Flower ib. The Sow-Bread ib. The
Anemonies or the Wild Flower ib. The Ranunculus, or Crow-Foot ib. The
Wolfe-Bane 230 The Hipatica, or Liverwort ib. The Helleborus, or Hellebor ib.
The Gentian ib. The Bell-Flower ib. The Jucca Indica, with other Indian Plants
ib. Auricula's ib. Primroses and Couslips ib. Champions ib. Wall-Flowers ib.
Plants that bear double White Flowers ib. Stock Gilly-Flowers ib. Gilly Flowers
ib. Clove Gilly-Flowers 232 Pinks ib. Sweet John's, and Sweet Williams ib.
Colombines 23^ Snap Dragon ib. Fox Gloves ib. Corn-Flowers, and Blew-Bottles
ib. Flower Gentle ib. Scabious ib. Larks Heels ib. Double Poppies ib.
Mary-Golds ib. Blew Bind-weed, or the Bell Flowers ib. Aples of Love ib. Garden
Lupins ib.
Chap. VII.
Treats of Ever-Greens, and such that bear Flowers, Fruits, or Berries, as the
Bay Tree, Orang-tree, tree, Strawbery-tree, Myrtle-tree, Jassamine, Phillirea,
ib.
Chap. VIII.
Treats of Flower-bearing Trees, and Shrubs that fall their Leaves in Winter,
and renew them again in the Spring 235 The Rose Trees ib. Jesmines,
Honisuckles, and some other woody Flower- bearing Trees 236 Other
Flower-bearing Trees and Shrubs ib. Ever-Green Trees, as the Horse-Chesnut,
Judas Tree, Bean-Trefoile, Bladder-Nut, Gilderland-Rose, Springa,
Christs-Thron, the Myrtle-leaved, Sumach, Larch Tree, Cypress-Tree, Tree of
Life, the Ever-Green Oak, the Holly, Pyracantha, the Staff-Tree, Privet,
Phillarea, Laurel and Bay 237
Chap. IX.
Treats of Fruit Trees, and how to propagate and manage them, as to Planting,
Grafting, Innoculateing, Pruning, etc. with an Account of each sort of Fruit
ib. Grafting ib. Raising of Stocks 238 The time and manner of Grafting 239
Innoculating or Budding 240 Fruits raised fom Seeds, Stones, Nuts, and Kernells
241 Fruits raised by Layers, Slips, and Suckers ib. Of Transplanting Trees ib.
Of Pruning, plashing and ordering of Trees 242 Necessary things about
Fruit Trees ib. Sorts of Aple Trees 243 Sorts of Pear Trees ib. Sorts of Plum
Trees 244 Sorts of Cherie Trees ib. Sorts of Quinces ib. Sorts of Apricocks ib.
Sorts of Peaches ib. Sorts of Nectorines 245 Of Vines, and the several sorts of
Grapes ib. The Fig Trees 246 The Service Tree ib. The Mulberry Tree ib. The
Cornelian Chery ib. The Barberry Tree ib. The Medler Tree. 247 The Filbert Tree
ib. The Nut Tree ib. The Goosberry Tree ib. The Curran Tree ib.
Chap. X.
Treats of the use and benefit of Fruits for the Making of Wines, Cider, Perry,
Mead, etc. ib. Of Perry 248 Of Wine 249 Of Wines made of the Juice of Fruits,
as Cheries, Plums, Mulberries, Rasberries, Currants, Quinces, etc. ib. Of M^ad
and Metheglin ib.
Chap. XI.
Treats of the benefit by raising and planting of Timber Trees, and other Trees
useful for Building, Fuel and other uses 250 Of Timber Trees, as the Oak, Elm,
Ash, Beech Walnut, Chestnut ib. Of Trees for Fuel, as the Birch, Maple,
Quick-Beam, Horn-Beam, Hasel 251 Of Aquaticks, or Trees growing in watery
place, as the Poplar, Aspen, Abele, Willow, Withy, Sally, Osier 252 Of Trees
for Fencing, as the White-Thron, Black-Thron, Pyracantha, Elder ib. Of Trees
for Ornament of Gardens, Avenews, Parks, and the like, as the Lime, Sycamore,
Firr, Pine, Pinaster, Pitch-Tree, Horse-Chesnut, Lacus, Larch, Plantanus,
Cypress, Caedar, Eugh, Bay, Privet, Philyrea, Alaternus 253 Rules for the
raising Trees in way of a Nursery ib. Concerning Transplanting Trees 254 Of
Pruning, Cutting, Shrouding and Felling of Trees, and Coppices 255
Chap. XII.
Treats of the several sorts of Beasts, Fowls and Insects necessary to be kept,
and the benefit accruing thereby ib. Of Cows 256 Of the Calves ib. Of the Ox ib
Directions to keep Beasts, and other Cattle 257 How to dispose of Cattle at
Pasture ib. Rules for buying Cattle ib. Diseases ib. Of the Fever ib. Of any
inward Sickness in Cattle ib. Diseases in the Guts ib. Pissing Blood ib.
Swelling in Beasts 258 For a Cough, or Shortness of Breath ib. Diseases in the
Lungs ib. Loss of the Cud ib. To kill Worms ib. Vomiting of Blood ib. To cause
a Beast to Piss ib. Overflowing of the Gall ib. A Cow that is Weathered ib. Of
Purging Cattle ib. Of Faintness of Labor in an Ox ib. Breeding Milk in Cows
ib. Of the Rot in Cattle ib. Of Wounds in Cattle ib. To Cure a Beast Goared ib.
To draw out a Thorn or Stub ib. Diseases in the Eyes, as the Haw, Pin, etc. ib.
Diseases in the Neck 259 Leanness of Cattle ib The Murrain in Cattle ib. Worms
in the Tail. ib. Diseases in the Sinews ib. Of Hide-boundness ib. Biting with a
Mad Dog ib. Of the Foul, or other grief in the Hoof. ib. Of Lice and Ticks ib.
Of Sheep ib. Signs to know a sound Sheep 260 Of Sickness in general amongst
Sheep ib. Of the Scab, or Itch ib. Killing Maggots in Sheep ib. Diseases in the
Gall, as Jaundise, etc. ib. Of the Sturdy, Turning Evil, etc. ib. Of broken
Bones, or out of Joint ib. Of the Tag'd or Belt Sheep ib. Of the Staggers 261
Loose Teeth ib. The Loss of the Cud ib. Worms in the Guts ib. Of Lung-sick, or
the Cough, or Cold ib. Diseases in the Eye ib. To preserve Sheep from the Rot
ib. To cause Ews to be easily delivered ib. Increasing Milk in Ews ib. To cause
an Ewe to love her own, or any others Lamb. ib. Of any Sickness in Lambs. ib.
To know the Age of a Sheep ib. Of SWINE, how to choose, order and feed them ib.
To cause Hogs to thrive 262 The Murrain in Hogs ib. The Meazels ib. Of
Leanness, Scurf, and the Mange ib. To cure Swine that are lugg'd in their Ears
by Dogs ib. Of Asses ib. Of GOATS ib. Of FOWL, and POULTREY 263 Of the
Hen-House ib. Feeding Fowl. ib. Setting of Poultrey 264 Of Capons ib. Diseases
in Poultrey ib. Of GEESE ib. Of TURKEYS 265 Of DUCKS ib. Of PEACOCKS ib. Of
SWANS ib. Of Herns, Puets, Guls and Bitterns ib. To Feed Phesants, Partriges
and Quails ib. To Feed Goodwits, Curlews, Gray-Plovers and Knots 266 Of PIGEONS
ib. Of Bees, and how to order them ib.
Chap. XIII.
Treats of external Injuries amongst Cattle, and other Inconveniences happening
to the Husbandman, with Remedies for the same 268 Injuries sustained by Beasts
and Vermin ib Of Moles ib. Foxes ib. Pole-Cats, Fitchets, Weasels ib. Rats and
Mice ib. Moles 269 Injuries sustained by Fowl, and Insects, as Crows, Rooks,
Sparrows, Kites, Snayls, Slugs, Wasps, Ants, Hornets, Catter-Pillers, Snakes
ib. Injuries Sustained by the Heavens, as by Thunder, Tempests, Hail,
Lightning, Blighting, Mildews ib.
Chap. XIV.
A Calendar, or Monthly direction to the Husbandman. 270
Chap. XV.
Treats of the choice, ordering Breeding and dieting of Cocks for the Battle
277 The Choice of Cocks ib. The Shape ib. Color ib. Their Courage ib. Of
Breeding ib. How to diet and order them 278 Matching and Fighting Cocks 279
FINIS
(...) Fig. 1. (...) Branch Droit (...) Pistolet: (...) Branch after y^ form
(...) Pistol.

Fig. 2. ^ne Branch a (...) Conestable. A Branch after the ^Duke of
Mentn^orancy Constable of France his Fashion.

Fig. 3. Une Branch a La Gigotte. A Branch after ye Form of a G'iget er. Ley
and pretty well. kneed and also bruised forewards at the Iarret. or Ham.

Fig. 4. Vne Branche a (...) The Eye G'eneuil. A Branch very much kneed at the
Iarret or Ham of it after y^ form of a bent Knee. The (...) of the Branch.

Fig. 9. Fer peur les pieds plats. The true form of a She for Flate Feet.

Fig. 10. Fer a Panto^^^e A Tanten or Tantable She.

Fig. 11. Fer a Demi Pantou^ffle. A half Panton Shoe.

Fig. 5. Vne Branche Franceise. A Branch after y^ French Fashion.

Fig. 6. Vne (...) Branche a La Conestable, Mais p^is har^ie que La precedente.
Another Branch after ye Duke of ^ommoraner Constable of France his Fashion, but
more strong and hardy then the preceding Branch.

Fig. 7. Vne autre Branche a La (...) Mais qui remene (...) Adeantage. qui La
precedente. Auther Branch after the form of a Gigot or Leg But which brings
in a Herses head better then the preceding Branch.

Fig. 8. Vne autre Branche Francoise, Mais ^bis hardy que la' Preceedente.
Auther Branch after ye French Fashion, but more strong and hardy then the
preceding Branch.

Fig. 12. An ^rdin: are Curb The hook which is fixed to ye Eye of the Branch.
The Esses or Chain of the Curb. The two Rings or Mailes.

Fig. 13. A Masticadour or Slavering Bit.

Fig. 14. A Curb more gentle then that at Figure 12. The hook which is fixed to
ye Eye of the Branch. The Links. The Rings.

Fig. 1. The Best and most modern Fashion of Carezen with its (...)

Fig. 2. The Best and most modern Fashion of Great Saddle, or Selle a ^^quer.

Fig. 3. The Best and most modern Fashion of Rope ^reizon For the Pillars. The
best and most modern Fashion of Shrrups. The best and most modern Fashion of
Spurrs.

Fig. 4. The True and period Seal upon Horseback.

Fig. 5. The true and but way of Ordering An Unruly Colt, Before^ Bicking.

Fig. 6. The true and best way of suppling Horses shoulders. Upon large Circles
to the Right Hand.

Fig. 7. A true and perfect Step Upon large Circles to the Left Hand.

Fig. 8. A true and perfect Short, or Peti^ Galop, Upon Large Circles to the
Right Hand.

Fig. 9. A true and perfect Passage a lena a ^all to the Right Hand.

Fig. 1. A true and perfect Passage upon narrow Circles to the Left Hand.

Fig. 2. A true and perfect Terra a Terra upon large Circles or a Square to the
left Hand.

Fig. 3. A true and perfect (...) to the right Hand.

Fig. 4. The true and exact way of (...) A Horse before upon (...) between the
Pillars.

Fig. 5. The true and exact way of raising a Horse before upon Pesales or
(...) without the Help of the Pillars.

Fig. 6. The true and exact way of teaching A Horse all kind of high Airs, by
the help of une Single pillar only.

Fig. 7. The true and exact way of teaching a Horse to (...).

Fig. 8. The true and exact way of ^eaching A Horse to go in ^reupads.

Fig. 9. A Back-^and. A H^se. A Side Rope. The true and exact way of ^eaching A
Horse to Amble.




