A Heavenly DIURNALL Glory be to God on High, Peace on Earth, Good will toward
Men.

It was good news, is, and ever will be.

OR, The long expected return of the many public and private Humiliations of
the people of God.

All which will by his blessing ere long, be turned into days of great praise
and th^^^^giving: and prove a fatal scourge to such Traitorous blasphemous
Tongues as Aulicus, etc.

By I. B.

London printed 1644.

To all unfeigned Lovers of Truth and Peace thorowout the world.
WHereas on Friday last, being the 6. of September. 1644. there was preferred to
the Common Counsel of London a Petition by several well affected persons, who
in reference to a late Order of the House of Commons upon the City Petition for
Provision of just Debts, had several meetings to consider of Propositions for
advance of Moneys, and having finished the same, being not at all different in
substance from those in a late printed Paper, did present the same to the said
Common Counsel, humbly praying them (if approved) to represent the same to the
Honorable House of Commons for such allowance therein as should be thought
meet, which Propositions were referred to the consideration of a Committee of
six Aldermen and twelve Commoners. Now to the end all scruples may, as near as
the Author can, be cleared, and the business which by judgment of many wise
men is conceived to tend so much to raise for the Parliament upon the public
faiths credit so considerable great sums of Money, beyond belief of many; and
not only so, but much to conduce to the glory of God, the peace, welfare, and
safety of these bleeding dying Kingdoms, may be hastened and furthered by those
in Authority whom it does or shall concern. The Author is imboldned to put the
ensuing Objections and Answers in print, without composing them in any better
form, as well for expedition sake, as also because they should not differ from
what he had formerly delivered to several persons in writing; not doubting,
though it be a transgression, it will be esteemed, as he professes, a well
affected one. Notwithstanding, for his proceedings in a bus^nesse generally
reputed and esteemed to be of so great good and importance to the public, the
Author has been most unjustly termed a Malignant, nay, the head of all
Malignants about Town. God forgive them, for he accounts it a very great
blessing rebus sic stantibus to be so honored.

Certain Objections made concerning Propositions for just Debts, which were
answered unto as follows, or to the like effect.
IT is conceived never to be the intent of the Parliament, that honest men's
Debts owing by Delinquents should go toward payment of public faith.

If provision be not first made for payment of just Debts, many Delinquents,
whose Estates are now offered to sale, being justly indebted more then they are
worth, it will be the honest men's Estates that unavoidably must pay such
public Faith, and so cause a great heart burning (if not prevented.)

If Lands be sold at a full value, there is no question but the Creditors being
satisfied their just Debts, there will be a good remainder, not only to pay
just Debts, but also the public faith, and such Damages as they have done to
the Kingdom.

If Land be sold at 8. and 6. years purchase, with such allowance of public
Faith as is propounded, the public Faith (if compounded for at a low rate)
will not only be dishonored, but also be a great weakening to future
Parliaments that may have the like use of it, when after ages shall know there
was so much loss (as in this way will be) to them that lent it; neither in
this way will there (save only some particular persons) be fully satisfied the
public Faith. The Malignants, so esteemed, of whom most is bought and desired
to be bought, being conceived to have but little confidence in the Parliament,
will sell it for little or nothing, and by what they so receive they are
thereby the more enabled to dis-serve the Parliament if opportunity serve.

The Reasons wherefore no more provision is made for the poor man, who is not
so well able to secure his Debt is:
THat rich men may not seem poor, and so take advantage of such a clause, and
thereby the State should be disappointed for the present supply of Moneys,
which in this way will be speedily raised. But God forbid that the poor man,
bringing in what he is able, should not be allowed Justice, which is his
birthright, as well as others.

It is conceived that the well-affected having spent their Lives and Estates
for the preservation of their Lives, Religion, Liberties, and Estates, might
expect as much as is petitioned for, without bringing in 10. in the 100. But
this they only do that the state should not (being necessitated for the
preservation of the Kingdom, sell that for 50. li. which is worth 100. And
rather then they should do so, it being known (not to be long durable] honest
men will strip themselves to their shirts to supply their occasions.

This will discover all Malignants that have lent any Moneys to wage War
against the Parliament; for first, they must bring in their Moneys, and then be
put over to the Committee to prove the justness of their Debts, wherein if he
shall be found guilty, he shall not only forseit the Moneys brought in for
security, but also be liable to such other fines and punishments as the
Parliament shall think fit.

Lands being (as they will be in this way) advanced to double the value at
which they are now offered to sale, there will be as much left to pay public
Faith as now is, nay far more, where there is clear estates; for the Creditors
desire to take them at a full value, and so they will produce double as much
money. And therefore if the offer which is made of 20 or 30 per cent. to secure
public Faith be hearkened to, it will much advance the business, if it be not
conceived a weakening of the public Faiths credit, to give so much, nay any
thing to secure it, being the noblest and greatest security that can he given,
and no ways thought desperate as Delinquents are by the strict Letter of the
Law. But how well affected some may be esteemed that offer 20 or 30 in the
hundred to secure the public Faith, that perhaps was bought at 60 in the
hundred profit, and so offer the Parliament in plain English a Pig of their
own Sow. I know not, but certain I am that none but such who have gotten by
purchasing of public Faith as aforesaid, will so undervalue its credit, and
therefore the well affected offer 10 in 100 more upon it.

It is not desired any man should be allowed more, nor any other of his Debts
then what he may recover by Law if these distractions had not been, and
therefore he is turned over to the Committee, who are to judge of it, and allow
so much thereof as they shall think fitting and just.

Also it is to be considered, that this way suits with the late City Petition
for provision of just Debts out of Delinquents estates, and will unite London
and the associated Counties, and raise in probability as much Money as the
whole public Faith lent already comes to, the State first and last being
allowed 20 per cent. which is the fifth part; and there is owing, as is
conceived, five millions at least, if not ten.

The Question being, which shall be first paid, Just Debts, or Public Faith.
Resolved as near as I can, with reference to better judgments, That just
Debts should be first paid, for these reasons:
1 BEcause it is the well affecteds estate, and not the Delinquents, and the
Parliament, (as it is conceived) only intended to satisfy the public faith
with what was the States own, not with what was the well affecteds.

Objection.

But all is forfeited to the State, and Delinquents estates are not by the
fundamental law liable to pay their Debts.

Answer.

Therefore the City pleads equity to the Parliament, as may appear by the
Reasons annexed to the City Petition, which are as follows:

The City Reasons, wherefore honest and well affected men's Debts should be made
good out of their Delinquent Debtors Estates, so far forth as they will pay the
same.
BEcause in confidence they should be made good in case the Parliament
prevailed, they have answerably to such Debts which they always accounted good
estate, given, lent, and subscribed great sums of money for the Parliaments
service.

2. That proportionably to their estates, as well in Delinquents hands as
others, they always were and still are estimated and valued, and accordingly
assessed for the fifty Subsidies and other Assessements for the Parliaments
service.

3. That according to their estates, as well in Delinquents hands as others,
they have adjudged themselves and been adjudged to pay their twentieth part.

4. That diverse Merchants who have great sums known to be so owing, and not
able to bear the loss of it, their credits, which ie the life of trade, will
be impaired, if not wholly lost; and diverse who have all or the greatest part of
their estates so owing, both themselves, wives and children will be utterly
undone.

5. That they who have been always very active and forward to and beyond
their estates to bring Delinquents to condign punishment may not be made
sufferers with them, as of necessity they must if provision be not made as
aforesaid, their estates being involved in the Delinquents.

6. That many for their extraordinary zeal and forwardnes to advance the
Parliaments cause, especially such as have taken upon them public services,
have rendered themselves so notorious to the contrary party, that many of their
Debtors would not, and others durst not pay them one penny of their Debts,
which otherwise might have been secured.

7. That if Debts so owing be not provided for, all in general, especially the
Citizens of London, to whom most is owing, will be much discouraged and
dis-inabled to serve the Parliaments occasions as formerly they have done, and
still desire to do.

Objection.

But how then shall the public faith be paid?

Answer.

We therefore after this 10. l. in the hundred, that Land may not be as yet
sold at so low rates, but thesequestrations may be continued for the States
use, till the Kingdom be more settled, and then we desire our debts may be
assured us at a full value which may be double that they are now offered to
sale, and by that means there will be enough to pay both.

Objection.

But how shall the State be supplied with monyes?

Objection.

Let them be but pleased to make trial of the propositions, which by judgment
of wise men will advance more then sale of Lands, and if it does not prove so
within the 28. days trial, then let them proceed to sale of Lands either in
the way propounded, or otherwise, provision being only made for such honest
men as shall bring in their monyes within the time, and then all claimourous
mouths will be stopped.

Secondly.

By the excise and diverse other ways, the State may take order for satisfying
of the public faith when the Kingdom is settled; in the mean time, the
overplusses of Delinquents estates may go toward satisfaction thereof, and
doubtless many of them will have great overplusses.

And which is most of all considerable.

This will unite the affections of all to the Parliament; whereas the not
allowing just debts, there being as conceived ten millions of money owing by
Delinquents to the well-affected, may dis-unite their affections (which God
prevent.)

Nay,

Whereas the paying of the public faith is so much stood upon.

Our desire is that it may be put to trial.

And we will produce of honest and well-affected men ten to one, nay an hundred
to one, that have lent ten to one upon the public faith, and not desire (as
they never expected) payment thereof till the Kingdom be settled: And therefore
we offer ten in the hundred more upon the public faith, which we will also
stay for; provided our just debts be secured.

So the great question is,

Whether the Parliament to secure well-affected debts (it being some of their
whole estates, and in hopes whereof, they have lent great sums of money to
the Parliament) will accept of three or sour hundred thousand pounds, nay more
there can be believed upon the public faiths security, or not.

But that which does most induce the well-affected to lend 10. l. in the hundred
more upon public faith is, that the well-affected Nobility, Gentry, and
Comonalty of the Kingdom, nay the Parliament and City be not undone: For if
these Lands now offered to sale, being the Cream, will produce but eight and
six yeates purchase with such allowance of public faith; which if it be not,
doubtless may be, and carried so closely too, by several ways as may be
thought inscrutable, or not to be discovered: What will the other Lands remote
and in the Kings quarters yield next time the State wants moneys, and so are
necessitated to sell more? Doubtless at last they will fall to an Irish
purchase, and so the well-affected having spent themselves already for the
service of the Parliament, the great rich men generally, though many of them,
as is the Author, unjustly termed Malignants, who have great purses, as the
Author has not, (yet contented with what he has) may ingrosse all the Lands
of the Kingdom into their own hands: In the fear of God let it be seriously
and speedily considered of, not fearing they will do any wrong, but that if
they would they mightand accordingly judge of them who are willing to discover
and make known such a gap for that purpose.

Now the better to advance moneys upon the propositions in hand, it is desired
a Declaration may be forthwith published, that it shall be lawful for every
man bringing 10. l. in the hundred to have his debt tried in this new Court of
Judicature, and upon due proof recover judgment against any debtors or
debtors estate, whom he supposes to be with the King, or otherwise absents
himself, and shall not repair to his dwelling, now or hereafter within the
Parliaments quarters, within a certain time to be limited, or otherwise show
good cause for his absence; because men will be fearful that the bringing in of
their 10. l. in the hundred may make their debtors Delinquents; whereas the
thing armed at is, that the Subject may be righted by his debtors estate, not
being able to reach his person by law.

God who is the God of peace, and Jesus Christ who is the Prince of peaces,
send us peace and truth, and which is the hearty prayer of the Author, and
which he professes in the presence of the Omnicient God to be the only thing
he aims at, and for prosecution whereof he is by some particular persons
(ignorantly, as in charity he conceives, but certainly most unjustly termed a
Malignant, his heart being right toward God, his Royal Majesty, Parliament
and Country; and therefore heartily desires, that this ill tare of devision may
be speedily rooted out, and that no man henceforward may dare to call a man a
Malignant; which name is much destructive to trade (it being a weakening to many
honest men's credit) unless he can prove that he has, or shall have a head,
hand, or purse against the Parliament, or that shall hereafter disobey.
Parliamentary commands; for as the Author conceives the Devil is the grant
Malignant, and all those who are now in Arms and maliciously bent against
their God, King, Parlialiament, and Country, are his real Children; but the
Author in judgment of charity must needs have better thoughts of many of them,
whose weak judgments have been wrought upon through the conning Prelaticall,
Jesuiticall, Diabolical insinuations of those blood-thirsty, Jesuiticall,
Prelaticall Papists, and Irish Rebels; God be merciful to their souls, (if
they belong to him) but certainly he will plague their bodies and estates for
this their Rebellion and Roguery; whereas the other so wrought upon as
aforesaid, the Author humbly desires should upon their timely submission be as
freely forgiven their great Trespasses, as we do expect God should freely
forgive us our Trespasses.

Further more.

Whereas the Author does confidently believe that the Almighty God has
honored this God-^earing Parliament to lay the foundation of that Spiritual
Temple of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: He does also as truly believe,
that God (how far the Spiritual Temple, exceeds the material, which was but
a type and shadow) will in these our days (if we could but fully believe in
him who is the Eternal, Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth; the only wise God,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) soon plant the Gospel of Jesus Christ in
the dark places of England and the two other united Kingdoms; and so erect
his Temple, by the Spiritual Sword; that which many think only possible to be
done by the Temporal; and I am afraid many are guilty of this abhorrid Achan.
Gods blessing goes along with his Ordinances to convert souls; the fiery
Ordinance which so much thunders now amongst us is only to chastise the bodies
of the above mentioned Malignants now in Arms, as aforesaid.

If therefore a Treasury were erected for the people to bring in moneys freely
for the building of this Spiritual Temple, as was in the days of old for the
Material: God, whose name is Jehovah; God that changes nor, that has the
command of all men's hearts, would so powerfully work upon them, that his glory
might be known amongst the Sons of men in these latter times, that the
Author does verily believe he would so move the hearts of people to this holy
and heavenly work that they should so freely cast in, that it should be said,
as in old times, forbear, there is more then enough.

The Author has some reason more then supernatural to believe so; because he
knows that every true Protestant, who desires to serve God in the ways of his
Forefathers since Reformation, and is willing to be reformed by Authority in
all Temporals, as immediately from the Parliament, who are their Heads. But in
spirituals, as immediately from that reverend Assembly of Divines, whom the
Author conceives to be the most compudent judges in Divine things, and are
only to hand such Spirituals to the Parliament for Confirmation (if approved.)
And because such a true Protestant as aforesaid will not willingly submit to
the malignant humor of every giddy unsettled brain, is thereupon presently
termed a Malignant, when God he knows such a Malignant will give ten in the
hundred for Peace and Truth, and none will refuse (if able) being allowed the
Public Faith for what shall be so flung into the said Treasury. Whereas some
men being not so well minded, may offer to give (as too evidently appears)
three times as much for bloody war to serve their own turns, not respecting
the glory of God, nor the Crown and dignity of his Majesty's sacred Person (as
he is Gods anointed) nor of his great Council the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, nor the welfare of their own native Country, much
less of the other two Kingdoms, one whereof by a former, but of late by a
more special providence so strongly linked together; all which are now
lamentably bleeding, and if not speedily stopped by God who is the only wise
Chyrurgion, and is only able to stop this (...) bleed to de^^; I me^^ to
ru^^, d^struc^^^, (...), d^p^pulation, and so at last ^o foraigne ^n^^^ion,
which God in mercy for (...) Names s^ke, and his Son Christ Jesus sake, the
Savior of us all, timely prevent, as doubtless he will.

Besides, another Motive is,

That by this means all Assesments, etc. and proceedings for non-pa^ment
thereof (which were caused through our sins, because we were so backward To
help the Lord against the mighty, which was Meros curse) may according as the
issue of this business shall prove, upon trial thereof, be speedily taken off,
which will mightily indeare the affections of the People to King and Parliament.

Let evil councillors be removed from the Throne, and it shall be established
in righteousness.

Dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,

If any thing be not as it should be, attribute it to the weakness and inability
of the Penner, who goes by the name of the Author, but not to the Author of the
Penner; I leave every man to judge that knows the Penner and his disabilities
in such things, to judge who that Author is that set him on work. And the
Penner humbly prays you will accept of (as our most Merciful and Heavenly
Father does) the will for the deed, being limited unto two hours time for the
expediting hereof. This business (as he conceives) admitting of no long
delays, which has bin, and still is too great a fault amongst us, for the old
Proverb of late has (often times) proved too true, When the Steed is stolen,
then we shut the stable door; and these after games to a cunning skillful
Gamster seldom proves good: b^^ a word to the wise is sufficient.

Finally my Brethren, let us trust in the Lord our God, who is the Lord of
hosts, and who for bis unspeakable Glory, and our comforts (be it known unto
you) blessed be his great Name.
The Author does very believe that rather then these true Malignants before
named, whom he has endeavored (but not fully able) to set forth in their
proper bloody color shall go unpunished for this their rebellion, blasphemy,
etc. but especially for the blood of Gods Saints, which they have so cruelly
and unmercifully spilt, without any other cause (save only in opposition and
malignity against God and goodness, that very God (Miracles being ceased) who
will be seen in the ordinary ways of his providence; Yet being unlimited, I
say again, rather then such Wretches shall go unpunished, He will fend an
Angel from Heaven to destroy them, or cause the earth of a sudden,
unexpectedly to swallow them up, as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who spoke
the same language to Moses and Aaron as these Wretches now do to the
Parliament, nay more, for these say in their hearts, We will not that Jesus
Christ shall reign over us, and so undeniably the Devil must, who they need
not fear but sooner or later will pay them their wages for this their
falacious good service, if not timely repented of, which God grant them so to
do (if they belong to him.)

If wicked Achans be but removed, and the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
settled, God will be soon seen in the Mount.


