SEVEN EXERCISES OR MEDITATIONS By which a MAN May be, in a short time,
Established In the FEAR of GOD, And in a Good and Holy LIFE.

By Lewis Blosius, Abbot Of the Holy Order of St. Benedict.

With other Choice Collections out of the same Author.

London, Printed for M. Turner, at the Lamb in Holbourn, 1686.

THE PREFACE.
IF thou would be confirmed in the Fear of God, and be established in a Good
and holy Life, thou must fall upon the following Meditations with an humble and
constant Mind, and accomplish them in order, although thy Nature seem to have
some Repugnancy; which also thou must not lightly or negligently run over, but
must ruminate them with leisure and diligence, and apply thy whole Soul, and
inward endeavors to them, diligently examining and discussing every particular
point, and imprinting it deeply in thy Mind.

And indeed thou must stay in every Meditation at least three days; and every
day (if it may conveniently be done) thou must employ Or 2 or 3 half hours,
according to thy leisure and Devotion.
two or three Hours, or rather more, in the Exercise of Meditation; leaving in
the mean time other private and voluntary Exercises.

Besides, throughout the whole day, whether thou walk or sit still,
(unless when thou ought to think of other things) thou must strive to have
in thy memory, and to revolve in thy mind those things, which belong to the
Meditation of that Day.

It is not necessary nor expedient, that in every hour deputed to the Exercise
of Meditation, thou should dispatch more Divisions, but it shall suffice to
take one Division, or two or three points to Metitate on.

When thou shall have ended the Meditations after that manner, thou must repeat
them again, persisting in every one of them at least two days, which
repetition being completed, thou must still continue these Exercises for two
Months, or longer; but then thou may assume the first Meditation on Mondays;
the second on Tuesdays; the third on Wednesdays; the fourth on Thursdays; the
fifth on Fridays; the sixth on Saturdays; the seventh on Sundays: Afterward
thou must diligently exercise thy self in the Life and Passion of CHRIST,
according to thy Devotion.

Throughout thy whole life thou must retain pious and congruous Exercises,
which may nourish in thee thy good purpose, and true Devotion. But thou must
take heed, lest at any time thou prefer these thy Exercises before Obedience,
or Fraternal Charity, or the Divine Will. For it is necessary that even in
these thou learn to deny thy self.

If, in this Spiritual Study thou shall feel thy self hard and dry, and shall
suffer grievous irksomes of Mind, thou must not, for that, leave off thy
profitable and wholesome Exercise, but must humbly, to the Honor of God, do what
is in thy power. Perhaps thou will often think thus with thy self: Why do I
afflict my Spirit in these things, when I might much better, and more to my
delight, be conversant in others: But neglecting such kind of thoughts, thou
ought to persevere in what thou have begun, and to believe that it is most
acceptable to God, that thou should be employed in them.

If God shall give thee the grace of Devotion and Tears, thou must not for this
take complacence in thy self, nor esteem thy self to be any thing, nor despise
others; but must always contain thy self in holy Fear, and humility of Heart,
judging thy self unworthy of all the gifts of God.

Thou may in thy Exercise, by speaking to thy Soul, stir up thy self: As if
thou should say; O my Soul! Let us watch, and consider attentively, etc. Thou
must also convert thy self sometimes to our Lord God, sometimes to the Blessed
Virgin Mary, the Mother of GOD, sometimes to other Citizens of Heaven, and ask
those things which make for thy souls health.

But that thou may reap plentiful fruit out of these Exercises, thou must
diligently abstain from immoderate joy, from dissolution of heart, and from
inordinate and vain laughter. For such things dissipate and extinguish inward
recollection, compunction, and grace. Thou must shun also (as much as
conveniently thou can) much talking, and seek convenient solitude.

Whilst thou art Meditating, thou may kneel, sit, or stand; observing that
posture of Body, by which thou shall perceive thy self to be most helped. Thou
must choose a secret quiet place, and fit for such Exercises.

Before thou beginnest thy Meditation, having made the sign of the Cross, thou
shall say this short Prayer: O most gracious Lord God, have mercy on me thy
poor Creature calling upon thee; and grant that every intention, thought, and
action of mine may be purely ordained to the observance and praise of thy
divine Majesty,

Amen.

The hour of Meditation being ended, Recite our Lord's Prayer, with the
Angelical Salutation.

Meditation. I. Of Sins.
Division 1. COnsider how that thy Soul was made by GOD, most noble and most
beautiful: But thou, by living wickedly and carelessly, have most dishonourably
defiled it, and made it vile, sordid, and abominable. For the deformity of sin,
is greater than any visible deformity.

And indeed, so great is the enormity of mortal Sin (which deserves eternal
damnation) that by right we ought to depress our selves for one, even the least
such Sin, all the days of our life, to the very dust, even under the brute
Beasts.

2. Thou wast made to this end, that thou should exhibit observance and
reverence to thy most high, most worthy, and most bountiful Creator, and that
thou should love and praise Him: but by sinning, thou have averted thy self
from Him, and converted thy self to the love of vain and perishable Creatures,
and so have made thy self unworthy of His favor; but worthy of eternal
punishments.

Wherefore deservedly thou should strive to bewail thy self, and lament the
evils by which thou have offended thy Lord God, with inward, or also with
outward tears.

3. Wherefore call to mind, as well as thou can, in the bitterness of thy
Soul, all thy more grievous Sins, which thou have committed from thy
childhood, to this very moment, by works, words, thoughts, and omissions, as
if thou were immediately to make an exact Confession of them to a Priest.

Yet notwithstanding, thou must not stay long upon the Sins of the flesh, which
thou have committed, lest such an imagination breed in thee some harmful
delight.

Run over diligently year after year, or day after day, or time after time.
Call to mind the places in which thou wast; the persons with whom thou livedst;
and the state and office which thou had. Ponder how often thou have repeated
thy wicked ways.

Make to thy self as it were a little bundle of all thy Sins, that, as often as
thou shall unfold it, thou may easily see the Crimes and Wickednesses of thy
former Life; and may therefore blush, be compunct, and humbled.

4. Exaggerate and aggravate thy Sins, by which thou, a despicable and vile
Man, have dishonored and despised the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and Lord of
highest Majesty, and have done Him an infinite affront; and after a certain
manner have Crucified CHRIST again: Who, notwithstanding, has always most
bountifully done thee good, and preserved thee.

Pondering well this thy pride, perverseness, and ingratitude; humble, cast
down, and put thy self beneath all the men in the world; yea, beneath all
Creatures, esteeming thy self the vilest of all, and unworthy, whom the earth
should sustain; but worthy, whom hell should swallow up, unless the Mercy of
God hindered.

5. Ponder, how much God detests and punishes Sins, so that by His terrible and
just Judgment, He has damned eternally very many, for one single Mortal Sin; as
is manifest in Lucifer, and in the Angels who consented to him.

It is manifest also, how much God was offended by one only Transgression,
which our First Parents Adam and Eve committed.

Now, What ought to have been done with thee, who have so often offended the
most holy King of Glory? Deeply considering these things, accuse and judge thy
self, lest afterward thou be judged by our Lord.

Admire greatly, that all the Elements, and all Creatures have not risen up
against thee, to revenge upon thee the Injury of their Maker. Be astonished,
that the Earth has not opened it self, to swallow thee up alive, and has not
transmitted thee into Hell; how the holy Angels also have been able to endure
thy iniquities.

6. Finally, grieving with thy very Soul, or desiring to have Grief, and eyeing
attentively JESUS crucified, and His bloody Wounds, cry out from thy heart, and
say these, or such like words; Alas! O most pitiful Lord Jesus Christ my
Creator, Redeemer, and Benefactor, I most unhappy, have so and so offended
Thee, and contemned Thee; those and those Iniquities I have so often repeated;
I have been so disobedient and ungrateful unto thee. But pardon me, I beseech
thee, for thy immense Goodness and Charity, with which thou did sustain for
me thy most bitter Passion.

When thou shall with humility have said these or such like words, by no means
despair, but resuming a full and amorous Confidence in God, purpose firmly, by
his Grace, to mend thy self, and to avoid, as much as shall be in thy power,
all Sins, not only Mortal, but also Venial, and the least.

Meditation. II. Of Death.
Division 1. TO think on Death beforehand, and diligently to prepare ones self
for it, is true wisdom. And thou shall be happy, if always, and every where
expecting the Hour of Death; thou shall so watch, as thou permittest nothing to
reside in thy Conscience, which might cause thee anxiously to fear, although
thou were just now to dye.

It shall be well with thee, if, considering how vile thy Flesh shall be, thou
art not proud, nor do not follow Carnal delights. For, How miserable, I pray
thee, is thy Flesh in this Life! How frail! how full of Filthes, which
continually flow with an intolerable stench through all the passages, although
outwardly it appear fair and neat! So that thy Body at present may rightly be
called a sack of dung, and all kind of filth; but shortly it shall be an
abject, corrupted, and putrid Carcass, and Worms meat.

2. Think therefore that thou must shortly dye, yea, perhaps to day, and must
go hence into another unknown region; and must leave here riches, glory,
honors, pomps, pleasures, friends, vanities; and all other transitory and
perishable things, which thou inordinatly love, or in which thou art now
delighted.

And indeed every day, every hour, and every moment thou approaches near thy
death, and the last hour of thy life. Therefore compose thy self as if thou
were now to die. Think thy countenance to wax pale, thy mouth to be contracted,
thy sight to be darkened, thy breath to fail, and the sweat of death to be now
present; which testifies nature to be overcome.

3. Think, I pray thee, how great a trembling and horror will then seize thee,
and how much thou will grieve, if thou shall be unprovided, because thou have
not vigorously mended thy self.

O how short will the time of thy life seem to thee? For it will appear like a
dream, and a shadow: when thou shall reflect that eternity is at hand, which
shall never end.

Perhaps thou will desire one little hour to correct thy self, but it is
uncertain whether thou shall obtain it.

What will thy pride profit thee? what will it profit thee, if thou shall now
have followed thy own will, and the vicious passions of thy mind.

O how sad will thou be, when thou shall have lost thy precious time, or spent
it unprofitably! How will thou be vexed that thou have lived so wickedly,
negligently and remissly! That thou wast so greedy to see, hear, and talk vain
things! That thou have not more manfully contemned the Allurements of thy Flesh
and Senses, that thou have been so slack to the mortification of thy self; and
to follow true humility and charity, and to gather together all spiritual good
things!

Now therefore, whilst thou have yet Time, amend thy self, and study to live
better, and more holily.

4. Think, when thy Soul, galled with the sharp prickings of death, shall cease
to see the light of this world, and shall begin with its inward eyes to behold
the state of the other Life, and those things which before it would not
believe: Cruel Beasts, and horrible troops of Devils will present themselves,
by diverse means endeavoring to ensnare thy same Soul, and exspecting it to
make a prey of it, if it shall have departed here without true Repentance.

It is therefore good and healthful to Salvation, now to provide for ones self,
to cut off bad and unprofitable desires; to leave vain and worldly things, and
to convert ones self wholly to love and seek after Celestial and Eternal Goods.

5. Consider, how that thy Soul being gone out of thy Body, it shall
immediately be presented before the Tribunal of a Terrible Judge, who cannot
judge thee otherwise than thy works deserve, seeing that He is the Supreme and
immutable Justice.

In this particular Judgment thou must render a most exact Account of thy whole
Life, of all thy Time spent unprofitably, of all thy Bad Works, of all the Good
thou have omitted, of all thy Idle Words, and of all thy Thoughts and
inordinate Affections.

The Devils shall propose all thy sins, and all thy negligences, which have not
been blotted out by Repentance.

Finally, a Sentence shall be pronounced by the Just Judge, concerning thy
Soul, which shall never be recalled for all eternity: For, where the Tree shall
fall, whether toward the South, or toward the North, there it shall for ever
remain; and shall belong either to eternal Salvation or Damnation.

6. It is profitable for thee often to think on these things, that thou may
with diligence Correct thy Life, and make thy Peace with God, before that thou
shall be called hence. This thou will do, if thou be'est wise.

For our Lord God is very merciful, and receives most courteously all those who
timely return unto Him by true Repentance: Because He wills not the death of a
sinner, but rather that the sinner should be Converted and Live. Ezekiel. c. 18.
and 33.

Meditation. III. Of the Universal and Last Judgment.
Division 1. NOthing can be imagined more dreadful, than that strict and
terrible Judgment, by which God will judge all men in the Last Day.

Very terrible Signs shall go before this Universal Judgment, to wit, a
stupendous violence of Winds, tumultuous Risings of the Sea, unusual Workings
of its Waves, vast Earthquakes, Fallings of Buildings, knocking together of
Mountains, breaking of Rocks, claps of Thunder, obscuration of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars; sad roaring and bellowing of Beasts, miserable withering of Men for
fear, etc.

The Day of Judgment being now at hand, the world shall be set on Fire by the
Divine Power, and so the Fire shall destroy and consume all brute Animals, and
all Men which it shall find Alive.

But the Supreme Judge will come in His Majesty, and with intolerable Anger.
That dreadful Judge shall come in the Clouds of Heaven, with the Elders of the
People, and with thousands of Angels, with the whole Celestial Host.

Deservedly therefore the Prophet Sophonias, considering that great and bitter
Day of our Lord, Sophon. 1.
says, That Day is a Day of Anger, a Day of Tribulation and Straits, a Day of
Calamity and Misery, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds and
Tempestuousness, a Day of a Trumpet and Noise.

And blessed Hierom, says, Whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever else I do,
the Noise of that dreadful Trumpet always sounds in the ears of my mind, Arise
ye dead, come to Judgment.

2. Then all Men in a moment, having received their Bodies shall Rise again,
and our Lord shall come down to Judge them.

And the Elect indeed agil, beautiful, strong, splendid, rejoicing, and secure,
shall meet the Judge; and being Raised from the Earth, shall stand in the Air
on his right hand: But the Reprobate shall stand upon the Earth, heavier than
Lead, infirm, deformed, stinking, vile, obscure, and miserably trembling, and
shall be on his left hand.

O! what horrid and unimaginable straits shall they sustain! With how
unutterable a Terror and Fear shall they be stricken, when they shall see above
them, an Angry and an Inflexible Judge, beneath them the Pit of Hell open, and
gaping for them; about them the World on Fire, beside them a multitude of
Devils Accusing them, within them a guilty and gnawing Conscience.

All their Sins, and all the Secrets of their Hearts shall be manifest as well
to Men as Angels.

The Wicked shall seek to turn away their Face from the angry Countenance of
the Judge, but shall not be able.

Who also beholding the glory of the Just, Shall be troubled with a horrid
fear, and sighing for anguish of Spirit, shall say, These are they whom
sometimes we had in derision, we fools deemed their Life a madness, and their
End without honor. Lo how they are reckoned amongst the Sons of God, and their
Lot is amongst the Saints. Wised. 5.

3. Christ our Lord will show to all his Wounds shining with an ineffable
Comeliness, which truly shall bring to the Just a most sweet consolation, but to
the Wicked a dreadful confusion.

Christ himself shall then terribly reproach to all the Reprobate and
Ungrateful, the benefits of his Incarnation and Passion: And they, with
unconceivable grief shall acknowledge Him, whom they chose rather to slight and
despise, than to fear and worship.

4. No Evil shall then remain undiscussed or unrevenged; but a strict Examen
shall be made of all thy works, words, thoughts, and affections.

The Justice of the Judge is not less than his Mercy; both is infinite.
Wherefore thou must render an account of all the time granted to thee, of
spiritual Gifts neglected, of temporal Goods ill expended, of Meat, Drink, and
Alms, unworthily consumed.

Thou shall render an Account, not only for thy self, but also for those, to
whom thou have at any time set a bad example, and have given an occasion of
doing ill.

As also, for all Sinners and Pagans, perhaps a grievous account shall be
exacted of thee, for that thou have not faithfully prayed for their Conversion.

But chiefly thou shall give an account for those who were specially committed
to thy care.

Innumerable sins, which thou do not take notice of, nor acknowledge, shall
then break out against thee, as it were out of ambush, and shall be objected
unto thee. The least thoughts, and very minute words, which thou slighted, and
reputed as nothing, shall then be discussed. Hence the Psalmist prays, From my
hidden faults cleanse me O Lord. Psalm. 18.

Attend now that most hard and irrevocable Sontence of the just and angry
Judge. For when he shall have said to those who shall be on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. He shall say to those who shall be on his
left hand, Go ye cursed into eternal fire. O sharp word! O word full of all
horror and bitterness!

This Sentence of eternal Damnation being pronounced, immediately the Earth,
with a terrible crack, shall swallow up the wicked; and that fire, with which
the world shall burn, involving them with darkness, and with all the filth and
stench of the whole world, shall thurst them down into Hell, there to be for
ever tormented.

But these falling down into the depth of Hell, the Elect shall go up
gloriously into Heaven, the same Reprobate beholding that very thing, and, to
their greater Calamity and Misery, never forgetting it.

O Despisers of the Law of God! think seriously, I beseech you, how sharp it
will be, to be in this manner separated from the society of God, and the B.
Virgin Mary, and all the Citizens of Heaven!

When Hell shall have received the wicked damned Wretches, it shall be shut,
and stopped at the top like a pot, and no Devil or Man shall ever come forth
thence.

6. Thou therefore, that thou may be able to avoid this unexpressible misery,
confusion, horror, and strait, whilst the time of Mercy lasts, study to appease
God, and to please Him.

Bewail, and humbly, and sincerely confess thy Sins. Do not hide now from the
Vicar of Christ, the Priest, what thou desire should be hidden in that
dreadful Judgment.

Correct thy Life with all thy forces. Depart from evil, and do good. Psalm. 36.
Spend thy time profitably: Fly vain and foolish joys: Mortify, as much as thou
can, the vicious Passions and Affections of thy Mind.

Now wisely fear, that thou may be then happily secure.

Meditation. IV. Of the Pains of Hell.
Division 1. AS the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven is unutterable, so the
Calamity of the Reprobate in Hell, is ineffable and incomprehensible.

Do thou now imagine a place under ground, and a horrible Gulf: Behold a vast
Furnace, all on Fire with Sulphur and Pitch, terribly burning, dark, smoking,
stinking; full of men and devils.

There is everlasting Horror, and never ending Despair; there is Gnashing of
Teeth, and great Howling, and perpetual Blaspheming; there the Damned, for the
sharpness of their Pains, bite their Tongues, and Curse the King of Heaven.

2. Consider that there is such Fire and Heat, and such Cold, as all fire and
heat, and all cold of this world, in comparison of that Heat and Cold, is
nothing. There they are forced to pass from intolerable Heat, to intolerable
Cold. There they are most cruelly boiled and roasted.

They feel most bitter Torments in every Sense, and in every Member: Their
Sight continually beholds dreadful and horrid Faces of Devils. Their Hearing
continually perceives the Lamentations and sad Cries of those, who continually
cry out, Woe, woe, woe! Why were we created and made? Cursed be God who made us.
This is the sad Song which is there continually sung.

Imagine there to be Vessels full of all filthiness, to wit, Toads, Snakes,
putrid Flesh of dead Carcasses, and the filth and dung of Jaques's mixed
together: And the Wicked to be drowned over head and ears in those Vessels, and
against their will to smell, touch, eat, and drink that stinking Mixture. Thou
can imagine nothing so abominable and grievous, but there are there things
more abominable and grievous.

There every one is punished most in those Members, by which he has most sinned.

3. There the Devils insult over those whom they torment, and whom they have,
and shall for ever have for their companions, saying, Where are now your
Riches, where your Honor, where your Glory, where your Pleasure, where your
Delights, where your Vanities?

Who is so hard and mad, as not to conceive a profitable Fear from the
consideration of these things? And, as not to amend his wicked and negligent
Life?

Assuredly whatsoever can torment, whatsoever can cause horror and abomination,
shall for ever be seen, heard, and felt in Hell.

4. Consider moreover the inward punishment of the damned; for they shall be
for all eternity deprived of the sight of God. They shall never see that
blessed City, the celestial Jerusalem.

God has cast them away, and they are delivered to everlasting oblivion; nor
will He ever have mercy on them, Romans 1. For they are vessels of wrath, in
which the rigor and the severity of the Divine Justice is manifested.

The Worm of their Conscience shall never dye, but shall without ceasing gnaw
and accuse them, for that for so short a joy, and so momentary a pleasure, they
have lost eternal Happiness, and found everlasting Punishments.

O Ponder! ponder diligently this Eternity of Pains. After a thousand thousands
of Years their End shall be no nearer, because they shall never end; but in
Hell there shall be a perpetual presence of all Evils, and a perpetual absence
of all Comfort.

5. Lo such a Calamity is the Reward of those who fear not God, and continue in
their Sins without true Repentance, until their Departure out of this Life. For
there being in Mortal Sin an infinite enormity, by reason of the contempt of
the immense God: Such a Sin (if it be not blotted out by Repentance) shall be
punished with endless Pain.

But thou who art yet in the time of Grace, leaving thy Vices and Vanities,
without delay return to the Lord thy God, and He will receive thee, cleanse and
heal thee. Fear Him, serve Him, love Him with all thy heart. For so thou shall
escape those Torments, which never are ended, never Intermitted, never
diminished.

6. If thou art entered into Religion, thou must with all thy might tend to
perfection, thou must lead an humble, pure, and signally Holy Life. But if thou
have a secular Heart and Religion, and live negligently, and shall end thy
life in such negligence, thou shall be thrust down into Hell; or certainly
shall endure such sharp, horrid, and long pains in Purgatory, as if thou
could now foresee them, thou would dye for fear and horror of them.

Wherefore now, if thou be wise, thou will take diligent care for the
salvation of thy Soul.

Meditation. V. Of the Life and Passion of Christ.
Division 1. THe sin of the world could not have been taken away, unless the
Creator of the world assuming human flesh, had abolished it with his own blood.

Ponder therefore, how our Lord Jesus, the Son of the living God, the most high
God, for the excessive love, with which he loved us, would be conceived by the
holy Ghost, and be made man in the womb of the B. Virgin Mary: that thou loaded
with thine Iniquities might not descend down into Hell.

Thy God was made thy Brother. He was born a tender little Infant, in a poor
Stable. He was wrapped in vile clouts. He was laid in the Crib of Beasts. He
lay upon hay and straw. He was suckled by the breasts of a very poor Mother.

He was Circumcised the eighth day, from his Nativity, and shed his Blood.

Then he fled into Egypt.

And so in his sacred Infancy, and Childhood, he sustained very many
necessities, and grievances, with Mary and Joseph.

2. The sweet Jesus when he was about thirty years old, humbly received Baptism
from his servant John.

He fasted, was tempted, watched, preached, was wearied with journeys and
labors.

He endured with a most meek heart, three and thirty years, hunger, thirst,
cold, heat, and innumerable grievances, and innumerable persecutions; and at
length went to Jerusalem there to die for thee.

3. The sweet Jesus, when upon his knees, he had humbly washed the feet of his
Disciples, and had wiped them with a Towell, and had instituted the Venerable
Sacrament of the Eucharist, he went unto Mount Olivet. O how grievous, how
unworthy, how sharp things did he suffer for thee.

For he the Lord of highest Majesty, would tremble and be sad even unto death.
He would be bathed in a sweat of blood, by reason of the vehemence of the
anguishes, with which he was oppressed.

He resused not to be kis't by the Traitor Judas, and as a Theif by wicked men,
to be ignominiously apprehended, bound, led away, dragged, pushed, smitten.

4. The sweet Jesus, the Lord of Lords, vouchsafed to receive a cruel buffet
from a servant of the High Priest.

He vouchsafed to be unjustly condemned, to be defiled with spittle, to be
beaten with blows and buffets, to be reproachfully blinded, mocked, and scoffed.

The most meek Lamb, did not in the mean while complain, nor turn away his
face, from those who spat on him: but teaching us patience, and exhibiting
himself a pattern of patience, he was dumb and opened not his mouth. Isa. 53.
He endured with silence, revilings, contumelies, disgraces, and many injuries.

5. Behold, sweet Jesus, the Holy of Holies, bespatred with spittle, and bound,
is lead to Pilate, and before him falsely accused, but he humbly holds his
peace.

He is sent by Pilate to Herod, and is despised by Herod, and clothed in a
white and ridiculous coat, as a fool, and so is sent back to Pilate.

He is stripped in the Pretors Hall, and inhumanely tied to a Pillar, and most
cruelly torn with whipps. His Virginal and delicate flesh was all deformed with
bruises and wounds, and out of it ran on all sides down upon the earth rivolets
of his precious blood.

O what, and how sad a Spectacle was this! Truly he was wounded for our
iniquities, he was bruised for our wickedness, and by his bruises we were
healed. Isa. 53.

6. The sweet Jesus King of Kings, is Clothed in a Purple Cloak, to his greater
reproach is Crowned with Thorns, and Wounded. Hence his Purple Blood flowed
down plentifully upon his amiable face, and neck.

A reed is put in his hand, and he is scoffingly saluted and adored; he is
stricken with a reed, again he is spit upon, and buffeted.

He is exposed to be gazed upon by the people, with a Crown of Thorns upon his
Head, and a Purple Vestment about his shoulders.

7. The Sweet Jesus, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, carrys his own Cross upon
his bruised and hurt shoulders.

He tastes upon mount Calvary wine mixed with myrrh and gall.

Again he is stripped, and his wounds are renewed by the pulling off of his
Garments.

He is unmerciful stretched out on the Cross, and his delicate hands, and
undefiled feet are transfixed with hard Nails, and the Joints of his most Holy
Limbs are miserably loosed.

Most Pure Blood Flows abundantly out of his sacred Wounds, as out of so many
Fountains.

Go to, Ponder, and Meditate profoundly these things. Take notice of the Bloody
and saving wounds of thy Redeemer, Salute and Venerate them with a Devout Heart.

8. The Sweet Jesus endured most bitter Torments three Hours, Hanging on the
Tree of the Cross betwixt two Thieves.

Lo, he is Mocked, and blasphemed! but he prays for his blasphemers, he prays
for his Crucifiers.

He deeply Compassionates his Sorrowful, and Afflicted Mother standing by, and
Courteously speaks to her.

Burning with a most grievous Thirst, Vinegar is given him to Drink.

And forthwith bowing his Venerable Head he gives up the Ghost. The good Pastor
lays down his life, for his sheep. He who gives Life to all things dies for
thee.

Afterward his Side is opened with a Spear, and thence Flows out Blood and
Water.

Last of all, his Immaculate Body being taken down from the Cross, is laid in a
Tomb, and buried.

9. Thou have here a Spiritual bundle of Myrrh. See thou lay it diligently
between the breasts of thy Soul.

But whilst thou ponderest these things, behold with thy inward Eyes thy
beloved Jesus Christ, not as a Pure Man, but Contemplate him as God and Man in
all things, which he did and suffered.

Consider diligently his deep humility and patience, his inestimable bounty,
and most Ardent Charity. Admire! be amazed, imitate, compassionate him, and
return love for love as thou art able.

Adore, praise and glorify him, and give him thanks.

Consider, I beseech thee, whether it be fitting, that the Son of the most
high, the Supreme King of Glory, enduring for thee a most vile Caitiff, so
great Abjection and Ignominy, and so great labors and torments, thou in the
mean time, as if thou were secure, should give thy self to sports, and jests,
to vanities and delights; little or nothing thinking of him, and living
negligently, nay, perhaps wickedly!

O! how ill at the last shall it go with those ungrateful and unhappy hearts,
who little esteem so great benefits, such ensigns of love, and care not to
ruminate the Passion of Christ! Far be it from thee.

Meditation VI. Of the Imitation of Christ.
Division 1. LO, the Cruel, base, and horrible Prince of darkness the Devil,
says to thee, hear and follow me, be Proud: and neglecting God do thy own will,
love the world, and those things which are in the world, that thou may be
Tormented with me in the horrible punishments of hell.

On the contrary side, the Mild, Gracious, and Amiable King of Glory Christ,
says to thee; Hear, and follow me; be humble, and despising the World, deny thy
own proper will. Love God, and those things which are above, that thou may
rejoice with me for ever in Heaven.

Here now enquire and weigh diligently with thy self, whether of the two thou
ought to hear and follow. Assuredly, thy reason manifestly cries, and shows,
that thou ought to follow the Lord Jesus, thy most sweet Creator, Redeemer,
Lover, and Benefactor.

Which being so, do thou without delay join thy self to Christ, and say from
thy heart: O Lord Jesus, I despising the Devil, from henceforth purpose, thy
grace assisting me, to follow, imitate, and love thee my King.

2. Wherefore as Jesus Christ thy King, the most high God, humbled and emptied
himself by assuming human flesh, and the form of a servant, by being born of a
poor Virgin, by washing his Disciples feet, by most perfectly obeying his
Father and Men: so thou must purpose hereafter to humble thy self under all
things for his love.

Thou must willingly submit thy self to all men; willingly serve all.

Willingly take the lowest place, seeing thou art not worthy that the earth
should support thee, by reason of thy sins and ingratitude.

Thou must willingly perform vile and abject works, although thou should
therefore suffer some shame before men.

Thou must willingly and readily obey men in lawful and convenient things not
only thy superiors, but also thy equals, and moreover thy Inferiors.

3. Also, as thy King Christ was always meek and humble of heart, so thou
ought hereafter to endeavor, that all rough and vicious motions of Anger be
extinguished in thee.

Thou must not be obstinate in thy own sense, nor adhere to thy own proper
Judgment: but must wisely prefer the judgment and will of others before thy
own judgment and will.

Thou must from thy heart, repute thy self the most unworthy of all men, and
renounce all vain glory and self complacence, as much as thou can:
acknowledging thy self of thy self, to be nothing, to be able to do nothing,
and to have nothing but sins and defects.

Thou must therefore never usurp to thy self any thing of Gods gifts, but must
attribute all good things to God, and purely refer them to him.

Thou must choose and love rather not to be known and little esteemed by men,
than to be known or praised.

4. Also as thy King Christ abstained from all vanity, pomp, curiosity, and
superfluity in meat, drink, clothing, and other necessaries for his life; yea
and chose most abject poverty in his Nativity and Death: so also thou must
purpose hereafter to use all things moderately, and to be content with simple
meat and drink, and simple clothing; removing from thee whatsoever is vain,
proud, or altogether superfluous.

5. Again, as thy King Christ did not follow sensual pleasures and the delights
of the flesh, but even thirsting drunk Gall and Vinegar, and adhered
inordinately to nothing, and had most pleasing manners and behavior: so thou
must purpose hereafter, to reject all impure and sensual delights, and impure
pleasures.

Thou must restrain all thy senses, thy sight, hearing, taste, and touching, and
also thy tongue from all excess, vanity, and curiosity.

Thou must keep thy heart with all diligence, clean and free. Thou must not
adhere by inordinate affection to any person, or to any perishable thing.

Thou must shun immoderate laughter, and all lightness of manners.

Thou must prudently decline noxious and superfluous conversations of worldly
men, and occasions of sinning.

Thou must spend the remainder of thy life, profitably to the honor of God, and
with Gods assistance, endeavor to live soberly, chastely, purely and piously.

6. Moreover, as thy King Christ endured unjust accusations of himself,
revilings, persecutions, and pains inflicted on him, most humbly, most
patiently, most gently, and with a mind absolutely resigned: so thou hereafter
must purpose, to endure patiently and gently reproof of thy self, injuries,
reproaches, contempt, dolors, and all crosses for his love, taking all from his
fatherly hand.

Thou must resign thy self wholly, as well as thou can, to his most just
judgment, and most acceptable good pleasure: Thou must I say, leave thy self
absolutely to him, permitting him to do with thee, to send to thee, to take
away from thee, whatsoever he will, and as he will. Thou must renounce all thy
own will.

Thou must believe thy self to be worthy of all Tribulation, and that no
creature can so much afflict thee, as thou deservest to be afflicted, by reason
of thy infinite iniquities.

Thou must not lightly complain, that any injury is done thee; nor say that
thou suffer any thing unjustly: because thou will always suffer less, than
thou have deserved.

7. Lastly, as Christ thy King, loving all men, and desiring the Salvation of
all, prayed even for his enemies, and makes his sun to rise upon the good and
bad: so thou must purpose hereafter sincerely to love all men, none excepted,
desire the Salvation of all, and out of charity exhibit thy self, faithful,
gracious, and sweet to all, especially to thy enemies.

Thou must grieve, that so many Souls, stamped with the most Noble Image of
God, do perish. Thou must compassionate the afflicted; Thou must despise no
body, Judge no body, for rash judgments greatly hinder the grace of God.

8. Thou must diligently ponder these things with thy self. Thou must consider
attentively how true it is, when in the foregoing points, Christ is said to
have done this or that.

Thou must wish from thy heart to be conformable to him, that the Disciple may
be as his Master: and the most vile Servant must not be proud, the supreme
Emperor showing humility in all things.

Thou must examine thy self diligently in the particulars, and see whether thou
have an absolute will to fulfill by work, with the Grace of God, that which thou
read. For thou ought to be ready to this, without any tergiversation.

If not withstanding thy nature repugning, thou perceivest thy self as yet less
ready, thou must not therefore be too pusillanimous, but must do what is in thy
power, and have a good will; renounce vices, and resign thy self as well as
thou can.

Thou must pray to God that he would strengthen thee, and give thee those
things, which are necessary for thy salvation, and are pleasing to him.

If thou desire and endeavor thus to imitate thy King, thou shall without
doubt come to his Heavenly Palace, and shall obtain everlasting Life and
Glory, with all the Saints.

Meditation 7. Of the Glory of Heaven.
Division 1. THou must imagine that Celestial Country, to be as it were a most
splended, glorious, and large City, built of most pure gold, and most precious
Or, if thou had rather imagine it to be a most spacious Country, and adorned
with all the beauty of grass, flowers, and trees, and filled with all fragrant
sweetness and delight: where there is ever a most pleasant spring and
delightful summer. Where there is pleasantness, rest, quiet, and peace
surpassing all sense.

2. Thou wast created for the highest and infinite good, which is God. This
good thou shall have for the merit of the Incarnation and Passion of Christ,
and shall enjoy it for all eternity, if here thou shall have worshipped God
purely and holily in fear and love.

Consider, that this most pleasant good contains in it self, superabundantly
all nobleness, pulchritude, comeliness, elegancy, sweetness, delight, grace and
perfection. This when thou shall have obtained, thou shall not be able to
desire any thing more; for thou shall find most fully in God, whatsoever may be
desired.

It is manifest therefore, that the Vision of God is most highly pleasant, and
incomparably excells all delight imaginable. For if naturally thou willingly
beholdest that which is beautiful, what, and how great joy will it be to thee,
clearly to contemplate the divine Essence, which is the Fountain whence all
beauty flows, and which is infinitely splendid, fair, comely, sweet, and
delicious?

O what does he see, what does he hear, what does he smell, what does he taste,
what does he feel, who is united to God in Heaven? Truly eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor have the goods and joys entered into the heart of mortal man,
which God has prepared for his elect, 1 Cor. 2.

3. In seeing God, thou shall see all things, and know all things which thou
would know. Thou shall behold in God the order of the whole Universe and all
truth.

Thou shall enjoy the highest good, and shall always possess it, and thou
shall have in it whatsoever is delightful.

Thou shall be shined upon by the eternal wisdom, and shall most abundantly
taste the sweetness of the divine Peace.

Thou shall be wholly absorpt with the love of thy Creator, and shall be
transformed into him, and shall always embrace him according to thy desire,
and shall be perfectly united unto him.

Thou shall see the bright and ever quiet Trinity, and thou shall know how the
Son is begotten by the Father, and how the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
and the Son; and how the Father loves the Son, and the Son the Father, and both
the Holy Ghost. Also how the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost are One GOD.

Then thou shall most perfectly praise God, and without any Irksomness or
Labor. Thou shall praise him with all the Blessed for ever and ever.

Now thou shall never displease him more, but shall please him in all things.

4. Thou shall see the excellency, and beauty of the humanity of the Son of
God, Jesus Christ. O! how will thou rejoice, beholding the Amiable Jesus
exalted, and Glorious in his Kingdom! Who once in the world was for thy sake
poor, despised, and afflicted.

Thou shall also see with ineffable joy, the Beauty and Glory of the most Sweet
Mother of God the Virgin Mary.

Thou shall behold all the Orders of the Angelical Spirits, and how thousands
of thousands Minister to their Creator, and that the Soldiers of God are
numberless.

Thou shall know most perfectly all the Citizens of Heaven; thou shall know
their inviolable peace, their most fervent Charity, their most Pleasant
Society, their unshaken security, their Inenarrable Beauty, Splendour, and
Glory. And all the Blessed are illustrious and glorious Princes and Kings.

Thou shall have most familiar, and perpetual society with Christ, and his most
Lovely, and most Gracious Mother Mary, and with all the Blessed.

Assuredly all the joys of the world Compared with the least joy of Heaven are
mere bitterness. The vast Ocean does not so much exceed in quantity one single
drop of water, as the least pleasure of the Blessed does exceed all the delight
and pleasure, that ever was in the world.

And the joys of Heaven shall never be ended, nor ever be diminished: Nor be
interrupted for one single moment for all eternity.

5. Besides, when thy Soul in the Resurrection shall have received thy glorious
body, what joy shall it thence receive? For thy very body shall be most
splendid, and much more bright than the Sun: it shall be most sound, most firm,
most beautiful, most pure, odoriferous, incorruptible, impassible, most subtle,
and very agil. Whence thy soul with its glorified body, can be wheresoever it
will, in a very short space of time: nothing can hinder it, nothing put a stop
or impediment unto it.

Thou shall also (after the Resurrection) conceive exceeding great Joy from the
happy renovation of this visible World: which shall be of a far more elegant
form than now it is.

For whatsoever is now in the World unclean, whatsoever is obscure and shady in
the Earth, whatsoever is cold in the Waters, and whatsoever has power of
burning in the Fire, all that shall go down into Hell.

The Sun, and Moon, and Stars, shall be seven times more bright than they are
now. Henceforth there shall be no Clouds, nor Hail, nor Rain, nor Winds, nor
Lightning, nor Thunder. Night shall cease to be, a perpetual Day and Clarity
succeeding, as well on Earth, as in the Heavens. The Air shall have more light
than it has now; the Water shall be purer than it is now. The Earth shall be
fair as Gold, and pellucid as Crystal, and plain as the palm of your hand.

6. Such things God has prepared for those who love him. O how unhappy are
they, who for the most base pleasures, delights, and vanities of this World,
deprive themselves of so great joys!

But thou who read these things, aspire and make haste to that never-fading
Glory.

Detest and fly all Sin, as much as thou can: contemn all transitory things,
love God, love all Men, and spend the time profitably which is allotted thee.

The Conclusion. Admonitions concerning the Practice of these Meditations.
1. HE who exercises himself in the foregoing Meditations, may, nay, ought in
some of them, to wit, in those which are more fruitful, stay more than three
days: especially during the first Exercise, which Exercise precedes the
repetition of the same Meditations.

2. It will be profitable, when he is to begin any Exercise our Meditation,
that he read first the last division of the same Meditation, for in it commonly
are put some things conducing to the right and profitable performance of the
same Meditation.

3. If, whilst he is exercising himself he be overcharged with sleep; let him
rise, and standing or walking continue the Exercise. He must diligently weigh
with himself all the points and members of the Divisions, and freely stay in
them.

4. Moreover, when he shall perceive himself to be solicited or allured to
follow his vicious passions, Concupiscences, and inclinations, if holy love do
not restrain him from evil, he must forthwith call to mind death, judgment, and
hell, that at least profitable fear may restrain him.

5. He must very Carefully contain and bridle his tongue and senses: for
otherwise he will never make any progress in true virtues.

6. That he may more speedily attain to a contempt of himself, and true
humility, (without which no Virtue is of any value) he must very often exercise
himself in an attentive and amorous consideration of the greatness of God, and
of his Fidelity and Charity toward himself; and on the contrary, in the
consideration of his own littleness, and of his unfaithfulness and ingratitude
toward God, he shall say to God these, or such like things.

O Lord who art thou? and who am I? Thou art the Lord of highest majesty,
nobility, and dignity; Thou art the Creator of Heaven and Earth; Thou art the
Immense God, the Omnipopotent God. But I am a most vile worm: I am unworthy,
whom the Earth should sustain; I am nothing, I can do nothing. Thou have been
ever most faithful to me, loving me most purely, and bestowing upon me
innumerable benefits; but I, alas! have been most unfaithful, and too
ungrateful to thee, and am so still. He must perform the foresaid exercise
purely to the honor of God. He must in his heart prefer every man, how wicked
soever, before himself, and deem him better than himself.

7. He must accustom himself, frequently to recall and elevate his mind to God;
and he must do this even amidst conversation, and when he is exercised in
external works; least his mind wandering and forgetful of his purpose, and too
estranged from God, lose its inward purity, and ancient grace. He must piously
attend the amiable presence of God, knowing that he always beholds all his
thoughts, words, and actions. He must aspire after the spouse of his soul Jesus
Christ, and maintain sweet colloquies of love with him. By this means he shall
both pass this life with pleasure, and after the death of the body, he shall
come to eternal joys of immortal life.

Amen.
A short Commemoration of the Life of Christ, divided into Articles
Article I.
THe sweet JESUS, the Son of the living God, the most high God, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth; for the exceeding Charity wherewith he loved me, would be
conceived by the Holy Ghost and incarnate, in the most chaste womb of the
Blessed Virgin Mary; in which also he dwelt nine months. My God emptied
himself, and taking the form of a servant, was made my Brother; that he might
reduce me to his Heavenly Kingdom. O Ineffable Piety and inestimable Favor!
what shall I return to my Lord? I offer and resign my self wholly to his good
pleasure. To him be praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Article II.
THe sweet JESUS, the King of glory, the cause of my salvation, was born a
Tender Infant in a poor stable, winter sharply raging. He was wrapped in
clouts. He was reposed in the Crib of Beasts. He lay upon hay and straw. He was
suckled by the breasts of a poor mother. The Son of God endured so great
Poverty for my sake. To him be praise, honor, and glory, for ever.

Amen.
Article III.
The sweet JESUS was circumcised on the eighth day from his Birth, his Mother
sadly condoling with him. He was circumcised, and shed his most pure Blood for
me a most vile wretch, and he would be called Jesus (that is a Savior) for my
comfort. Then he was revealed to the Gentiles, when the Sages guided by a star
to Bethlehem to adore the little Infant, and with joy and reverence offered to
him gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh. To him be praise, honor, and glory
for ever.

Amen.
Article IV.
THe sweet JESUS was presented in the Temple, and was redeemed with the
sacrifice of the poor. He fled into Egypt, and there endured the incommodities
of Poverty with Mary and Joseph. He was subject and obedient to the same Mary
and Joseph. In his sacred Infancy, Childhood, and Youth, he suffered very many
necessities and tribulations for my salvation. To him be praise, honor, and
glory for ever.

Amen.
Article V.
THe sweet JESUS when he was thirty years old, humbly received Baptism from his
servant John. He fasted forty days and forty nights, dwelling with the Beasts
in the desert. The maker of the World, the King of Angels, the Omnipotent God
did not disdain to be tempted by the Devil, for my sake. To him be praise,
honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article VI.
THe sweet JESUS was wearied with journeys, watchings, and labors for my
salvation. He preached, wrought miracles, bestowed favors. He suffered hunger
and thirst, cold and heat. He endured with a most meek heart three and thirty
years, innumerable grievances, and innumerable persecutions, and at length came
to Jerusalem, that he might die for me. To him be praise, honor, and glory for
ever.

Amen.
Article VII.
THe sweet JESUS, the King of Kings, and Lord of the highest majesty, girt
about him a linen cloth, and powered water into a Basin, and kneeling down,
humbly washed the feet of his Disciples, and wiped them with a towell. O what
an example did my Lord God give me? To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article VIII.
THe sweet JESUS, out of the immense Love with which he most tenderly loves us,
instituted the venerable Sacrament of the Eucharist, by a stupendous
liberality, and a most sweet charity, giving and leaving to us himself in it.
To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article IX.
THe sweet JESUS coming into the Garden of Olivet, he began to fear, and to be
sad: so that he said, My Soul is sad even unto death; he humbly bended his
knees upon the ground, and falling upon his face, he prayed to his Father three
times; for my sake being excessively afflicted, he most fully resigned himself
to his Father, saying: Father, not my will, but thine be done. Out of the
vehemence of the anguishes with which his most meek heart was oppressed, he
swet Blood all over his Body, so that the drops ran down upon the earth. To him
be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article X.
THe sweet JESUS burning with an earnest desire of redeeming me, and suffering
for me, went out to meet his Enemies, and most courteously spoke to them. He
refused not to receive a kiss from the traitor Judas, and ignominiously to be
apprehended and bound (as a thief) by wicked men, that I might be absolved from
the Bonds of my Sins. To him be Praise, Honor, and Glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XI.
THe sweet JESUS (bound as a Malefactor) was led with disgrace to the house of
Annas, and thence to the house of Caiphas the high Priest. My gracious and
sweet Lord was dragged, pushed on, beaten, and blasphemed, by the Ministers of
the Devil; but he bore all those grievous and unworthy things most patiently,
for the love of me. To him be Praise, Honor, and Glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XII.
THe sweet JESUS, Lord of Lords, endured most modestly for my Salvation a
reproachful and cruel box on the ear, most unjustly given by a servant of the
High Priest. And how shall not I hereafter in return for his Love, patiently
endure the affronts that are done me. I beg, I wish, I desire to be
strengthened and confirmed by his Grace. To him be praise, honor, and glory for
ever.

Amen.
Article XIII.
THe sweet JESUS was falsely accused in the house of Caiphas; he was unjustly
condemned; He was fowly spit upon, and received horrible blows and buffets; he
was scornfully blindfolded, the wicked smiting him, and in scorn saying,
Prophecy unto us, O Christ, who it was that struck thee. Ah! that royal and
amiable face of his, for me was defiled with filthy spittle; the most meek Lamb
in the mean while did not complain: but teaching us Patience, he was dumb and
opened not his mouth; he bore in silence for my sake revilings, contumelies,
reproaches, and all sorts of injuries. O how ill, and how unworthily was he
handled that night! To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XIV.
THe sweet JESUS, the Holy of Holys, and King of Angels, defiled with spittle,
and bound, in the morning was led to Pilate, and stood before him with a loving
countenance, and his eyes down. And when he was falsely accused by the Jews, he
humbly held his peace, answering nothing. To him be praise, honor, and glory
for ever.

Amen.
Article XV.
THe sweet JESUS (bound as a Thief) was sent from Pilate to Herod; who seeing
him silent to his own idle questions, and to the false accusations of the
Jews, he despised him, and clothed him in a white and ridiculous Coat as a
Fool, and so sent him back to Pilate. The amiable Lord, at the pleasure of his
Enemies, went backward and forward without contradiction, permitting them to do
with him whatsoever they would. O how humble was the Obedience and Patience of
the Eternal King! To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XVI.
THe sweet JESUS was ignominiously stripped in the Pretors Hall; he was inhumanly
tied to a Pillar; he was most cruelly torn with whips for me; his delicate and
Virginal Flesh was all deformed with blewness and wounds: and out of it ran
down on all sides upon the ground streams of precious Blood. O sharp dolours! O
sad spectacle! Indeed he was wounded for my iniquities, he was bruised for my
sins: and by his wounds I was healed. To him be praise, honor, and glory for
ever.

Amen.
Article XVII.
THe sweet JESUS for his greater ignominy, was clothed with a Purple Cloak; a
Crown of Thorns was pressed upon his venerable head: and so his head being
grievously wounded, most pure Blood abundantly flowed down upon his face and
neck. A Reed was put into his hand: and he was scoffingly saluted and adored by
the wicked, deriding him, and saying, Hail King of the Jews; he was smitten
with a Reed: he was spit upon, and received cruel buffets for my sake. To him
be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XVIII.
THe sweet JESUS was brought forth by Pilate, and shown to the furious Jews,
wearing a Crown of Thorns and a Purple Vestment. But they asked with loud
clamours, that he might be crucified. His head surrounded with thorns, his face
stained with blood and defiled with spittle, his body cut with whips, his
humble and pleasant Aspect did not move them to pity: I pray God they may move
me to a most inward Compassion, and ardent Love of him. To him be praise,
honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XIX.
THe sweet JESUS was condemned to dye, by Pilate, and delivered up to the will
of the Jews. Wherefore they forthwith laid hands on him, and loaded with the
Beam of his Cross, they drew him out of the City. The sweet Lord carrying his
Cross on his rent shoulders, was pushed forward, beaten, forced to make haste;
the amiable Redeemer made the reproach of men and disdain of the people, humbly
went forwards to the place of Calvary. O how much did the weight of his Cross
load and afflict him, but more the weight of my sins! But he for my salvations
sake willingly bore all Labor, and Dolor, and all Confusion. To him be praise,
honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XX.
THe sweet JESUS being come weary and out of breath to Mount Calvary, he
refused not to taste Wine mixed with Myrrh and Gall, which was offered unto
him, that by this bitter drink he might expiate the faults which I have
contracted by eating and drinking intemperately. O what a kind of refection was
that of my Lord! To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXI.
THe sweet JESUS was disgracefully stripped upon Mount Calvary: and by the
pulling off of his Clothes his wounds were renewed; the mild and innocent Lamb
of God was unmercifully stretched out upon the Cross by cruel men; his delicate
hands and undefiled feet were cruelly bored through with bloody Nails; the
joints of his most holy Members were miserably loosed. Purple Blood abundantly
flowed out of his sacred wounds, as out of so many Fountains. O how hard a bed
had the Spouse of my soul, extended on his Cross, and nailed to it for my sake.
To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXII.
THe sweet JESUS hanging naked upon the ignominious Gibbet of his Cross, in the
middle, betwixt two Thieves, with his hands and feet transfixed, powered out
most precious Blood, and suffered most bitter dolours for my sake; he was
scoffed at, he was reviled with Blasphemies: but in the mean time he prayed for
those who blasphemed him; he prayed for his Crucifiers, saying, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do. To him be praise, honor, and glory for
ever.

Amen.
Article XXIII.
THe sweet JESUS hanging upon the Cross, despised and wounded, graciously
promised Paradise to the penitent Thief; he tenderly compassionated his
Virgin Mother, standing by the Cross transpierced with the sword of grief, and
commended her to his Disciple St. John; and to the same St. John, and to us
all, he gave her to be a Mother. To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXIV.
THe sweet JESUS, when he had for me endured immense torments, for three hours,
upon the Cross, and his sacred blood being powered out, was most vehemently a
thirst: he had Vinegar given him to drink; which having tasted, he, the Author
of Life to all things, commending himself to his Father, and bowing his
venerable head, gave up the Ghost. To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXV.
THe sweet JESUS, as soon as he was dead upon the Cross, forthwith descended
according to his soul, out of exceeding Charity into Hell, and delivered the
Fathers detained in Lymbus; for they at the coming of his soul, instantly were
filled with the Light of Glory, and saw the most Blessed Trinity, saw clearly
the Divine Essence. And this was that spiritual Paradise of which our Lord said
to the Thief, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. To him be praise,
honor, and glory, for ever.

Amen.
Article XXVI.
THe sweet JESUS, the good shepherd, laid down his life for his sheep. And the
right side of his dead body was opened with a Spear, whence did flow forth to
us blood and water; his amorous heart was wounded for me. O may this most sweet
heart, this pleasant treasury of happiness, be salvation and comfort to me in
my death: that after death I may be united to Jesus, and contemplate him for
all Eternity. To him be praise, honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXVII.
THe sweet JESUS dyed for me, whose immaculate body, when it was taken down
from the Cross, his most blessed Mother received it into her Lap, kissed it, and
wept over it; then Joseph and Nicodemus wrapped it in a clean winding sheet,
and laid it in a Sepulcher; so that Jesus the immarcessible Flower of humane
dignity, was buried for me. To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXVIII.
THe sweet JESUS coming the third day victorious out of his closed and sealed
Sepulcher, by a noble triumph, arose from the dead: and the clarity of his most
pleasant countenance being restored, he first exhilarated with a new joy his
most dear Mother the Virgin Mary, then Mary Magdalen, and his other friends. To
him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Article XXIX.
THe sweet JESUS, on the Fourtieth day after his Resurrection, in the presence
of his Disciples, filled with ineffable joy, gloriously ascended into Heaven:
and afterward sent them the Holy Ghost. He sits in Heaven at the right hand of
his Father; and thence is to come in Majesty to Judge the living and the dead.
To him be praise, honor, and glory for ever.

Amen.
Thirteen short Precepts, necessary for one who aspires to a perfect Life.
Precept I.
FOr the love of Jesus Christ, who suffered very sharp things for thy sake,
renounce the pleasures of thy senses. When thou have a mind, and desires to
see, hear, smell, taste, touch, or speak any thing, remember that thou must not
obey thy sensuality inciting of thee, but Reason and God speaking in thee. Yea,
even be ready to want spiritual delights, according to Gods good pleasure and
ordination. And when thou art recreated with inward comfort and sweetness, have
a care thou do not rest in it, nor abuse it to thy own proper pleasure.

Precept II.
KEep very diligently thy sight, hearing, and tongue, that they do not decline
to unlawful, vain, and unprofitable things. It behooves thee to be vigilant and
very wary in thy speech, that thou speak not more words, nor otherwise than is
convenient. Let thy speech be succinct, plain, and quiet. Carefully rule and
contain in good order all the Parts of thy Body. Avoid immoderate Laughter, and
all lightness of behavior.

Precept III.
DO not adhere to any Creature by inordinate affection, but dye to all
perishable things, and keep thy heart free from them: for in such a death, and
in such a liberty does lie hid the most true and most pleasant life.

Precept IV.
BY an entire abnegation of thy self and resignation, diligently destroy in
thee vicious passions and affections, and thy own will and self-seeking. But
love dearly and only the Divine will, and ever wish it, and submit thy self
wholly unto it; so that, whatsoever God wills, do thou also will. Every where
seek rather the praise and honor of God than thy own profit.

Precept V.
IN all things which happen, wisely regard the providence of God, and securely
commit thy self and all thy concerns to the Almighty; knowing that he has care
of thee. Receive as from the hand of God, every adversity and tribulation
(whether internal or external;) believing for certain that he has sent it for
thy profit and salvation. 1. Then contentedly endure it to the very last;
giving thanks to our Lord, and praising him, by whose permission and order it
happened. 2. And thou must not be troubled for injuries that are done thee, nor
impatiently complain to men of them. 3. But calling to mind thy own wickedness
and ingratitude, think thy self worthy, whom all men should reprehend, chide,
contemn, vex, deride, and even trample under their feet. 4. Wherefore art thou
anxious, and dejected for the words of men, or for the temptations which thou
suffer? Let men think, and say of thee what they please, let the world rage
against thee, let the devil rage against thee, (as much as God permits.) 5. Do
thou in the mean time humbly and firmly repose upon the Almighty, and in
silence conserve peace of mind. If thou duly weighest, how unworthy and sharp
things, Jesus Christ thy Creator and Redeemer has suffered, thou will with a
ready mind endure all things though never so grievous.

Precept VI.
DEpress and put thy self beneath every creature, considering thy own vileness,
and thy own proper nothing. If thou think thy self to be any thing, when
thou art nothing; if thou foolishly within thy self magnifies thy own works or
exercises, thou art indeed very Proud, and stinkest before God. Whatsoever good
thou have, it is Gods, not thine. Take heed therefore, lest thou usurp that to
thyself which is Gods, see that thou do not thence foolishly boast, and please
thy self, and for that indeed displease God. Judge thy self also unworthy the
very least gift of God.

Precept VII.
WIllingly do the will, and follow the Judgment of another in those things
which are lawful, denying thy own will, and forsaking thy own sentiment. Ever
obey most readily; because whatsoever is done by obedience, is very grateful to
God: on the contrary, he abhorres whatsoever is done by disobedience.

Precept VIII.
BE content with a few and plain things, after the example of our Lord Jesus,
and Holy Mary his mother. Do not love vanity in thy apparel, nor luxuriousness
in thy diet. And how ungrateful would thou be, if thou should murmur for
thy meat or drinks being less savory or delicate, when for thy sake Christ
drunk gall and vinegar! If even such things as seem necessary are wanting,
praise God, confide in him, who cannot forsake his servants, although sometimes
he may profitably permit them to be pinched with want.

Precept IX,
SIncerely love all men, as thy brothers and sisters, having stamped upon them
the noble Image of God. Show a loving and gracious countenance, and speak kind
words to all, and especially to thy enemies and persecutors, by the sweetness
of holy charity healing and extinguishing in thee, all bitterness of heart. Be
ready to help and comfort all. Compassionate those that are afflicted, and
those that sin. Rejoice for the virtues of others, as for thy own, and repute
the misery of others as thy own; deeming every one to be thy self.

Precept X.
DEspise no body. Banish out of thy heart with great diligence rash judgments,
and naughty suspicions. Accustom thy self to think well of all, With a simple
heart, interpret the sayings and doings of others to the best. Heartily prefer
all men before thy self. Believe thy self to be the most ungrateful and vilest
of all mankind. Say to thy self, say to God, I am not worthy the earth should
sustain me. O if thou were wise, how willingly would thou for Gods sake do
the most abject works! How cheerfully would thou serve every body! For even
Christ our Lord took the form of a servant, being made man, and washed the feet
of his disciples.

Precept XI.
STudy to please God, and not men; and desire rather to be despised, than to be
praised or honored.

Precept XII.
HAve pious and holy thoughts, and every where take notice of the presence of
God, entertaining sweet colloquies with him, whether thou feel or feel
not devotion. To recollect thy spirit, and to consider reverently the presence
of God, these words often repeated may much help thee; O Lord thou God thou art
always present with me, thou dwell in the Fund of my Soul.

Amen.
Precept XIII.
WHatsoever is not God, do not greatly care for it, nor deem it much to concern
thee; for so thou will be be able by a holy introversion with a free mind
vacantly to intend to God himself. And indeed it is the one thing necessary;
which to obtain thou ought always to labor, strive, and do what is in thy
power; yet so that thou wholly despair of thy self and thy own endeavors, and
place all thy hope in God alone, in his only Mercy and Goodness, in the Sole
Help of his Grace. For without God, thou can do nothing but Sin.

The Penitent Sinners Confidence in God.
GOd never did despise, nor never will despise a contrite heart: He never did
reject, nor ever will reject those who fly to him by true Repentance. If thou
do not cease to rise, he will not cease to receive thee. Wherefore although
thou should fall a hundred times, yea a thousand times; as often as thou
fallest, so often rise again with a Holy Hope of Pardon; and rising again, give
Thanks to our Lord, that he did not permit thee to fall more grievously, or to
ly longer in thy Ruin.

Thou can not more dishonor God, or do him a greater injury, than if for the
multitude, long continuance, or enormity of thy sins thou should despair of
his Piety, Mercy and Goodness.

Permissu Superiorum.


