GODS SOVERAIGNITY, HIS SACRED MAJESTY'S SUPREMACY, THE SUBJECTS DUTY.

Asserted in a SERMON, Preached before his MAJESTY'S High COMMISSIONER, and the
Honorable PARLIAMENT of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND, At Edinburgh, the 31. of
March, 1661.

By Mr. HUGH BLAIR, Minister of the Gospel at GLASGOW.

Give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God, the things which
are Gods, Mat. 22. 21.

Jam pleno redeant tempora circulo

Promissumqumque serant diem.

Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur.

Irenaeus lib. 5. c. 24.

GLASGOW, Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, and are to be Sold at his Shop: ANNO DOM.
1661.

TO THE TRULY HONORABLE, AND NOBLE LORD, The EARL of MIDLETON, Lord Clairmont
and Fettercairn, His Majesty's High Commissioner for SCOTLAND.
May it please your GRACE,
I Can not so overlove and overvalue this ensuing Discourse, as to hold it
worthy of Your GRACES judicious eyes, much less of Your HIGHNESS Patronage,
yet now my very duty has commanded me to look thus high, and tells it would
be no less then injurious, if I should not lay down my work where I discharged
my service, and that I should offend, if I presumed not t^us: Whether should
the Rivers run, but into the Sea whence they came. This being first Preached
upon a call from Your GRACE, and the Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, and being
a little Mite from one who desires to carry in his bosom a Religious and
Loyal heart to GOD the Supreme Lawgiver, and ^o our Sacred SOVEREIGN.

May it please Your GRACE therefore, with an favorable aspect to look upon
this as a present for CAESAR, though a very mean one, yet the little All I
have, and as a testimony of that Religiou^ Reverend, and due respect I owe to
Your GRACE, for the undeserved favor soown to Your GRACES humble, and
unworthie Servant, knowing also that such Pieces are ob^oxicus to the
obloquies, malice, and envy of some, whether could I flee more rationally for
shelter then ^o Your GRACES Pa^rociny and Protection, whose high understanding
in all knowledge Divine and Humane, and especially in these Primitive Truths
here asserted, is no mean accession to all Your other Noble and Heroical
indowments.

Much is now expected from Your GRACE, both by the Almighty GOD, raising and
reviving Your GRACE as another Joseph out of the Dungeon, and another Jonah out
of the b^lly of the Whale, the depths of the earth; And from Your Sacred
SOVEREIGN, thus exalting You to this highest Pinnacle of Honor, and for
reviving the languishing Laws of this withering Nation. Unto all which that
Your GRACE may be sutablie answerable, and that the LORD may make You
eminentlie isntrumental as a skillful Pilot, to bring this tossed and only not
sinking Vessel of this poor distracted Church and State to the desired
Harb^rie of truth and peace, and for restoring His MAJESTY'S just P^iviledges,
and Royal Prerogatives: And that the Grace of GOD may be assistant to Your
GRACE to go on in the Work of GOD, and Your GRACES Master, THE LORDS ANOINTED,
the breath of our nostrils: Shall be the humble desire and hearty prayer of
him who is less then the least of Your GRACES Servants. So entreating this may
pass under Your GRACES favorable Patrocinie: And commending Your GRACE to the
Protection of the ALMIGHTY GOD. I am, and remain still,

Your GRACES in all humble observance and duty, HEW BLAIR.

GODS SOVERAIGNITY, HIS SACRED MAJESTY'S SUPREMACY, THE SUBJECTS DUTY.
PSALM. 82. 1. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty: He judges among
the gods.
THere is here a Congregation, yea, a Congregation of great ones, yea, of Gods,
convocat and congregat together. And O how necessary is Gods presence in all
Congregations and Assemblies; even as necessary as the presence of the soul is
to the body natural, as necessary is his presence to the body political, or
as the Sun to the air and to the earth, to recreate all with his light, to
revive all with his hot beams; therefore Moses the supreme Magistrate, the hie
Governor, who was appointed to lead his people like a flock through the
wilderness, he does breath out this as the marrow of all his desires, that the
Lord would go along with him, If thy presence go not with me, let us not go
up hence, for wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy people have found
favor in thy sight, is it not in that thou go with us, so shall we be
separate from all the people which are on the face of all the earth, Exodus 33.
15.

And as his presence is necessary, so it is promised here to you thus convocate
together, he who said, Mat. 18.20. Wheresoever two or three come together in my
Name, there will I be in the midst of them, in futuro, here he performs what
he had promised, and says in praesenti, God stands, etc. Surely that deep
wound given to his Disciples by our dear Lord, Yet a little while and ye shall
not see me; filled their heart with so much sorrow, that it was only curable by
that plaster and promise, Behold I am with you, Mat. 18.20. (...), O that
every one in this great Congregation might say from his personal experience,
with divine Bernard, nunquam a te, absque te recedo, I never come to to thee in
any Ordinance, duty, dispensation, that I go away without thee, without some
lively stamp up on my spirit, speaking thy presence with me, expect then in
faith, and ye shall enjoy his presence, even in him, in whom all the promises
of God are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Keep thy promise made to thy servants,
wherein thou have caused us to trust, Psalm. 119.49.

These words begin in the Hebrew Text, as the sacred Bible, with a Verb in the
singular, and a Name in the plural Number, Elohim Nitsab, as Barah Elohim, dii
stat, as dii creavit, that as the ineffable mystery of the blessed Trinity of
Persons is holden forth in the unity of Essence in the one, so the presence of
the blessed Trinity is holden out here, or to point out the necessity of unity,
unanimity and sweet harmony among you who are thus convocat together, so what
is in the Plu^all Number in the first and last words, is in the Singular in the
midst of the Verse, that alone is Gods own Congregation, as Grotius observes
here, which is thus lawfully convocat and united.

PSALM. 82. 1. God stands in the Congregation, etc.
There is here couched up together in these words three secret and sacred
Riddles, which only can be understood by these who plough with his Heifer.

1. Here is Jehovah the only God, yet mention of many gods, yea, these many
gods convocat, called, counten^nced by this one God. Has not this great
Jehovah said, Thou shall have no other gods before my face, but me, Exodus 20.3.
and, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Yet that same
Jehovah here creating and approving many gods, countenancing and authorizing
them in their great Congregation, stamping them thus created and convocat, with
such deep impre^sions of divine Majesty, power and authority, that Divinum
quid in illis appareat, when Moses went up to the Mount, little difference
betwixt Aaron and him, but when he came down as Lawgiver, with the two Tables
of stone in his hand, then his face did so shine, that not only all Israel, but
Aaron himself could not behold him, but did all flee from him, Exodus 34.29,33.
Such brightness of glory was put on him, as the supreme Magistrate, and as
eustos utriusque tabulae, Gods then they are unto men, but they are but men
unto God, therefore as he behoved to be veiled when he spoke to Israel, so when
he went to speak with God he took off hi^ vail, his brightness to men, was but
baseness to God, and so the Apos^le, 1 Cor. 8.5,6. loses this Riddle, though
there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or earth (as there b^ gods
many, and lords many) But to us there is but one God, the Father of whom are
all things, and we by him, even these go^s have their being as men, as
Christians, as gods from this one God, from him and for him as their Alpha and
Omega.

2. This one great Jehovah stands, these many and petty gods sitting in their
Cong^egation, we know that standing is the posture of a servant before his
Master, and sitting the posture of the Master before the Servant, Blessed are
these thy servants, which stand always before thee, said the Queen of S^eba to
Solomon, 1 King. 10.8. And you shall have place among them that stand by, is
promised to Zechariah, Zech. 3.7. Joshua even with his Mitre, as hie Priest,
see for this also, Luke 17. 7, 8. Or it is the posture of the Pa^ty to stand,
and the Judge to sit; Hence, Moses father in Law says to him, Exodus 18.14.
What is this thing thou do to the people? Why fittest thou thy self alone,
and all the people stand by thee from morning to even? Yet here the Master is
brought in as standing, the servants sitting, the Party sitting, the Judge
standing: This though spoken then (...) is to be understood (...).

1. Then he stands, as standing is opposed to falling, ver. 6. He will stand
when they all shall fall as men, Job 19. 25.

Or, he stands as attentive to all that is spoken or done by you as gods in
his Name and stead, he stands then not only as present with you, but
seriously and attentively, observing every one of your hearts, voices, acts
passing from you, weighing them all in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Or, he stands as waiting for an Invitation to be entreated to sit down with
you, Behold I stand at the door and knock, etc. Rev. 3. 20. Or does he stand,
because he alone can make all stand fast which is inacted by you, The Counsel
of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations, He
spoke and it was done, He commanded and it stood fast, otherwise who is he that
says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not; If you do all
as from him, as before him, as for him, he will sit down with you, and make all
stand fast which is done be you.

The 3 Riddle is, This great Jehovah with whom is no variableness, nor shadow
of changing, yet, here changing his site, with these many and mighty, yet petty
gods, and taking the place due to him and sitting down on the bench, even as
the Supreme Judge, and bringing these gods thus congregat before his bar, to
give an account to him of all he has done in the body, as men and Christians,
much more of all you have done, or shall do in this their body made up of so
many gods to ^ender to every one according to his works done in the body, and
the Acts of this their body thus convocat, which is a great check to their high
and honorable tittle of gods given you in the text, least dotting too much
with Nar^issus on their own shadow, some we^tigo should overtake you, while ye
sit as gods: Behold an antidot to prevent this, ye shall dye as one ex vulgo
ye P^inces, shall be judged their selves who judge others, two ingredients of
death, and judgment to make their plumes to fall, and their combs to crowch,
you sit on the Bench, He stands, but you shall stand at the Bar, and He sit
down on the Throne to all Eternity, and your Lordships shall think it your
greatest happinsse to have places to walk among these that stand by, Zach. 3. 7.

But how judges he, among the gods, in the Original it is Beker^belohim, in
medio deorum the 70. turn it (...) in the mids, and surely the word is taken
for the mids and inward parts of every one, Jer. 31. 33. Ps. 49.11. In the mids
then, 1. As the center of their felicity as Men and Christians, the ^oul finds
no rest, can have no satisfaction but in him, or as the center of their
Authority as gods and Judges, ye have all from him, and shall be accomptable
to Him.

Or, in medio to keep you in unity among your selves, surely after our Lord
arose from the dead, twice did our Savior come unto his Disciples, the Doors
being shut, and stood in the midstst, and said, peace be unto you, Joh. 20. 19.
26. so does He now judge in medio.

Or, is it in medio singulorum, having his Deputy sitting in the midst of every
one of you, as His Depu^ies on Earth, accusing or excusing, cherrishing or
convincing each of you, so K^reb imports.

Or in medio betwixt you all, in that day when he shall make the separation and
set some of you it may be on his right hand, and some on his left, if there be
any left handed men, here, which (God forbid) who for a bribe, or for respect
to persons will pervert Justice and Judgment.

Or, in medio Deorum, because of his supreme, and illimited Power and Authority
over all, all creatures must be subject to him, He rules therefore in the
midst of his enemies. Ps. 110. 3. All must submit to His Soveraignity, and when
the Son himself shall be subject, as Man and Mediator, His mediatorie Kingdom
being at an end, then shall all these gods be subject also, that God may be all
in all to all eternity: which the very H^athen saw be the light of nature, so
the Poet says, Regum timendorum in proprios greges
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.
Clari Gigontaeo triumpho
Cuncta supercilio moventis.


Therefore Calvin says, Who could have expected such a Testimony from a
Hea^hen of the Almighty Power of this great Jehova, be his brow commanding all,
and subduing all the^e giants on earth so called: Genesis 6. be his very frowning
upon them.

The last thing is He judges, either in praesenti, because these gods judge in
His Name, and sometime He even on earth executes judgment in the view of the
world on evil doers, that man may say Verily there is a God that judges on
earth, as well as a God that will judge from Heaven; Ps. But in the Original
their spot is in the future, because he has appointed a day, wherein He will
judge the world, and sentence against every evil Work, and Worker is not
executed speedily, He is so patient and long-suffering, giving every one time
to judge themselves, and that with a promise, If ye will judge your selves,
you shall not be judged: Thus for the explication of the Words.

But I hasten to the Divine truths holden out, in these Words, 1. I see that
the high and Honorable Tittle o^ being gods, is given here to Judges and
Magistrates, especially to the Supreme One, even be his Great and only Almighty
Jehovah, and that Kings hold their C^own, Scepter, and Sword, Honor, Power,
and Autho^ity immediately from God: v. 6. Ego dixt Dii est is.

2 That it is expedient, yea sometimes necessar that those Magistrates, Judges
and Lawgivers, be congregat together, and that lawfully, by the Power and
Authority of the Supreme Magistrate, for the Word Guadah, signifies only such a
Cong^egation as is cited and convocat together be Authority, being come from
Jagnad condicere coetum, judicere locum and tempus conventus: see Ex. 12. 3.
21. convocat be Moses is thus called.

There is an Hebrew Word Kalah that signifies any, though tumultuary and
unlawful meeting, as Ex 32. 1. as well as lawful; but Guadah is never used
but for a lawful Congregation gathered, citante Magistratu, and a Synagogue be
the Archi-Synagogues, named were no other lawful Synagogues: Acts 18. 8. 17. As
the light which for three days was dispersed throw the whole Heavens, He was
pleased to gather together in one body, and unite into one Sun, that that one
Star might be the Treasury of Light both to Heaven and Earth, to show how well
this God of Order loves the union and reduction of all things of one kind, to
their own head and center; so the general Light diffused in the three days,
was called together, and compassed in one Sun (...). So Stars Ye are my Lords,
and Stellae primae magnitudinis, yet one must be to you thus convocat your Sun,
by whose Authority alone ye come together, and by whose lightsome Beams heat,
and influences you are countenanced and cherished in this your Congregation,
and so you give light to the Inferior World, yea, so pleasant is this
subordination to the God of Order, that when He had made two great Lights in
the Firmement, The one to rule the Day, the other the Night. Genesis 1. 16. Yet
will he have all the World taking notice, that the one of them borrowes all its
Light from the other. If ye be fair as the Moon, he is clear as the Sun, ere Ye
can be terrible as an army with banners: If ye be all of you the Sons of the
most High, yet is he the first born, whose privilege it is, Be thou Lord over
thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers Sons bow down to thee. Genesis 27. 29. And so
God has given in the Heavens an Sacred Emblem of the Royal Monarchick Power in
a subordination of all Powers unto Him as (...), no coordination with the
Supreme Power, Nec Regna socium far, nec tae dae sciunt: The Throne and the
Bed admit of no rivals one or many, he must then be as your Sun, Aureo
vitalique calore suo, vos cunstos creatque fovetque alitque. Ps. 19. 6. 7.

And therefore when the 70 Elders were to ease Moses of his insupportable
burden under which he groaned and complained to the Lord, Numb. 11. 16. 7. The
Lord himself commands those 70 to come to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and there I will come down and talk with Thee; and I will take
off the Spirit that is upon Thee Moses, and I will put it upon them and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee: O the great necessity then of
their Dependence on their Supreme Lord: How is it here eminently and clearly
holden out, while He calls the Spirit of Government gevin the 70 Elders, (which
were the Parliament of Israel?) No, the Spirit of God (though it be so mediate)
but the Spirit of Moses, from Him the Power is derived both for Convocation,
Gubernation, and Action, So that KINGS are that same to the State Politic
which humid radical is to the body natural, for as when it is dried up the
blood becomes pituit, and hurtful Predominant humors do infest the body, so in
those Days wherein there was no KING in Israel, See what fell out: Judge. 17.
6. etc.

3. Observe. The presence of God as it is exceeding necessar to those Gods thus
convocat, so is it given and performed as is promised.

4. That this his presence is in posture of standing, and that God is very
attentive and diligently observes, their whole carriage in all particulars
coming before them. And as it is spoken of the land of Israel as its
P^iviledge, The eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it from the beginning
of the Year to the end of it; Deuteronomy. 11. 12. So from the beginning of Your
sitting down, to the close, the Eyes of the Lord Your God are upon You, even
those Eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the Earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect. 2 chapter 16. 9.

5. That this God who stands as a Witness will sit down, as a Judge, the
only Judge: And this is in futuro: This judge is so merciful, that He gives
those Judges, yea all Men time to Judge themselves and fit them for Judgment.

6. That He Judges in medio, and that You all shall be gathered by His Angels
on his Right or Left Hand, and hear His sentence, whcih shall stand in force to
all Eternity^ So that You may all say of Your selves of those Words as David
says of Himself, Ps. 102. 10. Thou have lifted me up and cast me down again.
O how highly are Ye exalted be Him from whom promotion comes! In the first,
But O how low are Ye laid in the close of this verse, when brought to the bar
before this Righteous Judge.

1. Doct. That this high and Honorable Title of being Gods is given, etc. To
Judges and Magist^ats qua tales, and therefore in a higher Degree to him who is
higher be the shoulders then You all. They are first entitled so be the
Prophet, v. 1. And least this should seem to drop from the pen of the Prophet
without a warrant from him by whose Command they speak, the Lord is brought in,
v. 6. speaking Emphatice, Ego dixi Dii estis, and this is not only verbum
(...). But if I may call it so (...), even by the same Word whereby He created
all things, and called those things which were not, as if they were his Word
being his Work. Dixit, and facta sunt omnia, dixi and facti estis Reges, Qui
Coelos verbi Reges verbo ille creavit, dicendo fecit quos jubet esse Deos. Gods
calling, it is still that makes the difference betwixt persons and things,
surely the rod of Aaron laid up in the Tabernacle, Ex. 17. was not more
precious in the matter of it, being of that same Wood, neither were the
Characters fairer, but be Gods calling and confi^ming him in it be its budding
and blossoming, as Moses and Aaron, are differenced, so is Aaron from the rest
of the Princes and Competitors, Therefore Justinus says on this place, (...).
And he from whom they have their Name, from him also they have their Power
suitable to this their name, per me Reges regnant By me there is great odds
betwixt the giving of Names in the Person of One, and in the Person of Another,
a Creature may give to its Fellow Creature Nomen rei, but only the Creator
gives it r^m Nominis. Our first Mother called her Son Cain, a Builder, but he
proved a Destroyer: The wisest of KINGS, His Son Rehoboam a gatherer of the
People, behold he scattered ten Tribes from him at one imp^udent answe^; But
when God gives the name, so the thing futeable to it, as when he changes
Abrams Name to Abraham, He says, For a Father of many Nations have I made
Thee, Genesis 17. 5. So has he given the Kingly power and Divine stamp of
Authority, by calling them Gods on Earth.

I hear also that proud father of lies, promising the same to our first
parents, when he tempted them to eat of the forbidden fruit, Genesis ^.5. though
it be in futuro, you shall be as Gods, yet never intending to give what he
promised, nor being able to perfo^m though he had intended it, for he lied when
he said, all these are mine, Mat. 4. And has he not deceived many in these our
last and worst days, prophe^iet of by Paul, wherein there should be many
traitors, headie, and hie-minded, 2 Timothy 3. 45. (...) etc. by the ^ame proffer
tempting them to eat of the forbidden fruit, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine
anointed. The lap of whose garment cannot be touched by godly David's, but their
heart will smite them, 1 Samuel 24.4. Surely if this liar with this bait had not
intised and prevailed with many, so many had not been found ready to rub
reproaches, cast aspe^sions on, and root out so far as in them lay, Sacred and
Royal Authority, whom God has now made to lick the dust as men, yea, as
stinging, subtle, deceived, and deceiving serpents, yea not as base men only,
but as devils, te^pting many ^o sin with them, their memory as of devils to be
d^testable to all posterity: So great difference there is betwixt him who says
in praesenti, dii ^stis, and him who promises in futuro dii critis, hea^ken
never then hereafter to such a liar, surely their Kingdoms have drunk deep of
Pandora's Box, by hea^kening to this subtle and enchanting Serpent.

And lest this should only seem to be Old Testament, as the Anabaptis^s fondly
dream, we have our Savior asserting the same under the New Testament, and that
^s a Law to stand in vigor for ever: Is it not writ^en in their Law, I said ye
are Gods. Joh. 10. 34. If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God came
and the Scripture cannot be b^oken, i. e. with the best expositors, the warrant
and commission to be Magistrates, who thus have their Commission and Designation
to their Office from God, though this may be in an ordinary call, even by men;
so he p^oves it lawfu^l to give them this Title of Gods (with a due
subordination to him alone by whom they are such) and to ow and bea^ all
reve^ent regard, both to their Persons, Places, and Power, and to have an high
esteem of such Assemblies as this, when so many Gods are gathered together by
lawful Authority

So the KING is thus created as a God upon Ear^h by Him who says, per me Reges
regnant and this p^r is not permission only as we say, per me licet, the Hebrew
(...) nor the Greek (...), not admi^^ing this, but it is a per creativum like
that per ipsum facta sunt omnia, by Him all things were made. Joh. 1. 3. Yea,
it is per approbativum, God approving this Government above others, therfo^e
says that Queen of Sheba to Solomon; Because the Lord thy God loved Israel;
therefore h^th He given thee to be KING over them: 1 Kings 10. 9. Yea, per
praeservativum like that Col. 3. 18. by Him all things consist, God in a
special manner owning the Interest of KINGS, and taking them into his own
pro^ection. It is he that gives deliverance to Kings, and preserves David His
Servant from the hurtful sword. Ps. 144. 10. And this day is this fulfilled in
Your ears and eyes: Yea, I may say it is per decretivum, or a per by a Decree
and Commission from God, for the powers that are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1.
(...), even like that decree of our Election, for this same word is used by the
Apostle, Acts 13.48. (...). As many as were ordained to Eternal life believed,
so that if the dec^ee of Election be Effectual for Salvation, this Decree for
the Supreme Powers is to stand in force for ever for establishing of KINGS on
the Throne; and so we must not only obey for fear, but ^or conscience sake: He
is not given ex importunitate populi, For though it be true that they did by
their p^ecipitancie anticipat and hasten the pace of his purpose, in which
respect it is said, dedi vobis R^gem in ira mea, Hos. 13. 11. yet that the Lord
did purpose to govern his Israel by KINGS and Monarchy, not by Aristocracie,
or Democracie. It well appears by Jacobs Testament, that he pu^posed I say, to
govern them by KINGS, and that of one Tribe and lineall succession while he
says; The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between
his sect until Shiloh come, Genesis 49. 10. And be that of Moses giving Laws for
the King thus set over all his Brethren of Is^ael, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. And as he gave
them one of the Tribe of Benjamin (which was not the right and Royal T^ibe) to
chasten them for their importunity: So when he gave them One of the right and
Royal Tribe, it was a man according to his heart, a David of the Tribe of
Judah; yea, he promised to build him an house, and that he should not want a
light in Israel. 2 Samuel 21. 17. 1 Kings 11. 36. And surely the keeping up of
this Royal Race of our KINGS, in one Line for so many Generations, without
interruption: And when of late He had chastened them with the ^ods of men, not
taking his loving kindness from them, but cutting off so speedily, those
blinded, deluded, and malicious enemies of Mona^chy, speaks eminently in the
Ears, and to the hearts of all Gods people, his purpose to make the Throne of
Our Sacred Sovereign, as the Sun before Him, and to establish it for ever as
the Moon, and as that faithful witness in Heaven, and the performance of that
P^omi^e; Their will I make the horn of David to bud. Ps. 89. 36. Ps. 132. 17.
^8. O that still it may be so, a David with a cornu feriens and penetrans
inimicos, and a cornu germinans, budding, nempe post Hiemem temporalis
desertionis, I have ordained a Lamp for my A^ointed, and this Lamp never to
want oil. Ps. 92. 10. Thou shall anoint Him with fresh oil the D^y whereof
approaches to our great joy, and sad may all their hea^ts be, who blesses
not God for this budding, and this furniture and supply of f^esh oil, from that
Olive Tree standing before the Ru^er of the whole earth. Zach. 4. 11. 14.

KINGS then are justly thus inti^uled and Authorized by God, Is it fit says
Elihu in Job to say to ^ KING Thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly:
Job 34. 18. If he that reproacheth the poor, rep^oacheth his Maker; surely he
that rep^oac^eth Princes, reproacheth much more their Maker: Therefore, Solomon
says, where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say to Him,
what do thou? Eccl. 8. 4. And he gives ^or this, a wholesome advice, I
counsel thee to keep the KINGS commandment, and that in regard of the oath of
God. Eccl. 8. 2. which, makes me the more to admire that great Count^y-men of
ours nisi deliquisset in vno, and hoc u^u^ est instar omnium, who asserens idem
jus esse multi^udini etc. An^we^ing that objection of Paul to the Romans chap.
13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus replies, that it was but temporary: quasi inquit Doctor
quidam Ecclesiae jam scriberet ad Christianos sub turcis d^gentes, ad homines
re tenu^s, animo demissos and inermes and paucos and ad omnem omnium injuriam
expositos, quid quaeso aliud consuleret; As if obedience Active and Passive
were not due to him, (...) or (...). Tit 3. not only for fear, but for
conscience sake, O the hallucination of such a one, as an evil Divine, pace
tanti viri dixerim, as if obedience were only for fear or want of Power, when
they have not (...) who have never (...); But observe, 1.

That he calls the blessed Apostle Doctor Ecclesiae, surely Doctor is but a
ordinary Office-bearer in the Church, and may err; while an Apostle is a
extraordinary and cannot err, And such an one was Paul, not inferior to any
of the Apostles; therefore he ought not to be entitled by any so.

2. That he speaks of the Roman Empire as if it were idem with that of the
Turcik, where quicquid libet, licet: Surely the best of our Divines do
otherwise assert, that the Roman Empire now being so long established, with
consent, and having a Senate above them, though some personally were monsters
among men, yet says, Acts 25. 16. It is not the custom of the Romans to
condemn any man unheard; Did not Christ himself, (our dear Lord) pay T^ibute
to Caesar, even by a miracle, and command us and them both? date Caesaris quae
Caesari, Matthew. 22. 21. and not to defraud Him of his due under pretext of quae
Dei, Deo.

3. That he says those precepts were but for a time, when Chris^ians were weak
etc. while all Divines agree that these Precepts do ever oblige and hold out
the rule both for Princ^s to rule (so that they may be a terror for evil
doers) and people to obey not only for fear but for Conscience sake, surely the
Armies of Theodosius did otherwise, oramus Domine non pugnamus, though they had
these thundering Legions and had (...) but wanting the (...) never du^st
attempt to make use of their potentia not having po^estatem a Domino.

4. That he says, tho he name others whose duties he p^esc^iveth, as of
husbands and wives, yet he mentions not the name o^ the Magistrate, while as it
is evident he names them exp^esly be their most Honou^able and Favorable
Tittles of (...) v. 1. of (...) v 3. of (...)) Gods Deacons they are then,
having power ove^ othe^s, and the bl^ssed Apostle Pet^r more particularly, who
was with his Lord in the Mount (...), exp^esly with his Royal Prerogative, as
(...). And that with all Infe^iour Magistrates as (...): not referring this to
(...) b^t (...) as the best Divines agree, for this would not qua^^at with the
scope, ^istinguishing so expressly betwixt the Sup^eam and Subordinat Magistrate.

5. Did he think that that promise was unknown to Paul, made to the Church
under the New Testament, I will make Kings thy nursing-fathers. Isa. 49.23. Had
not Paul a large measure of that spirit, which dictat that Prophecy, ^o that as
the lawful M^gistrate is Pater Patriae, the Roman Title, so he is Pater and
nutritious Ecclesiae, the Sc^iptural Title, and how evil will it fare with a
child when he wants a Father to provide for him, and a Nurse to feed him, let
the experience of all ages witness: Surely, when there is no King in Israel,
Judge. 17. 10. we f^nd a Levit wandering without a charge, and maintenance,
glad to be hy^ed, even with an Idolatrous Micah for ten Shekels of silver, a
small so^m forsooth, about twenty five shillings; and for a suit of apparel.
And how black coats were hated by these cursed usurpers, our sad expe^ience may
witness in these dismal days, of their prevalency, wherein we might have
complained with Jeremiah^ Lam. 2. 6. Thou have despised in thy in^ignation the
King and the Priest; never shall we fin^ Kings changed and ^espised, but the
Priesthood shall be despised and derided also, as in that under Jeroboam, 1
King. 12. Where every vile man might become a Priest.

Far better, and more agreeable to Divine Truth, he who said (...), Basilius
Bono principi tvnquam Deo, malo propter Deum obediendum, or as another learned
man ^aith, If the Prince be evil, it is not (...), but (...), not to the
person, but to him who made him such.

Gods they are representative, ^s his Deputies and Vicegerents on earth, a
quibus nulla nisi ad ipsum deorum Deum d^tur appellatio, Paul may appeal to
Festus, to Caesar, but here he reste^h, sisteth, the Lord himself leaving no
other remedy to his people, but then shall ye cry unto me, 1 Samuel 8. 18. and
indeed this is ^he sorrest of all appellations, if just. Or, as that witty man
said, a Caesare irato, ad Caesarem placatum. Therefore I find Moses the Supreme
Magistrate, Exodus 4.16. 7. 1. by the Lord himself called a god to Aaron first,
and then to Pharaoh, to denotat his power over Aaron himself, and the Tribe of
Levi, who are to be directed by him in the way of going about outy, his power
being supreme both in Ecclesiasticos, Romans 13.1. Every soul, si quis conatur
excipere intendit decipere: And in Ecclesiasticis, ad extra, ad intra, as Uziah
challenged, and Saul no Christian Prince will claim right, or ought to do so,
but in convocanda, moderanda, confirmanda sinodo, power is given him, but of
this, infra, therefore is there so great ^if^e^ence betwixt the Rod of Aaron,
and the Rod of Moses, when God called Moses to the Magist^acy, Exodus 4. 3. he
turned his Rod into a Serpent, that stingeth unto death, but when Aaron his dry
stick only became fruitful. The Rod so laid in, brought forth buds, and
blossomed blossoms, and brought forth ripe Almonds, Numb. 17.8. The power of
the Church is for edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. So there is
the Emblem of the Supreme Magistrates power in the one Rod, And the power of
the Church in the other, which is to make the dead, dry, withe^ing stock or
soul fruitful in every good word and work. And a God he is to Pharaoh also to
inflict be his authority sad and fatal judgments on the wicked, and
oppressors of his people, and to denounce war against foreign Nations,
infesting them, as the prerogative of these, to whom he said, dii est is.

Gods they are also, because as it is not lawful for any creature to search
into the secrets which he has not revealed, there is a foolish wisdom, saperc
supra quod scriptum est, to be wise above what is written; so the^e is a wise
ignorance in not prying too much into the Ark, which the Bethshemites paid
dear for, as scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria, so it is never well with
a State when they begin to dispute the prerogatives of a Prince, or search them
to the bottom, here is abyssus magna, the^e is some arcanae imperii, not
curiously to be searched into; as who knows the power of his wrath, P^al. 90.
so, the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, P^ov. 19.12. Cum numine
ut igne, nec distes nimiumve procul nimiumve propinques. Be not righteous over
much, (says Solomon) neither make thy self over wise, why should thou
destroy thy self, Eccl. 7.17.

Now because dignity is ever attended with duty, and the Lord never sows
liberally upon any soil but he expects a crop suitable: Much being required
of them to whom much is given, Luke 12.48. Let us see the Uses of this
Doctrine, and these shall be in 3. things.

1. What these gods thus created by him, ow to this great JEHOVAH giving them
this prerogative. 2. What we ow to God for them. 3. What we ow to them in the
Lord.
1. Of these gods thus authorized, it is required that they be humble and
thankful to this their great and dreadful Lord who has thus exalted them,
therefore David says, 2. Sam. 7. 18, 20. Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my
house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And, is this the manner of men, O
Lord God. 20. And what can David say more unto thec? And O how he bles^eth the
Lord as the Author of all his g^eatnesse, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10,14. Let that of the
Apostle be often meditat upon, quis te discrevit, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who differenced
thee? And what have thou which thou have not received? For of him, and through
him, and for him are all things, Romans 11.36.

2. Of them is required that they be like God, having more lively characters of
his Majesty, grace, goodness, power, justice and mercy g^aven on them in
great letters, He that rul^th among men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God: And he shall be as the light of the morning, etc. 2 Samuel 23.3 4. O what
manner of persons ought they to be in all holy conversation and godliness 2
Pet. 3.11. As in their plac^s above others, so in their graces and gifts,
beyond othe^s, being changed from glory to glory^ into that same image, as by
the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. that they may come as near as possible to
the rem nominis, as well as they have from him nomen rei.

3. That their Courts and attendants study to be like these blessed Seraphims
that are about the Throne of the King of kings, and deorum Deum, holiness
becomes thy house, says David, and holiness is suitable to their house,
therefore David thus exalted, promises to walk uprightly in the midst of his
house, and that his eyes shall be unto the faithful of the Land, etc. It is
expedient that not only their more imme^iat attendants, but that all these who
are nearer to him, and weigh the danger aright, to shun all show of impiety and
prophanity. There is so nigh a relation betwixt these that are gods and the
people over whom they are, so that the sin of the one reaches to the judgment
of the other, and the judgment of the one to the smart of both: The King is as
the Head, the people as the Stomach, is the Head be sick, the Stomach is
disaffected, David sins, the people die, 2. Sam. 24.15. if the stomach be sick,
the head complains; For the transgr^ssions of the people are many Princes,
Prove. 28. 2. both at once and successively, and all evil.

Yea, when the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, he moved David
against them to say, Go number Israel, 2 Samuel 24. 1. the very sins of the
Princes have often their rise from the sins of the people: the days were when
the sufferings of the Nations were charged mainly on the Kings Family, but if
we had viewed and weighed our selves aright, what Tribe of all our Israel could
have exeemed our selves from being accessory to these sad judgments, wherewith
we were nigh crushed. But let me speak it confidently, as every sin is a
traitor to a man's own soul, so every wicked man is a traitor to his King, yea
every one of his crying sins is powder and b^imstone hid in his pocket, to blow
up both his Sovereign and his State, even Matchiavel himself could say, that
the giving of God his due is the cause of the prospering of any State^
whatsoever Philosophers in their politics distinguish betwixt bonus vir and
bonus cives, yet true Theology and Divinity from Scripture asserts, that as a
good man, let be a good Christian, cannot be an evil subject, (the fear of God
and of the King, Prove. 24.21. being so in^eparably linked together) so a lewd
man cannot be a good subject to a Christian King. Are they any then ^ho rise up
early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, Isa. 5. 11. and
continue until night until the wine inflame them, against whom the Prophet
denounces so sad a woe, any here, who a^e so far from fearing an Oath, that they
strive to ou^-swear one another. Let them remember that flying Roll, Zach. 5.
3, 4. which shall enter into the house of such a one, in the house of the
Noble, as we^l as the house of the poor, and consume the timber and stones
thereof. These th^ee great sins ( that cursed Trinity) which too many adore,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life, pleasure profit
and preferment have some bait to en^ice and deceive the poor sinner, but this
sin of swearing, is the devils hook, without a bait, whe^eby many yield
themselves willingly to be drawn down to the place of torment, by that black
leader, where the tongues of such blasphemers shall be bu^nt up with these
flames, and not have one drop of water afforde^ them. For Gods sake then, for
your own ^ouls sake, for your King (whom ye pretend to honor) his sake, for
bear these gross wickednesses: Let it not be said that so gracious a Prince
has such graceless and godless followers and subjects. Let a wicked man
swear, carrouse, drink as he will: these gross sins are as so many treasons
secretly contrived against his sacred Sovereign, Church and State where he
lives, for all ruin, Ezekiel. 18. is from iniquity. Let these words of Samuel
sound always in your ears, IF YE SHALL STILL DO WICKEDLY, 1 SAMUEL 12. 23. BOTH
YE AND YOUR KING SHALL PERISH.

As for the duties we ow to God in reference to these gods whether we shall
repair for redress, if we want Kings, or if they be unjustly deprived of that
power due to them in the Lord, even to him who has said, By me Kings Reign,
and this was our sacred Anchor whether some of us did flee for refuge in these
sad days of our late confusions, propounding that same question to the Son of
God, which he did to the son of Man, Exek. 37. Can these dead bones live. Now
the Almighty has made the four winds to breath life into these slain ones,
that they not only live, but reign with glory.

And as to have our refuge to him by prayer, so to return unto him the praise
due to his Name, when a gracious Prince reigns over us, or is restored unto
us. This late wonderful Revolution and Restoration of our sacred Sovereign,
has so clear characters of Gods own finger graven on it, that he who runs
may read them.

As, 1. That it was done so unexpectedly, When the Lord turned back the
captivity of our Zion, Psalm. 126. we were like these that dream, even these
among the heathen say, The Lord has done great things for them, and we say
cordially, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof our hearts are glad.

2. That it was done to us undeservedly, to a undeserving, yea, to an
ill-deserving Nation. Were they not many of perverse spirits, who were saying
with the wicked men, we will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.27.
Yea, some who with that cursed high Priest were prophesying, It is expedient
for us that one should die rather then the whole Nation perish, Joh. 11. 50. So
that for the iniquity of our covetousness he was wroth, yet (says the Lord) I
have seen his ways and I will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore
comfort unto him and to his mourners, Isa. 57.17,18. The second Character of
his hand.

3. By whom was this delivery first intended and wrought, by one who rules in
chief among the very soldiers, our noble and renowned Jerubabel, the scatterer
of our confusions. When Saul was among the Prophets, the wise among them said,
but who is their father, even the Lord was their prime mover.

4. Char. Look to the assisters and carriers on of this great work, we may say
of many of them on every hand as Joseph said of his brethren, whom they had
sold, Genesis 50.20. You did it unto me for evil, but the Lord turned it about to
good, as at this day, to save many alive, and to breath life into a dying and
languishing Nation.

5. Char. How was it effectuat, sine sudore sine sanguine, not by might, not by
strength, no ax, no hammer heard in the erecting this wonderful fabric; may
we not cry, Grace, grace unto it, Zech. 4.7, from the very Alpha to the Omega
of it. This then is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes, Psalm.
118.91. Therefore since this is the Lords own work so eminently, I would advise
all with that Ruler Gamaliel, Acts 5.39. let us not intend to overthrow it,
lest we be found fighters against God. Have we not then cause to bless this
great JEHOVAH by whom Kings Reign.

And that 1. That we have a King: the showt of a King is a joyful shout, says
even Balaam himself, and that he is given to us renascendo, in that same day
wherein he was given to the world nascendo, born again in that same day he was
born. The first Prince he is that ever was born Prince of these three Kingdoms.
That we have a King as god from God, surely any King, even a Nebuchadnezar, a
Jeroboam better nor not one at all. Tyranny it self is better nor Anarchie; Any
one to be King is better no^ every one^ Tyranny is better^ nor Ataxie. Is it
not for tbis (says Hosea) that we have no King, because we feired not the
Lord. Hos. 10.4.

2. We are to thank him that we have such a King as is from our selves, and
proceeds from the midst of us. A stranger to be King is a heavy judgment.
The Assyrian shall be his King, Hos. 11.5. is a sad threatening: A King over:
Israel de fontibus Israel, Psalm. 68.26. Has he not restored our Judges as at
the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning.

3. A King, not a J^roboam ill affected to Religion, but tried as it were, and
proved both by fire and water, in the tract of continued trouble, remained
unconquerable by all, that whosoever doubts of his sincerity is (...). And such
a King as is not a Rehoboam, that could not judge of the advises given, but one
to whom God has given wisdom in the secret of the heart, and is as is said of
David, 2 Samuel 17.24. as an Angel of God. The breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4.20
a Jedidiah beloved of God, to whom God appeared twice, if ever to Solomon, 1
King. 11.9. in his oak of Mamre, his wonderful preservation at Worcester, in
his miraculous Restoration, without so much as the noise of an ax, yea,
whatsoever was done for his Majesty be force of arms succeeded not, discovered
only and weakened his friends and real followers, which though it was
interpreted as a signal token of his being rejected, yet speaks so loud Gods
wonderful love, in ^aising him to glory and honor, even as the Lord did raise
his own Son, Psalm. 118.21. Christum Dominum, so has he raised Christum Domini,
behold he is our Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 20 asked of God, many prayers and tea^s it
cost some of us, he knows, who searches our hearts, one asked, obtained,
devouted to God: A ^Beon^, once to us a son of mourning, but a Benjamin to his
father, Genesis 35.18. The man of his right hand, whom God has made strong for
himself Psalm. 80.17. and so may he be till time be no more. O what cause have
we to magnify this God, thus creating and reviving our sacred Saveraign who
was buried before under oblivion and obloquies. Let his Majesty as another
Noah preserved in the midst of the waves build an altar of rest unto the Lord.
Thou which have shown him sore and great troubles, quickened him again, and
b^ought him up from the d^pths of the earth, Psalm. 71.20,21. O increase his
greatness, and quicken him on every side.

But we come to the duties we owe to these dignities thus entituled^ thus
autho^ized by God, which are, 1. If by Gods own word and authority they be thus
created gods, then whatsoever ye do for them, or in obedience to them, do all
for conscience sake toward God, and arcessite rivum fideli talis de font
pietatis, as Gregory says, draw the streams of your loyalty to your Prince out
of the fountain of piety toward God, no other obedience pleases God, no man
can be constant in his duty of loyalty to his Sovereign, but he who obeys in
the Lord, and for the Lord. 2 Are they thus Gods on earth, let none presume to
dalie with them, or deal deceatfully in the work concredit by Gods Vicege^ent
on Earth, for as the Prophet Jer. 48.10. Cursed is he that does Gods work
deceitfully or negligently, so is it here, some have been for P^inces, who have
looked still Janus like, with two faces. One (...), another (...); one above the
table, and another under it, And as rowlers of an Boat they never looked to
that ^Aitto^ which they are rolling both with hearts and hands; But them that
turn aside be their crooked way^s will the Lord bring forth among workers of
iniquity, Ps. 125. vlt. Let Your Hearts^ Hands, Fac^s go one way in t^is great
Wo^k before You^ (Lo.) Our Gracious Sovereign now offe^ing the occasion as His
bles^ed Father of Eternal Memory said, when He did cast Himself over in the
Scots protection, now says He, will I read the Ridle of the Scots Loyalty to
give them oppo^tunity to let the World know they mean not what they do, but
what they sa^; Let your Works and your words be one in the Lord, (...). Joh. 6.
5. Not with Ey^-s^rvice as pleasing men but with singlenes^e of heart approving
your heart to God as the Apostle to se^vants, And be ye all Nathanaels
Israelits indeed in whose heart their is no guile. 3. Are they Gods, then has
any Nation changed their Gods even which are no Gods Jer. 6. 10. 11. I may say
that this complaint reaches us well, It was the Glory of this Nation
unparalelled by any other Kingdom under Heaven: Nobis invicta dedere centum
octo proavi, an hundredth and eight KINGS of one Line, and Royal Race, but we
may say we changed our Glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass;
and a living Dog was preferred to a dead Lion, I say supposed to be dead, But
that Lion now lives, and Longa Dics hominem docuit parere Leoni.

A little length of time has taught even those that were most active against
His Sacred Majesty now to bow to Sacred Soveraignity: And O that as a Lion he
may so roar, that he may may make all the Beasts of the Foorest, his heart and
hand foes, to tremble; yet Reign so, that He may have more of the Lion nor of
the Lamb, least he be led like a Lamb to the horns of the Altar, as that
unparalleld Martyr was by that cursed Crew who first began to cry him down as
non Deum, not in his due Line of subordination to God, then as non Regem, He
might not exercise his Royal power, and at last they made him not hominem, not
a Man: And as Your Lordships have begun happily, so go on still to wipe away
that sad reproach put upon us, even by a learned man in Print Salmasius 442.
page which else I would not mention, Presbiterianos perdedisse Regem in Carolo,
independentes trucidisse hominem Carolum; too many things were dona to prejudge
him in his Royal Authority ere these cursed and wicked men robbed him of his
Life. O my Lords vindicat now the Loyalty of this his Aneient and Native
Kingdom, as Your Lordships have begun Laudably to do, so all Posterity shall
call you blessed.

4. Are they Gods, then as the Name of God is Sacred and dreadful, Deuteronomy. 28.
58. So let all be tender of the Lords anointed. The Jews have a conceit that
the sin of that blasphemer who was stoned by a command from the Lord was that
he named that ineffable Name JEHOVAH. It has been the ancient policy of all
subtle Undermyners of Royal Authority still to begin with pasquils and
datraction, so began that cursed imp and unnatural Son Absolon, who began to
challenge his Father and Sovereign before the people, as not appointing any to
hear the complaints of his Subjects, 2 Samuel 15.^3. And that subtle Jeroboam
with his accomplices, in their addresses to Rehoboam to crave the easing them of
his Fathers yoke, as too heavy 1 King. 12. 9. If it be lawful for any to
detract from, or sow disaffection betwixt Princes and people, what will follow,
but when Shimeis tongue is not crubed Sheba's Trumpet shall soon blow loud.
Rebellion is the fruit of tolerated Sedition. Consider that of Solomon, My
Son, fear thou God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
changes ( Shonim) is the Word which comes from ( Shen) the tooth, changes and
seditions begin at the tooth with detracting. The Ancient Romans painted pride
with three Crowns, on the first whereof was written transcendo, they go beyond
the bounds of their station ( Corah) like, they will speak evil of dignities,
despise Dominions. On the second non obedio I will not obey, On the third
perturbo, suitable to the carriage of some who troubled the peace of our
Israel, If any have hatched a seditious Remonstrance against Soveraignity, if
any have wickedly robbed our Prince of His Crown, Authority and Life, into
their secret Let not my soul come, my glory, be not thou joined to their
Assembly. Genesis 49.


Moses forbids all to curse and revile their Gods, Exodus 22. 28. And if we
believe Paul that Interpreter one of a thousand, to speak evil of them, is to
curse them Acts 23. 5. (...). Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
People; and by the Law you know what punishment is due to those that curse
their Father or their Mother, Ex. 21. 17. Pro. 30. 17. And the King is Pater
Patriae, the Father of His Country; Yea it is Registrat in Sacred Scripture
what the Lord did to Miriam, though the Sister of Moses the supreme Magistrate
because of the Ethiopian Woman whom he had married, no sooner is the Word come
out of her mouth, but the Lord is seen at the door of the Tabernacle, in a
cloud Nub. 12. 2 3. And as her Tongue swelled with proud aspersions against the
lawful and Supreme Magistrate, so is she smitten with a deforming and defiling
Leprosy, and seven days was She shut out of the Camp, and not healed till
Moses cried unto the Lord for her, One man may kindle a ^re which all the World
cannot quench, a plague sore may infect a whole Kingdom.

Lastly, If they be thus Gods, then will not that God by whom they Reign,
resent and revenge the injuries done to them, as done to Himself: Surely when
the People began to flight Samuel, the Lord said, They have not rejected Thee,
but Me. And David says, Those that seek my soul to destroy it, will the Lord
bring down to the lower parts of the earth, They shall be a portion to Foxes,
but the King shall rejoice in God. 2 Samuel 1.7. Foxes they are, and such shall
their portion be. Has any Nation delivered their own Gods with their own
hands to burned, surely the very Lycaonians honored Paul and Barnabas much
supposing him to be their Jupiter and M^rcurius Act. 14. The very Heathen man
said when a Bird cha^ed, did flee to him for refuge, I will not deliver thee
into thy enemies hand, since thou have fled to me for a Sanctuary. Two sad
acts and sinful in this kind, which are displeasing to this God by whom they
Reign; I cannot but mention, the delivery of the Sucred Person of the one into
his enemies hands, the denying of the interest of our dread Sovereign, the
other: But in all those Acts, there is a great difference betwixt the Actors,
the Theologs distinguish a threefold Ignorance, the first is natural to all men
alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in them. Ephesians. 4.
18. The next is voluntar, this says Peter willingly they know not, 2 Pet. 3.5.
The third is judicial, while men receive not the truth with Love, but imprison
their knowledge, they have of God he gives them Judicially over (...) to a mind
that can not discern.

Philosophers have a distinction betwixt ignorantia purae negationis and pravae
dispositionis, I shall add a third pravae tentationis, and so a little compare
the denying, the delivering of our Lords Christ in these, Three Apostles were
guilty of denying our dear Lord, Paul who persecuted him, but was received to
mercy because he did it ignorantly: Peter who denied him throw a surprising
tentation, and was pardoned by his threefold confession, daring to affi^m that
he who betrayed him knew all things, knew his heart, loved him. And Judas who
betrayed him for love of money, and in delivering our blessed Lord to Pilat,
three Actors they were. 1. The people that did it ignorantly to please their
leaders: or 2. The Pharisees who did it of envy, because he Ecclipsed his Glory
And Judas again for 30 pieces of Silver. To some we may say as our Lord did,
Father forgive them, they know not what they are doing: But if any through love
to the wedge of Gold have done so to the Lords Anointed Ones, let it be
Mithridat in their meat, Wormwood in their Cup, a gnawing Worm in their
Conscience, a ded Flee in all their Ointment, a moth in their Estate and
Garment. Josh. 7. And let it do them no more good nor the golden wedge did Ahan
which brought the stones about his ears; or Naboths vineyard did to Achab, or
the two Talents to Gehazi. 1 King. 21. 2 King. 5. 27. Who view Scripture aright
shall ^ee that the Lord himself has made such a distinction in that first
insurrection against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 86.2. Corah kindled the fire, the
250 Princes added fuel to it, all Israel warmed themselves by it, yet only the
Incendiaries perish, God and Moses know to make a distinction betwixt the head
of a faction and the train, betwixt Absolon and those that follow him with a
simple heart. 2 Samuel 15. 11. These that have been leaders have ever been
plagued, the other less censured, forgiven, yea prayed for often times.

But against David the Father, the man according to Gods own heart, and Solomon
the Son, the wisest of the sons of men, they were 3 great and Archenemies,
Absolon in the State, Achitop^el in the Counsel and Army, Abiathar in the
Church conspyring with Adonijah, and against all those God write his indgnation
in Characters of blood and contempt: Absolon as a paricide, was exemplarly
lifted up as a spectacle of Gods wrath, and pierced with three Darts by Joab 2 Samuel ^^^ ^4. The first for his sin against God, that when he me minded
Rebellion, he pretendi^ ^^ligion, he is become so religious forsooth he must go
and pay his vows at Hebron. 2 Samuel 15.7. The second D^rt he gave him for his
unna^ural insurrection against his own Father to be a monument of his wrath,
unto all generations to stubborn rebellious and irreligious children. The
third, for his cursed and ^reacherous rebellion against the KING: Ahitophel,
whose Wisdom was such, that he was looked on as an Oracle from God, yet dyed
as a fool that he hanged himself, 2 Samuel 23. 17. Abiathar was deposed by
Solomon, 1 Kings 2. 27. and though ^t be questioned whether he did this as a
Prophet or as King of Israel, yet is it needless to dispute this; Since we
cannot deny this to Kings which is given to every man by the law of Nature, to
defend himself, and in so doing, to kill ere he be killed, if Solomon will not
depose Abiathar, Abiathar will depose Solomon.

Never was there a treasonable and treacherous plot against the Lords Anointed,
but this G^d by whom they reign did signally avenge it when Corah Dathan and
Abiram rose up against Moses, The very earth opens its mouth to devour them at
once. Number. 16. 31. This Element was not used to devour such morsels, it devours
the carcasses of men, but bodies informed with living souls never till now, but
as the Heavens hated to give them breathing in their Air, so the Earth abhorred
and his^ed to bear such a burden as a Traitor to the Supreme Magistrate, to
have them stricken dead instantly on the earth had indeed been fearful, but to
see the earth at once, both their executioner and their grave: O this is
dread^ull and horrible, who can but see how hateful seditious insurrections are
to him who is the God of Order! and can have no hand as author or fautor in any
treacherous rising up, against the suppream Magistrate. He who has said, By me
Princes reign, has said, By me all traitors shall perish: 1 Samuel 10.27. Does
not Scripture design those as the Sons of Belial, who slighted even Saul in his
Government, and Cuchi say; The enemies of my Lord the King and all that rise up
against Thee to do Thee hurt be as that young man is, 2 Samuel 18. 32. When
Absolon was exemplarly lifted up as a perk, to make all awarre le^t they should
split themselves, and all on that same rock of Rebellion.

Those Judges, Rulers, Magistrates, must be so convocat together that they make
up a lawful Congregation, and that in three. 1 Many they must be, of one mind
so far as is possible, Jerusalem is not builded but as a city that is compact
together III Psalm. v. 3. Many; where there is no counsel, the people perish,
but in the multitude of Counselours there is safety Pro. 11 14. where there is
no Counsel the People perish, but in the multitude of Counselors, there is
safety: Ps, 11. 14. Powers dispersed may do some good, but united much more,
yea, these things which are of publict concernment can only be well done by
powers gathered together both for consultation and action, that Politician
Tacitus observed, it as the cause of the old Brittons ruin, Raro in communi
^onsultant, and dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur, The Lord is building up
Israel, when he gathers in one the out casts of Israel, then he heals the
broken in heart and binds up all their wounds, O that ye may be so this day,
of one mind and Judgment not knit together as Sampsons Foxes Jug. 15.4. as
those cursed enemies of Sacred Mona^chy were quod dulcis odor lucri qualibet ex
re, and that Odor was Faetor, even of Rebellion did keep together, but
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment 1 Cor
1.10. So the promise holds out where two or three (...): hearts and vows one,
then whatsoever ye ask shall be given. In that first famous meeting of the
Christian Church they were gathered together (...) Act. 2. 1. For the divisions
of Reuben great sobs of heart, Jug. 5. 15. As the spirit natural is not infused
into the body till it be justly o^ganiz'd, and a^l the members united, So the
Holy Spirit fitting you for Your stations, is not to be expected enjoyed, by
those who are sweetly dwelling together. Ps. 133. 1. There the Lord commands
the blessing, whose Tabernacle is in Salem, Ps 76.2 Be war lest that fire be
kindled among you, which was betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem. Judge.
9.^27.

2. They must be convo^at together by the Authority of the Supreme and lawful
Magistrate only, they may not always conveen at their own pleasur, Parliame^ts
are the same to the politic body, which Physic is to the body natural: What
more hastens Death then continued and daily using of Physic, if this become
our daily food, the poor Patient lives miserably; There was a Parliament in
these Nations which sat so long that they caused distempers and diseases in
stead of curing them, But when lawfully thus called, they may not refuse to
come. Numb. 16 2. 12. Corah refused to come when called by Moses, you know what
come of it, and how Scripture speaks of it. (...), woe unto them, etc. inde 11.
3. They may not come together when not called, als dangerous, when Demetrius
(...) tumultuously gathers his c^afts-men together, no small trouble is in that
con^used meeting, a cry for two hours together, Great is Diana, etc. Yea, most,
not knowing wherefore they come together, but the wise Clerk dissipats them
with an (...), a hurly burly meeting it is, not a (...) as heir except gathered
be Archisynagogues. Acts 19. 23. 41. And such was the meeting of the children
of Is^ael against Moses, when they were ^eady to stone him Ex. 17. 2. 7. This
is conjuratio not congregatio, who thus are Scripturally called child^en of
Meribah, contention for contending with Moses, and of Massah, because they thus
tempted the Lord.

The war^and then for meeting must be from the supreme Magistrate, whether it be
Ecclesiastik or Civil in a Christian and constitute Church, in Ecclesia
constituta and Christiana, because the Supreme Magistrate is custos utriusque
tabulae, God put both the Tables thus into Moses hand twice, Charles the Great
had written on his sword, december Preceptorum custos Carolus, Charles the keeper
of the ten Commandments, and he who is, custos utriusque tabulae, is by that
same Lord appointed to be custos utriusque tubae, the keeper o^ both the
trumpets, therefore Numb. 10.1,2. The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Make thee
two trumpets of silver, and they shall be to thee for the calling of the
Assembly, and for the journeying of the Camp, both for peace and for war, for
the sons of Aaron, and for congregating the children of Israel Church and
State, this was a statute in Israel for ever, if this be not his Royal
Preregative, who is the Supreme Magistrate, he bears the Sword in vain, if any
may meet for things of a public concernment in reference to any of the Tables
without him.

Not Moses only, but Joshua his successor did both convocat and dissolve the
meeting of the 12. Tribes, even for the renewing of the Covenant of God betwixt
him and his people, Josh. 24.1.28. Thus in after ages even when Kingly power
was established, David himself did both for the establishing a place for the
Ark, and for settling the Office^s of the Church, in their courses for the
Tabernacle, 1 Chronicles. 15.4. 16. 43. So it continued in Solomon's days, 2 Chronicles.
5. 2. 5. So Asah 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.

Jehoshaphat thus established Judges from City to City, throughout all Israel,
see 2 Chr. 17.78. 19. 5, 8. And for a Fast, 2 Chr. 20.3. So in Hezekiahs days
who expressly convocat them, the Levits came according to the Commandment of
the King, for the business o^ the Lord, see the Margen, to cleanse the house
of the Lord, 2 Chr. 29. 15. Yet were all the^e Kings approven of God, no
Prophet crying out against this, though Isaiah lifted up his voice like a
Trumpet, to show Israel their sin, yet none of them protested aganist this, or
appealed from it.

After the captivity Nehemiah, Zernbbabel, did so also, Neh. 7.13. So were all
these famous Counsels in the Primitive times convocat, that of Nice, wherein
318. Bishops did sit, totius orbis lumina, by Constantine the great, none for
grace, virtue, holiness, valor for Christ comparable to them, some whereof as
Paphuntius, had lost one of his eyes for Christ, and some of them did suffer
thereafter; So that of Constantinople, (...).

So that at Ephesus, that at Chalcedon be Valentinian and Martian, vide Socr.
lib. 1. c. 9.

3. The end of convocating must be considered, this is causa causarum, but I
must be short, 1. Meet for the things of the Lord, to help the Lord, Judge.
5.23. Let him have the pre-eminence in all, Religion first secured by your
Lordship in Doctrine, Discipline and Government, let him be your first and
last. Beware of sacrilege, Mal. 3.8. if ye desire the Lord to delight in you,
delight you also, as the great Lord does, in the prosperity of his servants,
Psa. 35.37. Be ye healers of the breaches of Zion, uniting the minds and hearts
of all the sons of Levi in one, whose divisions has caused sad thoughts of
heart, thus the loins shall bless you as warmed with the fleece of your
favor, and the hearts of many shall sing for joy.

For securing the Government in our Sacred Sovereign in himself and his
Posterity; And O what thanks deserve your Lordships for what is done herein; Go
on in this till this be fully established, and these loyal acts pasted by your
Lordships in this be as the decrees of the Medes and Persians. Yea, thus it
shall be said of the acts thus enacted by your Lordships, as being compared
with other acts in his prejudice: as that famous Poet comparing Venice and Rome
together, Illa homines dicas, haec posuisse Deos.


And as is said of Augustus in reference to Rome, so of your Lordships in
reference to Scotland, invenistis latericiam O relinquite marmoream, you find
it of Tyle, O build it of Marble.

But I hasten to the third point, Gods presence with you thus congregat is
necessary, consider the danger if he withdraw, Hos. 9.12. Woe also unto you when
I depart from you, and that Isa. 29.19. The wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

Necessary 1. for graces and gifts suitable to your high and honorable
station: Every good gift is not only (...) but (...), not from above only but
from heaven, Jam. 1. 17. Philosophers call the eminent endewments of the mind
(...) and habits: Theology teaches us to call them (...) gifts of free grace,
he is the father of lights, if ye be deep Politicians, wise Statesmen,
gracious Christians, who is your father, 1 Samuel 10. 12. There is a spirit in
man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives understonding, Job 32.7,8. The
spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, Pro. 20.27.

And as for gifts, so for the exercise of their gifts in actu execito, if not
acted, assisted, the best of men is but a Dyall without the clear beams of the
Sun, when the spirit departed from Sampson, he thought to have done as before,
Judge. 16.20. but his wings were clipped.

His presence keeps you in a lively frame for duties, Psalm. 73.26. Luke 24.32.
2. It maks your face to shine so, that none shall be able to withstand you,
Josh. 1.5. 3. No business shall be intricat to you, but with Paul ye shall be
able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. 4. Freeth you from all fears, Isa. 43.3.
Psalm. 23.4. 5. You shall administrat Justice impartially, 2 Chr. 19.6.

How to have it, and intertain it, I dar not insist on, see only that Psalm..
16.7, 1.

4. Point, Gods presence is evidenced in his two acts of standing and judging.
1. Of these jointly: standing as it is opposed to falling, ver. 6. The greatest
of Princes shall be brought down to the dust of death as well as the meanest of
men, even ye who are gods on earth, says Job, and he shall keep the field when
the battle is fought, Job 19.25. Your wisdom and power, honor and preferment,
yea graces and holiness cannot exeem you from that first paenall Statute, Dust
thou art, Genesis 3.19. Hence when that Minion complained to his Master, that he
was envyed by many, and it was replied, unus hic dum tibi sit propitius
Jupiter, tu istos minutulos Deos flocci feceris, he returned wittily, quasi tu
nescias vir magne quam cito emoriantur hum^ni Joves, how soon does humane gods
die?

2. Act, He will judge, gods ye are, but such as must give an account as men
and Christians, 2 Cor 5.10. much more as gods, ye are both dii caduei, and dii
judicandi, two strong bits in the mouths of all to curb pride and abuse of
power; your Lordships must be within a little time stripped of all your earthly
greatness, glory and power, all your Parliamentary and honorable Robs, and
make your bed in the earth, and if your bones be full of the sins of youth,
they shall ly down with you in the dust, Job 20.11. and shall rise with you
when ye come before the La^b on his Throne, Revel. 6. 16.

Now of these two Acts severally, 1. He stands, our great Jehovah is very
attentive to all, his eyes are as a flame of fire, and reaches even to the
center of your hearts; he that planted the ear hears all your words, voices, do
all therefore as vigilantes servi coram vigilante Dousino, saying as to his
slumbering Disciples, Can ye not watch with we one honr, Mat. 26. ^9.

2. Stands wai^ing for your Invi^ation to come in unto you, let it not be your
challe^ge, Mat. 23.37. How often would I, and ye would not. Say not to the
Almighty, Depart from us Job 21.14. but rather as Genesis 24.31. Laban to Eleazar,
Come in thou blessed of the Lord, the rooms are prepared for thee, as thee, as
the Ethiopians le^t empty seats in Judicatories for their gods to sit down with
them: And with David say, Psalm. 101. 2. O when will thou come in unto me? Thus,
The gates of Glory shall be cast open to you, if ye open your everlasting
doors, that the King of Glory may come in, Psalm. 24.

3. Stands as ready to confirm all your Acts, if done as before him, concerning
the works of my hands command ye me, Isa. 45. 11. a strange word, Thou shall
also decree a thing and it shall be established to thee, and his light shall
shine on thy ways, Job 22.26.7.8,9.

4. He stands pro vobis fi mereamini in vos, as Trajan said: Who dar oppose if
he be for you? Korahs cup the dregs of it shall be for them. But if ye do
evil, behold the Judge stands before the door, Jam. 5.9.

PSALM. 82. 1. He judges among the gods.
1. In our Translation it is in the present time, 1. Because all power of
judging given to these gods on earth is derived from him, neither do they judge
but as clothed with authority from him ^itting in his stead, hence Abraham
styles him the Judge of all the earth, Genesis 18. 25. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.

2. Because he sometime judges even in this life, and judgment returns unto
righteousness, and all the upright in heart follow after it, Psalm. 94 15. Psalm.
58. 11. And this day this is verified in your eyes, when these cursed ones who
usurped the power over these Nations are made spectacles of his wrath to men
and Angels, before their pots wherein they in^ended to boil us, could feel the
thorns, he took them away both living and in his wrath, Ps. 58.10,11. The
wicked man shall no^ rost^ Pro. 12.27. God has written in deep characters of
blood his great indignation against these who rose up in rebellion against the
Lords Anointed, to be a caveat to all, for the ages to come.

3. He judges because certainly it shall be so, as Solomon, Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil man is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the children of men is fully set to vanity. Though some escape the sad
stroke of his pu^suing and revenging justice in this life, yet has he
appointed a day, Acts 17. 31. And they do but treasure up wrath to themselves,
Romans 2.4.

And your Lordships shall be judged, 1. de bonis commissis, of all the good
things committed to your trust, by God, or by his Anointed, graces, gifts,
talents of wealth, honor, power, a^thori^y, as that man Luke 16.^. Mat. 25.14.

De bonis omissis, if ye be not eyes to the blind, ignorantem dirigendo, feet
to the lame, impotentem adjuvando, fathers to the poor of the land, indigentt^m
subl^vando, and break the jaws of the wicked, and pull the prey out of his
mouth; oppressores conterendo, de malis commissis if any guilty Achan go free,
or an innocent Naboth be condemned: He that justifies the wicked, P^ov. 17.15.
de malis permissis, if any evil fall out in the land, which it was in your
power to have prevented, as Eli was for his too great indulgence to his
children, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Yet Heb. it is in futuro jisp^t. God in his admirable patience gives gives all
men time to judge themselves, and that with a promise, 1 Cor. 11.31. Let it not
be said of you (...) 2.24. O let your Lordships beware of unrighteous
judgment, justice is holden out, as blind, even with a just balance and a
sword: You shall have no respect of persons in Judgemen^ (...). 1. 27. Act.
10.33. no the poor in his cause, Exodus 23.2,3. Away with bribes from the rich,
^xod. 23.8. If golden pillules can cure the desperate and deadly disease of
treason, no rich man needs he^eafter fear to be treacherous to his King, or to
his Country. That Pythian Oracle said to Philip (...), fight with silver
Lances and you shall overcome all, thus you shall highly provoke God, For the
iniquity of his covetousness I was wrot^, Is. 57.17. and for this too much and
too long he has hid his face from us; thus you shall make your ^elves
contemptible in their eyes from whom ye receive these bribes, as Jugurtha for
all his fratricide, escaping looking back to Rome, said with disdain omnia
Romae sunt vaenalia, urbis ipsa venalis, si emptorem invenerit: Let us not be
double dyed with these sca^let sins. O ^i^e up with the zeal of Phineas, Psalm.
106.30. for Numb. 35.33. Justice is two ways wrested, 1. When the sweet wine
of Justice through tedious delays becomes sour vinegar. 2. If it become
wo^mwood and Justice be perverted. O arise and breath life into the languishing
Laws of this withering N^tion, now some years through want of administration of
Justice, and establishing the Judicatories of the Land.

In the midst he judges. The righteous Judge desires as your Center to have
you all united to him, in him, and among your selves, he thus came in after his
Resurrection twice unto his Disciples, Joh. 20,19.26. By concord small things
grow great, by discord great things grow small.

2. In the midst of every one of you God judges every day, he keeps a Court in
your consciences, if ye do wrest Judgment, this Deputy in your inward parts,
the minds of you, shall rise up as a witness to give Testimony, as a Party to
accuse, as a Judge to pass sentence, this one in whom ye now trust, shall
judge you, there is no peace says my God to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. A hell
within them till they fall in a hell without them, and can make any man as
Pashur. was, Magormissabib, terror round about, Jer. 20 4. Let this be your
brazen wall in all your ways and acts, nil conscire sibi: otherwise caeco
verbere tundit, it breaks it, bruises you as in a mortar.

3. He judges in the midst imports his dominium plenum, full dominion, Psalm.
110.3. over you all, in all your souls, bodies and estates, as when it is said
media dominantur in Urbe, it is a full conquesse when the heart of the Town is
possessed.

2. It imports a dominium securum, without all fear from any, as the Shunamite
says, I dwell in the midst of my people, 2 King. 4.13. Luke 4.30. So Gods
judging is such that it is i^resistible, Isai. 27.4. unconquerable.

3. A dominion aeternum, when this Judge has his sheep on his right hand, and
the goats on his left hand. So I close with an exhortation to your Lordships.

1. To your Grace, Set this God as thus judging before you; be faithful to the
most hie God in this your trust, endeavor to have more and more his grace in
you, (...), soul-sanctifying, soul-refreshing and saving grace, whereof Paul
Romans 1.5. grace and Apostleship, grace with your Commission, and (...), grace
with you, assisting grace, 1 Cor. 15.9. So your Grace shall have a double guard
peculiar to his own. The peace of God passing understanding which active (...)
shall guard your heart, Phil. 4.7. and the power of God ^or you passive, ye
shall be (...), guarded by the power of God, surer then any Lifeguard, 1 Pet.
1.5.

2. Study loyalty to your Sac^ed Master, he an Nathaniel, a true Israelite,
etc. and your Grace shall be a Gamaliel, God shall be to you as to Abraham,
your great reward, and keep many from fighting against God in his Anointed,
Acts 5.39. according to his counsel.

And to Your Noble and Honorable Lordships^: remember this, God will sit when
You shall all stand, be unpartiall in all Your actings, let not feed or favor,
love or hatred byasse You in Judgment, You are as Gods, to Men be Ye Gods as
God is holy, thri^e holy. Is. 6. 2. In his Es^ence, Acts, Decrees, Attendants,
so ought Ye to be. 1 Personally holy, For without holiness Heb. 12. 14. in
your actings. Ps. 101. 3. Set no wicked thing before you, in Your followers,
the sins of Rulers are a rule for sinning to many: Regis ad exemplum etc. Let
His Sacred Majesty read the riddle of Your Loyalty: The poor land the reality
of Your piety and pity: that of His Majesty it may be said, (by Your help) as
of Solomon, he sat on the Throne of the Lord in stead of his Father. 1 Chr.
29. 23. Thus go on still in the course of Justice as the Sun in the Zodiac,
running your race with Joy, thus the Good shall bless You, the poor pray for
You Your own hear^ shall cheer you, the great God of Heaven shall reward you,
Your gracious and Sacred Sovereign shall call You a blessed and a healing
Parliament, and all posterity shall speak t^ Your praise and bless God for You.

And all ye Religious and Judicious hearers, fear God and the King, as Solomon
Pro. 24.21. he cannot fear God by whom he Reigns, who fears not the King
given us of God in love, and he that is void of the invisible God, can neither
love nor fear his Deputy on earth; if any wrong his Majesty, detracting, sowing
sedition or disaffection betwixt him and his people, he but shortens or
embitters his own life, by stopping the breath of his nostrils the Anointed of
the Lord, and he puts out his own c^ndle, who qnencheth the light of Israel,
these titles being given him of the Lord, Lam. 4.20. 2 Samuel 21.17. Meddle not
therefore with them that are given to changes, and bless God for this
wonderful change and Revolution, praying heartily it may be without change
till time shall be changed into Eternity, and this mortal put on immortality.
To this God of all these gods, the King of kings, who remains the same for
ever, be praise, honor and glory for ever,

Amen.
FINIS

