Synopsis of Uocal Music: CONTAINING The Rudiments of Singing Rightly any
Harmonical Song, DELIVERED In a Method so Solid, Short and Plain, that this ART
may now be Learned more Exactly, Speedily and Easily, than ever heretofore.

Whereunto are Added Several PSALMS and SONGS of Three Parts.

COMPOSED BY English and Italian Authors for the benefit of young Beginners.

By A. B. Philo-Mus.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey, 1680.

JOHN LEVER, Bookseller, Stationer and Printseller, at Little Moorgate, near
Moorfields.

TO ALL Ingenious Lovers of MUSIC.
ALthough in this Age Books of all sorts do abound, yet in some Cases there
will be still need of writing more. When many Mysteries do remain still
undiscovered, no man will doubt, but it is the duty of any Ingenious Lover of a
Science, to bring the Truth to Light according to his utmost ability. If any
will say, shall we be wise than our Forefathers, to endeavor the discovery of
that which they could never find out? The Answer is clear, Truth is the
Daughter of Time. A Pigmy upon a Giants shoulder may see farther than the Giant
himself. Even so, one enjoying the Labors of those, that have gone before, may
see as far as they did, and by wading into further depths, may go farther then
they, Upon this account it does more peculiarly belong to every Ingenious Lover
of an Art or Science, to continue the work, where they (...) it, to add to the
stock of knowledge to be clear, where they were confused, to turn into the way,
where they went out, and to bring those things to light, that have been hidden
from them, If they further urge, that they are come to the very Zenith and top
of all kind of Learning, and that they know already all what they need to know:
daily experience will show the contrary, to wit, that many things are reserved
for the industry and diligence of the latter times, and that there will be just
occasion of writing new Books, as long as new matter remains to be published to
the World. Especially is this more evident in the excellent Art and Science of
Music, which transcendeth all others of its rank, because of its profound
mysteries, which have many times put the most learned Professors thereof into
great admiration. Therefore in this latter Age the most learned and renowned
Alstedius, Des Carts, and Kircherus, have not thought it any disparagement to
make a further, clearer and fuller Discovery, both of the Theorical and
Practical Parts of this Noble Science, showing such a way of an improvement
thereof, that those things which are concealed, may be fully discovered; those
which are imperfect, completed; and those which are doubtful, cleared by
evident demonstration. But because the Operation and Experience of the
Practical Part of Composing, require the study and expense of many years, and
so many excellent Tunes for Air, Variety, and Substance are at present Composed
by diverse eminent Authors, amongst several Nations: to condescend to the
meanest Capacity of Beginners, who intend only to spend but a small portion of
time, and to reap the benefit of the Works of those eminent Composers, there
are in this Treatise delivered so Solid, Short and Plain Principles and Rules,
that whosoever desires to learn to Sing any composed harmonical Song, may now
more exactly, speedily and easily, than ever heretofore attain thereunto. For,
besides the Principles and Rules formerly published by diverse other Professors
of this Art, here are now delivered and demonstrated out of the foresaid famous
Authors, the exact division of all the space, which any Sound can pass, into
certain degrees, whereof the Scale of Music does consist, and the admirable
Order of those degrees, their proportional dimensions or intervals, and also
the exact agreeableness of the Cliffs and Syllables with them, and the
generation of a Diapason or Eighth in b flat: by which means the very beginners
will be not only delivered of that toilsome and troublesome torture of mutation
of voices or syllables, which has often caused many of them to despair of ever
coming to any perfection; but they will also be very much enlightened, that they
may know the transcendent virtue and excellency, that is comprehended in the
due proportion of Musical Sounds, and gain a full satisfaction unto their
Reason as well as to their Sense. Furthermore here are added twelve most usual
Tunes of Psalms in Three Parts, Treble, Mean, and Bass; then twelve selected
Tunes of diverse English Authors, also in Three Parts; two Trebles and a Bass,
with twelve Selected Catches of three Voices; lastly fourteen Italian Tunes
composed by Giovanni Giacomo Castoldi de Carrivaggio, also in Three Parts, two
Trebles and a Bass, whereby beginners will have a sufficient store of Tunes to
exercise themselves by degrees, till they going on further to more difficult
Songs at length may come to some perfection, and be able to sing at the first
sight any Harmonical Song to their own delightful Divertisement from their more
serious Employments. No nobler and more pleasant Satisfaction can be afforded
both to Sense and Mind than by this Art, which is known to none but to their
own trial and experience, and by how much the more one exercises himself
herein, and becomes the more skilful, he will find and enjoy the more delight
and pleasure. For the improvement then of all ingenious Lovers, these Rules are
thus contrived, the certainty whereof has been experienced by diverse, and may
likewise be further known unto others, if they please to try, understand and
use them. Now not being willing to weary the Readers Patience, I shall only
add, that if any shall (as I doubt not but they will) reap benefit hereby, I
receive the end of my desires, and so rest

Your Servant for the common good, A. B.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Honoratissimo Domino, D. GUILIELMO,
Providentia Divina, Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Totius Angliae Primati ac
Metropolitano, Regiae Majestati a Sanctioribus Consiliis.
VENERANDE VIR,
Vltio ne vertatur, quod praefulgentis Tui Nominis minio, hujusce libelli mei
frontispicium exornare non erubescam. Etenim licet nostris, quas victuras
speramus, chartis, ceu Memoriae Aris, ea praefigamus nomina, quae studemus ad
seram posteritatem transmittere, illos mitati, qui chara sibi nomina ab
interitu, quantum pote est, vindicaturi, illa Palatiorum marmoribus insculpunt;
nunc tamen e contrario, huic libello e musei umbra ad publicum gestianti,
Lucem, quam a se non habet, ab illustri Tui Nominis sole foenerari studeo. Hoc
deinde Numine Tutelari, a Zoilorum morsibus and Lemorum censuris iniquis,
quicquid isthuc est opusculi, immune praestandum plane confido: Tuumque Nomen
Venerandum in hoc Vestibulo ei futurum, quod aiunt Romae in quodam sacello
fuisse quondam Herculis clavam, quae suo nidore canibus and muscis illud
Delubrum maccessum reddebat. Denique hosce meos labores Tuae, Rev. Dign.
inscribendo satius duxi, meum nomen inter illos profiteri, quibus eximiae Tuae
Virtutes venerationi simul sunt and admirationi, and quos de Tuo Singulari
Amore and Favore, praesertim erga literarum meliorum cultor^s perpetim gloriari
juvat. Concede, Vir Sum, ut hoc tenui munusculo, cum in praesentiarum nil Te
dignius ad manus habeam, in grati and Tibi devoti animi monimentum, Tuis in me
litem meritis; idque gratioso at benigno suscipe vultu, non tam aestimato rei
oblatae pretio, quam humillimo affectu offerentis, Tibi mansuri, quam diu hic
Spiritus hos regit artus Devotissimi and Addictissimi: and donec id Solenniori
modo contestandi mihi coelitus affulgeat occasio, Deum Opt. Max. indesinenter
venerabor, ut Te quam diutissima Ecclesiae and Rei publicae superstitem esse
jubeat, Tibique affatum benedicere pergat. Londini, e museo meo.

Pride. Call. December. Anno M D CLXXX. Amplissimae Dignitatis Tuae Devotissimus
and Obsequentissimus Cultor, A. B.

Synopsis of Uocal Music.
CHAP. I. Of Vocal Music in general.
VOcal Music is an Art of expressing rightly things by Voice, for the sweet
moving of the affections and the mind.

It is an Art, be^^use it is busied about an object, which can be made, and is
meet only for every Art.

For the formal object of it is Singing, wherein it directs the understanding.

Its form is a right expression of things by voice, either monodically in a
simple melody, or Symphonially in a compounded.

The end and effect of it is, a sweet moving of the affections and the mind.
For exhilarating the animal spirits, it moderateth gratefully the affections,
and thus penetrateth the interior of the mind, which it most pleasantly does
affect.

The means by which it is acquired are a frequent exercising of the voice, as
well according to certain signs by which vocal melodies are represented, as
according to the direction, either of a well tuned Instrument, or rather of an
experienced Master.

The signs whereby vocal melodies are represented, are either of the melodies
themselves, or of the Ornaments of them.

Signs of melodies themselves are either of sounds, or of things.

The signs of Sounds are either of the length, or of the thickness, or of the
breadth of a sound.

Signs of the length of sounds do note their duration. And are either of the
length of sounds it self, or of the touch, by which the length of sounds is
measured.

The signs of the length of sounds it self, are either of the length of
positive or present sounds, or of the length of privative or absent sounds.

Signs of the length of positive or present Sounds, are either primary or
Secondary.

CHAP. II. Of the Notes.
THE Primary signs of the length of positive or present sounds are the Notes.

Notes are signs which do note the duration of sounds; and are either whole or
broken.

Whole Notes do note the duration of whole times. And art either

Of Eight times, Which are called, Large. And are thus marked. ^ Four times,
Long. ^ Two times, Breves. ^ One time. Semibreves. ^

Broken Notes do note the duration of sounds of parts of a time. And are either

Of the Second Part of a time which are called Minims, And are thus marked. ^
Fourth Crotchets, ^ Eighth Quavers, ^ Sixteenth Semiquavers, ^ Two and
thirtieth. Demiquavers, ^

CHAP. III. Of the Pricks.
The Secundary Signs of the length of positive or present sounds are the
Pricks. Pricks are Signs which do augment by the half part every Note after
which they are placed. Therefore

A Large of the length of Eight times thus pricked ^ is of the length of Twelve
times. Long Four times ^ Six times. Breve Two times ^ Three times. Semibreve
One time ^ One time and an half. Minim Half a time ^ An half time and a 4th.
part. Crotchet The fourth part of a time ^ A fourth and an eighth part. Quaver
The eight part of a time ^ An eighth and a sixteenth part.

CHAP. IV. Of the Pauses.
SIgns of the length of privative or absent sounds are the pauses or rests.
Pauses are signs which do note the duration of silences; and are either of
whole times, or of parts of a time.

Pauses of whole times are either of Eight times. Four times. Two times. One
time.

Marked thus. ^

Pauses of parts of a time are either of Half a time. The fourth part of a
time. The eighth part of a time. The sixteenth part of a time.

Marked thus. ^

CHAP. V. Of the Signs of the Common Time.
SIgns of the tact, touch or time, are by which the length of all Sounds, Notes
and Pauses are measured and are either primary or secondary.

The primary Signs of the Time are diverse, according to the diversity of the
Time.

Time is a successive motion, depression and elevation, fall and rise of the
hand, by which the length of all Sounds, Notes and Pauses is measured: and is
either dupla usually called common, or tripla, or sesquiatera.

The Common Time is whose parts, depression and elevation are equal, or even
long, and by which all Notes and Pauses, according to their proper value are
measured. And is either

Slower but less usual, marked with an half circle thus -- ^ Swifter and most
usual, marked with an half circle cut with a perpendicular line thus -- ^
CHAP. VI. Of the slower Triple.
TRiple Time is whose parts are unequal, the depression of the hand twice as
long as the elevation and by which Notes and Pauses are measured, not according
to their proper value, but according to a certain proportion: and is either
slower, or swifter, or swifteste.

The Slower Triple consists of three Semibreves, or equivalent Notes, and is
marked with the numbers 3 and 1, the former being perpendicularly placed above
the latter, because it consists of three Notes of one Time, according to the
common Time. As in Example ^

A Breve serving in respect of his latter half part for the elevation of the
hand is commonly blacked, and also for the most part his immediately anteceding
Note. As ^

Two or more Breves, the one following immediately the other, are often signed
without Pricks or equivalent Notes for a whole time, because then the one
perfecteth the other. As ^

The Pauses of this Triple are thus measured. Pauses according to the Common
Time of Eight times, Four times, Two times, Two of one time, One time. ^ are in
this triple of Four times, Two times, One time, Depression of the hand,
Elevation of the hand.

CHAP. VII. Of the Swifter Triple.
THE Swifter Triple consists of three Minims or equivalent Notes, and is
marked with the numbers 3 and 2, the former being perpendicularly placed above
the latter, because it consists of three Notes of half a time, according to
the Common Time. As ^

A Semibreve serving in respect of his latter half part, for the elevation of
the hand, is for the most part blacked, with his immediately anteceding Note:
as also a Breve, serving in respect of his fourth or last part, for the
depression of the hand. As ^

Two or more Semibreves also Semibreves and Breves, the one following
immediately the other are often signed without Pricks or equivalent Notes, as
then the one perfecteth the other, and consequently a Semibreve is of one, and
a Breve of two times. As ^

The Pauses of this Triple of whole times are like to the Pauses of the Common
Time, but of parts of a Time are differing.

Pauses according to the Common Time of Eight times, Four times, Two times, One
time, Two half times, One half time, a Fourth part of a time. ^

Are in this Triple of Eight times, Four times, Two times, One time, Depression
of the hand, Elevation, A Sixth part of Time,

CHAP. VIII. Of the Swiftest Triple.
THE Swiftest Triple consists of three Crotchets, or equivalent Notes, and is
marked with the numbers 3 and 4, the former being perpendicularly placed above
the latter, because it consists of three Notes of the fourth part of a Time,
according to the Common Time. As ^

A Minim in this Triple, serving either for the depression or for the elevation
of the hand, is signed, either after his usual manner: As ^

Or is changed into a Semibreve blacked: as ^

The Pauses of this Triple of Whole Times, are like to the Pauses of the Common
Time, but of parts of a Time are differing.

Pauses according to the Common Time of 8 times, 4 times, 2 times, 1 time, 2
fourth parts of a time, 1 fourth part of a time, an 8 part of a time. ^

Are in this Triple of 8 times, 4 times, 2 times, 1 time, depression of the
hand, elevation of the hand, the sixth part of a time.

CHAP. IX. Of the slower Sesquial' e.
SEsquialtre time is whose parts, the depression and elevation of the hand are
equal, or even long, as in Common Time, yet by whom Notes and Pauses are
measured, not according to their proper value, as in Common Time, but according
to a certain proportion as in Triple: And is either Slower, Swifter, or
Swiftest.

The Slower Sesquialtre consists of six Crotchets or equivalent Notes, and is
therefore marked with the numbers 6 and 4, the former being perpendicularly
placed above the latter: Asin Example, ^

The Pauses of this Sesquialtre of whole times, are like to the Pauses of the
Common Time, but of parts of a Time are differing.

Pauses according to the Common Time, of Half a Time, two fourth parts of a
Time, one fourth part of a time, an eighth part of a time. ^

Are in this Sesquialtre of Half a Time, two sixth parts of a Time, one sixth
part of a Time, a twelfth part of a Time.

CHAP. X. Of the Swifter Sesquialtre.
THE Swifter Sesquialtre consists of six Quavers, or equivalent Notes, and is
therefore marked with the numbers 6 and 8, the former being perpindicularly
placed above the latter. As in Example ^

The Pauses of this Sesquialtre of whole times are like to the Pauses of the
Common Time, but of parts of a time are differing.

Pauses according to the Common Time of Half a Time, two fourth parts of a
Time, one fourth part of a Time, an eighth part of a Time. ^

Are in this Sesquialtre of Half a Time, two eight parts of a Time, one eighth
part of a Time, one sixteenth part of a Time.

CHAP. XI. Of the Swiftest Sesquialtre.
THE Swiftest Sequialtre consists of twelve Quavers or equivaleut Notes, and
is therefore marked with the numbers 12 and 8, the former being perpendicularly
placed above the latter. As in Example ^

The Pauses of this Sesquialtre of Whole Times are like to the Pauses of the
Common Time, but of parts of a Time are differing.

Pauses according to the Common Time of Half a time, the fourth part of a time,
the eighth part of a time, two eight parts of a time. ^

Are in this Sesquialtre of Half a Time, three twelfth parts of a Time, one
twelfth part of a time, two twelfth parts of a Time.

The secondary signs of the Tact or Time are certain words used by the
Italians, and afterward also of others, to wit, Adagio, and Presto,
fignifying, that such a part of a Song where Adagio is written, is to be Sung
slower, and where Presto, swifter.

CHAP. XII. Of the Systems.
THE signs of the thickness of sounds do note their gravity and acuteness, or
profundity and altitude. And are either containing, or contained.

The containing signs are either primary, or secundary.

The primary containing signs are the Systemes, which by their five joined
parallel lines, and spaces between them whereof they do consist, assign and
afford to the Cliffs their due higher or lower places: according to this Type. ^

But if any Notes of a Melody rise higher or fall lower, exceeding this Systeme
of five lines above or below, then there are drawn more small lines, that serve
for the placing of them: as appears in this Type.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Bars, and Repeats.
THE secondary containing signs are either Limiting, or Repeating.

The Limiting signs are the Bars which are perpendicular lines, and are either
single, measuring the distances of one or more times of a Song; or double,
marking the strains or stanza's of it: As in Example. ^

The repeating signs are the Repeats, which signify that a part of a Song must
be sung over again. And are either of a General part of a Song thus signed, ^

Or of a particular part of it over against a Note thus marked. ^

CHAP. XIV. Of the Cliffs.
THE contained signs of the thickness of a Sound, are they which in the
Systemes are placed. And are either Primary, or Secondary.

The primary contained signs are either principal, or less principal.

The principal contained signs are which chiefly do note the profundity and
altitude of a Sound. And are either Visible, or Audible.

The Visible signs of the thickness of Sounds are the Cliffs or Keys, which
being placed in the Systemes, do represent by their Notes the just Altitude and
Profundity of every Sound. And are according to the seven Degrees of the Scale
of Music, the first seven letters of the Alphabet, as A, B, C, D, E, F, and G;
whereof four, as B, C, D, and E, are never noted, but understood and known by
those three signed, as

G Marked thus. ^ C ^ F ^

These three are distant the one from the other by a fifth, and afford a double
use, to wit, in respect of voices, and in respect of Notes.

CHAP. XV. Of the Use of Cliffs in respect of Voices.
IN respect of voices, the Cliffs discern the voices distinctly the one from
the other. For the Cliff F, is proper to the Bass, and signifies being placed
on the fifth line a Lower Bass, on the fourth a Common, on the third an Higher.
^

The Cliff C is for Tenor, Mean, and Lower Treble, and signifies being placed
on the fouth line a Tenor, on the third a Mean, on the second an Higher Mean,
on the first a Lower Treble. ^

The Cliff G is proper for the Treble, and signifies, being placed on the
third line a Lower Treble, on the second a Common, on the first an Higher. ^

CHAP. XVI. Of the Use of Cliffs in respect of Notes.
IN respect of the Notes, the Cliffs give to all Notes, in regard of their
thickness their names, and make that the understood, or not signed Cliffs do
that same.

The Cliff G names all Notes that stand upon that line upon which it is
placed: in B sharp, that is, when the Cliff B, is not with a little round b
marked -- Sol. B flat, that is, when the Cliff B, is with a little round b
marked -- Re.


The Cliff C names them in B sharp -- Vt. B moll -- Sol.


The Cliff F names them in B sharp -- Fa. B moll -- Vt.


CHAP. XVII. Of the Syllables.
THE audible signs of the thickness of Sounds are certain Syllables every where
amongst Musicians received, that beginners may by the help of them easily learn
to discern exactly the just altitude and profundity of every Sound. And are in
number seven, as Vt, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La, and Ci.

The former first six of these Syllables are said to be invented, almost seven
hundred years ago, by Guido Arerinus otherwise in Music well enough skilled,
out of this Hymn of St. John.

Ut queant laxis,
Mira gestorum,
Solve polluti,
Resonare fibris,
Famuli tuorum,
Labii reatum.
Sancte Johannes.
But because they are not sufficient to express the seven degrees of the Scale
of Music, many have had need of diverse mutations of them, which (as Experience
witnesses) has been to Learners, not only a troublesome torture in learning,
but also no little hinderance in their going forwards.

Therefore later Musicians have added to the six Syllables the seventh Ci, that
their number might answer exactly to the seven degrees contained in the Scale
of Music, and no mutation might be any more required.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Scale of Music.
THE Scale of Music is an order of seven degrees, distant one from another by
just intervals, according to which every sound in ascending and descending is
to be directed.

The degrees of it are certain limits, by which all the space which a sound can
pass, is divided so exactly in certain intervals, that a sound may by them be
lifted up, or pressed down, in a due proportion, one following another.

And these degrees can be by nature neither more nor less in number: moreover,
neither can they differ one from another by greater or lesser intervals.

For all the space of sounds is first of all by Nature itself divided into
consonancies, whereof every one is called an Eighth, or commonly a Diapason.

Because Nature it self shows most evidentiy this division in a Whistle,
which being blown with a stronger blast than usually, gives immediately a
sound higher by an eighth.

And this sound, as the higher term of the eighth, although it in respect of
its altitude differs from the graver or profounder term of that eighth
therein, that it is only its half part, because it is twice contained in it,
like a shorter string in a longer, which is very well known by experiment in a
monochord; and that it is weaker, because it is moved of a graver, as of a
stronger, which appears by the strings of a Lute, whereof if any graver is
stricken, that which is by an eighth acuter, immediately trembles and
sounds: yet in respect of its consonancy it does equisonate with it after the
manner of an unison, which also most evidently appears out of the singing of
a Song of one voice made by two singers, who can sing that same altogether from
the beginning to the end, without any dissonancy, yet the one by an eigth
higher than the other.

The eighth therefore is the most perfect consonancy, differing from an unison
only therein, that in its terms is the most simple convenience diverse, as
between the whole and half.

The same reason is of an eighth once compounded, commonly called a
disdiapason, a double eighth, or fifteenth; and of a twice compounded, which is
called a trisdiapason, a triple eighth or two and twentieth; and also of a
thrice compounded called a tetradiapason, a quadrula eighth, or nine and
twentieth, whereof the one can in no way differ from the other.

Afterward an eighth is divided into a fifth, and its residue a fourth: this
is commonly called a diatessaron, that a diapente.

A fifth or diapente is very easily discerned by hearing, because its terms
differ between themselves more than they of an eighth, and less than they of a
third or ditone, and therefore it sounds to the hearing not so flatly as an
eighth, nor so sharply as a ditone, but most pleasantly of all. For that object
is most pleasant to sense, which in its receiving, neither by its easiness
wholly fills the desire of sense, nor by its difficulty does weary it:
because as too much easiness breeds fullness and loathing, so too much
difficulty trouble and weariness.

And this fifth is the most perfect amongst consonancies next to the eighth,
because it is by it self generated out of the division of an eight, which is
certainly known by experiment in the strings of a Lute, that if any of them be
stricken, that the strength of that very sound, immediately strikes all the
strings, which are acuter by any kind of a fifth.

After that a fifth is divided into a greater third, and its residue a lesser
third: this is commonly called a Semiditone, that a Ditone.

This greater third or Ditone is also very easily discerned by hearing, because
it consists in a manifold proportion, consonating with the terms, not only of
an eighth, but also of a fifth, and is therefore, next to the fifth, a
consonancy so perfect, that it, as experience witnesses, effects upon the
strings of a Lute a trembling, which may be perceived not only by seeing but
also by hearing.

Besides, the remaining Semiditone is divided into a greater Semitone, and a
greater tone, that the acuter term of the greater Semitone may consonate with
the acuter term of the eighth, after the manner of a fifth.

Further this fifth generated out of the division of the foresaid Semiditone,
is also divided into a Ditone and its residue a Semiditone, whose Ditone's
acuter term does constitute the sixth degree in an eighth.

Moreover the Ditone of the first divided fifth, is divided into a lesser and a
greater tone, that the acuter term of this lesser tone may consonate with the
acuter term of the sixth, after the manner of a fifth.

Lastly the Semiditone betwixt the sixth an eighth is divided into a greater
tone and greater Semitone, that the acuter term of this grater tone may
constitute a fifth, with the acuter term of the first Ditone.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Order of the Generation of the Degrees.
THE seven Degrees of the Scale of Music are then generated after this order.

1. The first Degree arises out of the division of all the space of Sounds
into eighths, and is the graver term of an eighth, as the acuter term of that
same eighth is likewise the first Degree of the next following acuter eighth.

2. The fifth Degree arises out of the division of an eighth into a fifth, and
its residue fourth, and is the acuter term of that fifth.

3. The third Degree arises out of the division of a fifth into a Ditone, and
its remaining Semiditone, and as the acuter term of that Ditone.

4. The fourth Degree arises out of the division of the Semiditone into a
greater Semitone and a greater Tone, and is the acuter term of that greater
Semitone, which makes a fifth with the acuter term of the eighth.

5. The sixth Degree arises out of the division of this foresaid fifth into a
Ditone and Semiditone, and is the acuter term of that Ditone.

6. The second Degree arises out of the division of the Ditone of the former
fifth into a lesser and greater Tone, and is the term of that lesser Tone, and
makes a fifth with the acuter term of the sixth.

7. The seventh Degree arises out of the division of the latter Semiditone
into a greater Tone and a greater Semitone, and is the acuter term of that
greater Tone, and makes a fifth with the acuter term of the former Ditone.

Therefore an eighth is divided according to the successive order of these
Degrees into a fifth and its residue a fourth; that fifth into a Ditone and a
Semiditone; the Ditone into a lesser and greater Tone; the Semiditone into a
greater Semitone and a greater Tone; that remaining sourth into a lesser Tone
and a Semiditone; that Semiditone into a greater Tone and a greater Semitone.

CHAP. XX. Of the Intervals of the Degrees.
AND these Degrees are distant the one from the other by these Tones or
Intervals. For a Tone is a space, distance, or interval between two sounds, a
graver and an acuter.

Between the first and second Degree is a lesser Tone, containing nine comma's:
between the second and the third is a greater Tone, exceeding the lesser by its
tenth part, which tenth part is commonly called a Comma; between the third and
fourth is an half greater Tone, commonly called a greater Semitone; between the
fourth and fifth is a greater Tone of ten Comma's; between the fifth and sixth
is a lesser Tone of nine Comma's; between the sixth and seventh is a greater
Tone of ten Comma's; between the seventh and the first of the next following
acuter eighth is a greater Semitone of five Comma's.

So that Nature it self demonstrateth it most manifestly that there can be in
the Scale of Music neither more nor less degrees in number than seven:
moreover that they cannot be distant the one from the other by greater or
lesser intervals.

That all these things may appear more evidently, so is the successive division
of all the space of sounds, and also the Scale of Music, together with its
degrees and intervals, rolled into a Circle, and represented in the following
Figure.



CHAP. XXI. Of the agreeableness of the Cliffs and Syllables with the Degrees
of the Scale of Music.
TO discem rightly these seven Degrees of the Scale of Music, are commonly
used the first seven letters of the Alphabet, called Cliffs (as above is said
Chap. 14.) which by their Notes do show before ones Eyes, the just altitude and
profundity of the sound of every Degree.

And because the Cliff b, being by nature sharp, can be changed into a flat, as
afterward shall be demonstrated, so is the first Degree of an eighth
represented by the Cliff c, the second by d, the third by e, the fourth by f,
the fifth by g, the sixth by a, and the seventh by b: which seventh Degree,
because it is the acuter term of a greater Tone, it makes a sharp sound, and
therefore that Cliss b is called b sharp, and the Scale marked with that b, the
Scale of b sharp, and also a Song contained in that Scale, a Song in b sharp.

Now reason it self also tells, that like as there be seven Cliffs showing
the just altitude and profundity of the sounds of every Degree to the sight,
that there also must be used seven voices or syllables, which also may fitly
represent the same altitude and profundity of the Sounds to the hearing.

And there can be no fitter syllables than the six of the Ancients, now by long
use every where received, if to them be added the seventh, to wit, ci, because
they make by their letters a sound convenient enough.

For ut and fa afford a flat and esseminate sound; re, sol, and la, a natural
and middle; but mi and ci a sharp and man-like.

Ut agrees with the first Degree, because this Degree is distant from the
seventh Degree of the graver eighth by a greater Semitone, which therefore also
makes a flat sound.

Re answers the second Degree, because this Degree is distant from the first
by a lesser Tone, and therefore also affords a natural and middle sound.

Mi is like to the third Degree, because this Degree is distant from the second
by a greater Tone, and therefore also emitteth a sharp and man-like sound.

Fa agrees with the fourth Degree, because this Degree is distant from the
third by a greater Semitone, and therefore also makes an effeminate and flat
sound.

Sol answers to the fifth Degree, because this Degree is distant from the
fourth, indeed by a greater Tone, but moveable into a lesser, as afterward
shall be demonstrated, when b flat shall be treated of, and therefore also
affords a natural or middle sound.

La is like to the sixth Degree, because this Degree is distant from the fifth
by a lesser Tone, and therefore also gives a natural and middle sound.

Lastly Ci does agree with the seventh Degree, because this Degree is distant
from the sixth by a greater Tone, and therefore also makes a sharp and
man-like sound.

By these voices or syllables is then the just altitude and profundity of the
sounds of every degree also conveniently enough represented to the hearing.

CHAP. XXII. Of the generation of an Eighth in b flat.
FUrther because there be in an Eighth two greater Semitones, and the acuter
term of a greater Semitone be the first Degree of an Eighth, so must then be
considered, how an Eighth with every one of his Degrees is exactly to be made
out of the acuter term of the latter greater Semitone.

The first Degree of that Eighth let be the acuter term of that latter greater
Semitone, to wit, the fourth Degree of the former Eighth.

The second Degree of an Eighth should be distant from the first by a lesser
Tone, and the thiid from the second by a greater, but the fifth Degree of the
first Eight is distant from the fourth by a greater Tone, and the sixth from
the fifth by a lesser Tone, therefore there must be made a fraction, which is
the difference of a greater and lesser Tone, and is commonly called a Schisma
or Comma, and that Comma must be taken away from the greater Tone, and be added
to the lesser, then the second Degree of this Octave will be distant from the
first by a lesser Tone, and the third from the second by a greater Tone which
was required.

The fourth Degree of an Eighth should be distant from the third by a greater
Semitone, and the fifth from a fourth by a greater Tone, but the seventh Degree
of the first Eighth is distant from the sixth by a greater Tone, and the first
from the seventh by a greater Semitone: therefore must here also be made a
fraction by the difference of a greater Semitone, to wit, a greater Semitone
must be taken away from the greater Tone, and be added to the greater Semitone;
then the fourth Degree of this Eighth will be distant from the third by a
greater Semitone, and the fifth from the fourth by a greater Tone, which also
was required.

The sixth Degree should be distant from the fifth by a lesser Tone, the
seventh from the sixth by a greater Tone, and again the first from the seventh
by a greater Semitone, now the second Degree of the first Eighth, is distant
from the first by a lesser Tone, the third from the second by a greater Tone,
and the fourth from the third by a greater Semitone, therefore these Degrees do
well agree amongst themselves, and all the latter eighth is perfected.

The Scale arising out of this Eighth is called the Scale of b flat, because
herein b sharp is turned into b flat; and also a Song contained in this Scale,
is called a Song in b flat.

And it begins in the Cliff f, and is therefore distant from the Scale of b
sharp by its gravity, by a fifth, for in so much as a Sound is flatter, in so
much it is also graver, and needs lesser breath, that it may be uttered. Both
these Scales, as well of b sharp, as of b flat, together with their Cliffs and
Syllables, rolled into a Circle, are exactly represented in the following
Figure: the degrees of the Scale of b sharp with continued Lines, but the
degrees of the Scale of b flat with lines made of small points.



In Plain are the Scales thus represented:

In B Sharp, ^ Ut Re Mi Fa Sol La Ci Ut. Ut Ci La Sol Fa Mi Re Ut

In B Flat, ^ Sol La Ci Ut Re Mi Fa Sol. Sol Fa Mi Re Ut Ci La Sol.

Therefore a Song being proposed, first must be the Cliff consulted what Cliff
it be, and whether in B sharp, or in B flat, and accordingly by its Name be
called: from thence must be proceeded to the Notes according to the Scale, in
ascending and descending to the end of the Song.

But if a Song is not concluded in these seven degrees of the Scale, either
ascending higher, or descending lower, then the degrees are iterated in order
either forward or backward, as far as a Song it self extends.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the lesser principal and secondary contained signs.
THE less principal contained signs, are signs either pressing down the sounds,
or lifting them up. Signs which do press down the Sounds is B flat.

B flat makes every Note before which it is placed, by half a Tone graver or
lower. As, ^

Signs which lift up the sounds are B sharp, and B cancelled.

B sharp raises every Note, before which it is placed, by half a Tone higher.
As, ^

B cancelled raises also every Note before which it is placed, by half a Tone
higher. As, ^

The Secondary contained signs are the Directs.

A Direct shows that in the same Cliff in which it is placed, the first Note
of the next following System does stand. As, ^ ^

CHAP. XXIV. Of the signs of the breadth of sounds, and of things.
SIgns of the latitude or breadth of sounds are which ought to show whether a
sound must be sung with a clear and full, or with a soft and small spirit, and
are by Artists less carefully expressed, who leave that to the text, and to the
things themselves which in a Song are to be expressed. Italians only, and some
that them do follow, do use these two words, Forte and Piano, signifying that
such part of a song must be sung clearer and fuller, under which is written
Forte, but softer and smaller, under which is written Piano.

Signs of things are either Primary or Secundary.

The Primary signs of things, is the Text it self written under a melody.

The Secundary signs of things are either Repeats or Ties.

A Repeat of things is a sign which signifies that a part of the Text must be
sung over again. As, ^ Vecedetemi pur (...) bell -- la, bell -- la tiranna.

A Tie is a crooked line, binding two or more Notes together, which to one
Syllable are to be Sung. As, ^

Gather your Rose-buds while you may, old Time is still a flying.

CHAP. XXV. Of the signs of the Ornaments of Songs.
SIgns of the Ornaments of Songs are also by Artists less carefully expressed,
the Art of Singing with Graces and Orntments being left to Beginners, to attain
to it by the imitation of those, who are perfect in it.

Yet these few directions are commonly given, that the chiefest ornaments do
consist in Exclamations, Trillo's, and Gruppo's.

An Exclamation is a slacking of the Voice to reinforce it afterward, and is
especially used in Minims and Crotchets with a prick, whom shorter Notes do
follow.

A Trillo is a shaking of the Uvula on the Throat in one Sound or Note, as the
Gruppo is in two Sounds or Notes, the one being by one degree higher than the
other, and are commonly used in cadences and closes.

These Ornaments are not to be used in Airy Songs, which require only a lively
and cheerful kind of Singing, carried by the Air it self: but in Passionate
Music, wherein must be kept a command of the breath, by taking heed, that by
spending much in one place it do not afterward fail in another when it is
needful. Besides the ordinary measure of Time is here less regarded, for many
times is the value of (...) Notes made less by half, and sometimes more,
according to the conceit of the words, with a graceful neglect.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the second Mean to attain the Art of Music.
HItherto is treated of the frequent exercising of the voice, according to
certain signs by which vocal melodies are represented, as the first Mean,
whereby the Art of Singing is to be acquired: follows now the other mean by
which it is attained, the often exercising of the Vo^^e also, by the direction
either of a well Tuned Instrument, or of an experienced Master.

Because a Beginner cannot at first order his Voice, in rising and falling of
the Sounds according to the several Degrees of the Scale of Music, he must
therefore guide his Voice in unity of the Sounds, either of an Instrument,
especially of the Virginals which are well tuned, or of the voice of one, who
in this Art is well experienced: a little practice by singing sometimes with,
and sometimes without this help, will so estabiish his Voice, that he will be
able to express by Voices all the Degrees of the Scale, and any Sounds of any
plain Song according to them.

But in the exercising of the Voice is this Order to be observed.

First of all must a Beginner learn the Scale of Music, that he may be able to
express exactly in Or erall the Sounds of every Degree, in Ascending and
Descending.

After that he must learn to Tune a Third, a Fourth, a Fifth, a Seventh, and an
Eighth, in Ascending and Descending from every Degree: which he will speedily
attain, by Sounding at the first Tuning by Degrees all the middle Notes, and
afterward by leaving them out, as in Example. ^

From the First Degree, etc. ^

From the Second Degree, etc.

After the same manner must they be Tuned from the rest of the Degrees. And
being herein also exactly skilled, he must begin with any plain Song,
consulting first the Cliffs whether it is in B sharp, or in B flat, naming it
by its proper name, and then proceed from the Cliff to the first Note of the
Song, giving it its name, and Tuning it so to the pitch of his Voice, that when
he comes to his highest Note, he may reach it without squeaking, and to his
lowest without grumbling, so that his Voice may come always clear from the
throat.

Then he must sing over all the Song first with the syllables, till he can sing
exactly: Afterward leaving the syllables, he must sing it over with the Text
or words underwritten, and that so often till he can sing it all, with all
readiness.

Having thus exercised himself in easier Songs, he must strive continually to
exercise himself after this manner, by Degrees further in harder Songs, till he
comes to perfection, and can sing any Harmonical Song at the first sight,
using this Art to his own Recreation, and the Glory of God, which are to Vocal
Music its subordinate and ultimate end.

Twelve Most Usual TUNES OF PSALMS: IN THREE PARTS. TREBLE, MEAN, and BASS.
Psalm 1.
Cambridge Tune.
Tho. Ravenscroft. B. of M
CANTUS.
^ THE man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear Nor led his life
as sinners do, Nor sat in scorners chair.

BASSVS.
^ THE man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear, Not led his
life as Sinners do, Nor sat in scorners chair.

TENOR
^ THE man is blessed that has not bent, to wicked read his ear, Nor led his
life as Sinners do, Nor sat in scorners chair.

2.
But in the law of God the Lord does set his whole delight:
And in that law does exercise himself both day and night.
3.
He shall be like the tree that grows, fast by the River side:
Which brings forth most pleasant fruits, in her due time and tide.
Psalm 9.
Windsor Tune.
Tho. Ravenscroft, B. of M.
CANTUS.
^ WITH heart and mouth unto the Lord, Will I sing laud and praise, And speak
of all thy wondrous works, And them declare always.

BASSUS.

BASSUS.
^ WITH heart and mouth unto the Lord, Will I sing laud and praise, And speak
of all thy wondrous works, And them declare always.

TENOR.
^ WITH heart and mouth unto the Lord, Will I sing laud and praise, And speak
of all thy wondrous works, And them declare always.

2.
I will be glad and much rejoice, in thee O Lord most high,
And make my Songs extol thy name, above the starry sky.
3.
For that my foes are driven back, and turned unto flight.
They fall down flat and are destroyed, by thy great force and night.
Psalm 23.
Martyrs Tune.
Simon Stubbs.
CANTUS.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed, How can I then lack
any thing, Whereof I stand in need.

BASSUS.
^ THE Lord is only my support, And he that does me feed, How can I then lack
any thing, Whereof I stand in need.

TENOR.
^ THE Lord is only my support, and he that does me feed, How can I then lack
any thing, Whereof I stand in need.

2.
He does me fold in coats most safe, the tender grass fast by:
And after drives me to the streams, which run most pleasantly.
3.
And when I feel my self near lost, then does he me home take:
Conducting me in the right paths, even for his own names sake.
Psalm 45.
London Tune.
Tho. Ravenscroft, B. of M.
CANTUS.
^ MY heart does take in hand, Some godly Song to sing, the praise that I shall
show therein, Pertains to the King.

BASSUS.
^ MY heart does take in hhand, Some godly Song to sing: The praise that I
shall show therein, Pertains to the King.

TENOR.
^ MY heart does take in hand some godly Song to sing: The praise that I shall
show therein, Pertains to the King.

2.
My tongue oeall be as quick, his honor to endite,
As is the pen of any Scribe, that uses fast to write.
3.
O fairest of all men, thy speech is pleasant pure.
For God has blessed thee with gifts for ever to endure
Psalm 34.
York Tune.
John Milton.
CANTUS.
^ I Will give laud and honor both, Unto the Lord always, And eke my mouth for
evermore, Shall speak unto his praise.

BASSUS.
^ I Will give laud and honor both, Unto the Lord always, And eke my mouth for
evermore, Shall speak unto his praise.

TENOR.
^ I Will give laud and honor both, Unto the Lord always, And eke my mouth for
evermore, Shall speak unto his praise.

2
I do delight to laud the Lord, in soul and ekke in voice:
That humble men and mortified, may hear and so rejoice.
3
Therefore see that ye magnify, with me the living Lord,
And let us now exhalt his name, together with one accord,
Psalm 47.
Lincoln Tune.
William Harrison.
CANTUS.
^ YE People all with one accord, Clap hands and eke rejoice, Be glad and sing
unto the Lord, With sweet and pleasant voice.

BASSUS.
^ Y E People all with one accord, Clap hands and eke rejoice, Be glad and sing
unto the Lord, With sweet and pleasant voice.

TENOR.
^ YE People all with one accord, Clap hands and eke rejoye, Be glad and sing
unto the Lord, With sweet and pleasant voice.

2.
For high the Lord and dreadful is, with wonders manifold:
A mighty King he is also, in all the earth extold.
3.
The people he shall make to be, unto our bondage thrall:
And underneath our feet he shall the nations make to fall.
Psalm 90.
Winchester Tune.
Tho. Ravenscroft, B. of M
CANTUS.
^ MY Soul to God shall give good heed, And him alone attend, For why? my
health and hope to speed, Does whole on him depend.

BASSUS.
^ MY Soul to God shall give good heed, And him alone attend, For why? my
health and hope to Speed, Does whole on him depend.

TENOR.
^ MY Soul to God shall give good heed, And him alone attend, For why? my
health and hope to speed, Does whole on him depend.

2.
For he alone is my defense, my rock, my health and aid:
He is my stay, that no pretense shall make me be dismayed.
3.
O wicked folk how long will ye use craft! sure ye must fall:
For as a rotten hedge you be, and like a tottering wall.
Psalm 84.
S. David's Tune.
CANTUS.
^ HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me, The tabernacles
of thy grace, How pleasant Lord they be.

BASSUS.
^ HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me, The Tabernacles
of thy grace, How pleasant Lord they be.

TENOR.
^ HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me, The tabernacles
of thy grace, How pleasant Lord they be.

Psalm 100.
French Tune.
J. Dowland, D. M.
CANTUS.
^ ALL people that on earth does dwell, Sing to the Lord with Cheerful voice,
Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, Come ye before him and rejoice.

BASSUS.
^ ALL people that on earth does dwell, Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice,
Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, Come ye be -- fore him and rejoice.

TENOR.
^ ALL people that on earth does dwell, Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice,
Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, Come ye be -- fore him and rejoice.

Psalm 119.
CANTUS.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, And pure in mind and heart, Whose lips
and conversations, From Gods laws never start. 2. Blessed are they that give
themselves, his Statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with all their hearts,
And never from him swerve.

BASSUS.
^ Blessed are they that perfect are, And pure in mind and heart, Whose lives
and conversations, From Gods laws never start. 2. Blessed are they that give
themselves his Statutes to observe: Seeking

TENOR.
^ BLessed are they that perfect are, And pure in mind and heart, Whose lives
and conversations, From Gods Laws never start, Blessed are they that give
themselves, His Statutes to ob -- serve, Seeking the Lord with all their
hearts, And never from him swerve.

BASSUS.
^ the Lord with all their heart, And never from him Swerve.

Psalm 150.
Bangor Tune.
Tho. Ravenscroft. B. of M.
CANTUS.
^ YIeld unto God the mighty Lord praise in his Sanctuary: And praise him in
the firmament that shows his power on high,

BASSUS.
^ YIeld unto God the mighty Lord, etc.

TENOR.
^ YIeld unto God the mighty Lord praise in his Sanctuary: And praise him in
the firmament that shows his power on high,

Psalm 148.
CANTUS.
^ GIve laud unto the Lord, From heaven that is so high: Praise him in deed and
word, Above the Starry Sky. And also ye, his Angels all, Armies royal, praise
him with glee

BASSUS.
^ GIve laud unto the Lord, From heaven that is so high; Praise him in deed and
word, Above the Starry Sky. And also, ye his Angels all, armies royal, praise
him with glee.

TENOR.
^ GIve laud unto the Lord, From heaven that is so high, Praise him in deed and
word, Above the Starry Sky, And also ye, his Angels all, armies royal, praise
him with glee.

Twelve Selected ENGLISH TUNES IN THREE PARTS. TWO TREBLES and a BASS.
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. William Webb.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ I wish no more thou should love me, My joys are full in loving thee, My
heart's too narrow to contain, My bliss, if thou should love again.

BASSUS.
^ I wish no more thou should love me, My joys are full in loving thee, My
heart's too narrow to contain My bliss if thou should love again.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ I wish no more thou should love me, My joys are full in loving thee, My
heart's too narrow to contain, My bliss, if thou should love again.

A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Matthew Lock,
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Claris, it is not in your power to say how long our love will last, it may
be we within this hour may lose those joys we now may taste. The blessed that im
-- mor -- tal be, From change in Love are one -- ly free.

BASSUS.
^ Cloris, it is not in your power to say how long our love will last, It may
be we within this hour may lose those joys we now may taste. The blessed that
immortal be, From

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Cloris, it is not in your power to say how long our love will last, it may
be we within this hour may lose those joys we now may taste. The blessed that im
-- mor -- tal be, From change in Love are one -- ly free.

BASSUS.
^ change in Love are only free.

And though you now immortal seem,
Such is the exactness of your frame,
Those that your beauty so esteem,
Will find it cannot last the same:
Love from your eyes has stolen my fire,
As apt to wast, and to expire.
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Matthew Lock.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ It Is love and harmony, it is Musicks melody, At this time joins our hearts,
to meet and sing our parts, and sing our parts. Then let no man disturb' our
delight, our content, Since we come, we come for merriment.

BASSUS.
^ It Is love and harmony, It Is Musicks melody, At this time joins our hearts,
To meet and sing our parts, and sing our parts, Then let no man disturb our
delight, our content, Since we come, we come for merriment.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ It Is love and harmony, It Is musicks melody, At this time joins our hearts,
To meet and sing our parts. and sing our parts. Then let no man disturb our
delight, our content, Since we come, we come for meriment.

A. 3. Voc.
Leno. Hodemonte.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ In my sad thoughts I sat and Sigh -- ed, With which none was delighted. Yet
was it still to me, A rejoicing, there to be in good Socie -- ty. Then farewell
Sadness now, Then farewell Sadness now, Let Us all agree, To join in Harmony, To
join in Harmony, To join, to join in Harmony.

BASSUS.
^ In my sad thoughts I sat and Sighed, With which none was delighted. Yet was
it still to me A rejoicing there to be, in good Society, Then farewell Sadness
now, Then farewell Sadness

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ In my sad thoughts I sat and Sighed, With which none was delighted. Yet was
it still to me, A rejoicing, there to be in good Socie -- ty. Then farewell
Sadness now, Then farewell Sadness

^ now, Let Us all agree, To join in Harmony, To join in Harmony, To join in
Harmony.

BASSUS.
^ now, Let Us all agree, To join in Harmony, To join in Harmony, To join in
harmony.

A. 3. Voc.
Dr. Wilson.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ In a Season all oppressed, With sad Sorrow; poor distressed, Troilos said
unto his Cressed, Yield, O! Yield thee, Sweet! and stay not; O, no, no, no no,
no, no, no, no, sweet Love I may not.

BASSUS.
^ In a season all oppressed, With sad Sorrow poor distressed Troilos said unto
his Cressed, Yield, O! Yield thee, Sweet! and stay not: O! no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, sweet Love, I may not.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ In a season all oppressed, With sad Sorrow, poor distressed Troilos said
unto his Cressed, Yield, O! Yield thee, Sweet! and stay not; O! no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, sweet Love, I may not.

A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Simon Ives.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Now we are met, let us merry merry be, For one half hour with mirth and glee,
To recreate our Spirits dull, Let Us laugh and sing our bellies full.

BASSUS.
^ Now we are met let us merry merry be, For one half hour with mirth and glee,
To recreate our Spirits dull, Let Us laugh and sing our bellies full.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Now we are met, let us merry merry be, For one half hour with mirth and glee,
To recreate our Spirits dull, Let Us laugh and sing our bellies full.

^

A. 3. Voc.
Dr. Wilson.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ From the fair Lavenian Shore, I your Markets come to store Muse not though
so far I dwell, And my Wares come here to sell. Such is the Sacred hunger of
Gold: Then come to my Pack, while I cry, what do you lack, what do you buy, for
here it is to be sold.

BASSUS.
^ From the fair Lavenian Shore, I your Markets come to store Muse not though
so far I dwell, And my Wares come here to sell. Such is the Sacred hunger of
Gold, Then come to my Pack, while I cry, what do you lack, what do you buy for

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ From the fair Lavenian Shore, I your Markets come to store, Muse not, though
so far I dwell, And my Wares come here to sell. Such is the Sacred hunger of
Gold: Then come to my Pack, While I cry, what do you lack, what do you buy, for
here it is to be sold.

BASSUS.
^ here it is to be sold.

I have Beauty, Honor, Grace, Fortune, Favor, Time and Place,
And what else thou would request, Even the thing thou likest best.
First let me have but a touch of thy Gold:
Then come to me Lad,
Thou shall have, what thy Dad
Never gave, for here it is to be sold.
A. 3. Voc.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Gather your Rose-buds whilst you may, old Time is still a flying, And that
same Flower that smiles to day, to -- morrow will be dying.

BASSUS.
^ Gather your Rose-buds whilst you may, old time is still a flying, And that
same Flower that smiles to day, to -- morrow will be dying.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Gather your Rose-buds whilst you may, old Time is still a flying, And that
same Flower that smiles to day, to -- morrow will be dying.

That Age is best which is the first,
While Youth and Blood is warmer,
Expect not then the last and worst,
Time still succeeds the former.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
And whilst you may, go marry:
For having once but lost your prime,
You may for ever tarry*
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Nich. Lanneare.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Silly Heart forbear, Those are murdering Eves, in the which I swear Cupid
lurking lies: See his Quiver, see his Bow too, see his Dart, Fly, O! fly thou
foolish Heart.

BASSUS.
^ Silly Heart forbear, Those are murdering Eyes, In the which I swear Cupid
lurking lies. See his Quiver see his Bow too, see his Dart, Fly, O! fly, thou
foolish Heart.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Silly Heart forbear, Those are murdering Eyes, In the which I swear Cupid
lurk -- ing lies, See his Quiver, See his Bow too, see his Dart, Fly, O! fly,
thou foolish heart.

Greedy Eyes take heed, They are scorching Beams,
Causing Heart to bleed, and your Eyes spring Streams:
Love lies watching, with his Bow bent, and his Dart,
For to wound both Eyes and Heart.
Think and gaze your fill, foolish Heart and Eyes,
Since you love your Ill, And your Good despise.
Cupid shooting, Cupid darting, and his Hand
Mortal Powers cannot withstand.
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Lewis
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ How happy art thou and I, that never knew how to love, there is no such
Blessings here beneath, what e're there is a -- bove: It Is liberty, it is liber
-- ty, that every Wise Man loves.

BASSUS.
^ How happy art thou and I, that never knew how to love, there is no such
Blessings here beneath, what e're there is a -- bove: It Is li -- ber -- ty,
it is li -- ber -- ty, that e -- ve -- ry Wise Man loves.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ How happy art thou and I, that never knew how to love, there is no such
Blessings here beneath, what e're there is a -- bove: It Is li -- ber -- ty,
it is li -- ber -- ty, that e -- ve -- ry Wise Man loves.

A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Edw. Coleman.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ The Glories of our Birth and State, Are Shadows, not substantial things;
There is no Armor against our fate, Death lays his I -- cy Hands on Kings.
Scepters and Crowns must tumble down, And in the Dust be equal laid, with the
poor crooked Sith and Spade.

BASSUS.
^ The Glories of our Birth and State, are Shadows, not substantial things;
There is no Armor against our fate, Death lays his I -- cy Hands on Kings.
Scepters and Crowns must tumble down, and in the Dust be

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ The Glories of our Birth and State, are Shadows, not substantial things;
There is no Armor against our fate, Death lays his Icy Hands on Kings.
Scepters and Crowns must tumble down, and in the Dust be equal laid, With the
poor crooked Scyth and Spade.

^ equal laid, With the poor crooked Scyth and Spade.

Some Men with Swords may reap the Field,
And plant fresh Laurels where they killed;
But their strong Nerves at last must yield,
They tame but one another still.
Early or late they bend to Fate,
And must give up their murmuring Breath,
Whilst the Pale Captive creep to death.
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Savile.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Here Is a Health unto his Majesty, with a Fa, la, la, etc. Con -- ver -- si
-- on to his E -- ne -- mies, with a Fa, la, la, etc. And he that will not
pledge his Health I wish him neither Wit nor Wealth, nor yet a Rope to hang
himself, with a Fa, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, with a Fa, la, la, etc.

BASSUS.
^ Here'r a Health unto his Majesty, with a Fa, la, la, la, la, la, la, Con --
ver -- si -- on to his E -- ne -- mies, with a Fa, la, la, la, la, la, la, And
he that will not pledge this Health, I wish him neither Wit nor Wealth, nor yet
a Rope to hang himself, with a Fa, la, la, la,

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Here Is a Health unto his Majesty, with a Fa, la, la, etc. Con -- ver -- si
-- on to his E -- ne -- mies, with a Fa, la, la, etc. And he that will not
pledge his Health I wish him neither Wit nor Wealth, nor yet a Rope to hang
himself, with a Fa, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, with a Fa, la, la, la, etc.

BASSUS.
^ la, la, la, with a Fa, la, la, la, la, la,

Twelve Selected ENGLISH CATCHES A. 3. Voc. Composed by sundry AUTHORS.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Come follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow me, Whither shall I
follow, follow, follow, whither shall I follow, follow thee, To the Willow,
Willow, Willovv, to the Willovv, Willovv tree.

Mr. John Hiliou.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Hey down, down, down, a down, hey down, down derry, shall I go with
my true Love now over the Ferry, and kiss her Rosy svveet Lips, until I am
weary, with a

Mr. Edmund Nelham.
A. 3. Voc.
^ A Boat a Boat have to the Ferry, For we will go over to be merry, to laugh, and
sing, and drink old Sherry.

Mr. Thomas Holmes.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Come follow me merrily, merrily, Lads, come follow me merrily, Ah! And we
will sing Sol, fa, fa, sol, fa, fa, fa, sol, sol, fa, Put sol before la, and fa
after mi, sol, la, mi, fa, mi, la, mi, fa

Mr, Edmund Nelham.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Come, come away, to the Tavern I say, For now at home it is washing day;
leave your prittle prattle, and fill us a Pottle, You are not so wise as
Aristotle: Drawer come away, Let Us make it Holy -- day. Anon, anon, anon Sir,
what is it you say.

Mr. John Hilton.
A. 3. Voc.
^ I drink this Cup to you, Sir heartily; and drink your part with a Heart
willingly, then so shall we both agree merrily.

Mr. Edmund Nelham
A. 3. Voc.
^ Ding, ding, ding, dong Bell, Ding, ding, ding, ding, dong Bell; Oh cruel
death! that stopped the breath of him I loved so well; A lack and well away, it is
a heavy day, as ever us befell, Then for his sake, some order let us take, that
we may ring his Knell, ding, dong.

Mr. Stoner.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Fa, la, la, la, la, la, Fa, la la, -- Fa, la, la, -- liro, Fa, la, la, --
Fa, la, la, -- Fa, la, la, -- -- liro, Fa, la, la. -- la, -- liro.

Mr. Simon Ives.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Now my lads, now my lads, now let us be merry, Here is old Charingo, Syder
and Perry, Then let us dance, and sing, down, down, down, der -- ry.

A. 3. Voc.
^ The silver Svvan who living had no note, Till Death approch'd unlocked her
silent Throat, Leaning her Breast against the Reedy Shore, Thus sung her first
and last, and sung no more: ^ Fare well all Joys, ah! Death come close my Eyes,
more Geese than Swans now live, more fools than wise.

Mr. John Smith.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Come follow, follow me, come follow, follow me, And we will to the Tavern
go, with mirth and merry glee, we will each Man take his Cup, what ever us befall,
and we will drink all up, all ^ up, and for another call, Then let us merry be:
be merry my noble hearts; For a Cup of old Sherry, will make us merry, And we will
sing well our Parts.

Mr. Johu Hilton.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Have you any work for a Tinker, Mistress? old Brass, or Pots, or Kettles,
I Will mend them all with a tink very tink, and never hurt your Metels: First let
me have but a touch of your Ale, 'twill steel me ^ against cold Weather; or
Tinkers Freez, or Vintners Lees, or Tobacco, choose you whether; But of your
Ale, your nappy Ale, I would I had a Ferkin, But I am old, and very, very
cold, and never vvear a Jer -- kin.

Mr. Edm. Nelham.
FOURTEEN ITALIAN SONGS COMPOSED BY GIOVANNI GIACOMO CASTOLDI DA CARRAVAGGIO.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ She that loves me for my self, For affections, not base pelf, Only She,
only she, yea only she deserves to be beloved of me.

BASSUS.
^ She that loves me for my self, For affection, not base pelf, Only She,
only She, yea only she, deserves to be beloved of me.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ She that loves me for my self, For affection not base pelf, Only She, only
She, yea only She, deserves to be beloved of me.

^

She that loves me with resolve,
Never to alter, till dissolve,
Only She, only She, yea only She,
Deserves to be beloved of me.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Gioc. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Were thou yet fairer then thou art, which lies not in the power of Art, Or
had thou in thine eyes more darts, Then Cupid ever shot at hearts, Yet if
they were not thrown at me, I would not cast a thought on thee.

BASSUS.
^ Were thou yet fairer then thou art, which lies not in the power of Art, Or
had thou in thine eyes more darts, Then Cupid ever shot at hearts. Yet if
they were not thrown at me, I would not cast a thought on thee.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Were thou yet fairer then thou art, which lies not in the power of Art, Or
had thou in thine eyes more darts, Then Cupid ever shot at hearts, Yet if
they were not thrown at me, I would not cast a thought on thee.

^

I Would rather marry a disease
Then court a thing I cannot please,
She that would cherish my desires,
Must court my flames with equal fires,
Would you know what that will be,
I Will then love you when you love me.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Phillis why should we delay, Pleasures shorter then the day, Could we which
we never can, Stretch our life beyond three span, Beauty like a shadow flies,
And our youth before us dies

BASSUS.
^ Phillis why should we delay, Pleasures shorter then the day, Could we which
we never can, Stretch our life beyond three span, Beauty like a shadow flies.
And our youth before us dies.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Phillis why should we delay, Pleasures shorter than the day, Could we which
we never car, Stretch our life beyond three span, Beauty like a shadow flies,
And our youth before us dies.

^

Or would Youth and Beauty stay,
Love has wings and will away,
Love has svvifter vvings than time,
Changing Love too often does chime,
Gods that never change their state,
Very often their love and hate.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Take O take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworn, And those eyes
that break of days Light that do mislead the morn, But my kisses bring a --
gain, Seals of Love though seals in vain: But my kisses my kisses bring again.
Seals of Love though seals in vain.

BASSUS.
^ Take O take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworn, And those eyes
that break of days, Light that po mislead the morn, But my kisses bring a --
gain, Seals of Love though seals in vain,

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Take O take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworn, And those eyes
that break of days Light that do mislead the morn, But my kisses bring a --
gain, Seals of Love though seals in vain: But my kisses my kisses bring again.
Seals of Love though seals in vain.

BASSUS.
^ But my kisses my kisses bring again. Seals of Love though Seals in vain.

Hide, O! hide those hills of snow,
That thy frozen blossom bears,
On whose tops the pinks that do grow
Are yet of those April wears.
But first, set my heart free,
Bound in icy chains by thee,
But first, set my heart, set my heart free,
Bound in icy chains by thee.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio, Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Stay, stay, O stay that heart I vow it is mine, ravished from hence by her
whose parts divine, Enchanted it and sent the wosnl No: which took't away, and
filled it is place with woe.

BASSUS.
^ Stay, stay, O stay that heart I vow it is mine, ravished from hence by her
whose parts divine Enchanted it, and sent this fatal No: which took't away, and
filled its place with woe.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Stay stay, O stay, that heart I vow it is mine, Ravished from hence by her
whose parts divine Enchanted it, and sent this woeful No: which took't away, and
filled its place with woe.

^

O hold it fast, I come, yet let it fly,
I cannot move it is pity both should dye,
Farewell, Farewell my heart I Have pleased mine eyes,
Thou being lost, sees thee her Sacrifice.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Bright Aurelia I do owe, (...) All the woe which I do know. To those
glorious looks alone, Though you are unrelenting stone, The quick lightning from
your eye, Did with force me Sacrifice, My unweary harmless heart, and now you
glory in my smart.

BASSUS.
^ Bright Aurelia I do owe, (...) All the woe which I do know, To those
glorious looks alone, Though you are unrelenting stone, The quick lightning from
your eye, Did with force me

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Bright Aurelia I do owe, (...) All the woe which I do know. To those
glorious looks alone, Though you are unrelenting stone, The quick lightning from
your eye, Did with force me Sacrifice, My unweary harmless heart, and now you
glory in my smart.

BASSUS.
^ Sacrifice, My unwary harmless heart, and now you glory in my smart.

How unjustly you do blame, --
That pure flame, which from you came,
Vexed with what your selves made burn,
Your Scorns tinder dit it turn,
The least Spark now Love can call,
That does fall as on the small
Scorcht remainder of my heart,
Will make it burn in every part.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Ah! my fair, ah! come behold me, How I pine away for thee, For too hard is
me the horrible Smart, which you cause to my poor heart, You force me, you tie
me, you wound me you vex me, you kill me, Ah! ah! most cruel fair, Ah! I die in
despair, Ah! ah! most cruel fair.

BASSUS.
^ Ah! my fair ah! come behold me, How I pine away for thee, For too hard is me
the horrible Smart, which you cause to my poor heart. You force me, you tie me,
you wound me, you vex me, you

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Ah! my fair, Ah! come behold me, How I pine away for thee, For too hard is
me the horrible Smart, which you cause to my poor heart, You force me, you tie
me, you wound me, you vex me, you kill me, Ah! ah! most cruel fair, Ah I die in
despair, Ah* ah! most cruel fair.

BASSUS.
^ kill me, Ah! ah! most cruel fair, Ah I die in despair, Ah! ah! most cruel
fair.

A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Gioc. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Bring back my comfort and re -- turn, For well thou know that I in such a
vigorous passion burn, That missing thee I die, Return, return, insult no more,
Return, return, insult no more, Return, return and me restore, To those
sequestered joys I had before.

BASSUS.
^ Bring back my comfort and return, For well thou know that I, in such a
vigorous passion burn, That missing thee I die, Return, return, insult no more,
return, return, insult no more,

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Bring back my comfort and re -- turn, For well thou know that I in such a
vigorous passion burn, That missing thee I die, Return, return, insult no more,
Return, return, insult no more, Return, return and me restore, To those
sequestered joys I had before.

BASSUS.
^ Return, return and me restore, To those sequestered Joys I had before.

Abscnce in most, that quenches love,
And cools this warm desire,
The ardour of my heart improve,
And makes the flame aspire,
The Maxim therefore I deny,
The Maxim therefore I deny,
And term it though a Tyranny,
The Nurse to Faith, to Love, to Constancy.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Only joy now here you are, Fit to hear and ease my care, Take me to thee,
Give thee to me, No, no my dear let be, Let my wisp'ring voice obtain, Sweet
reward for sharpest pain, Night has closed all in her Cloak, Twink^ing Stars
Loves thoughts provoke, Danger hence good care does keep, Jealousy it self
does sleep Take me to thee, Give thee to me, No, no, my Dear let be.

BASSUS.
^

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Only joy now here you are, Fit to hear and ease my care, Take me to thee,
Give thee to me, No, no, my Dear let be, Let my whis'pring voice attain, Sweet
reward for sharpest pain Night has closed all in her Cloak, Twinkling Stars,
Love thoughts provokes, Danger hence good care does keep, Jealousy it self
does sleep, Take me to thee, Give thee to me, No, no, my Dear let be.

BASSUS.
^

A. 3. Voc.
Gio. Gioc. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ O Sovereign of my joy, Triumpher of anoy, Star of my desire, And sweet fire,
For in whose shining eyes, Are lights of Cupid's skies, And whose voice when it
speaks, All sense asunder breaks? Whose heavenly voice is such, That hearts
does touch.

BASSUS.
^ O Sovereign of my joy, Triumpher of annoy, Star of my desire, And sweet
fire, For in whose shining eves, Are lights of Cupid's skies, And whose voice
when it speaks, All sense asunder breaks? Whose heavenly

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ O Sovereign of my joy, Triumpher of anoy, Star of my desire, And sweet fire,
For in whose shining eyes, Are lights of Cupid's skies, And whose voice when it
speaks, All sense asunder breaks? Whose heavenly voice is such, That hearts
does touch.

BASSUS.
^ voice is such, That hearts does touch.

And in whose body is, Each character of Bliss,
Full of true delight, Pure and bright,
My Dear when shall it be, That I thine eyes shall see,
And that my greedy ear, thy heavenly voice may hear,
Let be betwixt thee and me, A harmony.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ In the merry month of May, on a morn by break of day, Forth I walked the Wood
so wide, when as May, was in her pride. There I spyed all alone, Phillida and
Co -- ri -- don, Much ado there was so hot, he did love, but she could not, he
said his love was all true, she said none was false to you.

BASSUS.
^ In the merry month of May, on a morn by break of day, forth I walked the Wood
so wide, as May was in her pride. There I spied all alone Phillida and Co -- ri
-- don, Much ado there

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ In the merry month of May, on a morn by break of day, Forth I walked the Wood
so wide when as May was in her pride, There I spyed all alone, Phillida and Cor
-- ri -- don, Much ado there was so hot, he did love but she could not, he
said his love was all true, she said none was false to you.

BASSUS.
^ was so hot, he did love but she could not, he said his love was all true,
she said none was false to you.

He said he had loved her long,
She said Love should take no wrong
Thereupon he would kiss her,
She said Maids must kiss no men
Till they kiss for good and all,
And for plighting Truth have called,
Then with many pretty Oaths,
Yea and nay, Faith and Troth,
Love which long had been deluded,
Was with kisses sweet concluded.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Since Love has in thine and my eye kindled a holy flame, What pity 'twere
to let it dye, What sin to quench the same, The Stars that seem extinct by day,
Dis -- close their flames at night, And in a Sable sense, con -- vey, Their
Loves in beams of Light.

BASSUS.
^ Since Love has in thine and my eye, klndled a holy flame, What pity 'twere
to let it dye, What sin to the same, The Stars that seem extinct by day, Dis --
close their flames at night, And in a Sable

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Since Love has in thine and my eye, klndled a holy flame, What pity 'twere
to let it dye What sin to quench the same, The Stars that seem extinct by day,
Dis -- close their flames at night, And in a Sable sense, con -- vey, Their
Loves in beams of Light.

BASSUS.
^ sense, con -- vey their Loves in beams of Light.

If thou perceiv'st thy flame decay, Come light thine Eyes at mine
And when I feel mine wast away, I Will take new fire from thine,
Thus white we shall preserve from wast, the flame of our desire,
No Vestal: shall maintain more chaste, Or more immortal fire.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Giac. Gastoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ If the quick Spirit of your Eye, Now languish and anon must dye, If every
sweet and every grace, Must fly from that forsaken face, Then Ce -- li -- a
let us reap our joys, E're Time such goodly Fruit destroys.

BASSUS.
^ If the quick Spirit of your Eye, Now languish and a -- non must dye, If
every sweet and every grace Must fly from that forsakee face, Then Ce -- li --
a let us reap our joys, E're Time such good Fruit destroys.

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ If the quick Spirit of your Eye, Now anguisht and a -- non must dye, If
every sweet and every grace, Must fly from that forsaken face, Then Ce -- li --
a let us reap our joys, E're Time such goodly Fruit destroys.

Or if that golden Fleece must grow,
For ever free from aged Snow,
If those bright Suns must know no shade,
Nor your fresh beauty ever fade,
Then Celia fear not to bestow,
What still is gathered still must grow.
A. 3. Voc.
Di Gio. Gioc. Castoldi.
CANTUS PRIMUS.
^ Make have, O! Nymphs and fly, From this bank, though dry, On this Rivers
side, And near those Trees in the air, To stay forbear, For if you not quickly,
not quickly, not quickly are shnnning, And if you not swiftly, not swiftly, not
swiftly are running, Cupid hunts in this dale, Be sure he will not fail, To
wound your tender heart, But shooting once a dart.

BASSUS.
^

CANTUS SECUNDUS.
^ Make have, O! Nymphs and fly, From this bank, though dry, On this Rivers
side, And near those Trees in the air, To stay forbear, For if you not quickly,
not quickly, not quickly are shnnning, And if you not swiftly, not swiftly, not
swiftly are running, Cupid hunts in this dale, Be sure he will not fail, To
wound your tender heart, But shooting once a dart.

BASSUS.
^

The Contents of this Book.
Of the Synopsis of Vocal Music.
Chap. 1. Of Vocal Music in general Page 1 2. Of the Notes 3 3. Of the Pricks
5 4. Of the Pauses 6 5. Of the Signs of the Common Time 7 6. Of the slower
Triple 8 7. Of the swifter Triple 10 8. Of the swiftest Triple 12 9. Of the
slower Sesquialtre 14 10. Of the swifter Sesquialtre 16 11. Of the swiftest
Sesquialtre 18 12. Of the Systems 20 13. Of the Repeats 21 14. Of the Cliffs 22
15. Of the Cliffs in respect of Voices 24 16. Of the Cliffs in respect of Notes
25 17. Of the Syllables 26 18. Of the Scale of Music 27 19. Of the Order of
the Generation of the degrees. 30 20. Of the Intervals of the degrees 32 21. Of
the agreeableness of the Cliffs with the degrees of the Scale of Music. 34 22.
Of the Generation of an Eighth in b flat 36 23. Of the lesser principal, and
secondary contained signs 40 24. Of the signs of the breadth of Sounds of
things 42 25. Of the signs of the Ornaments of Songs 43 26. Of the second mean
to attain the Art of Music 44
Of Twelve most usual Tunes of Psalms in Three Parts, Treble, Mean and Bass.
Psalm 1. The Man is blessed that has not bent Page 48 9. With heart and mouth
unto the Lord 50 23. The Lord is only my support 52 45. My heart does take in
hand 54 34. I will give laud and honor both 56 58. Ye People all with one
accord 58 90. My Soul to God shall give good heed 60 84. How pleasant is thy
dwelling place 62 100. All people that on Earth do dwell 64 119. Blessed are
they that perfect are 66 150. Yield unto God the mighty Lord 68 148. Give laud
unto the Lord 70
Of the twelve selected English Tunes, in three Parts, two Trebles and a Bass.
Tune. 1. I wish no more thou should love me Page 72 2. Cloris, Is it not in
your power 74 3. It Is Love and Harmony 76 4. In my sad thoughts I sat and
sighed 78 5. In a Season all oppressed 80 6. Now we are met, let us merry, merry
be 82 7. From the fair Lavenian Shore 84 8. Gather your Rosebuds whilst you may
86 9. Silly heart forbear 88 10. How happy art thou and I 90 11. The glories of
our birth and state 92 12. Here Is a health unto His Majesty 94
Of the twelve selected Engl. Catch. A. 3. V.
Catch, 1. Come follow, follow, follow, etc. Page 98 2. Hey down, down, down a
down 98 3. A boat, a boat have to the Ferry 99 4. Come follow me merrily 99 5.
Come, Come away 100 6. I drink this Cup, Sir, heartily ibid. 7. Ding, ding,
ding, dong bell. 101 8. Fa, la, la, la, etc 101 9. Now my Lads 102 10. The
Silver Swan who living had no Note 102 11. Come follow, follow me 103 12. Have
you any work for a Tinker 104
Of the Fourteen Italian Songs Composed by Giovanni Giacomo Castoldi da
Carravaggio, in Three Parts, two Trehles and a Bass.
Tune, 1. She that loves me for my self Page 108 2. Were thou yet fairer then
thou art 110 3. Phillis why should we delay 112 4. Take, O take those lips away
114 5. Stay, Stay, O Stay, that Heart I vow it is mine. 116 6. Bright Aurclia I
do owe 118 7. Ab, my fair, Ah! come behold me 120 8. Bring back my comfort and
return 122 9. Only joy now here you are 124 10. O! Sovereign of my joy 126 11.
In the merry month of May. 128 12. Since Love has in thine and mine Eyes 130
13. If the quick Spirit of your Eye 132 14. Make have, O! Nymphs, and fly 134
ERRATA.
ALthough the Fate of Books is as that of men Vitiis nemo sine nascitur:
optimus ille est
Qui minimis urgetur --
Yet what (...) of any moment have slipped, ought carefully be amended:
especially in Music, wherein they in no wise can be tolerated.

In the Epist. Dedicat. page 2. lin. 2. r. gestienti: lin. 4. Momorum: page 3.
lin. 6. diutissime, affatim.

Page 24. Stav. 2. amend the Cliffs 3. and 4. thus ^

Page 41. Stav. 1. after the the Notes 5. 13. and 23. put in stead of the b
moll. or round, this b sharp, or quadrate.

Page 66. before the Note 7. and page 67. before the Note 17. blot out the b
cancelled

Also Page 92. Stav. 4. after the Note 17. and Page 130. Stave 5. after the
Note 3. blot out the single Bar. ^

And Page 111. Stave 2. blot out this Repeat ^

Add in Page 77. after the Note 10. this Note ^

And in Page 89. after Note 20. add this Note ^

Correct the Cliffs thus:
Page Stav. Errat. Correct. 49 2 ^ ^ 53 2 ^ ^ 62 2. 3. ^ ^ 63 2 ^ ^ 72 2 ^ ^ 78
4 ^ ^ 92 3 ^ ^ 101 2 ^ ^

Correct the Notes thus:
Page Stav. Not. Errat. Correct. 52 2 6 ^ ^ 59 1 6 ^ ^ 60 1 15 ^ ^ 63 2 1 ^ ^
66 4 1 ^ ^ 70 1 2 ^ ^ 70 2 19 ^ ^ 73 1 23 ^ ^ 75 1 19 ^ ^ 75 2 19 ^ ^ 77 1 13 ^
^ 78 3 21 ^ ^ 78 5 17 ^ ^ 79 5 2 ^ ^ 80 2 13 ^ ^ 80 2 15 ^ ^ 81 2 7 ^ ^ (...)
(...) (...) ^ ^ 86 (...) (...) ^ ^ (...) (...) (...) ^ ^ (...) 5 17 ^ ^ (...)
(...) 13 ^ ^ (...) (...) (...) ^ ^ 100 (...) (...) ^ ^ 100 3 10 ^ ^ 100 4 16 ^
^ 100 4 21. 22. ^ ^ 101 1 11 ^ ^ 101 4 39 ^ ^ 110 5 8 ^ ^ 110 5 24 ^ ^ 111 3 6
^ ^ 115 4 6 ^ ^ 120 3 9 ^ ^ 121 3 21 ^ ^ 124 5 3 ^ ^ 125 5 1 ^ ^ 128 5 1 ^ ^
128 5 25 ^ ^ 129 1 7 ^ ^ 129 3 20 ^ ^ 130 1 14. 15 ^ ^ 130 1 20 ^ ^

FINIS.

