foreground: two men praying over Jesus's body; background: three crosses on
Golgotha

A MIRROR FOR MONKS WRITTEN BY LEWIS BLOSIUS, Abbot of St. Benets Order.

printer's device(?) of a sphinx

Printed at Paris, M.DC.LXXVI.

CHAPTER I.
YOu desire of me (beloved Brother Odo) a spiritual Mirror or looking glass,
wherein you may behold your self and exactlye see both your beauty and,
deformity: This request of yours is somewhat strange: Certaynely I think that
you know me not: for if you did, whence does it happen, that you request a
spiritual thing of a carnal man: nevertheless least I might seem to
neglect, or rather to contemn your request: behold I send what our penury
has been able to affourd you Accept therefore of this short instruction, by
reading where of you may peradventure slenderly learn what you are, what you
are not, or certaynely what you ought to be: first and foremost therefore I
admonish you often and seriously to consider the end of your coming into your
monastery: that being dead to the world and your self, you may live to God
strive therefore with might and main to accomplish that for which you came
learn strongly to despise all sensible things and manfully to break, and
nolesse whole somely to for sake your self. make haste to mortifye your
passions and vicious affections that are in you.

Busy your self in repressing the instable evagations of your heart: strive to
overcome weariness, Idlenes-and the yerksomnesse of your infirm mind: spend
your daily labor in these things, let this be your glorious contention and
healthful affliction: Be not remiss, but arise; watch look about you, and
expose your self wholly, least your be evilly partial to your self: God
requires thus much of you so does your state.

You are called a Monk: see that you be truly what you are called: Do the
work of a Monk labor earnestly in beating down and casting forth vice.

Be always armed against the frowardness of nature, against the haughtynesse
of mind against the pleasures of your flesh, and the inticements of
sensuality: understand well what I say if you permit pride, boasting, vain
glory, self complacence to domineer over your reason, you are noe monk.

If you frowardly follow your own sense and dare despise every humble office
you are not what you are called you are no monk.

If as much as in you lies you repel not envy, hatred, maliciousness,
indignation: if you reject not rash suspicions, childish complaynts wicked
murmurings, you are noe monk.

If a contentious and earnest strife being risen between you and another you
do not presently treat of a reconciliacion and what wrong soever has been
done you do not presently pardon that but seek for revenge and retain a
voluntary private grudge, and not a true and sincere affection in your heart,
or show outwardly signs of disaffection, nay if when occasion and necessity
requires you defer to help him that has injured you, you are noe monk, you
are noe christian, you are abominable before God.

If having done amiss you are ashamed regularly to accuse your self, and
freely to confess your fault: if being blamed, reproved and corrected, you be
not patient and humble, you are noe monk.

If you neglect readily and faithfully to obey your ghostly father if you
refuse to reverence and sincerely to love him as Gods vicar, you are noe monk.

If you willingly withdraw your self from the devine ofce and other
conventuall acts: if you assist not watchfully and reverently in the service of
God, you are noe monk.

If neglecting internal things you take care only about the external and with
a certain dry custom move your body, but not your heart to the works of
religion, you are noe monk.

If you give not your mind to holy reading and other spiritual exercises: if
you have your mind so possessed whith transitory matters, that you seldom
lift your self up to eternal, you are no monk.

If you desire delicate and superfluons meats, and intemperately long after
the drinking of wine beyond the measure of a cup, especially if you be in
health, and have beer or other convenient drink sufficiently, you are noe
monk.

If foolishly you require precious apparel, soft beds, and other solaces of
the flesh, which agree not with your state and profession: if loving corporal
rest you refuse to undergo labor and affliction for Gods sake, you are noe
monk.

If you cannot endure solitude and silence but are delighted with idle
speeches, and inordinate laughter, you are no monk.

If you love to be with seculars, if you desire to wander out of the monastery
through the villages and cittyes, you are no monk.

If you presume to take any small matter, to send, receave or keep any things
without the knowledge or permission of your superior, you are noe monk.

If you esteem not the ordinations of holy religion though never so little and
willingly do transgres them, you are noe monk: To conclude, if you seek any
other thing in the monastery, but God and which might and main aspire to
perfection you are noe monk.

As I have said therefore, that you may truly be what you are called, and may
not wear the habit of a monk in vain, do the work of a monk. Arm your
self against your self and as much as in you lies overcome and subdue your
self if presently you find not the peace you desire if, I say as yet you
cannot be at rest, but are troubled and assailed by brutish motions and
turbulent passions: yea if so be, by Gods permission for your own profitt
throughout your whole life you shall have to do with such enemies, despair
not, be not effeminately dejected but humbling your self before God, stand and
be steadfast in your place, and skirmish stoutly: for even the vessel of
election, S. Paul endured temptations all his life time, in the which he was
buffeted by the Angel of Satan. When he often beseeched our lord to be freed
from this trouble he obtained it not, for that it was not expedient for him:
But our lord answered his prayer, my grace is sufficient for thee, for power is
perfected in infirmity. And so afterward S. Paul did gratefully endure the
scourge of temptation. Being comforted by the example of this most strong and
invincible champion, fainte not in temptation but endure manfully, remayninge
fixed and immovable in this holy purpose. For without doubt, this labor of
yours is grateful to God, although the same seem hard and insufferable to
you: go through this spiritual martyrdom with an invincible mind. Doubt not
although you be a thousand times wounded, and as often trod under foot: if you
stand to it, if you give not ground to your enemy and like a coward cast not
away your weapons, you shall receave a crown do according to your ability and
commend the rest to Gods disposing saying: As thy will is in heaven, so be it
done: let the devine will and ordination be your chief consolation: which way
soever you turn your self, where soever you are, you shall find tribulations
and temptations as long as this life lasts: which that you may patiently,
endure, you ought always ways to be prepared. But you are happy, if by grace
you have proceeded so far, that all grief and affliction whatsoever become
truly pleasing to you for Gods sake: what think you brother, is my glass bige
nough; or is not this yet sufficient for you but you yet desire to hear in
more express terms, more abundantly and fully how to compose your self,
within and without, or how according to reason you ought to order every day
before God.

foreground: three musicians; background: Jesus praying
CHAPTER II, How we ought to bestowne our time from our first rising to
mattins in the moring.
AS soon as you are wake and ready to rise to mattens, devoutly arm your self
with the sign of the cross, and briefly pray to God, that he will vouchsafe
to blot out the staynes of sin in you, and be pleased to help you: Then
casting all vain imaginations out of your mind think upon some other thing
that is spiritual and conceave as much puritye of heart as you can, rejoysing
in your self, that you are called up to the praise and worship up of your
creator. But if frailty of body if heaviness of sleep if conturbation of
spirit depresse you, be not out of heart, but be comforted and force your
self, overcominge all impediments with reason and willingness for the kingdom
of heaven suffers violence and the violent bear it away certainly according
to the labor with you undergo for the love of God, such, shall be your
recompense and reward, being come of from your bed commend and offer your self
both body and soul to the most high make haste to the quire as to a place of
refuge, and the garden of spiritual delights until devine office begin, study
to keep your mind in peace and simplicity, free from troubles and the
multiplicity of uncertain thoughts collecting a godly and sweet affection
toward your God by sincere meditation or prayer. In the perfourmance of the
devine office have a care to pronounce and hear the holy words reverently,
perfectly, thankefully and attentively that you may taste, that your lord is
sweet, and may feel that the word of God has incomprehe^sible sweetness and
power for whatsoever the holy Ghost has dictated is indeed the life procureing
food, and the delightful solace of a chaste sober, and humble soul remember
therefore, to be there faithfully attentive but avoid too vehement cogitations
and motions of mind, especially, if your head be weak, least being hurt or
wearyed, confounded and streightened internally, you shutt the sanctuary of God
against your self: reject likewise too troublesome care, which commonly
brings with it pusillanimity and restlesnesse, and persever with a gentle,
quiet, and watchful spirit in the praises, of God without singularity. But if
you cannot keep your heart from evagations, be not dejected in mind: but
patiently endeavor, patiently do what lies in your power, committing the rest
to the divine will. Persever in your godly affection toward God and even your
very defects, which you are noe way able to exclude, will in a manner, beget
you consolation. For as the earth which is of a convenient nature, does by the
casting of dunge, ostentimes more fruitfully send forth her seeds: so a mind
of good will out of the defects which by constraint it susteyneth shall in due
time receave the most sweet fruit of divine visitation, if it endure them with
patience. And what profitt do you reap by being impatient: do you not heap
callamity upon calamity; do you not show your want of true humility and
bewray in your self a pernitions propriety: As long as you do reverently
assist, and are ready with a prompt desire of will to attend, you have
satified God: neither will he impute the inordinatenesse of this instability to
you, if so be by your negligence you give not consent unto it, and before the
time of prayer you set a guard over your senses, if you cannot offer a perfect
dutifulness, offer at least a goodwill: offer a right intent in the spirit of
humility: and so the devil shall not find any occasion to cavil against
you: Although you have nothing else to offer but a readiness, in body and
spirit to serve our lord in holy fear be sure of it, that you shall not loose
your reward. But woe to your soul, if you be negligent and remiss, and care
not to give attendance: for it is writ. Cursed is the man, that does the
work of God negligently. Be diligent, that you may perform what you are
able, if you be not able to perform what you desire; upon this security be
not troubled, when impediments happen and you be not able to perform as much
as you would, when I say distraction of your senses, dejection of mind,
dryness of heart grief of head, or any other misery and temptation afflicted
you, beware you say not: I am left, our lord has cast me away, my duty
pleases him not: these are words befitting the children of distrust endure
therefore with a patient and joyful mind all things for his sake, that has
called and chosen you firmly believing that he is near to those that are of a
contrite heart. For if you humbly without murmering carry this burden laid on
you, not by mortal tongue, to be uttered, what a deal of glory you heap up
for your self in the life to come. You may truly say unto God: As a beast am I
become with thee: Believe me Brother, if being repleat with interne all
sweetness and lifted up abone your self, you fly up to the third heaven and
there converse with angels, you shall not do so great a deed as if for Gods
sake you shall affectually endure grief and banishment of heart and be
conformeable to our savior: when, in extreme, sorrow, auginsh fear, and
adversity crying unto his father: let thy will be done: who also being thrust
through his hands and feet hanging on the cross, had not whereon to lean his
head: who also most lovingly endured for thee all the griefs and disgraces of
his most bitter passion. Therefore in holy longanimity, contain your self,
and expect in silence until it shall please the most high to dispose
otherwise: And certainly in that day it shall not be demanded of you hove much
intetnall sweetness you have here felt: But how faith full you have bin in
the love and service of God.

top: Jesus arrested at night; bottom: a fashionable gathering
CHAPTER III. God has too sorts of servants and the description of both.
Among those that are called the servants of God, many serve him unfaythfully,
few faithfully indeed unfaithful servants as long as they have sensible
devotion, and present grace of tears, do serve God with alacrity, they pray
willingly, joyfully go about good works, and seem to live in deep peace of
heart: But as soon as God has thought it good to with draw that devotion, you
shall see them troubled, chafe, become malicious and impatient and at last
neither willing to be at their prayers, nor amy other divine exercises. And
because they feel not internal consolations as they desire, they perniciously
betake themselves to those that are external, and contrary to the spirit:
where by it is manifest, that they are not purely Gods gift, and abuse them to
their own pleasure: for if they did love God purely and did not vitiosty rest
in his gifts, they would remain peaceable in God, those gifts being taken
away: and would not even then turneout of the way to unlawful consolations.
Therefore they are unfaithful, because in adversity they keep not touch with
God. They believe for a while and shrinck back in the time of trial: They
would have all things go on their side, and endure nothing that goes against
them: if God grant those things that they would have, they serve him, if he
deny them, they leave him: nay in prosperity they serve not God, but
themselves. And in all things would rather have their own will done, then Gods
they place fanctity, in internal sweetness and consolation rather then in the
perfect mortification of vices: being ignorant that by the withdrawing of
devotion it more certainly appears. If one truly love God then by the
infusion of it. For that sensible devotion is commonly more truly a natural
then spiritual devotion. But whatsoever it be, unless a man make use of it
wisely, it is wont oftentimes to bring him that is so affected, to a hidden
kind of pride, a wicked complacence, and a vain security as we daily see in
these unfaithful servants: for as soon as they are tickled with this inward
sweetness, they will for sooth begin to judge and despise others: they think
themselves great saints, and the secretaries of God. They expect and
wonderfully long after divine revelations: and wish that some miracles were don
by them, or of them: by which others might take notice of the holiness, which
they think, they have, but have not. Thus do they use to vanishe away in
their own imaginations, who gape more after sensible grace, then the giver of
grace: But faithful servants behave themselves far otherwise for they seek
not themselves, but God: neither their own consolation, but chiefly the will
and honor of God: they always fly propriety, whether God be pleased to
infuse, or not to infuse the influence of internal sweetness, they are all
one and persisting in equality of mind, cease not to love and praise God it is
not internal darkness, nor difficulty of senses, nor coldness of affections
nor dryness of heart, nor dejection of mind, nor drowsinesse of spirit, nor
adversity of temptation: to conclude it is neither misery of adversity, nor
success of prosperity, that is able to heave them out of their place: for
although peradventure they feel in the inferior powers of the soul the
oppression of inordinate sorrow proceeding from adversity, or the violence of
sensual delight arising out of prosperity, they are not for all that dejected:
because they continue quiet in the reason or higthet part of the soul, and
do conform their will to the divine will or permission: and grieve that they
feel the least contradiction of unseemely motions. Being founded therefore as
a firm rock they persiste steadfast in the love of God, as they whose chief
comfort is in the will of God: They are always devour: because with all their
power they avoid and abhor whatsoever is displeasing to God, and may never
so little contaminate the purity of their heart, and committinge themselves in
all chances to God, do still possess a pure free, and quiet mind. This is
the truest devotion and most acceptable to God. The other sensible devotion,
which is more familiare to novices, or those that are lately converted is not
dureable and sure yet not with standing it is very profitable to us, if we
wisely make use of it: The faithful servants (for so I still call them, whom
christ calls not servants, but frineds) faithful servants I say, do seek
after that effectual, and most pleasant sweetness of grace also: they seek
after the joy of our lords salvation: they seek after his most lovely
countenance, and most sweet embraces: but they do this with a spiritual and
bashful, not with a sensual greediness, or childish lightness, or a troubled
impatience. They desire the gift of God, not that they may be sensually
delighted in them: but that being made more fervent by them, and more pure from
all inordinatenesse, they may please their heavenly bride groom. They love the
gift of God, and willingly thank him for them: but yet they keep themselves
as it were quiet and free from them, as long as they rest not in them. By grace
they go forword to the giver of grace, and supreme good, in whom only it is
lawful for them to rest: they are truly happy because by how much the less
they stick to those gifts they receave so many the more. And although they
benever so much endowed with blessings from God, they lift not up their mind,
they despise not others but themselves, I say, they despise and acknouwledge
themselves unworthy of all spiritual grace, they always keep in mind that
whatsoever they have it is of Gods mere mercy: and that of them more is
exacted, to whom more is given or committed. And so continving in holy fear,
and by these gists proceeding in humility, they confess themselves to be
below the lowest. They rejoice and glory with in them selves, if being oppressed
with unjust infamy, reproaches, injuries and uttermost scorn, they have
imitated christ: not if they could be elevated above themselves by excess of
mind, or could see strange visions or do most apparent miracles: They
presently making the sign of cross repel the deceitful suggestions, by
which the devil indevoureth to allure them to vain glory, and self
complacence, noe way consenting to the subtilities of the wicked serpent: they
do not confidently place the hope of their salvation either in the number, or
in the merit of good works which they do: But put their trust in the freedom
of the sons of God, which they have obtained by the blood of christ lo then,
Brother, knowing the difference of the faithful and unfaithful servants,
endeavor to be of those, which may be you are not of, and strive to leave them,
of whom peradventure you are one. If you are of those you would not be of, and
are not of those of whom you would be, greive and humble your self for God
gives grace to the humble. And certainly if you humble your self in the sight
of our lord, greiving that you are yet of the number of the unfaithful, you
have already in a manner passed into the lot of the faithful; labor,
persever, fear not. You shall not be reprooved with the unfaithful, but
shall be received with the faithful. There are others also that are bound to the
divine service, and yet connot be cal^ed either unfaithful or faithful
servants of God: these a man may lawfully call the idle slaves of the devil. I
mean those unhappy wretches that esteeming either not art all, or very little
of devotion, or the grace of God, and altogether neglecting the interior
parts, make a show, as though, they honored God with their lips, but their
heart is far from him, these being plunged over head and ears in a sea of
evil, do little think of their own salvation. These are all one to day as
they were yesterday they come from the quire as they went thither viz unclean,
tepid apt to noe goodness, wandering, dissolute, without fear; without
reverence By the divine praises, which with a polluted month they utter, they
more exasperate, then please God. I would to God these, had kept them in the
world: for what do they in monasteries why tread they on holy ground, why
devour they the alms of the just: why pollute they the Angelical schools of
spiritual exercises with carnal delights. If they intended to live uncleanly,
they should have remained in a place for their purpose, and not have entered
into places of purity: living negligently in monasteries they double the
punnishments of hell, which their ill living in the world had deserved. But it
is out of our way to speak more of these things: wherefore I return whence I
strayed.

top: Jesus whipped; bottom: people of fashion bathe and groom
CHAPTER IV. That for everye howr of the day we ought to cleave to some settled
exercise least our mind grow sluggish.
So that you may be seted in your private exercises prescribe your self some
thing what to do every howr, and to be busied in: But so, that if at any
time either upon obedience, or any other reasonable cause or chance happening
you abbreviate any exercise, or wholly overslip it, you be not inordinately
vexed for you ought chiefly to endeavor to attain to this, that in liberty
and purity of heart (rejecting all propriety) you may always persever
peaceable, and without trouble before God. For this is acceptable to our lord
above all other exercises be they never so laborious and hard, whatsoever
therefore shall hinder this liberty in you although it be spiritual and seem
very profitable occasion so requiring, leave it as much as obedience does
permit. Endeavor I say, to repel, all restlesnesse of heart, which choaketh
true peace, and perfect trust in God with all spiritual proceedings let not
vicious idleness at any time take place, for it distroieth souls. Avoid
also idle businesses I mean those that are unprofitable, Neither mervayle at
this kind of speech: let not vicious idleness at anytime take place, for there
is also a commendable idleness, which is, when the soul fixed on God, and
exempted from the noise and imagination of all sensible things, does rest as it
were idle in internal silence, and in the most blessed embracements of her
beloved to which if the hand of our lord bring you, you shall profitably and
happily be idle otherwise, always either read, or meditate or pray or take in
hand something else, that shall be serious and necessary and truly if you will
settle your self with all diligence to the study of scripture you will be
wonder fully comforted and every spiritual thing will begin to grow sweet
unto you: and so it will come to pass that being accustomed to holy delights,
you will easily contemn those that are carnal: and your mind will be
wonderfully strenghned in your good purpose. To the end therefore that you may
merit so great a fruit willingly and wisely give your self to reading; that
is to say in reading seek spiritual consolation and profitt and the love of
God, not curiosity, not superfluous understa^ding and knowledge, not neatenesse
and elegance of words: for the kingdom of God is not in elegance of speech,
but in holiness of lise: which elegance of speech nevertheless as it is not
overcarefully to be sought after, if it be wanting: so is it not scornfully to
be rejected by him that has it, for it is also the gift of God. Receave all
things with thanks giving and all things shall help forward for your
salvation. How beit be not troubled if many of those good things which you
hear or read slip out of your memory. For as a vessel which often receaveth
water remains clean although the water powered in be presently powered out
again: so likewise if spiritual doctrine often run thorough a well willing
mind, although it abide not there, nevertheless it makes and keeps the
mind clean and pleasing to God. Your chief profitt consists not in
committing the word of doctrine to memory, but rather that the effects of the
doctrine and words remain in you, that is by this doctrine to get an internal
purity, and a ready mind to fulfill the commandments of God. Learn to apply
those things to your self that are spoken against vice for it is not safe to
wrest them against others with a fixed indgement of mind: least while you
obstinately judge another, you defile or trouble your own conscience. And so
in all things which seem any ways obseene avoid as much as in you lies even
the very least allurement of any stippery motion if by way of temptation they
do impugn, molest and trouble you importunately, contradict them with reason,
deny to give consent, and making the sign of the cross, direct your whole
intention to God: For so without hurt you may escape this danger. Furthermore
do not imitate those that observe noe order in reading, but do read what
comes first to hand, and where they first open the book: they like nothing
which is not new and strange for they loath all things that are usvall and
stale, though never so profitable. far be such instability from you: for it
does not recollect but distract the spirit: and he is dangerously sick that is
taynted with this disease: wisely bind your mind to a certainty of reading
and accustom your self to go thorougth with it, although sometimes it
administer no matter of pleasure. Read, I say not confusedly or disorderly but
methodically. Repeat those things, again and again, that are good.
Nevertheless in time of tribulation and spiritual poverty you may intermitt
what your have begun, and according to your necessity turn and apply your
self to other godly exercises, which may be more consolatory. For it is the
opinion of the fathers, that it is good to go to prayer, or meditation from
reading, and again to have recourse to reading from prayer: that prayer with a
commendable vicissitude succeeding reading, and reading succeeding prayer,
loathsomeness may be taken away: and the mind being as it were fresh and lusty
may always be the more able for the proposed work, and that the greater fruit
may be reaped of both. And what hinderance is there why a man should not make
short prayers even in reading, and aspire to God by holy desires. There are
many things that may serve either for reading, or prayer or meditation: such
are all the scriptures in which there is conference with God: Always prefer
common prayers before private: and indge them to be more profitable for you:
although sometimes they may seem more barren and unsavory In like manner
esteem of all common and regular actions for above all things obedience ought
to be in the first place you: if peradventure you demand in what prayers and
meditations you should in private chiefly exercise your self: if you will
credit me, after you have accused your self, and craved perdon for you sins,
you shall chiefly beseech God to mortify your evil passions and vicious
affections, and quite and clean to strip you of all inordinatenesse: and that
he will be pleased to grant you grace joyfully and patiently to endure all
tribulation and temptation. Ask of him profound humility and most fervent
charity. Beseech him to vouchsafe always to direct, teach, illuminate, and
protect you in all things. These things in my judgment are most necessary for
you. And indeed they are great and high, neither can they otherwise be
obtained, then by prayer persever therefore continually knocking: and without
doubt our lord will at length open unto you: and will give you as much bread as
your necessity shall require. But so you neglect not willingly to give thanks
for what you have received. For nothing displeasesh God more, then
forgetfulness and ingratitude for received benefitts. And that you may the
more willingly and sooner incline Gods benignity unto you, pray, attentively
for the state of the whole church commending unto God all the faithful both
alive and dead and every reasonable creature. Will you further hearein what
with pro, fit you may exercise your self. I will tell you: singing of psalms
is profitable, the godly meditating in other parts of scripture is profitable,
the consideration of creatures compared to their creator is profitable.

Jesus crowned with thorns; a crowd observes
CHAPTER V. How powerful and efficacious the remembrance of Christ's life and
passion is.
ALl prayers, singing of hymns thankesgiving and holy meditations are
profitable: But by consent of all, the remembrance of christ's humanity, and
especially, of his most sacred passion is most profitable and only necessary,
and whorthily. For it is the present extermination of passions and inordinate
affections, a fit refuge in temptation, and surest safeguard in dangers a
sweet refreshing in distress, a freindly rest from labor, a gentle
repressing of distractions, the true door of sanctity, the only entry to
contemplation the sweet consolation of the soul, the indeficient flame of
devine love, the sauce of all adversities, the fountain of all virtues, from
whence they flow to us, to conclude the absolute example of all perfection,
the haven, hope, trust, merit, and salvation of all christians, I knew a monk,
whose custom was to propose to himself every day some part of our lords
passion, as for example: one day he would set before his eyes Christ's being in
the garden. And withersoever he went that day, whersoever he chanced to be, if
not troubled with any other serious and necessary cogitation, whatsoever he did
outwardly, he took a special care to direct his internal eye to our lord
suffering diverse distresses in the garden, and thus would he talk with his
soul: and my soul, behold thy God. Behold daughter, attend, see and
consider, most dear: behold thy God, behold thy Creator, behold thy
father, behold thy redeemer and savior: behold thy refuge, behold thy
defender and protector, behold thy hope, trust, strength, and health. Behold
thy sanctification, purity, and perfection: behold thy help, merit and
reward: behold thy tranquillity, consolation, and sweetness: behold thy joy,
thy delights and thy life: behold thy light, and thy crown and thy glory:
behold thy love, and thy desire: behold thy treasure and all thy good:
behold thy beginning and thy end: whether art thou scattered thou wandering
daughter. How long will thou leave the light and love darkness. How long
will thou for sake peace, and involue, thy self in troubles: Return,
return thou Sunamite return, daugthter, return and recollect thy self
most dear: leave many things and embrace one: for one thing is necessary for
thee. Abide with thy lord: place thy self by thy God: go not from thy
master: sit in his shadow whom thou love, that his fruit may be sweet to
thy throat. It is good for thee to be here daughter. For hither the enemy
cannot make his approach, hear are noe snares, no dangers, noe darkness. All
things are hear safe, all things calm. Reside here willingly most dear. For
here thou shall be safe and free: thou shall be merry, and joyful. Here are
roses, lillyes and violets: here flowers of all virtues do smell most
pleasantly. Here thou shall see a brightness sweetly inligtning all things
with his rays. Here thou shall find true consolation: here thou shall find
peace and rest: to conclude here thou shall find all good. With such short
sentences he would both sharply and sweetly spur forward his soul, and call
her home, when she was wandering abroad, and force her to apply her self to
the chiefest good. Of these little sentences he would take sometimes more,
sometimes fewer, sometimes only one, sometimes two, sometimes three according
to the fervor of his devotion and the pleasure of the holy Ghost: and he would
often times iterate and repeat them. He would also force his soul to the
remembrance of those things which our savior did and suffered for her in the
garden: in the mean time one while exciting her to the consideration of our
saviors unsearchable humility, mildness, patience, most fervent and
incomprehensible charity another while to take compassion on our lord of
infinite majesty so humbled and afflicted, and then again to thank him for
so great benefitts and piety, an other while to repay love, with love and anon
to ask perdon for her sins, and then to beg this or that grace: he would
often convert his speech to these or the like affectionate and fervent
aspirations: and my soul when will thou be ready to follow the humility of
thy lord when will thou imitate his mildness when shall the example of his
patience shine in thee: when will thou be better: when will thou be free from
passions and vicious affections: when shall evil be quite distroied in thee:
when shall all inordinatenesse be blotted out in thee: when will thou
peaceably and gently endure all tribulation and temptation: when will thou
perfectly love thy God: when will thou intimately embrace him: when will thou
be wholly swalowed up in his love: when will thou be pure simple and resiened
before him: how long will it be ere thou be hindered no more from his most
chaste embracings: and that thou were immaculate and that thou did fervently
love thy God. And that thou did inseparably cleave unto thy chifest good: And
then directing the eye of his heart to heaven, or to the depth of eternal
light he would frame these aspirations: and my soul, where is thy God: where
is thy love where is thy treasure: where is thy desire: where is thy total
good when shall thou see him: when shall thou most happily enjoy him when shall
thou freely praise him with all the citticens of heaven: these and the like
aspirations would he secretly speak either mentally or with his lips taking
sometimes more sometimes fewer according to the internal motion of the holy
Ghost: he would also often accuse his soul, that it was too slow, stuggish
tepid, ingratfull, hard, insensible, unstable, miserable and unhappy. Again he
would comfort it being dejected with pusillanimity or fear, and would
encourage it with these or the like words: despair not, my soul: take comfort
daughter, and be confident most dear. If thou have sinned, and art wounded,
behold thy God: behold thy physician is ready to cure thee. He is most
courteous and most merciful and therefore willing: he is omnipotent and
therefore can pardon thy sins in a moment. Peradventure thou art afraid,
because he is thy indge: but take heart: for he that is thy indge, is also
thine advocate. He is thy advocate to defend and excuse thee doing peanance, he
is therefore also thy indge to save, not to condemn thee being humbled. His
mercy is infinitely greater then thy iniquity either is or can be: which words I
say not, that persevering in evil thou should de make thy self unworthy of
his mercy: but that being averted from evil thou should not despair of
indulgence and forgiveness thy God is most gentle, most sweet, he is wholly
amiable, wholly desirable, and wonderfully loves all things which he has
created: when thou think of him, or conceivest him in thy memory far be all
imagination of terror, austerity and bitterness from thee. When we say he is
terrible, it is not in respect of himself, but of those, that abuse his
patience and deferr to do peanance. Whose most bitter and poysonons sins as
contrairy to his most sweet and pure goodness he repelleth and punnisheth; let
not thime imperfections discourage thee too much: for thy God does not despise
thee because thou art imperfect and infirm, but loves thee exceedingly
because you desire and labourest to be more perfect: he will also help thee
if thou persist in thy good intention: and will make thee perfecter, yea
peradventure, (which thou little hopest for) wholly fayer, and every way
pleasing to him. Thus and innumerable other ways would he frindly talk with
his soul, and invite her by chaste speeches to the chaste love of her beloved:
he would also turn his speech to our lord and aspiring to him by holy love
would say: and good JESU, pious Pastor, sweet master, king of eternal glory,
when shall I be immaculate, and truly humble before thee: when shall I truly
despise all sensible things for thee: and when shall I perfectly forsake my
self: when shall I bestript of all propriety. For vulesse there were propriety
in me there would not be self-will in me: passions and inordinate affections
would have no place in me. I should not seek my self in any thing propriety
only makes thee impediment and medium between thee and me: propriety only
does hinder thee from me: when therefore shall I cast of all propriety: when
shall I freely resign my self to thy divine pleasure: when shall I serve thee
with a clean, quiet, simple, and calm mind: when shall I perfectly love thee
in the arms of my soul: when shall I love thee with most fervent desire: when
shall all my tepidity and imperfection be swallowed up by the immensity of thy
love: and my desire, my treasure, o my total good, o my beginning and end: O
my God, o sweetness of my soul, o my consolation, my life, my love. O that my
soul might enjoy thy most sweet embracings: O that were indisolubly bound with
thy love: would it were perfectly united to thee. For what is to me in heaven.
And besides thee what would I upon earth. God of my heart and God my portion for
ever. When shall the world be silent to me, when shall the impediments,
troubles, and vicissitudes of this life cease to me: when shall my pilgrimage
be ended: when shall my sejourning be consummate when shall the miserable
captivity of this bannishment be disolved: when shall the shadow of mortality
decrease and the day, of eternity draw near: when shall I lay down the burden
of this body and see thee: when shall I praise thee with thy saints without
impediment happily, and eternally: O my God, my love, my total good. He was
often wont to use such aspirations knowing that by the exercise of them humane
spirit is more effectually united to the divine spirit and that there by man
attayneth the sooner to the perfect mortification of himself. He had then
ready every where: But if at any time he had more sufficient leisure, he would
then (sitting as Mary Magdalen did) rejoice to linger more freely and that more
to the honor of God, then to the inordinate pleasing of himself: he would not
in the mean time omit with a certain internal effusion of heart, by a
sincere and sweet affection to adore, bless, give thanks, and pray: Moreover
tourning his speech to the blessed virgin the mother of God, as to a most
merciful lady, and most liberal stewardesse of heavenly treasures, he would
ingeminat his pions complaints before her and with an holy importunity extort a
benediction. Another day he would sert before himself how our savior betrayed
by Judas was taken and concerning this point he would iterate his foresaid
exercises: and so would go through with the passion in order, and having ended
would begin again. And about that part of the passion, which did represent
Christ hanging on the cross he did not employ himself in order and in his
proper day, but every day at least briefly, if so be he thought it convenient,
exciting his soul to the earnest contemplation of these things. On every
solemnity of our savior or the blessed virgin he would (if he thought it good)
propose to the eyes of his mind the representation of that feast in steed of
part of our lords passion which otherwise was that day to be frequented: And
would perform his internal exercises or frindly discourses with his soul and
about the work, cause, mystery and joy of that festivity. He was also much
delighted with singing the psalms. And I know, that by the continued custom
of this holy exercise he reaped foreground: man riding chariot; background:
Jesus falls under the cross great consolation and singular profitt of his
labors.

I will set down an example imitate of it, if you please. For by this means
you shall be accustomed to apprehend the presence of God: by this means you
shall begin to have your senses sober, watchful, exercised, and calm: by this
means you shall prepare your self away to the highest contemplation and
perfection: thus wheresoever you are you shall spend your time profitably:
vain and instable cogitations being cast forth out of the corners of your
heart and such as are serious being entertained in their place: you may frame
your self meditations and aspirations in other terms, then we have, if you
perceave the looking in your book to hinder your mind, where by you are the
less able to reach to God, and to be united to him, lay a side your book:
again if you perceave it does further your exercise, make use of it: for I
would that your devotion should be free to you, and that you should follow the
grace of the holy Ghost without confusion or anxiety, moreover, by aspirations
(as you may perceave by the above written coppyes) we understand certain short
jaculatory prayers, or burning foreground: a rich banquet; background:
crucified Jesus is offered wine from a sponge desires, and lively and amorous
affections to God. He that has not as yet undertaken the beginning of
internal conversation and his own mortification or has at least but newly
begun, ought not peradventure so precisely to follow this rule.

But it shall be expedient for him to exercise himself for a while according
to this manner which I shall opscribe: let him therefore every day propose to
himself some part of our saviors passion and let him study to have recourse
in mind to the same whether he stand, go, sit, or rest: unless he have some
other profitable or necessary thing in his heart to treat of. And let him
often discourse with his soul in the presence of Christ suffering, either
thus, or after the like manner: O my soul behold thy God, behold
ungrateful, attend thou wretch, consider thou poor soul: behold thy God,
behold thy Creator and Redeemer: behold how the king of eternal glory
humbled himself for thee: behold how the highest majesty debased himself
for thee: see what sorrows, bitterness and indignityes thy savior suffers
for thee: Consider with what charity he loved thee, who undertook so great
calamity and affliction for thee. Arise my soul, arise out of the dust, slip
thy head out of the collar thou captive daughter of Sion. Arise forsake the
pudle of thy vices and leave the vucleanesse of thy negligent life. How long
will thou take pleasures in perils. How long will thou esteem anxiety and
torments to be rest: how long will thou securely sleep in destruction. How
long will thou willingly, leave the right way and wander abroad fart and near
by unknowen places. Return unto our lord thy God: for he expects thee: make
have, be not slack: for he is ready to receave thee: he will meet thee with
open arms: only deferr not thou to return: Come to JESUS, and he will heat
and purifi thee: Join thy self to JESUS, and he will illuminate thee. Adhere
to JESUS, and he will bless and save thee: sometimes let him more expressly
upbraid his soul of ingratitude and perverseness, saying: alas my soul, how
ungrateful have thou bin to thy God: he has bestowed innumerable and most
admirable benefitts on thee, and thou still repaye evil for good: he has
created thee according to his own image and likeness: he has endowed thee
with immortality: he has deputed heaven, and earth and all things contained in
them to thy commodity: he has enriched thee with many gists and graces: he
has brought thee to the light of the Catholic faith: he has with drawn
thee from the dangerous waves of the world, and conveyed thee to the haven and
tranquillity of a monastical life, where thou (as in a most sweet paradise of
spiritual pleasures) might have infinite occasion of holy joy and good
works: he has patiently borne with thee, greviously sinning, and has
preserved thee from the jaws of hell. The king has bin incarnate for thee:
thy Creator for thy sake has become thy Brother: Neither did he think it
sufficient to be borne for thee: wherefore he would also suffer for thy sake,
he endured sorrow and distresses, for thy sake, he was betrayed and taken for
thy sake, he was spit on and buffeted: for thy sake: he was scourged, and
wounded with a crown of thorns: for thy sake he was smytten with a reed, and
laden with the burden of the cross: for thy sake he was nailed to the cross
and drunk vinegar: for thy sake he wept and shed his most a banquet holy
blood: for thy sake he died and was buried. He has adopted thee to be heir of
the kingdom of heaven: he has promised those things unto thee, which neither
eye has seen, nor heart of man can comprehend: But thou have left and
contemned him who has bin so many ways beneficial to thee thou have cast
away the holy fear of him that loved thee: thou have shaken of his sweet ioke,
that has elected thee: thou art become as one of the daughters of Beliall: as
an impudent harlot, thou have iniquityes, worshipped without modesty: Thou have
compacted with death: Thou have given thy hand to the devil: thou have bin
most prompt to all wickedness: thou have heaped evil upon evil, and have
rejoiced to add worse to the worst. By thy wickedness thou have again
crucified JESUS CHRIST, who had chosen thee for his spouse: thou have renewed
his wounds by thy crimes. Who will give thee groans and sighs: who will give
thee a spring of tears, that thou may night and day bewail thine
ingratitude: O unhappy wretch, what will thou do o that thou had kept thy
self in the state of innocence: and that thou had remained immaculate: O
that thou had not miserably defiled thy self with dishonesty: O that thou
had not gone, astray from thy God: thou have lost thine innocence thou art
defiled, thou art become dishonest, thou have gone astray from thy God: Alas
poor wretch and what will thou do: to whom will thou fly: from whom will thou expect help: from whom, but from him, whom thou have offended: he is
most pitiful, most courteous most merciful. Humble thy self, power out thy
self like water in his sight, and he will take pity on thee: sometimes let
him turn his lamentations to our lord with these or the like words: Alas my
lord JESU, what have I done: how have I left thee: how have I despised thee:
how am I become forgetful of thy name: how have I cast aside thy name: how
have I cast aside thy fear: how have I trod thy law under my feet: how
have I trasgressed thy precepts. O me, my God, o me, my Creator: O me, my
Savior: O me, my life and my total good, woe be to me wretched creature, woe
be to me, woe be to me, because I have sinned, woe be to me because I have made
my self like to a brute beast, woe be to me because I am become more silly
then a sheep. O good JESU, o loving sheepherd, o sweet master help me. Set
me on my feet, stretch forth thy hand to me being in danger. Cleanse me from
my filth, cure my wound confirm my weakness, save me from destruction. I
confess my self unworthy to tread on the earth, I am unworthy to behold the
light, I am unworthy of thy aid and grace. For great is mine ingratitude,
great, yea too great is the enormity of sins: never the less thy! mercy is
infinitely greater: Therefore, o God, thou lover of mankind, and my only hope,
have mercy on me according to thy great mercy: and according to the multitude
of thy commiserations take away mine iniquity. Some times as if he were risen
out of adreame, falling on his knees in the sight of our lord, let him
affectionately say: lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Or this: O
God be propitious to me a sinner: or that have mercy on me JESUS, son of
David: or that other: o lord help me, So likewise let him power forth his
heart before the Virgin Mary the mother of our lord, and all the Saints of God,
humbly suing for their intercession.

CHAPTER VI. We must daily call to munde the manifould sins which we have
committed.
ANd very day, or certainly very often, when occasion shall serve let him
recollect him self, and with a profound humility firmly porposing amendment,
let him call to mind, and particularly confess before our lord the sins of
his fore passed life but especially those by which he has most greviously
offended the divine goodness. But it will be indiscretion to dwell long upon
those that belong to the frailty of the flesh, least the remembrance of them
and the longer treating of the old sin breed a new sin by unlawful delight:
In which confession, contrition and sensible devotion, let him accustom to
lament, more that he has behaved him selfs contumelionsly and ingratfully to
words his Creator and father, then that he has brought him self in danger of
eternal punishment.

In the forms of lamentation and godly complaints which we have prescribed, he
need not care for running over many sentences: But let him take which he will,
and as many as he will, observing no order if he make choice of only one, or
two, or three, which soever thy be, he may repeat again and again, he shall
do well. We would that he should do freely according to his devotion always
avoiding confusion and perplexity: I know one, that being externally; busied,
in his conversion to our lords passion among chaste discourses took delight to
call to mind these few words, or the like: O good JESU, o pious Pastor, o
sweet Master: good JESU, have mercy on me: pious Pastor direct me: sweet
Master teach me: my lord help me: Another there was that did take delight
torune over sometimes more, sometimes fewer of the afor said lamentations and
to express them in diversity of words recording to his affection. Let our
yoing beginner, as I have said, be free in these things, and let him stir
himself to compunction and diligence in his spiritual purpose by meditating,
if he please upon death purgatory, judgment, hell and heaven.

Which kind of meditation, by how much the nearer it draws to liberal
fear and the love of God by so much it is the more acceptable to foreground:
musicians play for a lady; background: angels our lord, and more affectuall for
the purifing of the soul: again by how much the more it participateth of
liberal and servile fear by so much is it the less profitable: By liberal
fear we fear to sin, least we offend our most bountefull lord God, and so
loose his favor and familiarity. By servile fear we fear to do ill, least
we should undergo damnation and punishment: Nevertheless it is good to be
with drawn from sinning by servile fear but so, that we stay not there, but
pass on to liberal fear: in meditating on eternal glory, let him go thus
or in the like manner to work: o how blessed is that heavenly Jerusalem: the
walls whereof consist of most precious stones: the gates where of shine with
most choice pearls: the streets where of are paved with most pure gold: the
gardens simile being dekt with flowers most incomprehensibly flourishing. There
the sound of joy is perpetual: there the canticle of gladness is over song by
an unwearied quire: there the jubily of exultation is alvvayes renewed there
the instruments of the saints do alvvayes resoud: there cinnamon and baulme
incessantly breath forth an unspeakable odor of sweetness: there is peace
and rest overcoming all sense: there is temperatnesse and calmnesse beyond all
human reach there is eternal day and one spirit of all: there is sure
security, secure eternity, eternal tranquillity quiet happiness, happy
sweetness, and svveete mirth: there the just shall shime as the sun in the
kingdom of their father. O what happenesse is it to be among the quires of
Angels, to have perpetual fellowship with the holy Patriarchs and Prophets,
with the holy Confessors and Virgins and with the most glorious Mother of God.
Not to fear, not to be sorrowful, not to be in anguish, not to be greived,
not to be troubled with tediousness, to endure no labor, no impediment, no
loathsomeness, no necessity: O what a wealth of consolation what a sea of
delights, what an abundance of joys, what profundity of most pure pleasure
will it behold that incircumscriptible light, to see that most amiable
brightness, to see that unspeakable glory of the moster high Trinity, to see
the God of Gods in Sion, to see him not ariddle, but face to face, to see also
the glorified humanity of the only begotten God for if the visible bravery of
the heavens be a pleasant sight, or to behold the glittering foreground: a man
with riches and food; background: Thomas puts hands in Jesus's side(?)
clearness of the stars, to see the glorious beutye of the sun, to see the
shining of the palefaced moon, to consider the gratfull light of the air, to
contemplate the elegant neatness of birds, flowers, grass and colors, to
listen to the sweet chanting, of nightinger als and larkes, to hear the
melodious harmony of Harp and Lute, to smell to the fragrant Roses and
Lillyes, to draw the breath that spices and perfumes send forth, to taste the
deliciousness of diverse palate pleasing fruits: if I say, there be so great
pleasure in these things, what a torrent of most sincere delight light will it
be perfectly to contemplate that immense beauty, and perfectly to taste that
infinite sweetness from whence all beauty, all sweetness of things created
flows down to us: The spring tide representh unto us the state of eternal
felicity, and the future resurrection: for then we see heaven earth, trees and
all things else with a certain new grace to be decked with admireable
ornaments: not withstanding there is greater difference beweene that which it
represently, and that which is represented, then between noone and midinght.
Blessed therefore, yea thrice blessed is foreground: man in a luxurious bed;
background: priest burns sacrifice on altar(?) that heavenly Jerusalem where
nothing wants that may please and whence all things are banished that may
displease, where almighty God is happily praised for ever. Let him learn
purely to frequent the joys of this supernall city, to love and desire them,
yet not so much for his one profitt, as for the profitt and honor of God.
Although indeed the meditation of eternal life may be more sincerely practiced
by him, that has bin a proficient in internal conversation, then by him that
has scarcely attained to the beginning of his own mortification, and knows
better how to seek himself then God. In our above related meditation let a
novice exercise himself continually for the space of one, three, or six
months, yea for a whole year or more: until he perceave with in himself an
absolute contempt of the world and himself, and that he begineth to feel the
fervent purpose of a spiritual life to take root in him. Sum are with more
difficulty, some more easily turned to the better. And some, whom it pleases
God ont of his most infinite favor most liberally to prevent are presently
changed. In the mean time he may also employ himself in thankesgiving in
praising God, and other prayers: but let his chief employment be in reasonable
mourning for, and persecuting of his sins. Let him not be troubled if he
cannot draw tears externally for he lacks not tears internally, that truly
hates all sin and iniquity.

Now after he has in some measure reformed the image of God with in himself
by healthful bitterness of mourning and contrition, he may with greater
confidence and profitt imitate the above proposed example of exercise.

Therefore let him take courage, and fervently prepare himself for a more
intimate familiarity with the heavenly briedegroome. But as long as he is weak
or cold he shall kindle in himself the fire of divine love by serious
meditating on the incarnation or passion of the only begotten son of God,
sweetly conferring with his soul concerning these things. By which meditation
being once inflamed, let him compose himself by prayer and aspirations,
desiring, by them to unite his spirit to the chiefest good. If he often persist
by this means to draw his heart to the love of God, he shall soon bring
himself to that pass, that presently at the first convention of his mind or
aspiration without any premeditation he may be able to separate himself from
creatures and their imagination, and plunge himself in the sweetness of
divine love. Then he shall not so much need to remember each, particular sin
of his life past in his penance before God, and with sorrow to direct the
insight of his heart unto him, for so might his freedom and affection toward
good be hindered: but rather let him amorously direct his heart to God himself
detesting whatsoever may separate or with draw him from him neither do we
mean that he should negligently forget his sins: but so to remember them,
that the remembrance hinder not a greater profitt, therefore let him confess
them daily to God rather summarily then particulerle. Truly we have a more
present remedy against lesser sins, when we turn to God by a sweet and
effectual affection of love, then when we tediously bisi our selves in the
consideration of them, and severe punishment of them. Let him therefore cast
them away into the bottomless depth of Gods divine mercy and goodness, that
like a sparkle of fire in the midest of the sea they may there perish. Let him
endeavor to reject quite and clean all inordinate pusillanimity, and
superfluons scruples of conscience, and perplexed diffidence whenever they
arise. For unless they be presently lopped of they do diverse ways chooke up
the alacrity of the mind, and very much hinder our internal going forward.

CHAPTER VII. Every one ought to consider his own ability and to proceed
accordingly.
MOreover let him attempt nothing beyond his strength, but be content with his
lot. If he cannot reach as far as he desires, let him reach as far as he
can: And unless he flatter himself, he may easily know what proceedings he
is able to make. Nevertheless the devine bounty is liberal, infusing it self
wheresoever it finds a mind worthyly prepared.

Wherefore if our spiritual practitioner be not yet admitted to the sublimity
of contemplation and perfect charity let him think himself as yet not
prepared for the receipt of so great a good. And what good would it do him to
receave that grace, which he knew not how to make good use of. Let him make
haste to pull up all vice by the root, that he may be the fitter. But still
with this proviso, that he strive not beyond his strength. Let him not
impatiently try to forerun Gods grace, but humbly to follow it. Let him not,
I say, violently force his spirit thither, whither he cannot reach: least
presuming which he ought not, he tumble himself down headlong by his own
violence, and being crushed be punished for his rashness. Let him so tend to
perfection that unbrideled violence and turbulent solicitude bear no part in
his endeavors. Let him attend the measure of grace given him, and with all
remember, that he shall far more easily, safely, quickly, and happily,
attain to the highest degree of contemplation, it is to the comprehending of
mystical divinity, if he be touched and rapt by the mere grace of God, then
if he endeavor to attain unto it by his own labors: Let him always
therefore observe a mean with discretion, least by excess he rum into
defects. The bread of tears is good and many when they should refresh
themselves surfeit by it. For they insist so long in tears, and with so great
confusion and agitation, that both spirit and body are feign to lie down under
the too much intent or extended exercise. We confess that many by discretion
and the help of the holy Ghost can long and profitably mourn. And there are
many again that being internally inebriated with the torrent of pleasure which
they take in God. Do unseasonably urge and spur forward themselfes to greater
violence, and desist not from this indiscreet forcing themselfes, until being
hurt and confounded they fall and faynte in themselfes, and are thenceforth
made unapt to receave the sweetness of grace. Wherefore the internal heat
and violence is always so to be moderated that the spirit be not
extinguished, but comforted by it. They whose heads are of a good temper, may
more fervently and strougly insist in fervent aspirations: but they that have
weak heads (especially if the weakness grow by indiscretion are not able to
exercise themselfes otherwise then very gently and moderatly. And such can
scarrely sometimes admit a simple compunction of mind, or meditation, or
reading wihout hurt yea although they leave their head on some place. So great
is the calamity that proceeds of the vice of indiscretions. But let them not
despair, that are brought to that pass: But let them diligently (as much as
in them lies) avoid the discommodity of this hurt or confusion, and humbly
pray to God for the restoring of that which they have spoiled themselfes. If
God be pleased to hear them, let them be thankful: if not, let them bless
our lord: and for his love learn according to his pleasure patiently to endure
this misery, which they have done on themselfes. Let our internal
practitioner beware also of all lightness of inconstancy and instability. Let
him take in hand those exercises that are good: and let him go on with what
he has once begun, although they like him not: but so that the pleasure of
the holy Ghost be followed in all, the decree of his own will and appointment
being rejected. For the holy Ghost does diverse ways as it were invite us and
use to as bring us by diverse paths to that wine celler and bedchamber of
divine love: whose instinct we must still obsearve and most readily follow,
laying aside all propriety wherefore this our spiritual scoller shall often
present himself to the holy Ghost as a prepared instrument: and which way
soever the holy Ghost shall bend and apply, let him presently follow: if at
any time he shall be drawn or elevated up to the soaring contemplation and
embracements of the chiefest good, let him freely offer up himself: and if
the passion of Christ, or any holy meditation and imagination occur, let him
not stay at it, but with all expedition fly thither, whether he is called by
the spirit

When he dout fully staggereth in his purpose not knowing how he ought to
proceed in his begun enterprise, let him use the counsel of men that are
prudent, expert, and humble: for so he shall be a greater proficient, then if
relying upon himself he proceed according to his owe inventions.

But in the mean time let him not forget carefully to have recourse to the
remedy of prayer humbly beseeching in all things to be directed and illuminated
by our lord: least at any time being deceaved he follow error instead of
truth. And let him always remembet, that he can never perfectly be at leisure
for God, unless his heart be free and clean from all things besides God: you
have now heard, Brother, after a manner how he should begin and how he should
go forward in external exercises, that desires to attain to any excellent
degree of a pure life. It shall be your part not only to hear and read these
things bu also to put them in practice. Which if you do, and have help from
above, and that you begin to be clear with in, and that psalmodis and other
offices of divine praise wax sweet unto you, search not to high, but be
afraid. For although your heart being enlarged you do awhile run the way of
Gods commandments, you have not of your self enlarged your heart, but God
has done it. And he that enlarged it can permit it, his grace being with
drawn, to be again coupled up and inprisoned. The sun of justice has
shined on you, and certain scales being taken of, has illuminated your mind:
but who can hinder him from hiding himself, of he be so pleased. We you
therefore ready: for he will hide himself and his amiable brightness being
once departed, your senses shall again be darkened and hindered. Moreover
certain immistions by evil angels will toss the shiop of your breast: yea
peradventure the temptation will be so strong, that you will think all to
oppose it self against you. You will seem to your self to be wholly given
over to satan: and will not have list to open your mouth in Gods praise.
Neither shall this calamity endure a little while. Neither shall you only once
or thrice or six, or ten times be laid hold on by it, but very often,
sometimes more vehemently then at others. But be not dejected at this: Neither
think any thing sinnisterly of your fault. For he has permitted you to be
tempted that it may be manifest if you truly love him and that you may learn
to pity, others that are oppressed by temptations. He scourges and bruseth
you, that he may purge you from vice, and prepare you for more grace. He
seems to leave you as it were for a time, that you wax not prond, but may
always acknowledge that you can do nothing without him: yet nevertheless he
does not forsake you. He exercises you in these, and the like adversities out
of the unspeakable charity where with he loves you. For the heavenly spouse
uses this kind of dispensation with a fervent soul converted unto him. He
visits her solemnly in the beginning of her new purpose, does comfort, and
illustrat her and after he has recreated and allured her with his sweet smell
he draws her after him and lovingly meets her almost every where, with his
mill feeding his new friud.

Afterward he begins to administer to her the solid food of affliction,
and plainly shows her how much she ought to endure for his name. Now she
begins to be in a sea of troubles: men molest her without, passions trouble
her with in: punishments afflict her externally, internally she becomes
dejected by pusillanimity: externally she is greived with infirmities,
internally darkness overcasteth and clowdeth her: the external parts are
oppressed, the internal dried up: one while the bridgroome hides himself
from the soul, another while he discovers himself unto her: Now he leaves
her as it were in the darkness and horror of death, and presently recalleth
her to the sweetness of light: insomuch that it may be truly said of him, that
he leads down to hell, and brings back again. By such means he tries
purifieth, humbles, teaches, weanes draws and adorns the soul: if he find
her faithful in all things, and to be of a good will and holy patience, and
that by long exercise and his grace she does mildly and affectionately endure
all tribulations and temptations, then does he more perfectly join her to
himself, and familiarly make her partaker of his secrets, and bind her far
otherwise to him, then he did at the beginning of her conversion: Be not
therefore troubled, when vehement temptation scourges you but as if you
received a tooken of his love remain faithful and invincible in your agonies,
saying with blessed Job: Although he shall kill me, I will trust in him during
this storm it will be somewhat hard for you to be present at the divine
office, by reason of the too much instability and cloudinesse of your mind.
Not withstanding be patient and gently do what lies in your power. The night
will pass away darkness will be dispersed and light will take place again.
But as long as it is yet night take heed you be not found idle and negligent:
if you have no list to pray, sing, or meditate, then read. If your mind loath
reading write, or manfully, exercise your self for the time, in some other
external work, in the mean time diligently rejecting the troubles of vain
cogitations. If drowsinesse do unseasonamolest you, so that it greviously
depresse you, you shall peradventure (time and place permitting) do better if
somewhat pertinently to the honor of God, leaning your head somewhere, you
slumber a little, then if inexorably you resist it: for if by labor you think
to drive it away, as long as you labor you shall be free: But that once paste,
and you betaking your self to your spiritual exercises, it will easily
return if you sleep let it not be deep, nor long: so that it last no
longer, then one may read one, or two, or three Psalms: for so your spirit
being as it were renewed, will arise with more expedition and alacrity. They
that know not how to behave themselves soberly in eating, drinking, and the
custody of their senses, if thy fly to this remedy, it is to be feared least
they rather aggravate, then alleviate this disease: and falling into a deep
and long sleep miserably loose their time by sluggishnesse: watch carefully
against those temptations by with the devil endeavors to incline the mind
to those things that are indecent and vicious: Be sure to reject them in the
very beginning, before they take possession of you with in for unless you
repel the adversary at the first onset, if he get entrance, he will presently
clap bolts on your soul: and you being destitute of liberty and force will
hardly be able to resist. But if you have behaved your self negligently and he
fetter you, do not yield so, but deny your consent, and strive against him
even by creeping on the ground, and pray to our lord in the strength of your
spirit, that freeing your bonds he will restore you to liberty, or at least
preserve you from giving consent. But know that many times you shall more
easily overcome the adversary suggesting any filthy impious, and absurd thing,
if you contemn and set light by his barking, and so pass them over, then if
you strive long with him, and with great labor endeavor to stop his wicked
mouth; But if he over much importune you, and being repelled once or twice do
still come on a fresh, you must meet with him on plain terms, that being
overthrown in plain ground he may fly away with disgrace. Now he sets on
us many ways: for sometimes he seeks to ensnare us secretly and under
pretense of piety: sometimes he sets upon us openly and with open fury:
sometimes he creeps by little: sometimes he breaks forth suddenly and
unlooked for sometimes he lays siege to us by spiritual and internal
means, sometimes by corporal and external adversayes or prosperities:
wherefore we must always have recourse to the aid of our lords passion, and
cry to God with tears. But as I have already said, soar not too high by
reason of the grace, which peradventure you have. For what have you, that you
have not received why do you glory, as if you had not received, take heed
therefore that by noe means you open the window of your heart to the blast of
vain glory or the air of self complacence: see you brag not see you boaste
not abroad of what you have received: But keep your secret to your self, let
it abide with you: unless you happen to reveal it humbly and modestly to some
intimate and secret friend for spiritual utility or consolation or that you be
compelled by obedience, or other manifest necessity, or great profitt. See that
you believe not, that you have received the gift of God by your own merits and
labors: but rather judge your self unworthy (as indeed you are) of all grace
and consolation, and worthy of all confusion and dereliction. Compare your
self with those that are more holy, that by consideration of their perfection
you may the better acknowledge your own imperfection: humble and deject your
self: place your self unfaynedly below all men: but you will say how can I
do this considering that many with out fear or shame live most debauchedly
which I neither do, nor will do: what shall I cast my self below them:
shall I place them above me: I say you shall.

CHAPTER VIII. A very good means to obtain, humility.
FOr if you consider that these who to day are so bad, may to morrow be more
perfect then your self: and that if they had received the gifts, that are
granted you from above, they would lead a far more holy life then your
self: and that you would sin more greviously then they, if you were not
prevented by a more abundant grace: I say if you consider these things, you
will easily observe how fit it were, that you should prefer every sinner
before your self: O if you did know the secret of God, how willingly would
you give place to others, how gladly would you take the lowest place, how
joyfully would you lay your self at the feet of others, with what alacrity
would you attend the sick, how devoutly would you honor all, how
affectionatly obedient would you be without any delay or complaint: But yet I
require a more excellent thing of you, viz that you place your self not only
below all men in your heart for Gods sake, but also below each creature,
reputing your self as most abject dust, esteeminge your self unworthy to
tread on the earth, or to enjoy the benefitt of light: look more exactly into
your self, how ungrateful, tepid, unstable, miserable, and vile you are: and
by that means you will attain to that most humble submission of mind: if
the old enemy knock importunatly at the door of your heart putting into your
conceit that you should think your self some body, that you should vainly
glory and compare your self with others: repel the subtle villainy, lock the
doors against him: and although you feel some pestilent immissions, beware
always of giving your consent: for if you consent, if you let in the impostour
and incline your mind to his unlawful allurements, you have broken your faith
and vow, which you have made to the bridegroom of your soul: you have
polluted the bed of your beloved, which before flourished: neither can you be
admitted to his most blessed familiarity, unless you cast out the adulterer,
and humble your self exceedingly. And peradventure you shall not be received
to favor, unless you be first punished and afflicted for a while, and that
the filthy kisses which the impure spirit has imprinted on your soul, be
rased out by the scourge of God. But enough has bin spoken of this.

CHAPTER IX.
HItherto we have spoken how you ought to assist at the divine office, what
internal exercises you should undertake, what rule to be observed, what to be
followed, what to be avoided in them, we will now pass to the rest, that we
have to speak of. As for corporal refections, beware of all excess: least
being overloaden you be made unapt for all spiritual exercises. For it cannot
be, but that the belly swelling by imtemperance must needs draw away the mind
from God, and those things that belong to salvation, wine especially being
more largely used, although without drunkenness, is a great impediment: it
inflameth the body, confounds the internal parts and distressing the
alacrity of the spirit, stirs up a beastly kind of sluggishnesse. In vain
therefore does that man aspire to a spiritual life, that yeildeth to his
belly: Lop of therefore all vicious desires. Take noe care whether your meat
or drink be very delicate or sweet of it self. If it be man's meat, and
reasonable, what need you desire more: you are a monk: come then to the table
to refresh several tombs, surrounded by kings, soldiers, and skeletons (...)
^it la Sagesse du (...) sou l^ (...) de Solom^^

Ci ^it la beauty du (...) sou le no^ (...)

Ci ^it la Riches se du mo^de sou le no^ de Cresus

Ci oit la Valleur du monde sou l^ no^ dalexandre

your body of Gods gifts, not to nourish the pleasures of the flesh: wherefore
if you are troubled about the goodness of your victuals and do murmer as I
have already said, so I say again, you are no monk: if JESUS were truly
pleasing to your heart what poor fare for his sake would not be pleasing to
your palate. For JESUS is a most pleasant sauce, even to extreme poverty.
Love him, and all manner of food will not be less, nay will be more pleasing
unto you, then the delicious banquets of kings. JESUS being hungry for your
sake was often fed with bace bread: JESUS thirsting for your sake drank
vinegar and gall. Take your meat and drink continently, leasurely and
moderatly, excluding all brutish gredinesse. Have a care even of the natural
delight, that proceeds from your natural refection. Do not reflect upon it,
do not desire to feed your sensuality: for if you feed that, it will feed on
you, and pollute you within: And as you must often deny the flesh what it
evilly desires: so sometimes you must force it to receave what it desires
not. For sometimes it does in a manner loath that, which natural necessitye
requires.

Further more beware that while you refresh your body your mind be not in the
mean time hungerstarved. Therefore let the mouth of your heart feed on the
word of God, and let your ears receave the wholesome doctrine and deeds of the
saints: And if you happen to sit at that table, where there is noe holy
reading, do not thus deprive your self of her spiritual food; but as much as
silence will permit, converse inwardly either with your soul or with God and
propose to your self some godly thing to keep your self doing. As in your
diet, so be also sober in apparel. Reject, scorn, and detest what soever is
contrary to monastical simplicity. Neither do you imitate those vain and
wretched monks, that are ashamed of their estate and vocation, but not of
their lewd life and conversation: who if they are to go abroad and to come
into the sight of seculars will bewray their foolishness and curiosity: They
must forsooth have such and such clothes, and wear their cassoke after this or
that fashion. They are ashamed to wear their apparel according as religion
does ordain, and according to the constitutions of their superiors and
ancestors: And so coming abroad not like humble monks, but like delicate
and neat courtiers by this prodigious sight they provoke wise men to sorrow
and indignation, but find matter of mirth for the devil, evidently showing by
this absurdity what they are with in viz proud, wanton, and full of vain
glory: Alas wretched monks far wide from the scope of true religion: O
monks not monks: but monsters: o monks detestable, by being thus deluded by
the devils clothing. Is this it, that you promised to God, when by the most
sacred vow of poverty, you solemly renounced the world with all the pomp and
vanities there of: is this it, that the king of kings has taught you by his
word: is this it, that he has showed by his example, when being wrapped in base
clouwts, he had noe other cradle then a manger. When likewise he was apparelled
in a white garment and a purple robe in scorn: is this to follow JESUS: is
this to tread in JESUS footesteeps. O intolerable confusion. O extremity of
madness. Look to your self, brother, that you become not like these: but
rather be content with plain apparel whether you be with in the monastery or
without, For thus much your profession exacceth of you. Every where, but
especially during the divine office keep your eyes from wandering: neither
lightly look about you either this way or that, unless necessity require:
least you chance to see something, that may hinder you from attention and
purity of heart. But although there be noe fear of danger, yet monastical
dicipline requires that whether you rest or go, you use modestly to look
down upon the ground. Never look curiously on the face of any.

Let not your gate be too swift or hasty especially in the church, unless it
happen that of necessity it must be so. Neither out of the church let it be
overslowe or remiss but modest and civil: In all things compose your self to
a laudable carriage of your whole body.

Let your looks before others be pleasing with a decent gravity, behaving your
self, courteously and affably toward all. And if against your will you happen
to be over sorrowful, so dissemble it, that you seem not unpleasant and
harsh, and so be troublesome to the rest: when you are forced to laugh, laugh
sparingly and like a monk: Avoid long laughter as a great impediment to you
in your purpose, and as the destruction of your soul: knowing that vehement
and immoderate laughter does violate the cloisters of modesty and dispersing
the interior powers of the soul drives the grace of the holy Ghost our of
your heart.

Above all things love solitude, silence, and taciturnity. Be more ready to
hear, then to speak: Be not hasty, nor turbulent, nor clamorons, nor
contentious in words: But speak modestly bashfully, courteously and without
dissembling, what is true and right. Be not, I say too loud: nor yet so low
that you cannot be understood, especially if the place, time, cause, or person
to whom you speak require, that you speak somewhat more loud then ordinary:
for as the voice of a monk should always be bashful, and for the most part
low according to the holy ordinations of religion: so also sometimes it
ought to be reasonable loud affirm nothing obstinatly: unless matter of
faith or necessity of salvation constrain: but whosoever contradicts you,
either yield or hold your peace, if neither ought to be done affirm with
modesty and humility what you know to be certain. For by this means you
shall take away all occasion of irreligions contention. Let not your words be
biting. Willingly speak not any thing that may be either to your own credit,
or another discommendation. But if out of necessity or utility you speak any
such thing, do it with a laudable modesty and a pure intention. Abhor
dissolute tales as the poison of the souls. As for jests (if they happen in
your presence) albeyt you suffer them, yet relate them not. Never consent to a
tongue, that speaks foolishly unseemely, and perniciously. Yea, if such
things are spoken, do you if it seem good, mildly and with reason find fault
with the speaker: if you think it not good, yet at least cut of his speech
honestly and endeavor to draw him to better discourse: if possibly you may
give noe ear to back biters. The liberty of external recreation granted you,
either by walking or otherwise, see you abuse not: that is, make such use of
them, that they hinder not your spiritual going forward, but rather further
it. You may indeed to the honor of God slake your mind, but let it not loose:
least whilst you wander abroad being expelled out of your self, some delight
or passion contrary to the spirit, lay hold on you, and disperse your interior
senses, and replenish them with bitterness. Therefore carefully learn by a
certain advised simplicity of mind to abide within your self: that the noise
of vain cogitations and the motion of inordinate affections being repressed,
you may keep your heart in silence and liberty. Let God be your chief, yea
your whole thought and study for it is not enough for you, that he be your
whole intention.

Likewise in all external occupations endeavor, that with Martha you do not
only for the honor of God perform your work prudently, devoutly, and with
alacrity, but that also in those works which you faithfully do to the honor
of God, with Mary you direct your mind being freed from the tumult of
cogitations and the confused imagination of sensible things, to God, or those
things that are divine: especially if reasonable discourse or any other
necessity hinder not.

CHAPTER X. Martha may serve as a mirour for imperfect Religious men; Mary
Magdalen for such as are grown to perfection.
MArtha because she is distracted in her external actions and in her right
intentions by the multiplicity of vain cogitations, and is troubled about many
things, although peradventure she be not deformed, yet is she not comely
enough. But Mary because she knows how to forsake the troops of unstable
cogitations, and persisting in unity and tranquillity of mind does strive to
cleave to goodness it self, is of more perfect beauty. Wherefore howsoever
you are externally occupied, love not only to be right and innocent with
Martha, but also to be clear and simple with Mary. Mary has chosen the better
part which shall not be taken away from her. And you have chosen the same:
which unless you keep according to your power, you produce not fruit worthy
your profession. Have therefore always a charitable simplicity of mind if you
be yet a little one in Christ, and are not able to follow Mary soaring so
high in mind: imitate her humility: imitate her affectionate watring our lords
feet with tears: imitate her sweetly feeding on our lords words: imitate her
most amorously seeking our lord in the sepulcher. For even in these she had
simplicity of mind: she loved one thing. She thought on, one thing, she sought
one thing: But imitate her not for your own delight, but to please our lord.
For if by spiritual delectation you do principally seek your self in these,
your soul is, not the chaste spowse of Christ, but the most baise servant of
sin, I might say, the devils impure hackney: you shall at length merit to be
admitted to the apprehension of higher mysteries by these that are more low,
if I may so call them, which indeed are not low, but of a wondrous hight.

In all things, that differ not from the sincerity of a monastical life,
conform your self to the community, still avoiding vicious singularity: And
because you live among Monks that live laudably according to the sweet
austerity of a holy rule, be not singular in abstinence and watching: neither
exceed the rest of the Monks therein: unless by the revelation of the holy
Ghost you know it to be the will and pleasure of God. Neither attempt any
thing without the counsel and consent of your superior: least while you
presume of your own head to afflict your body beyoud measure, you make your
self unable for good works, and wholly deprive your self of the fruit of
your labor: God requires of you purity of mind, not the overthrowe of your
body. He would that you should subject it to the spirit, not that you should
oppress it. Therefore as well in external exercises as internal, temper the
fervor of your mind with a holy discretion.

If your will being more slow to virtue and remiss do as it were sleep,
rowse it up, spur it forward. But if having to much bridle, it run too fast,
repress and cheek it. Always asist it with holy fear in the presence of
God. And let these words always resounde in the ears of your heart: look to
thy self. Consider not over curiously the deeds of others, what are their
manners and behavior, unless it belong unto you as an officer. Let your
curiosity and business be about your self. Howebeyt think not in this that I
would have you make noe account of the excesses or finnes of others, or neglect
to amend them as much as in you lies, or procure them to be amended. For we
condemn curiosity not holy zeal of justice. We discommend not what in this
case is not against mature stability, or contrary to the sincere love, of your
neighbor. These vices that you see in others or hear of them, either think
them not to be simply true, or interpret them in the better part: but if they
be so manifest, that no interpretation can qualify them, endeavor to
separate your sight both of body and mind from them, and reflecting on your
own sins if you have leisure, humbly pray to God both for your self and for
them. For so shall you more easily avoid unquiet suspicions and rash
judgments: But beware that with consent of reason you rejoice not at another
sin though of small moment, or of any adversity: but mourn for your brother
before our lord, calling to mind that we are members one of another, all one
body, and redeemed all with the same blood. Learn not to be angry, but to
pity the defects of others, and patiently to bear with them, whether they be
defects of body or mind.

For it is written: bear one another burdens: and so you shall fulfill the
law of Christ. Let not the heavenly grace, with you observe in others excite
you to satanicall envy, but to a faithful imitation and godly congratulation.
And although you have not the spiritual good, that you know another to be
blessed with, yet rejoice in heart that God is honored by it: as readily
thank our lord for it, as if it were your own.

And indeed it will be to your own good, and you shall be crowned for
another, as for your own. Nay more it shall become your own: so order your
mind, that you desire not to please the world, nor fear to displease it. In
man although very nearly allied, love, nothing but good, or the grace and
workmanship of good. And again hate nothing but vice.

Offend not God willingly either for kinsman frinds, or any other bodies sake
though never so well deserving at your hands: neither favor, flatter, or
applaud any one in any sin. Do not earnestly desire the presence or speech
of any man unless it be for some spiritual good: and yet a perplexed
earnestness is neither then good. Love all men, but spiritually, not
sensually. skeletons and angels draw death's chariot(?) Le trompe tout le monde

Ainsi (...) la gloire du (...)

For so it will come to pass, that you will not be inordinatly troubled at
the corporal absence of such as are virtuous or your frinds, nor afflicted at
the corporal presence of such as are vicious or your enemies.

Nay esteem noe man your enemy, but love even your persecutors, as the most
dear furtherers of your salvation. What soever you see, hear, or perceave, in
creatures to be delightful and worthy of singular admiration, either by their
natural disposition, or the art and industery of man, refer it to the praise
of the great Creator, or the use of eternal beatitude, that you may be
delighted in our lord. Always be afraid of sensual delectation whencesoever
it have its beginning. For if you seek your self by that and cleave to it,
you will be entangled and defiled: utterly detest the love of all sins, yea
even of the very least. By which not withstanding, if peradventure being over
reached you fall out of frailty, afflict not your self unreasonable with
inordinate pusillanity, but humbly confess your fault before our lord: and
renewing your good purpose and piously taking heart cast all your defects into
the unsearchable profundity of his mercies, or his most holy wouds. As long as
you live in this clay building of your body you may mortify in your self the
affections of lesser sins, but wholly avoid to slip into them you cannot:
godly Monks although thy slip sometimes, yea very often, yet they hate sinning
and beware of it, and greive after they have offended. But perverse Monks
sin without hating, without bewayling of it. For they take noe pains to
extinguish the affections of lesser faults nor to avoid the occasions of them.
They desire the liberty of a more loose life: they love to be absent from
divine office and other conventuall acts: they desire delicate and superfluous
meat and drink: they epsy out oportunities of trifling: they affect
inordinate laughter. They delight in seculer businesses, to see vanities, to
have curious things for their own use: self complacence, foolish joy,
idleness, vain talk, fables, fantastique behavior, and such other vices are
with them not at all, or scarcely accounted faults: in their conscience they
make no bones of them. For being made insensible they think themselves whole,
when they are deeply wounded: and therefore neither care for lamenting their
sins, nor amending their life. But what say they, these say they, are noe
wounds, or of thy be, they are very little ones, and as much as nothing: O
wretched Monks. O mad Monks: O Monks, not Monks. For although they seem
little, yet because they are not afraid to receave them, and after receipt of
them defer to cure them, they become mortal: I speak nothing of their
falling into pride, rebellion, disobedience, murmurations, fury, detractions,
hatred, envy, contempt, gluttony, with other hideous sines, and all by this
negligence: Do not, brother, do not imitate these: for they are not the
desciples of the Crucified, and the beloved frinds of God: Neither ever shall
be, unless they leave of to be what they are: look you better to your self:
leave, remove, cast aside whatsoever may any way hinder you from the true love
of God.

CHAPTER XI. Perfect mortification is the certain and only short way to
perfection.
BY mortification as by a certain and compendious way hasten to perfection of
life. Will you in few words know what this generality of mortification is.
Will you know that only certain short cut. I will tell you I will show
you: give ear therefore: putt of all propriety: Behold this short way: putt
of all propriety. And what is the meaning of this: lay aside all your own will
and seeking: put of all the owld man. But that you may the better understand
what is spoken, I will propose the same a little more plainly.

Have you bound your self to the observance of poverty. Why then be poor.
Poor how is that: Be poor in the desire of wealth, and passions of the
mind, poor in spirit: if you love and desire any thing by propriety of
affection and sensuality, if as yet you seek your self in any thing you are
yet voluntary, you are not yet truly poor: you cannot yet with S. Peter say to
God: so we have left all: and have followed thee. Strip your self, leave all,
putt of all propriety whatsoever is not God, let not abide in your heart by
cleaving to it, or in ordinately loving it. Be free from all things that are
besides God: in so much that I would have you neither foolishly to rejoice for
any good news, nor to be inordinately dejected for any bad: and whether you
have not received what you yet have not, or have lost, what you have, every
way keep a stable and quiet state of mind for Gods sake utterly deny all
sensible things, yea even your self. Which is as much as to say: mortify in
your self the force of concupisence, delight, anger, and natural indignation:
and as well in adversity as prosperity resign your self over to Gods divine
pleasure, without any contradiction of will. I have showed you, that this
short way and general mortification of your self is none other then the
genetall casting away of all propriety, that is an humiliation of your self in
all kinds. For indeed perfect humility it self is that short way, by which
you go straight forward to the forte of perfection. Now this forte, is
perfect charity or purity: you will demand how you may know whether you have
attained to that forte. I will give you manifest instructions. If always
abiding in silence of heart as in a most quiet haven, you affectionatly direct
and incline toward God your mind, being free from all inordinate care,
affection and earnest imagination of things that are below you, and in a word
from all disquiet and tumult: so that your memory, your understanding, your
will, that is, your whole spirit possessing the above named forte be happily
united to God.

This is the sum of all perfection. For although being clothed with this
corruptible flesh we cannot always by present insight and memory stick to the
Theory and speculation of God: yet here we ought always to be fixed by our
intention: and hither as to a mark we ought carefully to recall our mind, as
often as we waste our selfs by unseasonable light, and unsettled cogitations.
As long as by reading, meditating, hearing, or speaking we profitably and
sincerely treat of any contemplative and spiritual matter, we are not
separated from God. Neither when (occasion requiring) we do with the like
sobriety and sincerity speak or think of external matters in their due time,
do we go far from God. O what a brave philosopher, what a wise man, what an
excellent devine shall I account you, o how happy and blessed, if you convey
these things by your corporal ears into the ears of your heart, and being
stirred up to the true mortification of your self do lay the axe to the root
of the tree, but what tree is this: it is propriety, of which we spoke a little
before. But what is the axe then. It is the fervor of spiritual and internal
exercise. But chiefly the daily handling of our Lords passion, and often
aspirations to God, with prompt obedience and a reasonable sobriety of diet are
this axe. It is certainly a sharp axe, a blessed axe, a most grateful axe,
an axe that brings with it all good, and all purity, a golden axe, and deked
with precious stones. But the tree is a cursed tree, a tree full of most
bitter fruit, a tree of all evil, a tree that produces and nourishes all
inordinatenesse, a tree of obscurity and darkness. This tree is in you, as
also in all others, and as long as it abides in you, you cannot have perfect
light. If therefore you desire clearly to behold the bright beams of the sun
of justice, cut down this tree and cast it from you it is a very thick and
hard tree, not to be cut down at the first blow, not the first day, nor
perchance the first year, no nor peradventure in a long time together:
wherefore perseverance and patience are requisite. Now as gold, if there be no
let, naturally goes downwards and the flame of fire is carried upwards. So
the mind that is purged and purified from the dross of propriety and seeks
only the will of God, is naturally elevated to her beginning, which is God and
is more freely united to him. But the mind that is partly purged of it,
although she tend to her beginning, and be in some sorre illustrated from above
by the brightness of eternal light: yet notwithstanding because all
impediment is not taken away she cannot have free passage nor flow to, nor be
swallowed up in the bottemlesse depth of eternal light: that is she cannot
freely be united to God her principal and greatest good. Furthermore although
God out of his bounty be pleased sometimes to lift up some to his love by a
more easy way without many temptations, yet let noe man, although enriched with
spiritual gifts easily believe, that he has attained to the perfect
resignation of himself, unless in very deed he have endured many most
grevious adversities, and have keept a perfect quietness and liberty of mind
in the toleration of them. There are many that as long as they feel noe
checkes, noe injuries, noe losses, noe temptations, noe troubles, do seem
devout, patient, and humble. But as soon as they are but once touched by them,
they proudly show by murmuring, indignation, and impatience how little they
are mortified. Wherefore before any one can be thought to have attained to the
true abnegation of himself, he must necessarily endure many adversityes with a
voluntary and quiet mind: And as for him that has been exactly tried, by God
in afflictions, let him think that he has not yet gone so far, as that he
is able to endure them. For if he had, without doubt he should not want
occasions of diverse tribulations. For God rejoices to adorn the soul more
secretly and perfectly joined to him, with many fold afflictions, as it were
with so many precious pearls, and so to bring it to the true similitude of
JESUS CHRIST. He therefore that rejecting propriety in all things conformeth
his will to the divine will and ordination, being equally prepared to undergo
any adversity, confusion, subtraction of internal sweetness for Gods sake, as
he would the affluence of any prosperity, honor, and devotion: he I say, that
is come to that pass, that he can endure all temptation and tribulation with a
certain internal sweetness and joy, this man has found a precious pearl,
this man has attained to the highest degree of perfection: he is every where,
and in all occasions united to God, and most sweerly powers his soul to him.
He does purely quietly, simply, joyfully, and sweetly walk all the day long in
the light of our Lords countenance, and can adhere to highest contemplation
when he pleases, with the same facility that he does live and breath. What in
this veil of misery he may receave from heaven and to what God will be pleased
familiarly to admit him, it lies not in our power to speak, for indeed they
are things unspeakable. Let him that is such glorifi God, and confess, that
JESUS CHRIST has raised up the needy from the earth, and lifted up the poor
out of the dung, sithence that of an impure man here on earth he has made an
angel like to God.

CHAPTER XII. A Monk or Nune by virtue of their profession is bound to tend,
to perfection.
YOu will peradventure say: O this perfection is too much above me: therefore
will I not streich my self, nor endeavor to apprehend it, least I should
labor in vain. But my answer, is that if you do according to your words,
you are no Monk: For although you are not bound to attain to perfection, yet
are you bound as much as in you lies, to endeavor to attain to it. Flatter
your self how you will: persuade your self as you will: feign and pretend
what excuses you will, you are bound with might and main to tend to
perfection. It is even so, and noe otherwise. If hitherto you have been
ignorant of it henceforth ignorance cannot excuse you, you have bound and
obliged your self, and so you shall remain.

But you will say, I cannot attain to such perfection: what mean you by this
distrust. Are you ignorant that the divine power can do mo-more, then humane
infirmity can imagine. I confess that of yourselfe you are not able to abaine
it, but God is able to bring you. Believe God, hope in God, not in your self.
Trust in the grace and help of God, not in your own endeavors. Nevertheless
that God may be with you, be not you wanting, to your self by sloth. Do what
lies in your power, putt forth your hands, stretch out your arms, confirm
your mind to the destruction of vice, to the perfect abnegation of your self,
recollect your heart, produce affection elevate your mind to the contemplation
of those things, that are eternal and accustom your self every where to
attend the presence of God. Which that you may the better perform, propose to
your self according to the above demonstrated example every day some part of
our Lords passion, and carefully cast your internal eye sight upon the same:
in the mean time sweetly conversing with JESUS, or with your soul, concerning
him. Always I say, busi your cogitations (as much as commodiously you may) in
some divine matter. Let this be your scope, let this be the determination of
your mind: labor for this without rest with a quiet and pleasing care. And
although every moment (as I may say) you be distracted, and stray from your
intention, be not dejected, let not that breed pusillanimitie, but be constant,
and ever return to what you ear resolved. By your infatigable labor you
shall overcome all trouble of difficulty. Nay in a little while you will find
this labor more easi and pleasant: and being regenerate to the newness of an
unknowen light, you will begin to taste of the delights laid up for the saints,
you will not be the same that you were before: but being happily changed into
another man, and clothed with angelical grace, you will highly esteem what
before you despised, and despise what before you highly esteemed: That which
before did evilly please you, will now displease you: what before evilly
displeased you, will now please you: you will promptly and willingly endure
what before seemed insufferable. O pleasant metamorphosis! O change proceeding
from the right hand of the most high. At last this laudable custom growing
into a second nature, and the divine love more perfectly possessing you within
you will not feel any labor: and as before without labor you did think on
filthy, impure, absurd, foolish, vain and dream like things: so now you
will without labor adhere to God, and divine things. For of necessity the
mind must daily reflect on that, which the heart dearly loves. Woe, woe unto
perverse, tepid and negligent Monks, Monks in name, but not in life: who
contemning the reverence of their state, and violating their vows, are neither
ashamed, nor fear to wallowe in the dirt, and dung of sloth vanity, and
passions. But blessed yea ten times treple blessed are those Monks and
Religious men, who albeit they are of little estimation and imperfect, do
notwithstanding with might and main aspire and tend to perfection: For they
are certainly the adopted sons of God: whom our pious Savior JESUS does
comfort saying: fear not little flock: for it has pleased your father to
give you a kingdom: they may securely expect death, although they are yet but
in the beginning of their holy purpose: because it shall be precious in the
sight of our Lord securely may they expect death, and yet not death but the
sleep of peace, the period of death and the passage from death to life. What
say you, Brother: are you yet in doubt: do you yet stagger. Take courage I
pray you, and being emboldned through so great a confidence in our Lords
goodness going on the way of salvation without fear, preparing your soul
against temptations. Let noe manner of difficulty affright you. In all
adversity, which you happen to endure either at home or abroad, say gratefully
the will of our lord be done. Although you must sweat much and long, and
wrestle strongly before you can overcome, and supplant the owld man. Let not
that trouble you, consider not the labor: but the fruit of the labor.
Believe me, the supernall piety will be present at your labors, and will still
most lovingly succor you: will comfort you when you fear, will confirm you
when you stagger, will defend you being assailed, will uphold you when you
slip, will comfort you in your sorrow, and will now and then infuse the most
precious ointment of internal sweetness into you. If you persever, the force
of temptations must of necessity yield to the force of divine love: temptions
and tribulations will noe more be grevious and bitter to you, but light and
sweet: then shall you see all good and shall find a Paradise even in this
life: This I say will come to pass, if you persever, and be not of the number
of them, that begin well, but being deluded by the allurements of satan, or
wearied with the troubles of temptations and labors, do afterward lightly
leave their good purposes: They will not be pressed with the weight of
tribulation And therefore in time of affliction are scandalized in our Lord,
and going back from him do as it were seem to say: This saying is hard and
who can bear it.

They build not on the firm rock, but on the unstable sand: and therefore
their buldings do easily fall down at every puff of wind, and pushes of the
floods. And would to God they would consider their ruins: and not so give
over: but make haste to renew the decayed building, noe more laying their
foundation upon the sands, but committing them to the firmity of the rock:
Dear brother, if (which God forbid) your building be fallen: renew your
overthrown work: and build again more happily then you did before. If it
fall twice, or ten, or an hundred, yea a thousand times, or more repair it as
often as it falls: never despair of Gods mercy: For the innumerable
multitude of horrible and hideous sins does not make God so implacably angry
with us, as desperation alone. For he that despayreth of forgiveness denies
the mercy and omnipotency of God, and blasphemeth against the holy Ghost. We
cannot be so ready to sin, as our lord is to pardon, if we abuse not his
patience: that is, if we will truly, and in time do penance: Thus ought every
Christian to think. But least prolixity make my treatise displeasing, I think
it best for me to with draw my pen, and to stop the course of my begun
navigation. In the mean time while we take down our sails, it will not be
amiss briefly to touch what you ought to do at every days end.

Every day therefore before you go to bed, seriously, but without inordinate
dissipation of mind, consider in what you have that day offended: and ask
pardon of our most merciful God, purposing thenceforth to live better, and
more carefully to avoid all vice. Then pray that he will vouchsafe to keep
you that night from all pollution both of body and mind, commending to him,
and to his sacred Mother, and your holy Angel your soul and body to be
guarded and kept. Being gone to bed, arm your self with the sign of our
Lords Cross: and having honestly and chastely composed your body, sigh to your
beloved, thinking upon sum good thing, until sleep gently sease on you.
Which if it be over deep and rather a burden then a refreshing to your body:
if likewise by frail illusions it procure or produce any thing savouring of
dishonesty, be not over much greived theareat: but humbly sigh before our Lord:
and with humble prayers beseech him to grant you sobriety of diet and senses,
to which sobriety of sleep and purity of body are commonly companions. This is
all dear brother, that I have to send you. You desired a Mirror or looking
glass: see whether you have received one: If I have any way satisfied your
desire, God be praised: if not, how soever God be praised I have given, what
our Lord has given me But be they better or worse, I desire you sometimes to
read them over. Fare you well and pray for me.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the thing contained in this treatife.
CHapter I. page 1 Chap. II. How we ought to bestowne our time from our first
rising to mattins in the moning. 21 Chap. III God has two sorts of servants
and the description of both. 33 Chap. IV. That for everye howr of the day we
ought to cleave to some settled exercise least our mind grow sluggish 51 Chap.
V. How powerful and efficacious the remembrance of Christ's life and passion
is 67 Chap. VI. We must daily call to mind the manifould sins which we have
committed. 107 Chap. VII. Every one ought to consider his own ability and to
proceed accordingly. 130 Chap. VIII. A very good means to obtain humility.
154 Chap. IX. 159 Chap X. Martha may serve as Mirour for imperfect Religious
men; Mary Magdalen for such us are grown to perfection. 177 Chap. XI. Perfect
mortification is the certain and only short way to perfection. 194 Chap. XII.
A Monk or Nune by virtue of their profession is bound to tend, to perfection.
209
FINIS.

