THE Complete Gardeners PRACTICE, DIRECTING The Exact Way of GARDENING.

In three PARTS. The GARDEN of PLEASURE, PHYSICAL GARDEN, KITCHEN GARDEN.
How they are to be ordered for their best Situation and Improvement, with
variety of Artificial Knots for the Beautifying of a GARDEN (all engraven in
Copper) the choicest way for the Raising, Governing and Maintaining of all
Plants cultevated in GARDENS now in ENGLAND.

Being a plain Discourse how HERBS, FLOWERS and TREES, according to Art and
Nature may be propagated by Sowing, Setting, Planting, Replanting, Pruning;
also Experience of Alteration of Sent, Color and Taste, clearly reconciling as
it treats of each HERB and FLOWER in particular.

By STEPHEN BLAKE Gardener.

Search the World, and there is not to be found
A Book so good as this for Garden ground.
London, Printed for Thomas Pierrepoint, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Sun in St Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. LXIV.

To the Right Worshipful WILLIAM OVGLANDER Esquire; one of the Honorable House of
Parliament, Son and Heir to the Late Sr JOHN OUGLANDER, etc.
The Honorable Example of piety, the worthy Pattern of good endeavors, and
great observer of the Works of Nature.
SIR,
LEt the height of your understanding, and the greatness of your learning,
condescend so low as to take a view of the words and works which your Servant
has bound up in this Volume: to give you a description thereof in
metaphorical expressions I have not Scholarship enough, but I have confidence
enough to speak and publish the truth of these Experiments which I have
gathered, with a diligent Eye and a painful Hand from all such Plants as are
cultivated in Gardens now in England: the truth of the Discourse contained in
this Treatise, has enboldened me to enrich it with your Noble Name; now Sir I
will be accountable of the Work: I have from time to time took a due
observation of that part of Gods vegetable Creatures which are placed within
the compass of my Calling, and with pains, care and diligence, I have writ down
the knowledge of propagating of each Plant, to help me the better in my Calling;
for in viewing of it I am put in mind of those Herbs and Flowers that the
Winters cold breath has bereaved of life, or otherwise I might forget them
though I might know them very well formerly: they are so infinite in their
number, so various in their nature, that my Head cannot carry in mind what
Experiments my Eye and Hand has seen and done without the help of my Pen: upon
this account I have set down these Observations which I know to be true, and I
doubt not but it is a laudable Piece: now I think fit to publish it to the
World for the advancement of Gods Creatures, and for the good of my self and
others that shall put it in practice, that it may be a rule to guide the
ignorant, and confirm the judgment of those that have good experience. The
reason why I undertook this Work is this; I have made diligent enquiry after
such Books of such Authors as might help me in my Practice, and I could find
very few, and for those that are they did not answer my desires, because they
only treated of the use and virtue of Herbs, the beauty, variety and
pre-eminence of Flowers, the goodness and profit of Fruit Trees, but they have
written little or nothing as to the practical part of the advancement of the
nature and growth of Herbs, Flowers, and Trees; and for that which is written,
seems to me, and other Men which have experience, as fancies, dreams, and
conceits which might come into their heads as they were sitting in their
Studies; for I and others have found (by woeful experience) that their
direction concerning the propagating of any Plant, to be more hurtful than
useful; but this is not my intended Discourse, for in the ensuing Treatise, I
have spoken little against Authors, and took less from them; for mine is the
Gardeners practical part, which has never been written by any, and having
good experience therein (a talent God has given me to improve) I think it not
fit to lay it up, but to unfold my Napkin, that it may contribute to a public
good.

I further humbly conceive, that it was my duty to dedicate it to you before
any other whatsoever, because I was a Plant nourished up within the pale of
your habitation, and I hope not altogether unfruitful: yet considering I was
nursed up with your bounty, preserved with your love and care, then the fruit
is no more mine but yours worthy Sir, and I know it is very useful for all as
have a desire of such a Work as tends to the propagating of Plants, wherein
is abundance of excellent things both for food, medicable and physical Arts
for the use and comfort of mankind, that God in all things may be glorified;
every sensible man knows this, and he has so much reason (if he will but set
his understanding awork) whereby he can discern the wisdom of a Creator, in
forming such a harmony of Creatures, and in giving of them such various
operations in their several natures, and that all things are so ordained that
it shall be no way useful without knowledge and labor: then let all degrees
of men know, whether they be high or low, rich or poor, they ought to labor
either in body or mind, that they may some way or other cooperate and
contribute to the common good, or else they are unworthy of the blessings of
this life: yet all men desire a good name, with reputation and honor, whether
they are deserving yea or no.

Now my counsel is to all such, that they will look upon you, worthy Sir, as
an example of all good endeavors, (to wit) your great love, care, and diligent
search after the knowledge of those Plants which are mentioned in this Book,
and that they will take notice of your more estimable virtues, as constance in
times of distraction, such a settled devotion in times of faction, such
lowliness of mind in such height of Estate: much more my eyes and ears have
gathered from your eminent parts which my Pen cannot express.

And Sir, let me intrude farther on your patience, to acquaint you with this
Treatise, wherein I have faithfully declared the way of contriving, modelizing
and situation of a Garden of Pleasure, with artificial Knots to be amplified
therein, for the variety of delight, pleasure and contentment of all noble and
ingenious persons. I have given rules and directions for the advancement of a
physical Garden and a Kitchen Garden, and for each of these I have given a
right information, how each Herb, Flower and Tree in particular is to be
propagated in its own nature; also Experiments of alteration, ingemination in
the fructition, or by conviction, with varieties, properties and beauties
appertaining to Plants either for food, physic or pleasure; and I suppose it
cannot be altogether unwelcome to you and the rest of the Nobility of this
Nation, if they take into their consideration, those excellent effects that I
show from the practice of a skillful Gardener, as Fruit so desirable, Herbs so
virtuous, Flowers so beautiful, how delightful all these are placed in
uniform ranks, whose beauteous luster beautifies the Banks, the Earths Cabinet,
wherein is its chiefest treasure and School of Divinity: on the contrary, by
reason of the ignorance of the Gardener in artificial work, Noblemen are
deprived of their pleasure, their minds are discontented, and the place is
disgraced, if in propagating of Plants they will follow old errors, by reason
of the dullness of their brains, and stubbornness of their wills, which will not
let reason work, to know the times and the seasons, the difference in Climates,
the mixture, the operations of the Earth, and the vast difference in the virtue
of Plants; for want of these Observations the owner is deprived of his profit
and earnest expectations of fruit, which cannot choose but be a trouble to
Master and Gardener: to prevent these dangers I give this my testimony, which
is a true relation how Plants may be propagated and made fruitful without any
sensible error, it being some part of the best invention of my lean brain; I
now right worthy Sir recommend it to you as yours, and my self as obliged to
you by the Law of nature and gratitude, submit my self to your loyal will, and
shall study the remainder of my days as now I do, how I may be truly worthy
for to be

Your Worships in all humble service to be commanded whilst I have a being.
Stephen Blake.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, Declaring why this TREATISE Was written, the use
and profit of it.
READER,
INcomparable are the works of the eternal God, the Creator of all things that
live, move, or have any being; for by his Wisdom he formed the world of a
composition of Elements, and of those Elements he created all kind of
Creatures, and man being a Creature of the express Image of his Creator, it
pleased God his Creator to give him power to rule and govern all Creatures
else, and man having reason given him to exercise himself therein, then it is
reason that man should be accountable to God of what improvement he has made
of that measure of knowledge which was given him; then it follows by
consequence, that he which cannot give a reason for the judgment which he
holds, and the actions which he does, that man is without reasonable
knowledge, and if he die so, the end of that man is miserable: Then it fits the
time, the place and the work, that I give you some reasons why I writ this
Treatise, and a brief account of what it is, and what the use and profit of it
will be, or otherwise I shall condemn my self to be one of those miserable men.
Reason at the first set my understanding awork, to know to what end I was made,
presently the Word told me, and Reason confirmed it, that I was made to set
forth the greatness and the goodness of God in his wonderful works he has
set before me, and unless I should blind my eyes by winking at the light of
Nature, I could not choose but see the wisdom of a Creator in forming the whole
Creation, and in giving such a Decree that all his work must once come to a
period; but whilst it has a being underneath the Sun, it must be in actual
labor according to its course of Nature; nay the Sun it self never rests,
but still is running of a race to enlighten a dark World; the Moon goes her
circuits, the governing of the Sea and man's body; for the observation of times
and seasons, the Stars and Planets are always traveling of their circuits; the
Wind passes to and fro and never abides in one place, the Air is continually
moving in and out at the nostrils of all living Creatures; it is that which
gives life, beauty, virtue virtue and perfection to all sensible and
unsensible Creatures: the fresh Waters are always ascending and descending
through the Air and the Earth for the preservation of the whole Creation: The
Clouds are continually riding on the wings of the Wind, the dropping of their
moisture to stop the mouth of a thirsty Earth: The Sea has no rest, but is at
all times ebbing or flowing: The whole body of the Earth has such motions,
operations by assimulations, which does give nourishment to all Plants therein;
the fire is always craving and never satisfied; the Stones are in a posture of
growth for the increase of their number, the perfecting of their nature; the
innumerable company of Vegetables spread over the face of the earth, do
participate, draw and contract into their several natures, the operations of
the teeming womb of the Earth; the endless and hidden company of Fish in the
boundless Sea, have an order and discipline according to their kinds, they can
discern what tends to the good or evil of their life: The universality of
Fowls, according to their distinct kinds, have unity and copulation one with
another, they know how for to build their nests, and to provide for their
young: The Worms know the times and the seasons, they provide for the Winter in
the Summer, they will not engender but with their fellow creature: The
numberless and powerful hosts of Beasts have a government, whereby they know
their Superior and Inferior, they are offensive and defensive, they know
their prey and pasture, and have generation one with another. And lastly,
according to Creation, is the harmony of Properties, Phisiognomies, Languages,
Speeches, Actions, Judgments; of the innumerable and triumphant Army of men,
which by reason and labor subdues and brings to their use and subjection all
creatures else, they multiply by conception. These are the humane labors
wherein all things work according to their several natures; now I communicated
with my self, how to know the difference betwixt men and bruits, I found in
respect of gemination, appetites, sleeping, waking, wrath, lusts, diseases,
seeing, hearing, beginning and ending; what befalls the body of the beasts,
befalls the body of man, as the one dies so dies the other; yea they have
one breath, all are of the dust, and turn to the dust again, and man has no
pre-eminence over a beast save this, that man has a spirit that goes upward,
which gives him a spiritual understanding, whereby he can discern the work and
will of God and his own duty, and he is able to give a reason for each, which
makes him a reasonable creature: But all men are not thus able to give a
reason for that, yet all men have a spirit, but that spirit (by the generality
of men) is kept in subjection to the flesh, for it must not labor no more than
for the satisfying of the same; these men are unreasonable men, for they have
only a knowledge, and so has the beast, For the ox knows his owner, and the
ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider,
Isa. 1. 3. So it is plain and evident, that man with a bare knowledge of those
things which necessity and custom has taught him, without a spiritual
consideration, and a temporal knowledge of the several workings of the course
of nature under the Sun, is no better than the Ox and the Ass that knows
their owner and his crib. Now let thee and me consider this, it is
unconsideratenesse that undoes worldly men, for without consideration
accompanied with reason and labor, no man can understand the use of external
things which are visible every moment to the sight, how then shall a man
understand eternal things which are invisible in the Heaven of Heavens, where
no mortal eye can approach, but by an extraordinary means of reasoning and
laboring betwixt the body and the spirit: The generality of men are far from
this spiritual understanding, for they have no reason but what custom has
taught them, no faith but what is builded on other men's foundations: The
discovery is this, Let the custom be never so evil and heinous in the sight of
God and good men, yet if it be but a general one they will follow it, and for a
wise man to persuade them to the contrary, he were as good to throw feathers
against the wind, or shoot arrows at the Moon: And for their faith, let it be
never so contrary to natural reason, never so false to spiritual understanding,
yet they will keep to it, and lay it on the Clergy man's shoulders, whether they
are able to bear it yea or no, they will venture all and learn nothing; as
simple passengers do that are going over the Seas for a far Country, when they
are aboard, there they lie like the ballast not knowing whither they are going,
nor will they search out by reason how Mariners guide the Ship with Globe, Map,
Crosse-staff, Scoul, Rudder and Compass, why then for all they know the Pilot
may be a Devil to carry them to a burning Sodom, as well as a Saint to convey
them to a glorious Jerusalem: Thus stands the case with ignorant and dull
spirited men in their passage toward eternal life; and it is plainly seen,
that they manage their affairs so in this life, by imprisoning the spirit in
the corrupt body of clay, that will not let their inventions to work no farther
than filthy lucre does draw them; truly the reason is this, the flesh and the
Devil warreth against the soul, and brings the natural and spiritual
understanding into this total ectipse of utter darkness.

Again, my soul wondreth to see how laborious carnal men are in bodily labor,
and in the workings of the spirit they are so idle, dull and stupid, that they
will not open an eye or an ear to give wisdom any entertainment, can they give
a reason for this? Sure they cannot. Now I wish all men would study even as I
do, how they may be able to give a reason for their words and actions; the
truth of it is, the god of this world has so blinded their eyes that they
cannot see the reasons of the working of the course of nature, nor how they
labor for that which they do not enjoy: They will part with their
understandings before they will part with their money: See what Solomon says
of them, Prove. 1. 19. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain,
which takes away the life of the owners thereof. These words are of efficacy
enough to persuade me, that those men that look no higher than their barns, no
farther than their fels and flocks, no nigher than their chests and apparel,
are men without wisdom or spiritual understanding if so bruit, then I think it
is reason man should labor to obtain wisdom: For wisdom is better than
rubies, and all things that may be desired are not to be compared to it, Prove.
8. 11. So Reader, let this wise Kings counsel, and my weak argument serve to
prove why man should labor for wisdom and reason, which is to understand the
working of the course of nature, as God has fitted, created and ordained it.
Much more I have to say, and I could have enlarged upon each of these
principles but for passing the bounds of my Preface, and being too troublesome
to the Reader.

Now I shall conclude the introductory part with this advice to all sleepy
headed, ignorant and customary men, that they will take the Wise man's counsel,
as he says, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave whither thou go.

Truly the weighty considerations of these words, and the persuasions of reason
was the grand cause of my studying this work, and with truth and honesty I have
finished it, which told me I must publish it to the world; and as my duty I
have done it for the preventing of public dangers, not for the gaining of
filthy lucre, or purchasing of vain glory, but for the gaining of a free
conscience, and purchasing of the society and love of just and wise men: Let
these few reasons serve to acquaint thee why I writ and published this work.

Now I will give you a brief account what it is, and what the use and profit
will be.

For as much as diverse men have took in hand to set forth in order the perfect
way of propagating of those excellent, amiable, desirable, medicinable,
physical, profitable and mystical Arts, which are derived from the hand, and
are placed within the compass of a Gardeners Calling, those Authors have
written many large and methodical Volumes upon this subject, and have greatly
furnished our Students with such Books, but little or nothing have they given
unto the practical man, that which is set down is too dark for their
apprehension; yet let me not judge hardly of these Authors meanings, for I
assure my self, had they had so much of the practical part, as I have, that
they would have delivered their Art in a great deal better method than I have
done, in expressing themselves in the quintessence of wit and refinings of
Scholarship unto the learned, which would have fitted their minds, as well as
the apparel fitteth the body; so that they circumvent the apprehension with
their learned style, they make those helpless rules which they set down for to
pass blameless, whereas if they did illustrate in their writings, a weak
capacity might comprehend what is incredulous or improbable, also what is
laudable and full of practice.

But whereas the vulgar sort of people have tired their apprehensions, with the
perusing of such Treatises as are so full of Oratory of words, and so filled
and varnished (as it were) with Quirks. Quiblets and Paradoxes, speaking little
absolutely, but imaginations very obscure and promiscuously written and
composed together, running far wide of the practice, and for the major part
suspicious and incredulous, seeming to men of experience as an Emblem, so that
the Studies of them which study natural work, and deliver it in methodicall
expressions, prove unfruitful unto the unlearned sort of men, and I my self
being wanting of Scholarship, had a sympathy with those in their wants, which
caused me for to write this plain and extemporary Work in the following
Treatise, which was merely drawn from the very practical part, that it might
red ound to an extraordinary and public profit, etc. which I suppose will be
as follows:

First of all, there is the expert way for the situation of a Garden of
Pleasure, so that in it you may have large, sound, plenty, beautiful and
wholesome fruit, which is accomplished by the observation of the year as the
chiefest part, next in the laying of the ground for to keep it fruitful,
declaring what errors are in it to be observed, and how they may be prevented
with great and easy Rules, how Gardens may be laid in descents, that it may be
best for to draw or amplify every Knot prescribed therein by the most severe,
commendable, and workman-like way as may be imagined.

Secondly, There is presented to thy view plenty of Knots and whole Garden
plats, and such as are merely inacted and sprung from my own Study, yet I will
not say but some of them have reference to some other thing; yet let me tell
you that if they were the same, yet they were worthy of the Impression after my
own way and method of drawing of them, for I have given an easy scale to each
particular Knot, which shows plainly what each Plat does contain, being drawn
upon the ground, and that no other Author has done.

Thirdly, You have an Inventory of all Plants cultivated in Gardens now in
England, and those are divided into three general parts; the first is a Garden
of Pleasure, consisting of Flowers and curtous Trees: the second is a Physical
Garden, describing how it ought to be planted with physical Simples, as Herbs
and Trees of that nature; the third is a Kitchen Garden, where it is most
properly shown, how such a Garden should be planted with salletting Herbs,
Pulse and Roots.

The profit of this Work will be more than I can or will stand to reckon up to
him that does put it in practice: 1. In that thou can not think of any Plant
but presently thou have my judgment for the propagating of it, which I assure
thee are certain and true Rules: 2. You have a Catalogue of Plants, also fit
places for the planting of them in; with apt times and seasons for the sowing,
planting and replanting of all Plants whatsoever. If this Catalogue seem
indifferent to thy judgment, yet it will turn to thy profit, if it be but only
for to put thee in mind of particulars.

Lastly, What the lack of these things may be to the practical man, a wise man
will understand; therefore I shall cease to give any farther information, and
for any vindication of the Work, I shall not give it, let it vindicate it self:
so I leave this my testimony, and conclude my Preface, resting a servant unto
all men, as I am

Thine in truth and love. S. B.

THE GARDNERS PRACTICE in Preparation for a Garden of Pleasure.
First for the Situation.
IF a Man would have a Garden situated according to his desire, it would be so,
that it might be shelving or declining on the South-East Sun; so that the Sun
at its first rising may reflect upon the Garden, for the vanishing of vapors,
dispelling of mists, and quallifying of cold air and frosts, which oftentimes
perish Herbs and Flowers in their first gemination, and nipping of fruits at
the first knitting, which causes them to fall at an untimely birth; or if you
please, before they come to perfection.

The air is farther to be observed for Plants that are at their full growth.
Being planted in a bad air, though the soil be never so rich, yet the Herbs are
never so virtuous, the Flowers never so beautiful, the fruit of the
fruit trees is never so sound, as those that are planted in a clear air. Yet
seeing that all men cannot obtain this, though they have never so earnest a
desire, therefore let the Inhabiter learn how to dispense with his own
habitation, so that he may make the best improvement that may be upon all
advantages, for the making of his Garden fruitful. And let the Purchaser
learn, that in purchasing, the choice of air is the chiefest thing to be looked
after: for if the soil be bad, it may be improved with labor and soil, and
made rich: or if it should be so barren, that it could not be made rich under
two or three years time, by any art in digging and dunging of it; yet a man may
remove their barren earth and bring good mould in its stead; or otherwise it may
be laid a top of the other: so a man may have a Garden fruitful, if the air be
good, with industry and charge. But if the air be bad, all the cost, care and
skill that may be used, cannot change it, or remove it for a good; Therefore
the air is the chiefest to be looked upon for health, pleasure and wealth.

Secondly, What means is best to be used for the situation of Gardens of
pleasure, according to every man's respective place, which is the modelizing and
contriving of it.

The modelizing of a Garden, is to compose it of the bigness according to the
cost intended for it, in the making of it up, and for the keeping of it
afterward. This rightly understood, the second thing in modelizing, is to
raise it by a direct square, from that part of the house where it is appointed
to be; for if it be not took by a true square, there will be a confusion in all
the work that is to be done in that groundplat, intended for a Garden: besides
that it will never answer the face of the house, but all things will seem to
stand askew, when there is any prospect took of it from a window, or a Balcony
of the said house.

The ready way to prevent these mistakes is thus: having appointed the place
and the quantity of ground, according to the former directions; then lay a line
upon one side thereof, as I told you, by a direct square from the foundation of
the house; then look how many yards you will have your Garden in length, so
many yards measure out by the line side, beginning at the house: and when you
are come to the end of the account of your measure, there stick down a stake;
so done lay another line across at that said stake, which must be one corner of
your Garden, in that corner place the square, so that one part of it agree with
the first line; then cause the second line to come exactly straight by the eye
of the other part of the square: this observed, measure out so many yards as
you would have the Garden in breadth; and if it be to be laid at a full square,
then measure just as many as before: this done you are come where the next
corner must be, there stick down a stake in all respects as you did at the
first corner; then take up your first line, and lay it across as you did
before, making of it agree with the square. Do thus till you come to that place
where you begun, leaving a stake at every corner, which will stand at a just
square, which is the first and chiefest part of modelizing of a Garden of
pleasure.

Secondly, Lay two lines from each corner cross-wayes to the next corner
opposite to it, and where these lines cross, there is the center of the
Garden-plat, and in that place set another stake; let this stake and the rest
be drove in stiffly, so that they may not be easily pulled up; and also let
these stakes be as straight, and as long, and stand as upright as it may be
possible; for if the Garden-plat be unlevell, you will have an occasion to
raise your lines by these stakes, as I shall show you afterward in the
levelling of a Garden.

Thirdly, A form for a Garden-plat thus laid out, what remains but that I make
some queries, what kind of earth it is, and what air and shelter it has, and
what work may be intended to be amplified in this space of ground: but I will
first speak of the improvement; so that in the future ages the Garden may be
fruitful, and then of draft-work.

The improveing of a thing is to bring it from barrenness to fruitfulness; for
barrenness is a disease, and improvement is a cure; therefore I must know the
disease, before I can give directions for the cure. To be brief, if I know what
earth it is, and what place and manner it lies in, reason tells me the cause
of barrenness, and experience teaches me the cure. viz. If it be a cold wet
and clayey ground, then contrive it with high walks, which in the making of
them will make motes: but if the Garden should be large and spacious, and
springs lie in the middle, then dig trenches where the walks of the Garden are
intended, and lay in those trenches stones and wheat-straw; it is no matter
whether it be in any order yea or no; it will convey the small springs and
issues out of the earth, better than those gutters which are laid by a Mason
with lime and sand. Yet further observe, that stones thus laid in the ground,
if they have not a vent for that water which it receives, they are of no use:
therefore lay them so, that they may be somewhat falling from the center of the
Garden, to those motes aforementioned, or to any other respective place.

The second cure which is more available for stubborn and barren earth is this:
level it about Michaelmas or Candlemas, when opportunity shall best serve: the
next Midsummer following or thereabout dig the quarters at a spit depth,
casting off the stones and roots out of it, breaking the clods; which will be
then as dry as dust. Now consider what good this will do; and if you please I
will name some of those benefits to you. First, The Sun by reason of the
looseness of the earth, kills all the weeds that are displanted there, and it
breaks the heart of the stubbornness of the earth. Secondly, The rain
mollifieth it, and makes it to shiver; whereas before if it were dug in the
wet time, it binds it and makes it the stronger. Thirdly, The reason of this
looseness is, the air has recourse and influence into it, whereby it purges
it, and makes it fruitful: for let me premise a word or two; earth and water
are that whereof bodies are made; but air is that which gives life and virtue
to all things that are sensible and insensible. I cannot stay here, but must
insist upon that promise which I made, touching the levelling of a Garden.

I am come now to the levelling of a Garden, either by descents, or a true
levell-fall, and that which is better than either is a true water level: the
last of these shall be the first I will speak of before I give you the
directions. If you please to look back into the second Page, there you shall
find that I spoke of modelizing, and I also gave directions for it; that is, to
leave the stakes standing at the corners and the centers thereof. This
observed, here follows the levelling of it.

First of all find out the highest corner thereof by your eye; then go to that
place with a water-levell, and they are placed like a levelled Canon, against
that corner cross-wayes opposite against you, which is generally the lowest
part of a piece of ground: your level thus placed, fill it with water, so that
it may stand at both ends alike; then lay your eye to the uppermost part of the
level, as if you were shooting at a mark; take your sight exactly on the
furthermost stake, and mark the place well: do so likewise of that in the
center; then strain a line from that place where your level lies, to that
place where you fixed your eye upon the lowermost stake; then consider how many
yards, foot or handfuls that is from the ground, just half so many set another
line below that; again strain it as far toward the upper corner at that
height, as the ground will give you leave, which if the ground be of a true
fall, before it will be just at the center: be it more or be it less, take your
gage from the uppermost line; then fasten it, and stick some pegs down as may
be just as high as the line; so done, you may take away both lines, and do so
cross-wayes again, leaving pegs in like manner. Now understand, that earth
which rises above the pegs being brought down, will make good what is wanting
there, and abate what is too much in the other: so the Garden-plat will be
level, without bringing of any to it, or carrying any from it. I think this
experiment would sometimes have saved many a Noblemans purse, and a Gardners
credit.

Next for laying a Garden by a true fall: that is done with great ease, if you
know how to level it, or did observe what directions I gave you for it. You
may remember what was said for setting of lines, to make the Garden of a
level; then it is no more but to set the line at the lowermost stake, a foot
or a yard, more or less under the levell-mark, according as you would have your
Garden fall; and this brings it exactly to pass, if you observe to lay cross
lines, as was said of the levell-work, for casting the ground by.

Next for laying Gardens in the ascents, it must be done in the selfsame
manner, one quarter after another levelled, as I prescribed for a whole Garden,
according as the ground will rise, either one yard or two yards, more or less,
with half paces, or steps to walk up out of one part of the Garden into the
other. I have more and greater things in hand for the advancement of
Garden-plats, either for pleasure, physical or profitable, viz.

How to level ground to make it fruitful. How to divide ground into quarters
for knots. The expert way of laying of Grass-work. The manner of setting of
hard quick-set and Poll-work. The ready way to make borders and beds according
to the new art. The way of purifying of earth, for to receive curious plants.
The best way for laying of walks, either with Grass, gravel or Taris-morter.
The way of making high walks and mounts. How to make bowling Allies with great
ease and little cost. Rules for cutting of a wilderness and maze-work. Also one
hundred proper drafts, as were never so drawn by any, with rules and directions
how they may be amplified in the ground, with an information and a farewell on
them in verse. The advancement of a physical Garden by improving the earth.
Preparations for Indian plants. Contrivance for a physick-Garden for profit and
pleasure. Means for the saving of plants from hurtful worms. Errors discovered
in the practice of digging. The means of improving a Kitchin-Garden. The ready
way to cleanse and destroy weeds. Seasons for digging for improvement.
All these experiments I shall not fail to bring forth, if God permit me life.

But what remains at the present, but that you modelize and contrive your
Garden-plats, by these few directions which I gave you, or others, which you
may better like of; and also to beautify them with such knots as follow
hereafter of my invention, or those that may be invented by your self, which
probably may please your fancy better than mine.

1 This Figure represents Lines how they ought to be laid before you begin to
draw a large Knott but especially that following, And also note that these
Lines are not to be stirred till the Knott be finished, and so by the use of
these Lines and two lines more you may draw any Knott. This figure is supposed
to contain. 18: yards square and allowing. 21: Inches to each footpath.


2


3
a Scale by one foot Measure



4
This is a Scale of 20 Foot



5 Here I have made the true Lovers Knott
This Scale will serve for 3: other Knots following. a Scale of 32: Foot



6 Running Drafts


7


8 Cross Diamonds in the paper I do frame


9
This Scale by 9: Inch Measure



10
This Scale is 18: Foot



11
a Scale by Foot Measure



12
by the foot Measure



13 Four several Quarters fit for to be drawn with herb or box for to set
Flowers there in.
These works need no Scale being so plain



14 Here is other four fit for the same purpos as the last
This by 19: Inches page weere. This by twenty.



15 This Knot may be drawn with four Lines only as it is here
This Scale by prescribed. one foot



16
It is by twenty two a Scale Inches Measure



17
This Scale by 10: Inch Measure



18
a Scale of 28 foot



19
a Scale of 30 foot



20 a Scale by the foot etc: Also a form how to lay your Lines.


21 This is a good pattern for a Wilderness as well as for a Quarter of Herbs.
a Scale of 24 foot



22 a Labyrinth
This scale by two foot and two Inches



23 a form how to lay Lines for the following work.


24 The Flower of Deluse Ovall. Here I have in the paper the Ovalls so round
put And in the Ground the same I can Cut.
a Scale of 40 foot



25
a Scale by the two foot Measure



26 The half Moons.
Every black and white in this Scale is two foot and two Inches upon ye work
Grass work.



23 a form how to lay Lines for the following work.


24 The Flower of Deluse Ovall. Here I have in the paper the Ovalls so round
put And in the Ground the same I can Cut.
a Scale of 40 foot



25
a Scale by the two foot Measure



26 The half Moons.
Every black and white in this Scale is two foot and two Inches upon ye work
Grass work.



27 The Figure of a whole Garden.
This ye a foot and half.



28 a plain Ovall for Flowers.
by: 15: Inches Grass work



29 This is the Triangle Ovall.
a Scale by two foot.



30 a plain Wilderness.
a Scale of Yards.



THE GARDNERS PRACTICE in the Garden of Pleasure: in the knowledge of
propagating, preserving and maintaining of Flowers, and curious Trees therein
contained.
First of Flowers.
Amorantus: or Christerious Purantus.
THere are diverse names and diverse colors of them, but one in nature. Their
names are thus; Amorantus purple, Amorantus scarlet, Amorantus cleery; many
more that I Will not stand to speak of. Now I Will give you a description of them;
Amorantus is like the Princes feather in shape; it flowreth in the Spring, and
it is sown in the same, and seedeth the same year, and dies presently after:
the seed is of a purple color; this is for no use but only for the beauty and
preheminency of the Flower, and therefore we nurse it in Gardens in England,
and hold it in great estimation. It is supposed that the seed of this Flower
came first from the Indies, and they call it there Utter: it is the Flower of
which they make the scarlet-dye; the Heathens with the juice of this Flower
will make their skins look as if they were imbrued in blood. Now I shall speak
something to the propagating of it.

First, The season for sowing of it is in the beginning of March, on this
manner; we make a hot bed with horse-dung, as we do for Purslin; then we sow a
quantity of this seed upon that bed, setting glasses over it, covering the bed
with Mats: this done, it comes up the sixth day, so soon as it is come up, you
must give it a little air in the middle of the day, covering of it again at
night; water it moderately as you see occasion: this carefully done, it will
grow to be half a foot high by May; then you may transplant it from these hot
beds into borders or pots, or other places wherein you take most delight,
sheltring of it for the first week, till it be well rooted again: this done, it
will come to flower by the latter end of May. There is little or no experiment
to be used about this plant, because it dies yearly; therefore it is only
propagated in its own nature as aforesaid; so I leave the ordering of it to
your care, and proceed to the next.

Anstartion indecom.
It is known by no other name, and it is a Flower that is raised every year. If
you will have it every year, I describe it to you thus; it has a seed
something like a pepper-corn; this seed when it is sown, it comes up something
like the honey-suckle, and flowreth in June, and it is a Flower of great rarity
amongst the Gentry and Gardeners of this Land. Now follows the ordering of it.

The season fit for it is in March, in the increase of the Moon; the place for
it is to make a hot bed, covering of it pretty thick with mould; let this bed
lyeten days, covering of it with a little straw to keep in the heat, and at
the third days end take off your straw, and set some bended sticks over the
bed; then prick in your seeds at a handful distance; then cast a Mat on the
top of your sticks; this done you shall see your seed to come up the fifth day,
as I told you before. Now take notice that you must give these plants some air
once a day, if the weather be warm: this done, you may transplant them in the
middle of May into the out-borders of your Garden of pleasure, there setting of
them at half a foot distance, and one chase in a border: this done, it will
flower, and the flower will keep fresh long on the stalk; it seldom bears
seed in England without great care and industry. I should speak much more of
it, but that it is of a tickle nature, as to the alteration of it in
germination, which I have been informed by others, and being not well
acquainted with it, I shall cease to give any arguments to the contrary, and
leave those experiments with you which are set down.

Angulshenelus.
It was never called by any other name: I Am not very well acquainted with this
Flower, and therefore I shall not affirm any thing of experience; but take this
description, as I received it from a friend: he says this Herb or Flower,
whether you please to call it, has such a property that there is none like it,
viz. says he, when this Flower has its seed full ripe in its self, then if
you go to it and touch it with your hand, presently the Cod that the seed lies
in breaks, whatever he be that touches it: from the nature of this Flower,
viz. says he, I have gone to one that has been counted for a Maid, and I have
desired her to touch the Cod A cunning invention.
wherein lay the seed of this Flower; what if I should, says she, why then,
says he, if you have lost your Maidenhead, then this Cod will break at your
touching of it; she cannot believe that, but boldly touches it, then it
breaks, and she is convinced of her fault and confesses, thinking the seed
were sensible of her fact; by this says the Author I have found out my desire,
as to the knowing whether a woman has lost her Maidenhead or not: this I
thought worthy of the reciting. Now I will give you a description of it.

It is much like your purple- valaren in shape, but in color Descrip.
of a whitish green, the Flower being of a bluish color: it never grows
above a foot high, and it flowreth in August, and has a hundred seeds in a
Cod, and it is much like Rose-campion seed.

It is raised of the seed in the Month April, in the same Ordering.
manner and place as you do your Clove-gilliflowers, as you may see hereafter,
and at the Months end it will be fit to be transplanted into the borders
amongst orher Flowers, or you may let it stand in the same beds if you please:
this done, it will grow up and flower as aforesaid, and when the winter comes
the top-branches dye, and at the top of the root remains a small spring being
well shelterd, but be as careful as you will, the third year dies both root
and branch, says the same Author.

Batchelors Buttons.
Descrip. It is a Flower that runs on the ground like Water cresses, with
stalks like Pease, with a thick round furrey leaf like Balm, but only it has a
bright green color; the Flower is a round double Flower of the color of a
white and red speckled Cornation, but something less; this Flower seldom
leaves any seed behind, the branches of it dye when winter comes, and
springs again in the spring.

Now for the propagating of it; if you have it not already in your Garden, then
you must procure slips of it, not that it has slips from the branches which
may be set to grow, but they must be such slips as have both root and branch,
and such are easy to be had where they are growing, for they spread mightily
in the ground; now having got such slips as I told you of, prepare a border,
either a border round a quarter of herbs, or an out-border of your Garden, as I
told you in the former part of this Book, then set your line at the uppermost
part of the border, then your slips a hands breadth asunder only one chase in a
border, for they increase exceedingly, this must be done in March or August,
those that were set in August will flower early, but those that are set in the
Spring will not flower till July or August, those that are set in August will
flower in May, June and July; now observe, that as soon as they have done
flowering you must cut off the top-branches with a pair of Garden-shears, then
it will spring presently after; and take notice, this Flower never grows out
of a Garden being once planted, though the old stock dies yet it sends forth
young shoots in its stead, which causes them to spread mightily; and therefore
if you will keep them in uniform manner, you must transplant them once in two
or three years, as I directed you before.

Bee-Flower.
It is so called because it bears a Flower in shape like a Be; whether I may
properly call it a Flower or the seed I Will not dispute, but such a like thing
in shape and color; it puts forth at the time of seeding, therefore I call
it a Bee-Flower: I shall cease to give you any further description of it,
because I think it not worth the labor.

If you have a desire to raise them, if you can procure the seed, it is easily
done by sowing of them in good mould in the Spring time, with other Flowers in
borders or beds, setting a mark where you sow them, you shall see them come up
with a sharp leaf, and in June or July they bring forth seed, and dye the same
year: I have spoken with some which have been mightily taken with this Flower.

Balm of Christ.
Or if you please the hand of Christ; the Romans in former time were wont when
they found any excellent Herb or Flower, to dedicate it to their Saints, and
call it by their names, so I conceive that the name of this Flower was derived
from some Romish Author because it has this title, and indeed it is a great
rarity to see a Flower representing the figure of a hand, as this does when it
is in the fullness of its perfection: it will be needless to describe it any
further.

Now for the propagating, if you can procure the seed of it at the beginning of
April, then sow it, but with a great deal of care and curiosity, viz. First
find out the warmest place in your Garden, and there make a bed of Barley-straw
and Bran, then cover it with fine mould three inches thick, then prick in your
seeds half an inch deep, then shelter this bed a nights with a Mat, you shall
have your seeds to come up the tenth day; you shall find that making of beds
with Barley-straw and Bran to be the excellentest way of raising of Flowers
that ever was invented, for why your beds that are made with horse-dung forces
gemination too soon, and does not continue that height which the plant was
forced up, for which cause the plant decays, and those that are made only of
earth they are too cold for outlandish plants; if you will take my counsel and
sow it after this manner before described, transplant it in May into a box of
earth, and you shall have the balm of Christ to flourish in July, which is a
great rarity to the beholders of this Nation: there are few experiments more to
be used than have been described; it will dye when winters cold breath comes,
therefore remember every year to raise it as I told you.

Bears-Ears.
By some called Rickaluses, by others French Cowslips, and purple Cowslips; it
has a leaf like your None so pretty, Descrip.
very thick and jagged, and keeps green all the year, they never rise above a
handful high, only the stalk, the Flower on that stalk is much like the double
Cowslip, and the Flower is not much unlike in number of leaves and in shape,
but in color they differ; the colors are these, the pink color, the scarlet,
the morey color, and the purple, these naturally flower all at one time, and
that is in March and April: these are Flowers of great estimation, and a great
many of curiosities are used about them, in the propagating of them from seed
and slip.

Now I will give you my own experience which I found true by my practice;
Rickaluses are increased by seed and slip: first of the seed, if you can get
the seed of the best colors, then sow it in a box in March or the beginning
of April in special good mould, you must be careful to water the seed well
for the first summer, the second summer it will flower about that time as I
told you before, you may let these remain in the box, so they stand not too
thick where they will grow continually, you may take slips from them to
transplant into other places: take notice that the putting of them inboxes is
not because they will not endure the cold winter, but to have them early.

There are ordinary means for raising of them by seed and slip, the seed you
may raise in beds with other Flowers, the slip is to be set in August and March
in this manner; having gotten your slips prune them handsomely, and setting of
them at a distance atop of a border, or by a borders side, watering of them for
the first ten months if the season should be dry, by that time they will be
rooted and come to perfection, but they flower not that year.

Bell-Flowers.
There is a white and a blew, they differ not much one from the other in
nature, therefore the directions of one will serve for both: first I Will give
you a description; they spring up with branches like Safforn-Crocus in the
beginning of January, if the weather be not too much unseasonable, and flower
in the latter end of March, the Flower is in shape like a Bell, it has only
five leaves, presently after it is flowering the stalk withers and bears no
seed, but the root remains in the ground always and springs every year, they
are a Flower numbered amongst those that have Bullous roots.

The preserving of them in their nature is thus; at any time after they are
flowering you may transplant the root into new places, or set them again in the
old; or if you have them not, then you may send for the root to some other
place where they may be had, the place proper to set them in is in your
intervails of herball or out-borders of Grass-work in this manner; make holes
in your ground with a diber half a foot asunder, put in each hole a root, be
sure you make not your holes too deep, for then it will keep back the Flower
from coming early, it lying so low and so cold, otherwise you may get them
early by putting of them in boxes and housing of them: lastly take notice that
you must replant them every two year, or else the roots will grow thick and the
Flower will be small.

Crows-foot.
There are single and double, there are distinct colors, as Descrip.
white, red and purple, the double sort bears a Flower something like the
double stock-Gilliflower in bigness, set with many leaves like the inner part
of the Emrose, it spreads with many stalks of two foot high, with many dark
green leaves, and shaped like the Vine leaves with a weak stalk, it flowereth
in July and August, and bears its seed a little after.

The chiefest way of propagating this is of the slip, in the Months March or
August, the slip is taken partly from the root, for the branch dies every
year, and the slip of such branches will not take root. I shall not need to
describe every particular in planting of them, the places fit for them is in
the borders next the walks in your Garden at a foot distance, for they spread
very much: you must save the seed of this Flower, or take of some of the slips
and set, for he will stay with you but two years, then he dies; you may raise it
of the seed also even as you do any other ordinary Flower, and therefore I Will
not stand to treat of it.

Crokus.
Of these there are two sorts, the striped Crokus and the Safforn Crokus, these
are both winter Flowers, for they Descrip.
flower at the beginning of February even to the latter end of March, they are
a very pretty Flower, and they are so well known I need not stand to describe
them, only I Will tell you what properties they have; and though it be said that
all Herbs and Flowers bear seed, this I could never find to bear any, for
flower, stalk and branches soon vanish after their first appearing, nothing
remains but the root, and this root ought to be took up presently after he is
flowered, which is in April, and when you have taken them up, reserve the
suckers by themselves and the bearers by themselves, you may keep them in a box
with a little earth a Month or two if you please, and plant them at your
leisure.

The manner and place of planting of them: the properest place to plant them is
in borders where Tulips are planted, between every Tulip-root you shall set a
Crokus-root, at what time the Crokus has done flowering a little after the
Tulips will begin; we usually take up Crokus as well as Tulips every other
year, because they should not lie too deep in the earth, for they will run
downwards and increase with so many suckers that they will be hindered of their
large growth; and by having too many suckers about them, and by lying so deep
in the cold earth, they will be hindered of their early flowering, for these
reasons we transplant them every year, or every other year: from the
Qualon-Crokus you may save Safforn.

Lastly, Some may enquire for experiment of moloration in the nature of the
plant, in ingemination there can be none, for it is out of man's element,
because they are not produced of seed, but increase of themselves by the root
in the earth: now if any man should desire to alter the color of this Flower,
I think it a vanity, for no man can devise more rarity of colors than nature
does bestow in flowers; but for promoting of the nature of this or any other
which springs of a bullous-root, take these observations: First, fill some
boxes of the finest mould that may be had, and as dry as may be, then put it
into boxes, then set these boxes in some garret, or room, or other, where it
may have the Sun and Wind, but no rain come at it, have so much patience as
to let it stand for a twelve month, then get Sheeps-bloud, the juice of a
Laren, Camomile, Mallows and Lapeons tails, mix these juices and Sheeps-bloud
together, then water this dry earth with this substance, then take your
Bullous-roots, as crotus Tulips, crown Imperials, Lillies, Snow-drops and the
like, then plant them in these boxes at the times and seasons as I have
directed you formerly, and anoint the roots with this substance at their
planting, water them continually with the same, let them have no rain, or any
kind of water else, but only this; besure they have Sun, Wind and Air enough,
for otherwise your flowers will corrupt; this done, your flowers will spring
out of an exceeding large growth, and produce them very early, and I can
positively say, that it will make them differ from what they were formerly. So
much for that.

Crains-Bill.
It is a flower of a Bullous-root about the bigness of the top Descrip.
of a man's thumb, long and flat, on one side rising with branches like great
rushes spreading every way, with a stalk rising in the middle, whereon grows
the flower with a few small long leaves, hanging down of his head; it is a
flower of the Spring, being once planted in a ground, there it remains: it will
not be worth my labor to describe every particular of it; to be short, the
time of planting of them is in April or August, the place in some out-border in
a physical or a kitchin-garden, and there if they be but kept clean from
hurtful weeds, they will flower yearly and increase, so you may plant more
ground with the suckers, or pleasure your friend with them.

Cullenbines.
There is a speckled Cullenbine and the purple Cullenbine, Descrip.
the white and the blew: and many other mixed colors, which I shall not stand
to name. The branches of Cullenbines die every year, and the root springs
again; the leaves are for good use for pot herbs; and for physical uses, as you
may see in Herbals; the seed of this flower does ripen the latter end of July,
and if you let it shed of it self, it will spring up again, if the earth be
cleansed from weeds; so where they are once, soon the falling of the seed
keeps the Garden replenisht with them, yet the old stock dies standing four
or five years: the time for sowing of these is chiefly in August, so that they
may flower timely; the place ought to be in some borders, next a privy walk; be
sure you let them not stand too thick, for then they will grow small and
single; let them be cleansed from weeds. Thus much may serve for the ordinary
sort of Cullenbines.

Now there is a more tenderer sort, which we call the thrice double converted
Cullenbine; these are not much unlike the former, but only they are much
larger, and much exceeding the other in orient color; these flower at the same
time the other do, they seldom bear seed, but if you can procure either seed or
slip, you shall order them, as follows:

Prepare some fine boxes of earth, and therein sow your seed, or set your slip,
having a diligent care over them afterward: by watering of the slip, and
transplanting of the seedlings, sheltering of them from the frost and snow, you
shall have them to flower early in the Spring: I cannot stand to set down every
particular; there may be many means used to set forward the nature of them, but
no way to alter the form, setting forward of the nature is but a watery
substance, which I shall not speak of here, but refer it to that place where I
treat concerning Cornation Gilli-flowers.

Crown-Imperial.
Crown-Imperial, or Imperial-Crown, counted the worthiest of Spring-flowers,
for it flowreth at the beginning of April; now understand that there are two or
three sorts, as the great Imperial, the Italian Imperial: they differ not so
much, but if you know one you may know the other.

Imperials at the first coming up are so like Lillies that they Descrip.
have been took for Lillies by some; they rise to three foot high, and at the
very top shouteth out six flowers, hanging directly downward, above them rises
sharp leaves, eight in number, sharp and small, and a handful long, standing
directly upright, which resembles an Imperial-Crown: this flower keeps fresh
three weeks off the stalk; in the middle of the flower stands six bluish
pearls; the stalk of this flower perishes every year after it has born its
seed, which is about the middle of June, the root remains in the ground,
which is as big as a man's fist, yellow and round, it stinketh mightily: I need
not give you any farther description.

The propagating of them is either by seed or slip: First, The seed that is
raised as are Tulips (of which I treat hereafter) in the same time and place
setting of the slip, is presently after his flowering, then if you have them
not, you may procure them, and set them in your borders with your Tulips,
betwixt every Tulip an Imperial root, so by that time your Imperials have done
flowering, your Tulips will begin, so you shall have your borders to flourish
all the Spring.

And not to be troublesome to you, the Imperial-roots must be removed every
year, and the suckers took from the old mother, and planted in a bed by
themselves at a handful distance, and the next year you may replant them into
the borders amongst your bearers, they flower the second year.

Lastly, To produce any thing by Art from this flower contrary to Nature, if it
may be done upon any, it may be done upon this; for you may take the root out
of the ground for a months space, and in that time you may water it, or anoint
it with such contrary colors as you desire most to have the flower of, then
this root is forced to participate this watery substance of contrary colors
into its nature; and some think that this must force the root to bring forth a
flower like those colors, like that substance that it was watered with, but I
am not of that judgment; yet some alteration may be, but not according to man's
expectation; for sow a Turnip in a sandy ground, which is that which his nature
requires, and sow it in the rankest ground that is, and it is a Turnip still:
so Imperial roots being set in these substances, it will be an Imperial still;
and therefore they are but conceits, and not experiments, which I can affirm
for truth; yet some alterations will be, and many times contrary to what a man
does expect, every seed will spring up to be the like of his mother, yet some
difference may be in shape and form, as one Physiognomy of a brother may
differ from another, and that is not as man pleases. Let this suffice.

Cornflag.
This is a flower which springs of a bullous-root, rising with many leaves
two foot high in the shape of a sword, in Descrip.
the middle of those rise in the branch with shorter leaves, one in the same
form as the other; this bears a flower resembling the Flowerdeluce in shape,
a matter of six leaves, and every leaf is of three fingers breadth, purple at
the top, and blew toward the bottom; this flower is in his prime in May, and
the seed is ripe in June, then dies the branch, the root remains in the
ground, and springs yearly.

The ordering of them I shall set down in few words: First, If you have them
not, you shall procure the seed in the month of August, then you shall sow it
in this manner; Prepare a border of good mould under some wall, where it may be
sheltered from the cold Winter, your bed being finely raked, cast your seed on
it of such a thickness, as reason shall best direct you, then riddle a quantity
of fine mould, and cast upon these seeds, so that they may be covered half an
inch deep; this done, you shall see your seed spring up a matter of three weeks
after with a single blade, shelter these all the Winter there, and in the
latter end of March replant them into the out-borders of your garden of
pleasure at a foot distance, one range in a border, the second year they will
flower: the fourth year you shall replant them again, for otherwise they will
grow so thick that it will spoil their flowering: and for planting of them,
take slips which are took from the root in the month of March, and set them
one chase in a border, as I told you of seedlings. Thus much for our English
Corn-flag.

There is also the Indean Corn-flag, which is of a more statelier growth, a
curiouser color, and tenderer in nature, but it flowereth at the same times,
and is sown and planted at the same seasons as the former, only with a great
deal more care, for the seed, root or branch will not endure the cold Winter,
therefore we sow it in boxes, transplant it into others, and by putting these
boxes into houses in the Winter, giving of them air in seasonable days, we
raise and preserve this Italian Corn-flag: now concerning any experiment of
alteration, I never could find any man of such an ambitious desire as to do any
such thing, but for the setting forward of the nature of it, water it with such
a water wherein has been Sheeps-dung and Pigeons-dung: So I cease and proceed
to the worthiest of flowers, which is

Cornation Gilliflowers.
Of Gilliflowers there are diverse kinds, as the Cornation-Gilliflower, Of Kinds.
the Clove-gilliflower, the Wall-Gilliflower; these I shall refer to another
place, and speak here only of the Cornation-Gilliflower, which for beauty and
delicious smells, and excellent properties deserves letters of gold. I wonder
that Solomon did not write of this Flower, when he compared his Spouse to the
Lilly of the valley: but whether there were any of these flowers in those
days, or in those places we will not enquire, but proceed to the flower it
self. To give a description of it were vanity, being so generally known by
every one, yet few know the nature of it; therefore I shall only speak of the
titles of them, and proceed to the ordering of them.

They are only tituled and distinguished by their colors, Names.
chiefly thus; the Crystaline, the Granado, the fair maid of Kent, the
Fools-coat, the Dover, the Bandeleer, the mixed Clove, the painted Lady, the old
Man's Head, the London-white the Emperors-robes, the Pattern of Nature, the
Scarlet, the Wine-colour, the Widow, the Peach-colour, the Purple: these and
all these are intermixed, which does make so many mixed colors that I will not
stand to name, but will proceed to sowing, planting and replanting. First, Of
these I Will begin with sowing, and therein are matters of consequence; first, it
is the way to have plenty and store of these flowers; Secondly, it is the
chiefest art in the practice indoubling and redoubling of them.

For sowing of them you ought to consider what ground is Sowing.
fit for them; it must be a well tempered ground, by no means too rank, and in
a convenient place, where it may be warmed by the reflection of the Sun: the
place appointed, dig it and cleanse it from stones, then lay it out into small
beds of two foot and a half in breadth, then rake them finely, take a quantity
of seed and sow it of a thickness, as you think best, then get a little fine
mould and riddle through a riddle, cover these seeds with it a matter of three
quarters of an inch thick; these seeds will come up the sixteenth day with two
spindles like grass. Now I have shown you the manner of sowing of them; now
you must consider the times and the seasons for them.

The season fit for it is the first full Moon in April, and the Season.
first full Moon in May, and likewise in August, the same manner as I told you.

Now observe those that are sown in April ought to be watered in the dry
weather, and in the first full Moon of August they ought to be replanted to a
better earth in some border by a wall-side where they may be sheltered from the
cold the Winter following.

The planting of them is done thus; when your border is dug and evenly
raked, then go to your place where your seedlings grew, then take them up with
a setting stick, which is the fittest instrument for that purpose; so done,
prune them, which is to cut off all the superfluous gross top blades, slipping
off some of the under blades, then go to your place, as before mentioned; and
by a direct line set the one from the other six inches distance, and so let
them stand while the next March, covering of them from frost and snow a nights
then in March you may remove them into knots or pots, or any other proper place
where you shall have a desire, or shall stand for the beauty of your Garden;
these plants being set in a better mould than before, and diligently watered,
will come to flower by the next July following. Thus much of the seedlings sown
in August.

Now for those that are sown in the Spring, being ordered in like manner as the
other, preserved with the same care, will come to flower the second Summer.

Next for the setting of the slips, the time for it is in April, Of slips.
May, June and August, the Moon being three days before the full; in this
manner, we go to such stocks, and slip off such slips as we can conveniently;
these slips we clip off the tops praise with a knife, and under we slip quite
off, then slitting the lower most part of the slip that we put in the ground;
this done, set them in a convenient place, as I told you of the seedlings, at a
hand-breadth asunder, the next Spring or fall following transplant them into
borders, three chase in a border at a foot difference. Thus far of the
ordinary means for ordering of the common sort of Cornation-Gilliflowers.

Now follows extraordinary means for the propagating of the rarest sort of
these flowers, with some answers to such vain opinions, as some men affirm to
be true by words, but never proved to be true by actions.

First, For altering the color by incisions; it has been Color.
given out by some that Aris, and Bisse, and Verdigrease; these and such like
may be dissolved betwixt the bark and the body of the Cornation, and that these
mixed colors will cause a mixture in the flower. To this I answer, That this
will never cause the effect, upon several trials that I have made; for any
thing dissolved betwixt the bark and wood of a tree, causes that part of the
bark to die, which is of a stronger nature than any flower whatsoever: I could
show you many more of these arguments, but I will only propound this one
Question to you: Do you think that you can any way give sullenance either to
man or beast, any way but at the mouth, so that it may be concoctedin the man,
and dissolved into the several parts of a man? Nothing can be applied to any
part of man to cause it to grow as aforesaid: in like case it is with flowers,
for the root is the place where sustenance must be had for the maintaining of
the branch, then if any alteration may be made, it must be a watery substance
applied to the root, and not to the branch, but it is not Aris nor Bis that the
plant will participate of, but it must be the corruption of itself, or the
corruption of some other: Now I will instance to you, what I have done, viz. I
took Camomil, Valaren, Flag-roots, Solendine-leaves, these beaten together into
a salve, and applied to the roots of the flowers when they are planted or
removed, and watering of them with the same, has propagated the flower in
bigness, so that it has made it as big again as any of the ordinary natural
flowers, but I could never find that I could alter the form of them; sometimes
the color of them will alter that are thus ordered, but the alteration or
mixtures of colors is a law in nature more than experiment in art.

Secondly, There have been certain ways given for grafting and inoculating of
these flowers.

But I wonder whether they mean the root or the branch; if inoculating in the
branch there is no bud, and to inoculate without a bud that is impossible to
me: now we'll enquire about their grafting, what manner of grafting they did
mean, whether it be clift-grafting, or whip grafting, or grafting betwixt the
bark and the wood? If they meant any of these, or all these; if clift-grafting,
I could never get any such thing as a science, for that purpose, and for any of
the rest I think it more strange.

But what grafting may be done is by addition, grafting, Grafting.
and addition grafting is done thus; take two young plants of four months
growth, take a part of the bark of the root of each of them alike, then join
them artificially together, then bind them with a little soft flax, and anoint
it with the juice of Valeran, which is of a healing nature, then commit them to
the ground, those will incorporate into one body, which will bring forth a very
large flower if they be both of one kind; if of two several kinds, then there
will be two several kinds of one stock, which is rare; but some have told me
this will make a mixed color, but I could not give any credit to their words,
as to believe them, for why, each of them keeps their own nature: For example,
the least bud of an Apricock inoculated upon a plum-stock, keeps his own
nature, and brings forth an Apricock, then of necessity we must needs think,
that if this keep his nature where there was no substance, that the Gilliflower
grafted (as before spoken of) where there was body and substance, must needs
bring forth flowers according to their kinds. I can keep you a long time upon
these like things, but so much for this point.

Now for altering the sent of these flowers, there be diverse Of Sent.
things they say will cause this effect, which I think altogether needless,
because it has a passing smell of it self; therefore if you have any desire to
make use of what Authors have said for altering of the sent of flowers, make
trial upon such as have little or no sent, as Fowerdeluces, Scarlet-beans,
Emrose or Tulips, because they are flowers that Ladies love to have so nigh
their noses, which have little or no sent, and it would be a rare art to cause
them to have a sent, as Authors say; and it is a great wonder, that if they
could alter the sent of them, that they do not produce some of those flowers;
now if you will make use of this experiment, I can tell you what will follow,
you shall lose your labor; and I give you my reason; the sweetest and
lushiousest meat turns into the foulest and stinkingst excrement; so it is with
these infusions and molerations which man does imagine may infuse a sweetness
to any flower; for the flower does not draw the substance as it is, but
converts it into its own nature and intercisial form that it has.

Here follows some directions for the preservation of your choicest Diverse
ways for the preservation of Gilli. flowers.
Gilliflowers.

1. Observe that they have good mould. 2. That they have pots. 3. That they
have cradles. 4. That they be not kanker-eaten. 5. That they be not bound too
hard in the mould. 6. You must observe you let not too many flowers grow upon a
stalk. 7. That they be housed in the Winter. 8. That you get layers.
1. For the first of these, you must understand that every thing brings forth
fruit according to its mother; the mother here is the earth, therefore if poor
earth then poor flowers.

2. For the second, Pots are necessary for the keeping of hurtful worms from
the roots, and sheltering of them from the storms in the cold weather, and from
too much moisture and too much drithe, for too much wet does keep the plant
cold, and too much drithe does famish the plant: now these pots do preserve
them from both, and if they are made of a stately fashion they do beautify the
Garden. And lastly, you may have your flowers at such times in the year by
removing of them from place to place, as cannot be effected by those that grow
out of Pots.

3. Thirdly, Cradles are necessary; you must understand to keep the wind from
breaking and beating of them to and fro, and keeping of them in uniform manner;
these cradles are made of white rods, six standing, and two woven round about,
and the lower end sharp to put into the earth, and these keep the flowers up.

4. Fourthly, If flowers be kanker-eaten it will destroy them, for it is a worm
that eats the root; this you shall discern by the branches, when they look of
a dead color, then search the root, when you have found this kanker, take tarr
and the yelk of an egg, and man's ordure, and apply this to the kanker-eaten,
and that will cure it.

5. Fifthly, If your flowers stand too long unremoved, or the ground stirred
about them, and fresh mould put to them, the ground will be bound stiff about
the root, which must be remedied by opening the earth about them, and putting
in of fresh mould; this must be done early in the Spring, or otherwise you will
hinder it more than farther it.

6. Sixthly, If you let too many flowers grow upon a stock, they will be very
small, and in danger to kill the stock; therefore you must when you see there
is like to be great store of flowers, cut the most of them away, for the
preservation of the stock, and the enlarging of your flower, and for the
preserving of seed; for if you would have good seed, you must not suffer above
five or six Flowers to be upon a stock, these must be of the top Flowers, at
the first flowering, the seed will come to perfection by the latter end of
August, and when you see the seed black in the cod, then cut off the branch and
hang it up in the house till it be through dry, then you may rub it out, this
seed you must sow in your own Garden for two years, and afterward you must
change it, or else your Flowers will degenerate and grow single.

7. Seventhly, Housing of the Plants is necessary for preserving of them from
frost and snow which would kill them; and for getting of them to flower early,
observe that you are to give them sun and air on such days as it is to be had,
and to set them forth in rainy days, for rain water is much better than
conduit for them, but if rainwater may not be had, water them with standing
water, and be sure that they have it often, for all vegetable creatures do
partake more of the element water more than the element earth; to prove this,
take any plant and burn it, look how much ashes so much earth, and all the rest
which vapour'd away was a watery substance which vapoured up out of the earth,
then watering often is needful.

8. Eighthly, To get Laires is very needful, and it is done thus; you may buy
small pots for the purpose, which are like a tunnell, with a hole at the bottom
to let out the water if there should be too much, it has a slit of one side,
these pots we fill full of earth, and set it by Cornation-Gilliflowers side,
and bring one of the choicest slips that we can see in at the slit, so that the
top of it shall be above the top of the small Laire-pot, and the lower part of
it is in the pot and in the earth, so this puts forth root, this must be
done in August, and next March you shall cut off the slip that is so rooted and
plant it in another pot, that Laire-pot which the slip came out of will serve
for the like use again.

Further queries and observations there are concerning producing Various things.
of these Flowers contrary to nature and seasons:

1. The first dispute is, whether Cornation seed brings forth a single Pink,
I answer some do and the most do not, for those that comes single were of the
under-seed, therefore if there were diligence and care in the saving the seed,
(as I told you before) there would be very few single Pinks, but those that are
by diligence replanted may be made double, but if you will not bestow the
pains, you may plant them in some border or bank-side, there to remain for
strowing Flowers: another curiosity is to have Cornations almost while
Christmas, and it is very probable this might be done if you will take these
directions.

2. In June and July till the latter end of August, cut away all such buds or
branches that you see are like to bring forth a Flower, and afterward let such
as will spring forth alone, and by Michaelmas these will be budded forth, this
must be done by your pot-Flowers, because they must be carried in, in the cold
nights they must be set into a room, and set abroad again adays, by this means
you shall have the buds open, and keep this Flower even while Christmas.

3. Other things I have been told that would cause this effect, and that was by
enclosing the Flower in soft wax at the time they begin to open, and so let
them stand enclosed while Christmas, or any time of the winter that you have a
desire to have a Cornation-Gilliflower, then (says he) take off your wax in a
sunshine day, and the sun will open the Flower, and by this means you may have
them at any time; you may believe this if you please, but it were good for you
to find it true by experience, for my part I think it cannot be so, for the
stalk withers before that time of the year, and if the stalk be dead the
Flower cannot be alive, and that is a sufficient reason.

4. Many other vain things I have been told concerning alterations, which are
very uncertain truths which I shall not bestow the pains to set down, but shall
proceed with laudable and creditable and profitable things for him that is
employed therein: I do not intend to please any man in writing of this
Treatise, unless he will be pleased with the bare truth and no more: so I Will
speak a word or two of the continuance of this Flower.

If it may be carefully looked to it may continue five or six Continuanee.
year, or otherwise not half so long.

Some men are of opinion when they see this beautiful Flower, as to think it
is of an art of their own or others, but they are mistaken, all the art of man
is to find out the art of nature it self, for if any thing be not used in its
own nature Nature.
and season it will come to no effect, therefore what I have discovered of the
nature of this or any other Flower (as far as my capacity can truly understand)
I give it to all men; yet I know (Reader) that it may be contrary to your
judgment, for so many men as there are so many minds, but the truth that I have
here set down, I shall dispute it face to face with as many as have an
objection against it.

One thing more I give you and then I have done: if you The last experiment.
shall have any of these Flowers stolen, and if you would be revenged on the
party, or would put a jest or a jeer, you shall accomplish your desire thus;
take an Elecompane root dry and beaten to powder, then sprinkle it upon your
Gilli-flowers, or put it into the midst, then give your Flowers to the party
that you desire to be revenged of, let it be a he or she they will delight in
smelling to it, then they will draw this powder into their nostrils which will
make them fall a sneezing, and a great trouble to the eyes, and by your leave
will make the tears run down their thighs: other things there are which may be
bought at the Apothecaries, which I will not give you the receipt of, for fear
it should come to a malicious man's hands, then the effect would be evil.

Clove-Gilliflowers.
These differ little from the former in nature, to give a description of them
it were needless, I Will only speak a word of the propagating of them: they are
sown of the seed and planted of the slip as the former, but for the most part
they grow single without much pains and care, therefore I think it best to set
them of the slip if they may be had, if not you must take the pains to sow them
as aforesaid, and out of a great Propagating.
quantity of seed it is very probable you will have but a few double ones, for
the seed is of so great a rate that they commonly mix it with others that came
of single Pinks, or else of the under-seed: if you set them of the slip, the
best time is the first full Moon of August, so that they may take root by the
Spring, (all things observed as I told you of the ordinary sort of
Cornation-Gilliflowers) you may remove them in March again at the full of the
Moon; take notice that the Moon is of great force, for we find in the
Scripture, that the Seasons of great force
Moon is appointed for times and seasons, and I observed it by this more than
any other, for those slips that were set just at the full Moon were so great
that they brake in the hores or the husk, and these are as bad as those that
are too small, therefore set them three or four days before the full Moon: it
will take up a great deal of time to set down every particular, but he that
knows how to order Cornation-Gilliflowers may order these; I shall speak
something to the worth of this Flower, but my pen is not worthy to subscribe
it, for all The worthiness of them.
other Flowers are inferior to them, because they are preserved, conserved,
and also pleasant syrups for the palate of man. Many other things of them there
are which the Apothecary well knows.

Cowslips.
Double Cowslips are fit to be planted in a Garden of pleasure for the use of
their Flowers in sallets, for the bedecking Reasons why.
of the Garden, because they flower early when other Flowers are scarce, being
once planted there they continue always; they never bear seed, therefore they
must be planted.

The time of planting of them is either in the Spring or the Fall, the place is
in the edge of the upper part of your borders, Ordering.
having prepared your ground then slip your plants into as many slips as you
can, cutting off the top leaves within three inches of the root, and strain
your line and prick them in three inches one from another where they will grow
very well, if you water them, this must be while they are well rooted, and
afterward they need no care but weeding, now remember to clip off the dead
leaves and stocks after your Cowslips have done flowering, then the leaves will
spring green and fresh again which is very pleasant to behold.

Daysies.
There are three or four kinds, as the wild Daysie, the French Daysie, and the
Garden double Daysie; the Garden Descrip.
Daysie it is I intend to treat of, of these there are two or three sorts of
colors, but one in nature; the colors are these, the white, the red, the
purple and the speckled: This flower never bears any seed; the time of
flowering is in May and June, a fine ornament to a Garden, and the flowers are
used in Nosegayes: The branches of this flower dies every year, and the root
sends up young again; so where they are once planted they always continue.

The place, time and manner of planting of them, is as Planting.
I told you of the Couslips, only the choicest sorts be set in knots or beds,
so I need not trouble my self nor you to give any farther reason for the
ordering of them.

Daffodillies.
These are very well known to them that know any thing; Of sorts.
there are many sorts, and for little use, and I might describe them as Mr.
Purchase has done, and truly I think it a needless curiosity, I will only
describe to you their names; there is the wild Daffodilly, and the Garden
Daffodilly, the French Daffodilly, and the Italian Daffodilly; all these but
the wild are cultevated in Gardens, because they flower early in the Spring,
and are commonly used in flower-pots; it is a flower seldom bears seed;
presently after it is flowering, the stalk dies, and the leaves remain green.

They are propagated by slips taken from the old root; the time for it is in
April presently after they are flowered; the place for the ordinary sort is in
some borders by a privy walk, where you may plant them half afoot asunder, and
no deeper, and that they may be just covered.

The Italian, and the French, and great double sorts are planted in the
intervals of Herb-knots, or in the out-borders of Grasse-knots, in manner as I
told you of the former; some make a curiosity to plant the great double sorts
in boxes, because they would house them in the Winter, to the end that they
would have them flower early in the Spring; you may, if you please, take up
this root, and keep it in the house in a little sand a quarter of a year, and
plant it again, and it will grow, in which space you may see if there be any
alterations, in sent, color or form, as some have said.

Dragons-Claw.
It first rises up with dark-green leaves like black Elivert, and afterward
they grow more smaller and jagged; with these leaves rises a stalk of the
substance of a Mallow-stalk, and this stalk shouteth forth many branches; and
on these branches there are many flowers of a bluish color, in the shape and
bigness of a woman's thimble; the time of their flowering is in the month of
May, June and July; for the top branches being broken off, the sides send forth
more, which causes it to continue so long a flowering; the seed is ripe in
August, the stalk dies presently after the root springs, the next year
after, and having yielded its seed three years the root and branch dies: the
general use that it is for, is for the beautifying the Garden, and for
flower-pots.

This flower is propagated of the seed only; the time for it is the beginning
of April; the place fit for it is in a piece of Sowing.
ground which we reserve only for a Nursery, only for raising of flowers in,
there you may sow it with others, or by themselves in the end of a bed, having
committed them to the earth, you shall see them spring up in a fortnights time
with two small green leaves; being carefully watered they will be big enough to
be removed, for they will spread mightily, so they will not have room enough to
grow in the bed where they are sown, therefore transplant them into beds or
borders in your Garden of pleasure, and in August they will come to flower, and
the next year they will flower by the latter end of May.

There is another season in sowing of them, and that is in the latter end of
August; but the plants that were sown at this Another season.
season must be carefully looked after, and sheltered from the frost and snow,
they will come to flower in the Spring seasonably, and die at the third years
end (as I told you before) therefore save that seed and sow it again; there is
nothing more of curiosity belongs to this flower, so let these short and
plain directions serve.

Emrose.
Considering that flowers are more for beauty than for virtue; this flower
challenges the title of praise: First, for its early flowering; for in warm
places some begin to flower presently after Christmas, and then others begin;
so some are continually flowering while June; others by art and nature flower
twice a year, as in March and September. Now to give you a description of them,
they are of a set color seldom or never speckled, the ordinary color is red,
blew and purple; the Emroses held most in estimation are, the scarlet, the
London white and the black; these colors being of large kinds, I have known a
root of each sold for ten shillings; others have told me they have known them
sold for three pound a root.

Of these flowers there are double and single; the root is 2.
like a Ginger-race in shape and bigness; this flower bears a weak seed
something like sweet Madeling-seed, and that will seldom grow; and I suppose
that Emrose-seed never grew, though it be commonly sold for that purpose; yet I
have found by experience that it will not grow; and as many Gardeners as ever I
had conference with, did ever affirm such a thing to be true: therefore if you
will have Emrose, you must set them of the root, and I will be brief and
willing to show you where and how.

The fittest season for setting of them is in June, the Moon being at the full;
but if opportunity does not then serve, you Of planing.
may plant them any time betwixt that and the latter end of August, but (as I
said before) it is best to remove them in June, for then there will be the
stalks above ground, and some flowers, and afterward there will be none; so
that in the taking of them up you may cut them with a spade, but that is not
all, you will never find all your roots, unless you will sift the earth, and that
is a great deal of trouble.

The fittest place in planting of these roots is in beds amongst Of place.
your Cloves, or else at the edge of your borders where you plant Tulips, and
sometimes in beds by themselves, for the common sort make a little trail of an
inch deep, then break the roots into a many small pieces, and lay them into
this trail at a hands breadth distance, the least piece will grow and flower
the next year following.

Here follows experiments worthy of observation, Emrose-roots Experiments.
must be removed once in two years, because they do so increase and multiply,
so that you shall have twenty or thirty roots about one old bearer, these being
so thick, and growing barren, will cause them to bear very poorly, which is a
very sufficient reason that they must be removed every year, or every other
year at least.

Secondly, Whether there might be any alteration in the color by any skill or
care that may be used. Many men have 2.
said this may be done, and they have given some blind reasons for it, which I
shall wave, and tell you how you may propagate the natural growth, viz. Take
Tulip-roots, Lettice, Sheeps-dung, Strong Water, mix these together into a
salve and apply it to the root, and so commit the root to the earth, and it
will cause this root to send forth a large flower, and more speedilier than
those that are not so ordered: those roots ought to be planted in a box for to
have them come timely, not but that any Emrose-roots will endure any weather.

Lastly, To produce Emrose at all times in the year, is easily done, if the
Winter be not too violent: First take notice 3.
that you may take up Emrose-roots at any time, and keep them in your house,
though for a year, then set them again, and they will grow. Having this
advantage, if you have a desire to have them in Harvest, you must plant them in
the later end of May, and they will flower at that time; and to have them
flower later, plant them at the later end of July. Now observe that there is
such a Law and Nature, that any Herb being deprived of its natural season, yet
it will bud forth its flower afterward having liberty, always provided it be
sheltered from the cold: so it is plain, that a man may put such flowers as
have bullous roots, you may put them forward or backward by keeping of them in
season or out of season out of the earth.

African.
By some called the African-Marigold, all that can be spoken (...) names.
of this flower is, that it serves for beautifying of a Garden, for they
flower toward the later end of Summer, when most flowers are nigh done;
another thing, they have not been long in England, it came to use first out of
Africa, and you know that things that are new are rare in estimation.

It rises first like young ashes in shape and color, afterward Descrip.
spreads it self into many branches, and before it flowereth it rises to be
a yard high, the flowers are in shape like the double Marigold, but three times
as big, and of a yellow color; if you smell to it, it will put you in mind of
honey: the seeds are small and black, something like Oats; this seed is ripe
about September, the branch and root dies presently after.

It is propagated by sowing of it in hot beds, as you may see of Sowing.
Amorantus in this Book; this must be done in the beginning of March, so that
they may be ready to transplant into borders at the beginning of May, so that
you may have them to flower timely.

The second and the ordinary way of raising of them is in 2.
the middle of April; it is done thus, when you have prepared a bed fit for
that purpose, then sow them, you must get other earth and cover them with, for
if you should rake them you cannot cover the seeds, they being so long they
will not fall in, then cover them, as I directed you three quarters of an inch
thick; this done, if the weather be seasonable, you shall see your seed come up
the eighth day, and when they have stood in this bed five weeks you may replant
them into borders, two rows in a border, each plant nine inches asunder, there
let them remain, they will come to flower in August, or in September. A little
after the seed comes to perfection, and the plant dies, you may pull it up
and hang it in the roof of the house while it is dry, and this will cause the
seed to ripen, then you may rub it out, and sow this seed for two years, and
the third year you must change it, or else your flowers will degenerate and
grow single.

Everlasting-Pea.
It comes up with many branches out of one root; these Descrip.
branches run out to four-foot length much like the veins of Cucumbers, on the
stalks are narrow small leaves set on close to the stalk without any stem, and
at the top of every branch runs spindles which will take hold of any thing
that they are nigh, they spring up at the first of April, and flower in the
later end of May; the flower is mixed with a blew and purple colout of the
bigness of the Snap-Dragon flower; the seed of it is like a small gray pea.

The time of planting of it is in the beginning of April; the place fit for it
is in some border next a wall, where you may Setting.
prick them down athalf afoot distance, they will spring up in a fortnights time,
and after they are of a pretty height, you must support them with small sticks;
they seldom flower the first year, but the second year, and so onward, so
they will continue alwies with you: Hence it is they call it Everlasting-Pea. The
branch dies every Winter and springs again, as was said. I shall not trouble
you with any more directions for the propagating of it, it being of such a
hardy nature that it is altogether needless.

Everlasting-life.
It is so called by reason of its long continuance on the stalk, and being
gathered, it will keep fresh two months in the house: I Will give you a short
description of it; it springs up about the beginning of May, and by August it
flowereth; it rises up with a stalk two-foot high; there is but one flower of a
stalk, and that puts out like the Fennel-flower, with many small leaves like
the inner part of a Marigold; this flower is white, it seldom or never leaves
seed behind it, the branch dies yearly, and the root remains in the ground,
which is like the root of the Spare-mint.

If you will have this Flower in your Garden, you must procure the root in the
Springtime, then provide a bed by it self, Planting.
dress it in order, as you do for any other flower, then plant three chase of
these slips in a bed, the bed being two foot and a half in breadth, water them
well at the first planting, plant nothing else amongst them, for they increase
and spread mightily; this done, you shall have them to flower that Summer, and
continue with you always they being cleansed from weeds.

Flower-deluce.
I cannot describe them more than they have been by others, The Dignity.
as to the pre-eminence of them; the King of France's Arms is a witness, and
our English Quoin is a testimony that this flower is and was in great
estimation: Farther consider, that no inferior person dares put this flower in
his Coat of Arms, though he may put it in his Gardens: waving this Discourse,
I will show you the ordering of them.

This Flower leaves a tender seed, therefore if you have Seed.
a desire to sow them of the seed, you must have a special care in the ordering
of it; the time is in the later end of April, in a natural fertile earth, the
Moon being in the increase; this being done (in manner as I told you of
Cornation Gilliflower-seed) the twentieth day it will come up with one blade,
which grows very slowly, therefore it must be diligently weeded, and the
first Winter it must be covered from the cold, the second year they will get
strength, and shift very well for themselves, the third year they flower: but
you must take notice, that they must be rep anted every year about that time
that they were sown.

I have discoursed with many Gardeners, and one amongst Of flowering at certain
Seasons.
the rest told me, that he could have them to flower in any month in the
Summer time: I demanded of him how? He told me it was by housing of the root in
boxes of earth in the Winter time, giving of them the benefit of the Sun,
when opportunity did serve, and by watering of them now and then with warm
water, and this will cause them to spring forth presently, and flower by the
later end of April (says he.) Now reason told me that it could not be so soon,
yet it may cause it to flower a month before its natural season, as any man of
natural reason may understand.

Now to have the flower late, you must nip off the springs as fast as they
begin to spindle to flower till the middle of June, and then forbear; this will
cause them to flower about about Michalmas.

The next thing is, to know the right manner of planting Of planting.
and replanting of them for the increase of their number, and the perfecting of
their nature.

First, The time for planting and replanting of them is in the The time.
later end of July, or the beginning of August, presently after they are
flowering: the place fit for it, for the pre-eminence of your Garden, is in the
intervals of your Herb-work, or in the trails of Grasse-work.

The manner is as follows; when you have taken up The place
your roots, slip the small suckers from the old bearers, and set them in a
border by themselves at a hand breadth distance, there let them stand while
that time twelve month, then replant them into those places where you do your
old bearers: some of them will flower the first year, others not till the
second after their planting.

The manner of planting the great bearers, is to make How.
holes at a foot distance in those respective places as I told you, putting of
them no deeper in the earth than they may be just covered.

Now we will enquire of colors, and coloring of this Flower; the natural
color is the blew; the colors held Alterations.
most in estimation is the white and blew, the yellow and white, the blew and
purple; there is another color that I have been told of, that is the red and
white.

Experiments of force of nature may be as easily acted on this Flower, as any
other whatsoever. The first experiment Experiments.
is, you may take them out of the earth, and keep them in a room in sand two
months, in which space you may steep them in morical substances, whereby you
may make some infusions and alterations, and cross the nature and the seasons
of the plant, whereby you may bring about pretty fancies.

Other experiments may be made by grafting of them, 2.
which is subtle, viz. take the root of this, and the Foxes-glove, cut a part
on the side of each of these roots off with a sharp knife of each part alike,
letting the strings of the bottom of the root alone, then join them together,
and tie them with a little soft flax, and so plant them in a box of earth,
these two roots will unite into one body, and the effect will be pretty, for
there will be two several Flowers in one body.

Lastly, This Flower is a great ornament to a Garden, and for beautifying of
rooms, being placed in Flower-pots, and an excellent shape it has, which my
artlesse pen cannot describe in writing, but in draught work, my Pen, Rule and
Compass has walked a station, and set it forth in its own shape and fashion,
and so I leave this worthy Flower to your care.

The Flower of the Sun.
It is well known to those that have it, and so is any other Flower; therefore
I shall give a short description of it, to satisfy those that are not
acquainted with it. This Flower, when it is at its full growth, is at the
height of a man, only with one stalk, and that is as big at the nether end of
a man's hand-rist; upon the stalk are many leaves something like Mallow-leaves,
in color and in bigness, but they are not divided: this one plant bears but
one Flower, and that is at the very top of all, and is of a great bigness, so
that some of them are thirty inches about, and of a black and yellow color,
bending it self down, and inclining after the Sun; it flowereth in August.

The season fit for sowing of them is in April, on this manner: Prepare a
border, then prick in these seeds with your finger at half afoot asunder; they
come up suddenly after their setting, they ought to be replanted after they are
half afoot high into a rich earth, where they may have good store of rotten
dung under them, to the end they may grow large; you must water them often, for
it is a plant requires much moisture, so it will grow up and flower, and bring
forth seed which you may save and sow again: the root and branch of this Flower
dies every year.

French Marigolds.
These are something like the African Marigold, that is to Descrip.
say, as like as any two several kinds may be like one another, howsoever yet
they are not so near alike, but there is a difference in every part: for seeing
the one, and not seeing the other, it puts you in mind of the other, this is at
such time till they come to flower, then there is a great deal of difference in
the colors of the Flowers, for this is more delightful than the other, for it
is intermixed with purple and yellow like your double Wall-flowers; this
flowereth in July, being sown in natural earth, being produced from hot beds
they flower sooner.

Concerning the raising of them, I shall not need to trouble my self to set it
down how, or where, but see the directions for Africans, as you raise them, so
you mayraise these.

I shall only give you a few observations; if you low them Of raising.
in natural earth, you need not replant them, those that are sown in hot beds
must be replanted; you nor I need not trouble our selves with any more
curiosity than has been spoken, for they continue not long with us, they die
that year; so I hope out of your own capacity, and what has been spoken may
sufficiently serve for the propagating of this Flower.

French Pinks.
French Pinks, otherwise called French-Daises, by others None so pretty; and
seeing the names are so obscure, I will give you a description of this Flower;
it never rises not above half afoot high, but lies on the ground with some
stalks about afoot long, these stalks are reddish about the bigness of a
Peas-vine, of a hard substance, with many thick leaves set in order upon them,
thick and jagged, a whitish green color about the bigness of a ten
shilling-piece, round also, at the top of the braches rise little spindles of a
handful long of a red color; on these branches grow many small Flowers no
bigger than a single penny, five leaves in number white and red speckled: their
time of flowering is from the latter end of May, even to the later end of July,
they never bear any seed, therefore take the propagating of them with slips, as
follows.

The fit time for it is in the later end of August, or the beginning of March,
for they cannot endure any drithe, therefore Time.
set them in these seasons, and now I will give you my directions how it ought
to be done: having gotten slips, then prepare a border which is round an Herb
knot, and if you have none, prepare a border next the wall, having dressed this
border by a direct line, and made the sides of it firm, then set your line
against the side of the border, two inches below the top, then prick in your
slips by your line at two or three inches distance, so that nothing appear but
the tops of them; if you do this in August, they will flower the next Spring
following timely; those that be set in the Spring will not cast their Flower so
soon.

Lastly, Remember that you cut the leaves and dead branches off after they have
done flowering, then they will spring again fresh; where they are once planted
they always continue and spread mightily, so that they will run out upon your
walls; to prevent this, and keep them in uniforme order, strain a line at the
bottom of your border, and cut them off with a spade by that line; those slips
you may set again, or pleasure your friends with them, which you please.

Foxes-glove.
It is a Flower that springs up with a blade like the Corn-flag, Descrip.
through which shouteth up a stalk which bears many Flowers set in order one
above another, and of a reddish color, and in the shape of a drinking bowl.

This Flower is richest on the branch in July, it continues fresh long on the
stalk, it bears a seed which is ripe in the latter end of August.

The propagating of this Flower is either by seed or root; First, of the seed,
and that you shall sow in the beginning of April, the Moon being in the
increase, in beds of natural earth, in manner as I told you of the seed of the
Flower-deluce; the plants sprung of this seed grows very slowly, so that it
will be two or three years before it come to flower; in which space you must
replant it once or twice at the Spring or fall, and have it weeded carefully,
and after it is come to perfection they are very hardy.

Next I give you directions for setting of them of the root; thus having roots
of your own, or procuring of them from some other place, slip all the young
roots off the old, set the old by themselves, and the young by themselves, in
the intervals of your knots, or in borders where your fancy most leads you.

Lastly, I advise you to cut off the dead branches when they have done
flowering close by the earth, and remove them once ntwo years.

Globe-flower.
It is known by no other name that ever I did hear of, yet there are two sorts,
that is, single and double, they are of Descrip.
one nature; to give you better knowledge of them, this plant grows up to two
foot high, with many branches of one stalk, spreading with green leaves, in
shape like the Ivy-leaf, but lesser, rough and jagged; this plant bears many
Flowers, which are yellow, round, and of the bigness of a Wallnut; it
flowereth in the latter end of April; the branches die every Winter, and
springs again early; having stood four year root and branch dies: This
Flower is propagated by seed or slip; the slip is it which is taken from the
side of the old mother, which is taken from part of the root, and part of the
branch; this is to be done at the later end of March; the place for planting of
it, is where you plant your pot-flowers, I hope I need not stand to insist upon
every particular that appertains to this Flower. Having given you the
knowledge of ordering of more choiser Flowers, I think your own discretion may
guide you how to order this. So to be short, you may buy the seed and sow it in
the Spring with other Flowers, and it will come forward without any great care
or curiosity.

Green Cowslips.
So called, because part of the Flower is green, for there are leaves that are
mixed amongst the Flowers, which makes them appear to be green; they flower
early in the Spring, and never bears any seed.

This Flower is set only of the slip in the Spring, or in August; the place fit
for it is upon the edge of borders, you shall do it thus; slip them into as
many pieces as you can, then prune them with your knife, which is to cut off
all the leaves within an inch of the root, then set them down by a line one by
one upon the edge of your border, water them while they are rooted, then
afterward they need no care but cleansing of the weeds from them, thus you
shall have them always after.

Holihock.
Or Mallows, there are many kinds and full of many virtues, but first I will
describe which they are, and then I Will treat of them in particular.

First, For worthiness and beauty that are placed in Gardens of pleasure, is
the white, and red, and double Holihock; next the red, white, yellow, and blew,
double Holihock; forasmuch as they are called Mallows, I take them to be two or
three distinct kinds, for there is the Kings-Mallow, Diverse kinds.
March Mallow, and French-Mallow, these bear single Flowers, and so will the
Holihock without good industry; but that is not all, they differ in virtue; as
the Kings-Mallow, the French-Mallow, these are for physical uses, and the
Holihocks are very wholesome for the body, and a very pleasant Flower they bear:
I shall not treat of every sort in this place, because they fit not the Garden
of pleasure, I shall reserve the French-Mallow, March-Mallow, or Kings Mallow,
to the Treatise of the physical Garden.

Holihocks I have described, what they are in order to their places and names,
I think it is needless to write any farther description of them they are so
generally known: I now proceed to the propagating of them.

First, To have them early from the seed, you shall sow Sowing.
them in hot beds in the middle of March, the seed is of a quick spirit and
comes up the sixth day, these plants must be covered or else you will lose
your labor; by May day you shall replant these seedlings into borders next the
walls, set them at the innermost part at a yard distance, set them nigh the
wall, because they spread much: another reason is, you may nail the body of it
to the wall to keep the wind from breaking of them, these will flower by the
latter end of the summer.

A second and ordinary way of sowing of them is in the 2.
middle of April, in beds of ordinary earth, where you may let them remain till
the next August, then replant them as you did the former.

The third best way is, to sow them in the middle of August, 3.
so by the coming on in winter they will have four or five leaves; be sure you
shelter these plants in the frost and snow, and the seedlings will flower as
soon as the old standards, which is in July and August, the seed is ripe about
Michaelmas, which you may save and sow again.

Herbit.
If I am mistaken in the name I will give you a description whereby you shall
know it; it has many jagged thick leaves rising half a foot from the ground,
in the midst of it rises a stalk like the stem of a Cowflip, though something
bigger and higher, it is bare without leaves, the Flowers have many small
leaves in the middle with five greater set round it, this Flower is the bigness
of a double Primrose white and red speckled, the time of flowering is in May,
it seldom brings seed to perfection, the nethermost leaves keep green all
the year.

This plant is set of the slip in the Spring of the year, I suppose it is
needless to stand telling of you how in every particular; the place fit for it
is in a quarter laid out into beds for Flowers (as before,) this being so
planted it will endure any weather till the fourth year, and then it dies
naturally, therefore take off some of the slips from the branch and root, and
set them, which will renew their nature and keep the Garden flourishing.

Humble-plant.
I suppose the name of it was derived from the nature of it, Of the name.
for the nature of it is thus; when it is in its perfection, if a man or a
woman go to it and touch it with their hand this plant will bow to them,
therefore an humble plant.

It Is a plant that rises never above a span in height with a Descrip.
broad head, only a single stalk with small sharp whiteish green leaves set
thereunto about the top, the foot of the stalk is without leaves, it puts
forth a blossom before it yields its seed, which I cannot fitly call a
Flower: the seed is in shape and color like the Spanish-Broom seed, though not
half so big, and a smooth glistering seed.

In the propagating of this plant there must be a great deal Care in
propagation.
of care and diligence; this plant is only raised of the seed; observe the time
and season for it, that is in the beginning of April, the Moon being ten days
old, or in the increase, at least the season being temperate for the time of
the year, then order this seed as follows.

First, Get a small quantity of horse-dung, lay this in a bed 1.
of two foot square and a foot high, lay upon your dung some barley straw and
some bran, which may make it rise to a hands breadth higher, then get a
quantity of Pigeons dung and lay atop of that an inch in thickness, then sift
some freckled mould and lay atop of all about two inches in thickness, then
prick a small stick through the middle of your bed, so that it may reach to the
bottom and stand an inch above the too of the bed; the use of this stick is to
let up the steme of the heat below, when you see the plant shall want it: now
these things observed, cover the bed with some litter for four and twenty hours
both top and sides, and when the time is expired, then take the litter off from
the top of it, and prick in the seeds in such a circumference as a million
glass may cover them; I suppose no body will be willing to buy any more seeds
than may be planted therein, for they are usually sold at twelve pence a seed.

Now for the further care of the plant, be sure that your bed 2.
be not too hot, for if it be it will spend the spirit of the seed before it
has taken root, and then it will fade immediately: to prevent the bed for
being too hot, you shall make a hole with a stick of one side, or both, to let
out the steme; these things observed, the plant will come up moderately the
sixth day, and afterward you must give it a little air, by raising of the glass
up on one side, for without air your plant will never come to any color or
perfection; if the plant stand at a stay by reason of the coldness of the bed,
then stir the stick of the middle of the glass to let up the steme and the heat
which is at the bottom to the plants, with this care I have raised them up in
five weeks time, fit to be transplanted into boxes of freckell earth, and then
I left them, they left not me.

For the further preservation of them, I have been satisfied Preservation.
by my brother Gardeners and by my own reason, they may be preserved in boxes
all the summer, and in the winter housed in the same, so they will continue two
years before they die.

Hearts-Ease.
Or Wall Flowers, by others yellow Gilliflowers, I cannot stand to dispute why
this Flower has several names.

The nature of this plant requires to have a dry and a rich soil; for fear you
should mistake, there are two kinds sometimes The nature.
called by one name, the one is single and coveteth to grow upon walls, the
other is double and desires such earth as I told you of.

This Flower yields a pleasant smell, and keeps green its leaves all the
year, and flowereth the most part thereof; Descrip.
this plant is in shape and substance like the stock-Gilliflower, the Flower is
yellow intermixed with purple, this plant being planted in earth that it likes
it continues five or six years, the double Wall-flower seldom bears seed to
perfection, therefore I shall not trouble my self to set down directions for
the ordering of the seed, yet it is generally sold and sown, but seldom or
never hits.

This plant may be set of the slip, at any time of the year save the middle of
the winter and the middle of the summer, Planting.
the place fit for them is in the borders of high walks: having prepared such a
place, then dress your slips, which is to slip off all your under-sprouts and
leaves, then twist the nether end which you intend to put in the earth, and
thrust them in with a dove-tail setting stick, about eight inches asunder by a
line, two rows in a border; if this be done in the beginning of September, most
of them slips will flower in the Spring quarter, those slips that be set in the
Spring, if they be well watered at the first planting they will come to flower in
Autumn.

For preservation and doubleing of them, first I advise you Preservation.
to cut most of the under branches away, this will help to enlarge the rest of
the Flowers and preserve the plant: secondly they would be molded up with
fresh mould, by these means many times such as are single are turned double.

The other kind of Wall-flowers are single with five leaves Another sort of
Wall. flowers.
only, they love to grow upon walls and are seldom set of the slip because
walls are not a convenient place for it; they are sown of the seed thus, take a
quantity of seed and cast it upon an old wall or pavement where you have a
desire it shall grow, this seed will spring forth without any more care and
come to flower and bear seed, which seed will fall and grow up of it self, so
where they be once sown they always continue, the time for sowing of them is
when you please, for if you sow them in the winter, they will spring in the
summer, so it is no matter when. So much for Wall-flowers, it may be some may
think it too much.

Jerusalem-Cowslips.
The least hair has a shadow, and every shadow has a substance, and this
small Flower has a property which makes it to be cultivated in Gardens,
though it be but small, yet it is pretty.

It has many spindle leaves like soft rushes, in the midst is Descrip.
a stalk of a handful high, very small, with a Flower atop of it of five
leaves, usually of a blew color, in the shape of a Cowslip, the root of it is
a Bullous-root with many knots, which increase in the earth, for the Flower
never brings seed to perfection.

The time, place and manner of planting of them, is as I told of Crocuses,
where they are once planted they always continue.

Indian-wheat.
Indian-wheat or Christmas-flower; it is known of a broad Descrip.
blade like a flager-leaf, these leaves spring out of the earth, on the stalk
are a matter of four smaller leaves, of one root springs but one stalk, and
that stalk never bears but one Flower rising to two-foot and a half high; the
Flower is like the Dragon when it first begins to open in the husks, under the
Flower grow seeds in color and shape like a reddish seed, only flatter of one
side; the time this plant flowereth is presently after Christmas, if it be
housed from the cold; the seed never comes to perfection in England, but in
the Indies from whence it had its name.

This plant is propagated by sowing of it upon hot beds in Marck, these beds
are only to be covered with mats, the seed is of a quick nature and comes up
suddenly after it is sown; the plants coming thus of seed are to be
transplanted into boxes (as I told you) and after it has yielded its Flower it
dies.

Catterpillars.
Is a plant men fancy to have in a Garden, because it bears a seed so much
like a Catterpillar, that at a distance one Descrip.
may take the seed for it; the branches of this plant lies on the ground like
Clovergrass with many knots and small green leaves, it bears a Flower like
the Broom-flower.

This plant though it be little worth yet it has a peevish Raising.
nature, for one must sow the seed many times before they will grow if it be
not ordered carefully, the surest way to get them, is to prick in some of these
seeds on your hot beds with choice seed, and at the replanting water them well
at the first, and afterward they will grow very well and yield their seed in
August, presently after root and branch perishes.

Lillies.
I write Lillies because they be of the plural number, for there are many
kinds of the wild sort; the water-Lillie, the Reasons.
Lilly of the vale; the garden-Lillies are these, the white, the red, the
yellow, or cur-Lillie; the worthiest of all both for pleasure and antiquity,
for use and virtue is the white Lilly.

Although that all these are generally known by the sight, yet the nature and
the properties are not so well known, therefore I shall describe them to you;
this Lilly bears a seed in four quarters, being but a small seed, and small
in quantity, and if you sow it, it will be long before it come to perfection;
and seeing the root is so common, I think it needless to bestow the pains to
show you the difficulty of the raising of them from the seed.

In planting of them, take notice that the root seems to be Planting.
set with leaves like a Hartichoke, and brittle, therefore you must be careful
in the taking of them up, and planting of them again, for fear of breaking of
them; the place fit for the planting of them is under some stone or brick wall
which incloseth your Garden on the Sunnie part thereof, for of all Flowers this
delights most in heat and drithe: When you have provided your ground in such
a fit place, the manner of planting of them is thus, lay a line upon your
border in the midst thereof, so that you may plant but one row in a border,
then the way is to make a trench with your planting hoe a matter of four inches
deep, then set your great Lilly-roots, such as bore Lillies the last year in
this drill, a matter of six inches difference one from another, the suckers are
best planted by themselves at four inches distance in another place, those you
may set with a Diber; the time for this is in August, for that is presently
after they have done flowering: some will plant them in February and March, but
they will prosper nothing so well as those that were planted as aforesaid, it
may be a reason, because they spring in February, and the removing of them in
the Spring will hinder their growth.

Some would have Lillies to be colored by art, and they A question.
have set down directions for it, and that is, you shall take them up out of
the ground about Michalmas, and hang them up in the smoke for the space of a
month, and then steep them in Claret Wine two days and two nights, then
commit them to the earth again, and this they say will alter the color: Gravos
Marcombe is the Author of this.

I answer to the first of these, for the keeping of the root Answer.
so long in the smoke, I have not the faith to believe that ever they will grow
when they are committed to the earth, for sure in that time they will be dried
up so, that they will have no more moisture than a dried chip; for if you be
pleased to take notice of this root, there is no substance in it, as in others,
no sooner is it out of the earth, but presently it withers and falls
asunder: I thought good to give you these reasons, that you might not lose your
labor about what Authors have said concerning the alteration of Lillies.

But if you have any desire to make any incisions by applying of liquors, do it
seasonably at the removing of the root, Of alteration.
for it is so loose a root that the liquor will go into every part, but I think
it a needless curiosity, for thereis no Lillet o compare with the white
Lilly, nor no Lilly that there is any likeness of altering of the color but
it, and why should you alter the best to make it the worst?

Red Lillies, and yellow Lillies, or cur Lillies, these differ Other sorts.
not from the white, but that they are of a contrary color and growth, not to
half the stature; they differ not in nature, as the one is propagated, so is
the other.

The last observation of Lillies: all sorts of Lillies being Observations.
once planted, there they continue, yet if they be not removed every year, or
every other year at the least, and the suckers taken away and set in another
place, they will grow small and wild.

To conclude, Lillies were held in great estimation in Solomon's days, when he
commended his Spouse to the Lilly of the valley: You may consider that it was
the Flower that he took most delight in, or at least the admirablest Flower
that was in those days; but as the world has grown in years, so does it still
grow in knowledge more every day than other; for I am persuaded, that the most
part of the Flowers cultivated Industry.
in a Garden, do grow naturally in some part or other after the similitude
which we have them in, though not in that perfection that they are brought to
with diligence, care and industry.

Larks-heel.
Larks-heel or Larks-spur; it is a plant so well known I need not give a
description of them, therefore take the nature of Nature.
them as follows: they are a plant that are propagated only of the seed, it
is a plant that dies every year, and springs no more, therefore they must be
sown yearly, if you will have them every year.

The time of sowing of the seed is in April, the place fit for Sowing.
them is in a bed by themselves in your quarter of Flowers, for they spread a
great deal of ground, and will not let any thing grow nigh them; if the plants
grow too thick, you will do well to pull some of them up, and plant them again,
or throw them away, whether you please, for the rest will prosper much the
better: In August these plants usually flower, and after the flower fades,
there springs a cod, wherein are eight or ten seeds, small, round, coal black
and rough: of Larks-heel there are three sorts of colors, though but one in
nature, those are the perfect white, blew and purple, very pretty Flowers they
are all.

London-pride.
It Is a plant that dies every year, and when it is at its full Descrip.
growth, the plant is a foot and an half high, with a stalk like the sweet
William, but it is strong, it supporteth it self; at the top of every stalk
spring many small branches of an equal height,, atop of every branch is a
Flower of a pretty Pink, speckled color, the Flower is five leaves in number,
at the outer part of every leaf of the Flower grows a prickle: This Flower
flourishes most in the latter end of July.

For the propagating of them I will be short with you, the Ordering.
time is in the latter end of April, the place is in the quarter which you
reserve for Flowers, in that manner as I have shown you of other small seeds of
Flowers, in which bed you may let them stand till they flower, soon after they
have yielded their seed the whole plant perishes.

Lupins.
Many sorts there are, viz. the blew, the yellow, the white, the purple, and
the great Lupin; these and all these differ as The names and kinds.
well in shape as in color; they differ also in growth, every sort of seed
has a difference in greatness, and in color also, to puzzle my self and
trouble the Reader with the description of each is altogether needless, I
shall give you some observations, how all sorts of Lupins may be raised of the
seed, and not stand to name in particular how each is to be raised, for one
direction will serve for them all.

The time of planting of all sorts of Lupins, is in the middle of April, and so
till May; the place is in beds or borders, Of planting.
according as your fancy is, or the quantity of your seed; if you have a great
quantity, then you may plant them in trails, in beds or borders, in manner as
they plant Peace; these are for the blew and yellow (which are the ordinary
sorts) but the greater sorts require more room.

Lastly, Observe that any sort of Lupins committed to the Observations.
earth in their season, will spring up without any further care, so they need
nothing but weeding; in the latter end of July all sorts of Lupins come to
flower, which are very beautiful in a Garden; after the shading of the Flower
springs cods in the shape of a Bean-cod, bigger or lesser according to their
kinds; the cods are rough like a Peach; the seed will come to perfection in the
latter end of August, and may be set again in the same Garden where it grew for
many years, and it will not degenerate.

Ladies-Thistle.
It has only one stalk upon a root, with long leaves, and as Descrip.
broad as a man's hand; these leaves are prickley, and of the color of a
Cardus-leaf; the plant never grows to above two foot high, and in August it
flowereth; the flower is of the color of the great wild thistle-flower, but
greater and without prickles; the seed is long and rough, of a gray color.

This plant is set of the seed in the later end of March, the place is in a
border; when you intend to have them flower, each seed being set half afoot
asunder, and half an inch deep, it comes up suddenly, and flowereth the same
year, and the time as aforesaid: the branch when Winter comes dies, and
springs again in March, the third Winter after it soon dies root and branch.

Low in idle.
Low in idle, or two faces under a hood, is a Flower that Descrip.
is much like Violets in all respects, but only it flowereth at such times at
Violets does not, that is in June and July; this Flower bears a seed, of
which it may be raised, if slips might not be had.

The time for setting of them in the slip, or sowing of them in the seed, is in
March; the place is either in the side borders Sowing.
of high walks, or on the edge of low borders, in manner as I told you of
Cowslips; if you sow them of the seed, then you shall make drils by a line with
a stick half an inch deep, each drill at a foot asunder, if it be on the side
border of your high walks; if on your low borders, one is sufficient in these
drils, thinly cast your seed, then cover it, and it will grow up, and cover the
whole border suddenly, where it will always remain, for it renewes its nature
by the branches taking root as they lie on the ground.

Ladies-liveries.
This is not a Flower, yet many people fancy to have it in the Garden of
pleasure, because it has such a pretty property Descrip.
with it, for it shouteth up with many blades like spire-grasse, of an inch in
breadth, each blade is striped red, white, yellow and green; some call it
Truelowe-grasse, it has a root like such grass, though it run not so far;
this root if you set in any part of your Garden, there it will grow and
continue always.

This plant I thought fit to set down for brevities sake, because I would not
exempt any.

Ladies-smocks.
Otherwise called Blew-caps and White-caps. It is a plant that the nethermost
leaves keep green all the year, those leaves Descrip.
are green and jagged, of the length of a man's finger, set on close to the
ground; in the midst of these leaves rises a stalk with a few smaller leaves
on it, and on the top of the stalk are four or five Flowers, white, or blew,
according to their kind: This Flower is single, with five leaves, in shape and
bigness like a Dogg-rose; the time they chiefly flower in, is in April and
May, it seldom brings seed to perfection.

This plant is set of the slip, at any time of the Spring or Planting.
the fall, in the edge of borders for the keeping of them up, and for the
beautifying of the Garden; if you set them in the fall, it is much better than
in the Spring; for those that are set in the Spring in dry weather, usually
comes presently after, then your borders will be so dry, without watering,
will cause the slips to die; those that are set at Michaelmas will be well
rooted by that time the Summer comes, and so flower in their season; these
slips being thus planted continue always, nothing dies but the stalk whereon
is the Flower, which you shall cut off after the Flower fades for the keeping
of your border handsome.

Marmadle deparve.
Or otherwise called the Worlds wonder, and I think it no wonder that it should
be so called, for it has a quality naturally as no other Flower has, and that
is this, it bears a Flower of one color as it may be to day, and on the
morrow Various descriptions.
after of another, and sometimes two or three colors at once; the colors are
chiefly these; first red, white, purple, peach, yellow, and cinnamon, these are
distinct colors; there are mixed also, as the white, and the red, the purple,
and the yellow, and so of the rest; the shape of this Flower is much like a
heart, with the smallest end upward, no bigger than an Acron, this Flower is of
no continuance, for it continues not long upon the stock not touched, and being
pulled off it withers presently, so that it is of no use but for the ornament
of the Garden.

There is two kinds of these plants, that is, the single and the double, the
single dies yearly, the double will continue two years, if it be sheltered
from the frost and snow in the winter.

This plant is in growth like unto the stock Gilliflower, Descrip.
it rises not so high, it spreads close to the ground, with sharp-pointed
leaves, with a stock of the bigness of a man's thumb, each Flower brings a
seed and no more, which is in shape and color like the Pepper-corn, but
something greater.

The fit time for sowing of it is in the Month of March, the Moon being in the
increase, these seeds are tender and Sowing.
very dear, for I never bought them for less than two pence a feed, therefore
they ought to be raised with great diligence, and thus it must be ordered; it
must be sown in a hot bed, but you need not make it purposely, for about that
time we fow Colliflowers, Cowcumbers, and Musmillions, and in some part of one
of these beds you may prick down your seeds, three fingers asunder, so done
cover them with a glass, the sixth day they will come up with two round thick
leaves, the next leaves that shoot forth will be long and sharp-pointed, when
this plant has six leaves, they ought to be transplanted into a border or pots
of good mould, so done about the beginning of August they will come to flower
(in manner as aforesaid.)

There are other ways of sowing of them, that is in beds of 2.
freckled mould in the latter end of April, for if they should be sowed before
they would not grow, those that are thus sown toward May day, may be let stand
in the same bed and it will be Michaelmas before they come to flower, the year
being so far spent they will not come to perfection, therefore I think it best
to take the pains to sow them in hot beds (as was said) so I Will leave these
directions to your charity, and rest to speak any more here of the Worlds
wonder.

Muscabious.
Be not Flowers of distinct natures and properties, but distinguished in
colors, as the purple, white, red, and damask-colour Flowers.

Scabious is a plant that grows to great stature as it is in number of
branches, though they be but small they spread and grow to three foot high,
with some leaves growing jagged, and others smooth, of a dark green color,
standing from the branches upon stems, every plant yields abundance of
Flowers, in shape and bigness like the great double Emrose; this Flower
smells like honey; the time of their flowering is from June till Michaelmas
and after, the seed of this plant grows atop of all, standing in order naked
being enclosed in nothing, these seeds when they are ripe have many beards
whereby it entangleth one in another, it is a hollow loose seed and the
lightest of all others.

These plants are propagated from the seed, the time for it is in April or
August, for indeed August is the best, for then it sheddeth its seed; and it is
to be noted, that at such time as plants shed their seed, is the natural time
of sowing, if they be such plants as keep green all the year.

Then in August prepare a bed of earth in a quarter which Raising.
you reserve for Flowers, so done mingle with your seed some earth, or
otherwise it will not untangle, so that you will sow it too thick or too thin;
so done get some other earth and cover your seeds half an inch thick; these
things observed, and your seed new and good, it will come up in three weeks
space like Gruncel; let it always grow on this bed, and next summer following
it flowereth, then if you rail in this bed with little sticks, it will keep the
wind from breaking the Flowers, keeping the plants in uniform order: when the
seed is ripe upon the stalk, then cut the stalks off within a hands breadth of
the ground, the plant will spring again, so you shall preserve seed and plant,
thus you may do for three years, the fourth root and branch dies.

Monks-hood.
Or old man's head: it rises up like the branches of Carawaies, with small
stalks never above two foot high, every plant yields many Flowers, which are
set with many small whiteish gray leaves, the Flower is of the bigness of the
ordinary Cornations, with a few green prickles growing among the Flowers.

This plant is sowed of the seed only in the latter end of April, usually after
this manner; we dig a border by a walk side, when this border is dug and
raked, then lay a line in the middle of the border, and by the line make a
drill, then cast the seed thinly into that drill, for it is very small, then
cover it; this done it needs no more care, it comes up well, and by the mid-
August after it flowereth, and dies as soon as it yields its seed.

Marble-flower.
It is a plant of a small stature, and the stalks are of a soft Descrip.
substance and of a whiteish green color, the leaves are of the same color in
shape like the wild poppy-leaves; this plant bears many Flowers which have no
more than four leaves apiece, and of a perfect white color, the time of
flowering is in July, the seed is ripe presently after, then dies the plant.

This plant is raised only of the seed in the Spring time: I shall not stand to
set down every particular concerning the ordering of it, but so as you raise
Monks-hood so you may raise this, you may have that at one end of the border,
and this at the other.

Nurssusuly.
They are a kind of Daffodillies; the difference is, these flower after the
Daffodilly, and is of a milk white color, something smaller, growing upon
longer stalks.

These are planted of the root, as I told you of the Daffodillies; the place is
chiefly upon borders of high walks, because they are of a hardy nature, and
nothing else might so well grow there as they, because of the drithe you may
set them in any place else, and they will grow and flower yearly, neither
weeds, nor grass, nor any thing that grows nigh them will kill them; some
will plant them in their Orchards round their fruit trees.

Oxslips.
The double sort are planted in Gardens, because they flower early in the
Spring, and for using of the Flowers in Salets, and for strewing Flowers.

Oxslips are set of the slip only in the Spring or fall; the place fit for it
is on bank-sides; where they are once set they always continue.

Oak of Paris.
It resembles a young Oak plant, the leaves being much smaller, body and
branches also are of a short substance: the Descrip.
plant spreads at the top, whereon are many pretty Flowers; they flourish
chiefly in August, the seed grows in great cods eight square, wherein is
brown seed as small as Parsley-seed; after this seed is ripe the plant dies.

This plant is propagated of the seed only in the beginning of May; the place
fit for it is in a bed, in a quarter amongst other Flowers, but sow no other
seed amongst them, for they are a tender plant, so that another will kill them:
this observed, sow them as I have directed you to sow Muscabions; this done
they will grow up (if the seed be good) according to the description.

Pionys.
Of these Flowers there are two or three sorts; first the male Poiony, next the
Rose-Poiony, the small Rose-Poiony, or the Poiony-Rose; the colors are all
these, it is naturally red, there are searlet colors (supposed to be made so
by art) the male Piony never bears seed to perfection, but the rest do, which
you may raise Pionies of: the way here I shall not stand to treat of, because
it is so nigh the nature of Tulip-seed, and must be ordered alike, and it will
be so long before it come to flower; I will save the pains to set it down here,
but refer you where it treats of Tulip seed, and so give you a short
direction for the ordering of the root.

The fittest time for planting of Piony roots is in July, presently Planting.
after their flowering, yet you may do it in March, or September; the place and
manner is thus: First, the place is in the out-borders of your Garden, the
ground being good, where you must set them a yard distance, no deeper than the
root may be covered: Now if you have but small store of roots, and would
willingly have great store of Pionies, you may cut every great root into half a
score pieces, and set them in like manner, and they will grow, but they will
not flower till the second year; those that are set whole will flower the next
Spring following.

The old Piony-roots should have the suckers took from them once a year, in so
doing you need not remove the old root, but make the Flowers much the larger.

The male Piony is planted at the same times and seasons in a box, because it
is of a more tenderer nature; and for the causing of them to flower early; some
have told me they have had them flower at the beginning of April, but I Will not
affirm what I hear by relation for fear I should not make it good by my action.

Primrose-tree.
If you know it not by that name, I will give you this description; when this
plant first springs it has many broad, long leaves lying on the ground,
whitish green in color, jagged on the sides, full of veins; afterward rises
the stalk, being bore without leaves, at the lowermost part, and at the top a
few small one; this stalk rises to four-foot high, and it resembles the
Daisie very much; this plant bears its flower in June, it bears a seed that
seldom will grow by man's industry, but I have known it grow naturally of it
self; sometimes the branches of this plant die in the Winter and spring again;
this plant has certain young springs come from the Of planting.
side of the old mother, which may be taken off, and set in good earth, and
they will grow; thus you must do if you have them of your own, if you would
have them to multiply; and if you have them not, you must procure them of the
slip, if you will have them. The place fit to plant them in, is in a bed with
other Flowers, where they will prosper without any more trouble; I shall not
trouble my self to write any more of them.

Princes-feathers.
Otherwise called, My Love lies a bleeding; yet forasmuch Of Kinds.
as they are called by two several names, they are partly of two kinds, but
both in one shape, though they differ in color; that which is called the
Princes-feather has green leaves with red and white speckled Flowers,
bendingof it self down, and many of them put together in a man's hat at a
distance, you would take it for a feather: That which is called, My Love lies
a bleeding, has red branches, red leaves and red Flowers, hanging its head
down: There is a difference in the seed also, that of the Princes-feather is
white, that of My Love lies a bleeding red, both as small or smaller than
Mustard Seed, glistering like a Marble-stone; the nature of them are alike,
therefore the ordering of them I will set down alike.

The time for raising of these curious Flowers is from the Sowing.
later end of April till the middle of May, in manner as follows; prepare a
border, or a bed being finely raked, take the seed and mix them with a little
earth in a dish or bole, for these seeds are so small that you cannot sow them
otherwise, but that they will be unevenly sowed; this observed, commit them to
the earth with an even hand, according to the quantity of your seed, then
riddle a little fine earth, and cast uodn the seed a matter of half an inch
thick, if the season prove dry, afterward you shall water it in the evenings
and mornings sometimes; this done, you shall see this seed to spring up like
Bloudwort about the twelfth day. When these plants come to have five leaves,
you may remove some of Transplanting.
them, or all of them into another bed or border, and set them by a line each
plant half a foot distance: they would be watered at their first planting, for
then the time of the year is commonly dry; these plants will hang their heads
the first three days, while such time as the root is well fixed in the earth,
then the plant rises and flourishes bravely, and needs no more labor but
only weeding: In the later end of July they begin to flower; and if you note,
this Flower has a quality as no other has, and that is this; it appears at
the first in the same shape and color as it is in the fallnesse of its
perfection, and that will be five weeks after: this Flower keeps long fresh
in a Garden, and being gathered it fades quickly, therefore they are little
used in Flower pots: this plant after the seed is ripe dies suddenly.

Lastly, To have them sooner than ordinary, you may raise them upon hot beds,
as I told you of Amorantus.

This Flower has a property of coloring as none has, of it self it colors
red, writing upon paper, it serves as well as the best Ink in the world; it
colors Cloth, or any thing that the juice of it touches.

I have showed a pretty experiment with this Flower; I took Experiments.
the juice of it, and went to the white Lilly, and gave it strokes with it,
presently the Lilly appeared white and red striped; all that saw this Lilly
thought it grew so naturally, which indeed is strange to behold. Many rarer
things may be done with the juice of this Flower, if a man be studious
thereabout.

Poppies.
Blew, white, black, red, double and single, wild and Garden Poppies there are:
I shall only speak here of the blew Kinds.
and white. Double Poppies I shall not need to give any description of them,
because they are so well known: nor shall I need to make any distinction of the
directions for the propagating of them, they being of alike nature.

Both these sorts are raised of the seed only; the time for it Preparetions.
is in the beginning of March; the place for it is in a bed in a quarter which
is reserved for Flowers only, in manner as I showed you concerning the
Princes-feather: if your seed be good, in a short time it will come up: and
observe, if your plants should be thick, then pull some of them up, and set
them in another place, or cast them away; by the later end of July following
your plants will flower according to their kinds. The white Poppie is for
general uses, and for distilling, as the Physicians Herbals will show you. The
red is also good for the cure of many maladies.

The second season of sowing of Poppies is in the later end of 2.
August, or the beginning of September, in place and manner as aforesaid. These
plants will come to flower in the later end of May following.

Lastly, Where Poppies are once, they likely always continue, though the plant
dies every other year, yet the seed that it sheddeth springs up again
naturally.

Pinks.
Two sorts there are, viz. the matted Pink, and the grass Pink. I need not
trouble my self to write any more of them they are so well known; I will only
acquaint you the easiest and the best way of propagating them by seed and slip,
which may be most for pleasure.

First, For sowing of them of the seed; the time which is Easy way
seasonable for it is in the middle of April, the place in some high border
side, or a high wall side, provided that there be but earth dressed conveniently
and finely: if the bank-side be ten foot high, then make as many drils at a
direct line, and at an equal distance one from another; in those drils sow your
seed with an equal hand, then cover it and fix the face of your bank smooth
again.

Now understand that these seeds will come up in ranks, which will be very
pleasant to the beholders; these plants must be well weeded the first Summer,
the second Summer they will spread so that they will cover the bank themselves,
so that no weed can possibly grow there, then these Pinks will flower, which
will cause such a beauteous sight as has nor been seen in England, unless it
were the like. Besides this, they will always continue there, and need no
labor, but cutting off the dead stalks after they have done flowering.

The time for the setting of the slips is in the beginning of September, the
place is in the edge of borders, round grasse-work, Of slips.
or herb-work, a single chase in every border, set at three inches distance: so
done they will come to flower the later end of the next May following.

Purple-Primrose.
These are Flowers that differ not from the white Primrose in shape and growth,
but only in bearing purple Flowers; and that which is more rare, they flower
twice a year, in March, and in September: These Flowers are set only of the
slip, at two several seasons, and those are presently after their flowering.

The place fit for it is in borders, at the uppermost part Planting.
thereof, directly at a hands breadth asunder; if this be done in the Spring
time, the slips must be well watered till they have taken root; if in the fall,
you have no more care or trouble with them but to keep them weeded, to cut off
their dead leaves and stalks after their flowering, for the renewing of their
nature, and to cause them to look the pleasanter.

Pawmers.
So called because the seed is the figure of a Pawmer, and Descrip.
upon this account men hold such a thing a great rarity, and though of little
use, yet they will bestow the pains to propagate it as follows.

About May Day this plant is only to be raised of the seed in Ordering.
this manner; prepare a place in a border under a wall, or some other warm
place, there prick in your seeds with your finger, at a hands breadth asunder,
(I suppose you will not set many of them, because they are no more useful) and
so by July they will come to flower, and a month after the seed is ripe, and
the plant dies.

Queens-Gilliflower.
Some call it the white Gilliflower, whether it has any more names I cannot
tell; yet I know it is usual to give diverse names to one and the same plant.

It has many leaves growing and spreading close to the Descrip
ground, something long, sharp-pointed, of a dark green color, being hard,
rough, rugged, and grayish underneath, of little or no sent, but of a fine
pleasant sharp taste: above these rise a stalk two foot in height, and at the
tops of the stalks and branches stand many tufts of small white Flowers which
smell sweet, and in their places, being fallen, come cods wherein is a brown
flat seed, and at one time you shall have Flower and seed ripe upon the stalk:
the root is somewhat black and woodish with diverse great strings, the top
branches die every year, but the root and the under leaves perish not, but
abide many years, the sides (partly from the root) send forth many young slips
every year.

By this description I hope you understand the nature of this Nature.
plant; I shall not need to stand to treat of every particular in reference to
its ordering: to be short, get of the slips of this plant either in Spring or
fall, and set them in a convenient bed or border of good earth, etc.

The Flowers of this plant are good in nosegaies or to be placed in
Flower-pots, the leaves are a good pot-herb and serve for many physical uses.

Rose-campions.
Be these, the white, the red, the purple, they differ not in form but in the
color, let one description serve for all: Rose-campions have white hoary
leaves and soft, sharp at each end; the stalks are of the same color, weak and
small as a Hop-vine, not well able to support themselves: from one root
springs many of them which spread mightily: in June and July this plant has
its Flower richest in the branch, these Flowers are made of five leaves, the
seed lies in bags which are round and of the bigness of a man's forefinger,
and when this seed is full ripe it will rattle in the husks; the seed is as
small as Gunpowder and of a dark brown color; on this plant will be ripe seed
and a rich Flower at once: this plant rises to three foot high, the second
year the whole plant dies naturally.

This plant is propagated only of its seed, and in short I will Ordering.
show you the way, viz. prepare a bed or one end of a bed in the quarter which
is appointed for Flowers, so done sow your seed, then cover it thinly with a
little ridled earth, let this be done in the beginning of April or the latter
end of August: now observe, that those that are sown in August, if the winter
following be hard they must be covered with a little straw, and the Spring
following when your plants are grown up, make a frame of rods round your bed to
support the plants, for they are altogether weak of themselves, so often as the
seed falls it grows naturally.

Rose-Rubee.
Or Satin flower: it rises with a stalk of a foot high, bare Descrip.
at the bottom, toward the top are many leaves like the smooth Charlock
leaves or wild Turnop leaves, and on the tops of the stalks are many small
Flowers, composed of five leaves betwixt a blush and a scarlet color.

The natural time for the sowing of the seed of this plant is in the latter
end of August, in a bed by it self as was said of Rose-campion seed: so done,
by the next March these plants flower in manner as was described: after the
Flower is gone there appears a bag wherein is composed many small seeds,
after these are ripe the plant fades and springs no more.

Rocket-flower.
It Is needless to give you any description of them because they are so well
known and so little worth, yet shall I not wholly exempt this plant, by reason
it is one that helps to make up the inventory of kiltevated Flowers, the leaves
when they are young serve well insallets.

This plant is raised of the seed only, the season for sowing Of raising.
of it is in mid- April, in a bed as I told you of Rose campion seed, in the
same manner and with the same care, by the middle of June it will come to
flower, and a little after the seed is ripe (which is as small as any seed
whatsoever and of a whiteish red color and glistering) the plant fades and
springs no more.

Stock-Gilliflowers.
This Flower has the preheminency of a Garden for ority of color, delicious
smell, and for continuance of flowering, for they flower almost all the year:
and again they cast such a pleasant sight afar off or nigh, and are such a
pleasant ornament, as cannot be better expressed than they express themselves,
for some of them are of a crimson and a purple die, others of a scarlet, and
some have intermixed colors, as white and red, purple and blew, so
overspreading the bush with a passing beauty, some double, and some single: but
the chiefest of my work shall be to show the ordering of the double stock.

First, I must make some queries, what is meant by a double Double sorts.
stock, whether the double and single are two distinct kinds or no? I answer,
they are, and they are not, for the double is made by art of nature, the single
comes naturally: now you must understand there is two sorts of nature, the one
voluntary, the other of industry, for naturally every creature lives, but by
nature and industry every creature comes to the fullness of perfection, and so
man by nature and Of nature.
industry comes to the fullness of wisdom, whereas naturally he is a fool.

Well then I hope you confess it is truth (and this fits my discourse) that we
must use industry in the propagation of Gilliflowers, wherein there is some art
in doubling and redoubling of them.

The first thing needful to know in this art is, the distinct The art of
doubling.
times and seasons for the sowing of them: true it is you may sow them betwixt
March and August, and they will grow very well so that the earth be fixed for
the seed, but yet they will prove single if you do not take the right times and
seasons for them: the right season is the first new Moon in April, when it is
about fifteen days old, and in May also observing the Moon, these are the fit
seasons: now I will show you what earth the seeds require, that is a dry,
loose, and something stony, but by no means barren: the fittest place for it is
in a border by some wall, where they may have the reflection of the sun, and a
shelter from the storm: such a convenient place prepared, sow your seeds as you
think fit according to the quantity of it, then cover it with a little fine
mould as thin as you can possible, forget not to water it if the season be dry:
all this done you shall see your plants come up the eighteenth or the twentieth
day: let these plants be weeded, and so stand while that day two months that
they were sown, then remove them into a richer earth of the same nature: but
one thing you must observe, such plants as have crumpled heads, them reserve by
themselves, for those will be double if you will order them as follows: in
the next September following remove them again at the full Moon, and that will
keep them back from flowering until the next Spring: be sure these plants be
sheltered from the frost and snow the winter following, for we found by
experience, that the last winter killed all the Stock-Gilliflowers, both old
and young, unless it were such as were sheltered.

Thirdly, Replant these plants the first full Moon in March following, and be
sure that they be transplanted into a better earth which is as rich as it may
be possible, to that place where you have a desire they shall be, and the most
of these will be double, if in their farther growth, before they come to
flower, you guild off some of the leaves, and cut off some of the branches that
would deprive the Flower of its sap.

Fourthly, There are subtle ways of grafting of them, the effect of it is to
have two several colors of one stock, it is done in manner as I told you of
the Cornation-Gilliflowers, so of these, and with a great deal more ease you
may obtain your desire.

Fifthly, The ordinary sowing for ordinary and single Flowers is at any time
you please, for they usually grow best to be single Flowers when they have
least care took of them.

Sixthly, Means for setting of slips of double stocks that they may not
degenerate but be double and large, still the time for it is the first full
Moon in May, the Flower is ricked in the branch, then slip off as many slips of
the under leaves as you can conveniently, then plant them in such earth, and in
such a place as you replanted the seedlings in: Let these slips be often
watered with such water wherein have been steeped Sheeps-dung; these plants
thus planted, and those raised of the seed, will continue three or four years
before they decay, and then they must be supplied with younger in the room.

Seventhly, To plant seedlings for pleasure, and that is upon the border of a
high walk (where there is no hedge) set by a direct line, each plant seven
inches one from another, and so to grow up in a frame made with small sticks,
and to be kept clipped with a pair of sheers on each side, and on the top where a
plant rises higher than ordinary, so that they may stand like a hedge, and a
pleasant hedge indeed: but if such a convenient place is not to be had, then
you may plant them in uniform order insome out-border.

Lastly, Some may surmise, or be ready to conjecture, because I have not set
down rules for inoculation and transforming of shape, and altering of sent and
color, nor any objections to the contrary, that I do not understand whether
any such thing may be done yea or no. To this I answer, That Natures fancy.
these intercisions or supplies, are but conceits took up upon trust, and never
made good by practice, and therefore I shall not dispense with the time to
answer them in particular, and swell up my Book about such uncertain, vain and
needless curiosities which are unpractical, and that which is more, they were
never affected, so I wave the Discourse.

Snap-Dragons.
They are not distinct kinds, but distinct colors, viz. the white, the red and
the peach color, so I will give a description which shall serve for all. This
plant spreads at the middle with many branches, the bottom of the stalk is
bare without branch or leaf, the top of the plant rises by degrees above the
rest, whereon are many small leaves, green and sharp pointed, of the same
color of the stalk, on every branch are many Flowers knit double, in the shape
of a Peace blossom: the time of flowering is chiefly in July, the seed is ripe
soon after, which lies in bags, it is very small and of a brown color: after
the seed is ripe, the uppermost branches die, the lowermost spring again two
year after its first flowering, then root and branch dies.

This plant is propagated of the seed only; the time is in March or August, but
it is best in August; it is done as follows: Prepare a bed or a border, and
there sow the seed, in manner as I told you of others, so done it will come up
in a fortnights space, it need not be removed; all the care is to shelter it
the Winter following from the frost and snow; the Summer following these plants
will flower, and continue with you according to the description.

Sweet Williams.
It is a plant that springs every year, when it is at its full growth, it
lies one half of the ground, the other rising up; Descrip.
the whole branches being nigh three foot in length, with many knots or joints,
where springs many small leaves set close on to the stalk, betwixt the stalk
and the leaves springs tufts whereon are many small Flowers, four leaves in
number of a Pink color, rising all of a height, that at a distance you would
take it for one united Flower: this plant continues flowering both June and
July, it seldom or never bears seed to perfection.

Now this plant is set of the slip in March or September; the Propagation.
slips must be such as have part of the root and of the branch, and that is
easy to be had where they grow, for the root spreads in the ground mightily.
The place for planting of them is in banks or border sides: I shall not need to
stand to declare every particular of it, but as you set the Bachelors-buttons,
so set these: where they are once planted they always continue, they need no
more trouble, but after their flowering cut off the old vines, and they will
spring anew again.

Scarlet Beans.
Various are the ways which I could enter upon the description, and the
ordering of this plant or Flower, which I shall omit: The description is thus:
This plant rises in all respects like the Kidney or French Bean; the Flower is
of a scarlet color, which continues long on the stalk, and after it fades
springs cods, wherein are likely five Beans, something bigger than the
Kidney-bean, in the same shape, and of an intermixed purple and red color;
these Beans or seeds are set in the middle of April, and so till May Day, if
opportunity do not then serve, or the weather contrary to the season.

The place fit for it is in out-borders of Gardens of pleasure, where they may
run up against the trees, or supported with sticks against the wall; this
done, by the later end of July they will come to flower, and yield their seed
ripe in the middle of September, and then dies the plant.

Lastly, This plant yields a great increase of seed, which The increase.
you may plant again, and it will prosper very well without any changing for
three years: These Beans are very good for to eat, insomuch that they are
prized before the Kidney-bean.

If you have a great quantity of the seed, and would plant Profit.
them for food, you may do it in a Kitchen-garden, the ground being hot and
sandy, well dunged; plant them in rows of two foot and an half distance, and
when they are grown up, if they be stuck with small sticks, they will be much
the better, yet they will bring a good increase without.

Snails.
They are so called, because the seed is twisted much like it in shape and
bigness, and of the color of a dry Tobaccoleaf: This seed is ordinary to be
bought at most seedmens; and if you set it in the Spring time, it will grow and
bring forth its seed the same year, and after that the plant dies.

Snow-drops.
They rise with many spirish blades, thick and of a soft substance, Descrit.
set close to the ground, bending with their tops down to the ground again,
through which rise many small stalks of half a foot in length, upon which
grows Flowers of the bigness and shape of an Acorn, five leaves in number,
of a milk white color bending downward: The time of this Flower is in the
beginning of April, the roots are bullous-roots, which you may transplant after
their flowering.

The place that they are commonly planted in is upon borders in intervales,
with Crokus, and other Flowers with bullous-roots. Let this short direction
serve, for I think it is as much as is needful, it being a Flower of such a
hardy nature.

Start up and kiss me.
Or otherwise called Wag-wantons. This is a plant that rises to half a foot in
height, with many small brown leaves, Descrip.
with a few branches spreading from the stalk, whereon grows Flowers of a sky
color, being but a small Flower spreading of it self full abroad; in the
middle stands three or four knots always wagging, of the color of the
flower; the time this flowereth is in April, and after the Flower is gone, are
round husks wherein is seed much like Violet seed.

This plant is sown of the seed, or set of the slip in March, in manner as you
do Violets, and such like. I cannot stand to dispense any more time about it,
but must go to that of more consequence, which is

Tulips.
I am come now to that Flower which Authors have left a large description of to
posterity, and also vain disputes, how Tulips are made by art into those
several colors that they are in. To give an answer to those things I shall
omit the pains, and not raise my discourse out of other men's words: so I Will set
down what I have found by experience, and what the nature of them is.

First, In nature: Here is a wonderful work, and many rare and excellent
things to be observed from this work in nature: First, consider how beautiful
it is, and of what a hardy nature it is of; other Flowers that are beautiful
are of a tender nature, it is not so with this, considering what a stately form
it has: but this I shall wave; I will speak how Tulips are tituled.

Tulips are distinguished and called in the oraty of the color each Tulip
has; that which is held most in estimation Of names.
is the Scarlet, the Princes-robes, and the Fools-coat, the Chimney-sweeper,
and the black and yellow, especially if they have the shape of the Crown Tulip.
The ordinary sort of Tulips are these, the Wind color, the London-white, the
yellow, the purple, the peach color, the Maiden-blush, the red, the white, the
Cinnamon, the Widow-Tulip. Ordinary mixed colors are these, the Lords-livery,
the Priests-vestures, the red and white, the yellow and red, the orange and
damask, the purple and red, and many more, which I cannot stand to name. All
these colors, or any other, does sometimes alter their color by nature as
well as by industry of themselves; and forasmuch as the color of Tulips do
differ one from another, is of an apt nature, and not of a forced nature; and
seeing that they are apt to alter of themselves, I will endeavor to show you
how you shall find the nature of this Flower.

First, If you have Tulips already in your Garden, when they are flowering,
take notice of what color they are, then stick a small stick by each
particular Flower, and write upon the stick what color each Flower is; now by
the setting down of this stick, you shall know what color they were when the
Flower is faded, and nothing remains but the root in the earth: Let these
sticks or marks stand till such time as you remove them; the time of removing
them is presently after they have done flowering, and that is about the
beginning of June: in the removing of them, all the art and knowledge consists,
either for the enlarging of them, or to have them flower at contrary seasons,
or to alter the color.

First, For altering the color: Having set the marks to know what color they
were, take up your roots, and lay Color.
each color by themselves, so done prepare your ground to set them in; if you
set them in the same place where they were taken up, some fresh mould must be
gotten and well ridled, so lay it upon the border where you have a desire to
set them.

But happily you may set them in a wrong place for ornament, therefore I will
give some directions for the place; if the Garden be crosse-work, then it is
proper to set them in a border round it; if Herb-work, then Tulips must be set
in a quarter cast out into beds, in such a manner as is in the draft-work of
this Book.

Secondly, These Tulip-roots thus taken up, you must seprrate the young suckers
from the old bearers, and plant them Suckers.
in a bed by themselves, at a hands breadth one from another, the old bearers
must be planted at eight inches difference either in bed or border, no deeper
than that there be half an inch of earth above the root, for if you do, they
lie cold in the ground, and cannot get the benefit of the Sun and air to cause
them to spring timely.

Thirdly, Concerning the altering of color, having taken Color altered.
notice of what color they were before, set the red Tulips by themselves, and
the white Tulips by themselves after these directions; take a quantity of wild
or Garden-herbs, and Sheeps-dung, and Pigeons-dung, beat these Herbs and the
dung together, so done put some of this into the holes where you set your
Tulip-roots, anoint the roots with the same, and set them into the holes, and
put in more atop of them, covering of them with earth; this done, upon several
trials it has altered the color, some after one manner, and some after
another, but still the red and the white carries the greatest sway.

Again, I have been told, and I have conceited it to be true, that is in the
planting of a red Tulip, to alter the color, I should take a white Tulip-root,
Lettice-leaves, Solendine leaves, Camomile, and the white Thistle and
Peas-flower, and beat all these together, and so I did, and committed them to
the earth, as I did the former, and I did imagine that the root would partake
of those several colored juices, and convert it into its own nature, which
should cause so many orites of colors as was mixed in the juices, but I found
by experience that it was nothing so, for I found no more alteration in those
than I did in the former, which was only the enriching of the earth with the
strength of the substance of the Herbs and dung; so Flowers do not convert any
colors as they are, but into its own color and intercisial form as every one
has. Some think that there is several juices in the earth which is the cause
of it, as is said, that if Garlic be set by Gilliflowers, that they will be
the sweeter, because that they think that the Garlic does draw away the
strongest juice; this is as uncreditable as the stories of Robinhood; for sure
if Flowers draw juice, so does the Crab-tree, I mean drawing or receiving of
Disputes of Nature.
it, as it is; then mark, an Apple grafted upon a Crab-tree must needs turn a
Crab, for it receives its juice from the Crab-stock; and as they say the
Crab-stock draws sower juice, and if it be so, from whence should the Apple
receive its sweet juice? Why then it is plain, that the Apple graft converts
the sower juice of the Crab-stock into its own nature, and becomes of a
pleasant taste, and so it is with all plants else: so it is not Garlic by
Roses can make them the sweeter, nor contrary colors applied to Tulips that
will alter the color, and seeing there are diverse colors it is an art of
nature, and those things which I direct you to apply to them in the former
page, is that which does agree with their nature, for it inlargeth the Flower,
and alters the color as soon as any thing whatsoever applied unto them.

Fourthly, There is certain ways of grafting of them to Grafting
have two Flowers spring from one root, and that is done thus; Take two
Tulip-roots of two several colors, one as big as the other, and cut off a part
from the side of each, proportionably alike, so that you cut not the strings at
the bottom, then join them together, and bind them with a little flax, and set
them in the earth, and the next year, according to what they are grafted, they
will bring forth Flowers of two several kinds, seeming to spring from one root;
some are so simple to think that they will be mixed colors; but that is
answered where I treat of Flower-deluce-roots, and prove to the contrary.

Fifthly, To have Tulips of the seed, is to sow it in the later Of Seed.
end of August in a fine fertile earth, for it is a very tender feed, though
when it is come to perfection the plant is the hardiest of all others. The
plants that come of seed will be very small the first year, and bears no
Flower while the fourth year; and seeing Mr. Purchase and others have took up
their time to study curiosities about ordering this seed; and that this Flower
is grown so common that the roots may be had almost any where, I shall not
insist any more upon ordering this seed.

Sixthly, Tulips must be removed every year, or every Removing
other year; the time fit for it is in the later end of June, in manner as
aforesaid; the reason is, if they be not removed, they grow too deep in the
ground, and the ground grows stiff about them, and they send forth suckers
from the old bearers; these things hinder the timely bearing, and makes the
Flower the less.

Seventhly, Concerning sent. In the former Treatise of Gilliflowers I had an
occasion to speak of the alteration of the Ofsent.
sent of Flowers, and if it could be done on this, as I know it is impossible,
it would make this Flower exceed all Flowers, for here is nothing wanting in
this Flower that nature did bestow in any other, except sent; and what may be
done in altering the sent, Authors say it is thus: Take two or three Cloves, as
much Mace, and a stick of Oinamon, two grains of Musk, and a little
Amber-grease, these beaten together, add unto it a few drops of
Damask-rose-water, then take a fine Camebrick rag, and spread this upon it; lay
this to a Tulip-root, then commit it to the earth; this done, water them now
and then with Damask rose water, and some other sweet drugs this cost with
diligence performed, say they, the Tulip that springs from that root will be
as sweet as any Flower whatsoever. This you may believe if you please; but I
can assure you that you will lose your labor and cost: My reason is, as I said
before, plants do not contract any substance, as it is either sweet or sour,
black or white, but into its own sent, color and for me that God and Nature
gave it.

Lastly, Some things may be done in crossing of the nature Crossing of Nature.
of this Flower, by keeping of the root out of the earth to put it backward for
flowering at contrary seasons, for you may keep it out of the earth a quarter
of a year and set it again, and it will grow and flower; thus you may keep them
back from flowering one Summer, and the next Summer they will flower the
timelier, and the Flowers will be much the larger. I cannot insist upon every
particular, but I hope I have showed you the principal things of concernment,
and I have answered some of the groundless opinions that men have took up upon
trust concerning the ordering of this Flower.

The Sensitive plant.
A strange nature this plant has, and that is, if a man touch it with his
hand, it will crumble it self up together; hence the name of it is derived, or
called the Sensitive plant.

It rises to a span high, with weak stalks, but tough with Descrip.
small brownish leaves, with a few tufts at the top of the branches, where
grows small Flowers, and it bears a small seed presently after.

This plant is raised on a hot bed of the seed under a glass: In the beginning
of April, and at May transplant it into a box of fertile earth, where it will
remain two years, if it be housed in the Winter, and carefully looked after.

Thrift.
It is matted close to the ground like matted grass, with spiry Descrip.
blades like matted Pinks; it spreads mightily upon the ground, and it
bears a Flower in May, which is double, and of a whitish Pink color: This
Flower stands upon a naked stalk of an handful long, and after the Flower
fades and bears no seed.

This Flower is set of the slip only, for the keeping up of borders, and for
the distinguishing of knots; these slips may be set at any time of the Spring
or fall, and where they are set they always continue.

Turkey-caps.
They spring up like red Lillies to two-foot high, and afterward brancheth out
into five or six branches, on each branch grows a Flower which is red, and in
the form of a cap, standing with the tops exactly downward; the time of its
flowering is in July, and after the Flower fades, it leaves the seed behind
it, which seldom comes to perfection.

This Flower is set of the root only; the time for it is presently after its
flowering, or at its first springing in March, in the same places and manner as
was told you of Lillies, after the stalk dies the root springs again yearly,
the roots would be removed every year, or every other year, or else the Flowers
will be but small.

Violets.
Both double and single are sown and planted in Gardens for several uses as
well as for pleasure.

In August and the beginning of March they set up the slip in borders or banks,
and in April you may sow them of the seed in drils, as was shown of Pinks,
where they will always remain. I need not trouble my self to write any more of
them.

Wall-gilliflowers.
I am now come to the last Flower in my Treatise, it needs no description; it
is only propagated of the seed, by sowing of it amongst rubbish, or upon walls,
at any time of the year you please; for it is a seed of that hardiness, that
it makes no difference betwixt the Winter and the Summer, but will flourish in
both equal, and bears its Flowers all the year; therefore I advise you to sow
it upon some wall or stony bank: Now after this seed is once sown and has
taken root, it will naturally of it self overspread much ground, and will
hardly ever after be rooted out. This bears its seed much like to the
Stock-gilliflower, but that it is much smaller, and the lightest of all seeds;
and as it scatters it comes up naturally of it self; and seeing it requires
no more labor, I will not insist any more upon it.

So ends the Treatise of Flowers.

THE GARDEN of PLEASURE as it treats of CURIOUS TREES.
Here follows short Descriptions and Directions for the raising and
maintaining of such curious Trees as are placed in Gardens of Pleasure now in
England, either for their Fruits, Flowers or Pleasure.
Apricock.
AN Apricock is a tree that is placed against a wall for the gaining of fruit
from them; for if they be set abroad for standards they will never bring fruit
to perfection; neither will those against the walls some years, if they be not
preserved with mats, and that is done thus; Drive some Tenter-hooks at the
uppermost part of the wall, and upon those hooks with a pole hang your-mats in
the Evening, and in the Morning take them off with the same, and these mats
will preserve the fruit from frosts, winds and blasts, which oftentimes
perishes fruit at the first knitting: thus you may preserve any other wall
fruit.

Apricocks are propagated by inoculation and circumcising; the experiments I
refer to the Treatise of Fruit Trees.

Almonds.
There be two sorts, the sweet and the sour; the sweet sort are planted against
walls, as the Apricocks are, and propagated as the other are in all respects.

Bay.
Bay-trees are planted sometimes against pillars, or on each side of doors of
Gardens of Pleasure, but chiefly in fore-Courts at a yard difference, to the
end that they shall spread the wall, and not grow too big, for then they would
not be nailed to the wall, but would endanger to throw it down, and stand very
unseemly.

These trees are raised of seed or slip: First of the seed; the time for it is
in the middle of April, in a good earth; and if the seed be new and sound, it
will come up suddenly, and by the third year it will be four foot high: The
setting of the slips is in this manner; in September go to a Bay tree, and cut
off all the strait shoots that are joining to the body, and set them
slope-waies in good earth, and they will take root most of them at that time
twelve month, they may be took up and set in those places where they shall
remain.

Box.
With Box, knots and borders are set, but now it is almost out of fashion, for
the roots of it dries and improverisheth the earth, so that nothing can grow
nigh it, so it is chiefly now used for setting of hedges upon the edge of high
walks, where it shall annoy nothing but cast a pleasant sight always: this is
set of the slip in September, and the least slip of it will grow, though it be
but slowly.

Ciprus.
There is two kinds, that is the great Cipruss and the dwarf-Cipruss: the great
kind will grow to twelve foot high; the dwarf-Cipruss seldom grows to above
four or five foot high; they are both planted for pleasure thus: The great kind
is planted at ten foot distance, more or less in grasle-knots, according to
the space of the Garden, usually at the corners thereof, and for to keep them
in a pleasant form, you shall set a stake by them, which is strait, to the end
that the plant may grow up by it, and be bound to it with wier, and clipping
off of the loose branches with a pair of sheers, and keeping of it so clipped
that they grow no bigger than a man's body, and cutting of them all off at an
equal height, which is usually at nine foot high, and when they are at their
full growth they will be kept in this form with twice or thrice clipping in the
year.

The dwarf-Cipruss is usually planted by pole-hedges, two foot and an half
distance, so that when they are grown up they might be a hedge themselves, cut
at three foot and a half high: The place that they are thus planted, is round
the quarters of a Garden, and it is the newest work that is growing, witness
his Majesty's new Garden at St. Jameses.

These plants are raised of the seed in April, sown in exceeding good earth,
and sometimes in hot beds: The plants thus come of seed ought to be
transplanted into other beds, and set at half a foot distance, sheltered the
first Winter, and the third transplanted for pleasure as aforesaid.

Fig Tree.
Fig Trees are planted against the house, because they run up to such an height
that no wall will be high enough for them.

These are set of the slip which springs from the root of the old Fig Tree,
as usually all Fig Trees put forth, unless such as be set in pavements, where
the stones hinder them from coming up.

Figs of India.
Figs of India, or Indian-figs: it is such a strange kind of plant that I
cannot call it an Herb, Flower, nor Tree.

It grows on the ground like an heap of Cucumbers laid Descrip.
up together without either branch or leaf, or any thing like it; at the bottom
it has a root which is white, and of a soft substance, and those kind of parts
which I cannot give a name for, which I told you are like Cucumbers, take root,
whereby it increases; and for me to give you any farther account of them, I
shall go beyond my knowledge, but these are to be seen in the Earl of Meaths
Garden in Ireland.

Filleroy.
There are many sorts of them, but all are of one nature and held in great
estimation.

They are trees that grow to three foot high, spreading with branches to the
very bottom, and in the beginning of Descrip.
March this plant puts forth so many Flowers that it covers it self, these
Flowers are made of four leaves and of a reddish color, and after the Flowers
shed there springs leaves which are of a swarthy green color and as broad as
a shilling, afterward appears a green berry, and in August it turns red as
a Cherry, and something bigger than a great Pea, by Michaelmas it is full ripe,
then it is coal black and loses the outer husk, the seed is in the middle,
which is black also and smooth as glass.

The propagating of this plant is chiefly of the seed in this manner, in the
beginning of April make hot beds of a foot high, laying of two inches of earth
on it, then cast the seed upon that, then lay another inch of earth upon that,
let both be ridled well; make a shelter over the bed with sticks and mats, and
in short time the seeds will come up and there they must stand till the fall,
and then transplant it into ordinary beds, but they must be sheltered the
winter following or else the cold will endanger to kill them: many curiosities
more there are used about them which I will not treat of, a wise man knows one
thing by another.

Gesamits.
Of these there are two sorts, the white, and the yellow, the yellow is little
set by because it has no sent, yet it flowereth early even at the beginning of
May, the white Gesamit flowereth not while June, this tree bears a Flower, in
sent, color and shape, like the white stock-Gilliflower, both these kinds are
set of the slip in Autumn, in a moist rich soil, so they will take root by the
Spring: the place they are severally transplanted to after they have taken
root, is against walls or bowers, so that they be nailed or tied up, for they
cannot stand of themselves: these directions are sufficient, there is no
curiosity belongs to these plants.

Holyander.
It is a tree that keeps green all the year, it grows to Descrip.
four foot high, with five or six branches rising together even from the very
root, on these branches stand leaves in order one against another much like the
Laurel leaves, and atop of every branch springs a Flower like the white
Lilly.

These plants are not raised in England but are brought in boxes of earth out
of Italy, so I shall cease to give any directions for the propagating of the
tree: this tree is to be seen in the Lord of Brobston's Garden, where you may
be satisfied whether I have given you a right information of it yea or no.

Horn-Fig-trees.
It is a tree has few branches scattering one from another Descrip.
with here and there a leaf, the bark of the body is of a brown color, the
whole tree grows to be a little higher than a man, atop of every branch
puts forth a kind of a fruit like a Key ball, and at the first it has a
kind of a red husk on it, which makes it appear at a distance like a Flower,
and when that sheddeth the fruit is as hard that is underneath and as rough as
the Pyone Apple.

This tree is raised either of the seed or slip, but best of the seed, for it
is done with as much ease as the Pippin-kernels are raised, but it is hard to
procure the seed or slip, for the tree is very scarce.

Creeping Vine.
So called, because if it be set against a wall or a house, it will take hold
it self without any nailing, and run up to the very top, and needs no care
but pruneing: you may say, what need it have any pruneing, seeing every branch
will take hold of the wall? I answer, the reason is, because one branch will
grow over another else, and therefore they must be prevented while they are
young by cutting off.

I need not trouble my self in setting down ways for the planting of them, for
it is done with as much ease as the ordinary Vine.

Lowaray.
This tree grows to ten foot high, with branches springing Descrip.
from the body of the root, even from the very bottom to the top, being very
strait shoots covered with a gray bark, the leaves are of a pale color, round
at the bottom and sharp at the top: at the and of every old branch springs a
Flower in the form that the Vine puts forth her Flower, but of a blew color.

This tree is raised of the sucker which springs from the root, these being
taken away in September and set in any ordinary earth, they will grow as soon
as a willow: the place that they are usually set in is by bowers, to the end
that they may cover them, for you may bend this tree which way you please and
they will not break.

Laurel.
Is so generally known that I need not speak any thing in describing of it, I
shall only speak two or three words of the raising of it, and the place of
planting of it in for ornament.

First for the raising of it; if you have good store of Laurel trees, at
Michaelmas cut off so many young branches as you can, that are two foot in
length and longer, the longer the better, then find out a place that is very
moist earth and rich, lying something in the shade, there plant your cuttings,
laying of them slope-waies, so that there be a foot of them in the ground and
the rest above; thus done let these cuttings remain there till the next March,
and by that time they will have roots of an inch long, then you may transplant
them to wall-sides or pales, where they may be set at four foot distance, and
kept nailed to the walls or pales: those that have great store of them make
hedges of them by walks sides, supporting of them with poles, and so keep them
cut at the top: about London they make a great profit of the cuttings of
Laurel.

Lowrex.
This plant spreads like a bush even close to the ground, Descrip.
and seldom grows to be three foot high, the leaves are green and two inches
in breadth, made of the fashion of a long ovall, and are so thick set on, that
a man cannot see into the body of the plant: this plant keeps green all the
year, and bears a berry, but it never comes to any perfection, therefore it
is set of the slip, and the least slip of this plant will grow.

The raising of it and planting of it, is as I told you of the Laurel
cuttings, therefore let one direction serve for both: the place that this plant
is set in, is in physick-Gardens, because it is a physical plant.

Lorestrinus.
The branches of this plant are weak, so they are usually Descrip.
planted against walls, arbors, or upon frames of close walks: it keeps its
leaves green all the year, which are of a brownish green, shoots out with
long branches, like the young Vine shoots, and the old shoots bears a tufty
white Flower which flourishes in May.

This plant is planted of the slip as most plants are that keeps green all
the year, so I shall not need to insist upon the manner of it, for it is done
with as much ease as any of the other; so nothing remains but that it be
planted in the places according to the description.

Lignae-vitae.
Is a tree that is not very common, I do not know that ever I saw above three
of them in my life, yet if the slips of them may be had, I am confident that it
would grow almost any where, but it never bears seed which comes to
perfection, and that makes it so much a stranger in England: and for your
better understanding I give you this short description, it is a tree which has
branches like the Saven, the body of it is smooth and strait, and of a ruddy
color, with never a twig upon it, but at the very top, which is very pleasant
to behold: this tree at his full growth is as big as a man's thigh; and a matter
of twelve foot in height, the body of it is the best wood in the world for
musical instruments and for your new Engine turning-work; I think it needless
to speak any thing of the propagating of it more than I have.

Mirtill-trees.
Of Mirtils: there is the sweet Mirtill, the smooth Mirtill, and the prickly
Mirtill, and some will have them distinguished into more names, yet he that
knows the one may easily know the other.

All Mirtils keep green all the year, and have a thick leaf Descrip.
as broad as a groat; that they call the prickly Mirtill has a sharp-pointed
leaf full of veins: the sweet Mirtils leaves are smooth and round: that they
call the smooth Mirtill, differs not in any thing from the sweet, but only
the sweet has a bloom which has a sweet savor: no Mirtill tree grows to
any great stature, for it is a great tree counted that is so big as a man's
thigh and six foot high.

The propagating of each of these sorts is chiefly of the berry or seed on this
wise, prepare boxes of as good mould as may be had, set the seeds therein, so
done, let the boxes be sheltered anights: the time for this is in the beginning
of April, this observed, if the seed be good it will come up in a little more
than three weeks space, let the plants stand in these boxes till the next
September, then draw out such plants as stand too thick, and plant them in
other boxes, and let some remain in the same, where they may stand always if
the boxes be big enough and deep enough: these plants must be housed in the
winter as long as they stand in boxes, but some when they are three years
growth transplant them against walls, where they will prosper very well if it
be upon the South part thereof.

Orange Trees.
And Lemon-trees will grow very well in England if they have houses built on
purpose, so that they may be wheeled in and out upon truckels, in the boxes of
earth that they grow in, but yet they seldom bring any fruit to any
perfection, they are only for a sight, they are pleasant trees to behold, for
their leaf never fades but keeps green all the year: I think I may spare the
labor to give any further information of them, or any directions for the
propagating of them, for I think few of my countrymen will dispense of so much
charge for to have nothing but a sight for it.

Pomegranate-tree.
Is the stateliest tree in shape or growth of all others, it is a tree also
that never fades its leaf, the leaves are long and of a yellowish green
color, of a thick substance: this plant grows not to its full stature in
England, and I never saw it out, therefore I cannot give a right description of
it: these plants will be raised no where but at home, which is in Spain, and
being brought hither when they are young plants, in boxes of earth, they may be
preserved in warm chambers to bring untimely fruit.

Peach-trees.
Of Peaches: there is the double Peach-flower, the smooth Peach, and the rough
Peach, the early Peach, and the winter Peach, all these are planted against
walls, at twelve foot distance, and preserved as you may see of Apricocks: for
the raising of them I shall wave it here, and speak of it in the Treatise of
fruit trees, I only name them here, because they are cultivated in the Garden
of pleasure.

Perry winckle.
It runs training on the ground with many joints, Descrip.
whereat shoot out leaves of a dark green, shining leaves somewhat like the Bay
leaves but not half so big; at every joint comes Flowers of a paleblew color,
some are white, some of a dark reddish color; the root is a little bigger than
a rush, the branches creeps far about.

This plant is set of the slip only, and it may be set any where, it refuses
no ground, being set either in the Spring or the fall: the best place to set it
in is upon bank-sides, where little or nothing will grow, this takes root and
spreads a great deal of ground presently, and keeps the bank whole of it
self without weeds, for it kills them.

Sweet-Bryer.
It is planted underneath windows for its sweet savor sake, the suckers that
come from it may be planted, they will grow up very well, but to have great
store of sweet-Bryer, save the seeds while the Spring of the year, and then sow
it in beds of loose earth and it will grow without fail, the plant sprung of
that seed by that time a twelve month they will be big enough to transplant
into hedgerows, as some have them planted round their quarters of their
Gardens, others plant them in maze-form, keeping of the sides cut and the top,
and pleasant walking it is there.

Tamarus.
Is a tree so well known that it needs no description, it is usually planted
to grow over doors or bowers, for it shadeth and covers much; it is a tree
that never bears seed, therefore it is only planted of the sucker or the
slips which comes from the body, or the root being took of in September and
planted where you have a desire they should grow, and it may be done without
any curiosity.

The Gilli-Rose.
Or the Gilderland-Rose; it rises to six foot high with Descrip.
a body as big as a man's wrist with a reddish bark, the leaves resemble the
Vine leaf, though much less and of a darker color, upon one branch grows but
one Flower, after the Flower sheddeth there appears a seed but it never
comes to perfection, this tree decays not in eight or nine years where it
likes its air and earth.

Of the sucker this Rose may be raised: the time for getting and setting of the
sucker is in February the latter end thereof, placing of it in a very warm
place, so done it will come to flower the third year after: another way is,
which is more certainer, for to inoculate it upon a Damask-Rose stock.

The Province-Rose.
There be two or three sorts, and that is, the Provincerosal, the
Province-vicar, the red Province, and the damask Province: a great enlargement
I could make upon these, but the sum of all is, Province-Roses must be
inoculated upon damask Rose stocks, so I shall give you the way of inoculation,
and that briefly.

First, Observe the time, and that is about the first of June, when the plant
is full of sap: now follows the manner; Go to a Province-Rose tree, and cut
off one of the likeliest young shouts that you can see, then go to a young
damask-Rose stock, which must not be above a year old; this observed, take off
a bud from off the cutting which you brought from the Province-rose; the bud
took off evenly and square, then lay it upon the damask-rose stock, a matter of
a foot from the ground let it be, so mark out just such a proportion of bark by
that, then take it out with the point of your knife, then set the other in its
room, which if you did it artificially, will just fill up the place, or else it
is worth nothing; but if it do join right then it is very likely if will grow,
then bind it with a little flax, leaving the middle open for the bud to grow
out; set two or three of these buds of one stock, but if one grow it is enough.
Now when you see the bud incorporated with the stock, then unbind them for the
band will do them hurt; after the bud is shotten forth an handful length, then
cut the stock off above it: these are certain and easy ways of inoculation of
Roses, but if you are not satisfied with these short directions, see the
Treatise of inoculation for fruit trees.

The Cinamon-Rose.
A great quoil there is about this Rose: Some think it was colored by a
morical substance, being a damask Rose before: Others are of that opinion that
it was inoculated upon a Barbary stock; but whilst men hold these opinions, it
does plainly appear, that they do believe, that colors in Flowers were made by
man's art; but I am not of that opinion, for I believe they are only preserved
by man's industry, and all man's art is to find out the working nature, and all
that is here required in the promoting of this plant in its own nature, is to
inoculate it upon a damask Rose stock, which may stand in a warm convenient
place where the unkind Winter may not nip it.

Vines.
Of Vines there are many kinds, and many Authors have given large descriptions,
praises and directions for the promoting of Vines, whose large and historical
Discourses have drowned the sense or the method of it to the Reader: This
Discourse I shall omit, and speak a few words in brief, how Vines are
propagated of such ordinary sorts as grow in England.

First, I will give you an account of them: There is the white Muskadine, the
red Muskadine, the small sugar Grape, the Murcot, the ordinary French white and
red Grapes, and the English white and wild Grape: In the raising and
maintaining of these, I find but four things requisite, and that is, Planting,
Pruning, Gelding, and Cures for hurtful distempers.

For the first, Before you plant, get such plants as are rooted, though some
say, that cuttings will root very well, but I have found by experience, that
one in ten will hardly come to any thing; and if they do shoot out the first
year, they decay afterward: The way to get rooted plants is thus; Go to an old
Vine, and bring most of the young Vines that grow nigh the root, and bring them
under the earth, and bring the tops up to the wall again; this ought to be done
in September, and those Vines let lie under the earth while that time twelve
month, and by that time they will have taken root, then they may be cut from
the old mother, and planted against walls, houses, bowers, or close walk
frames; and in setting of them, observe that they stand not too nigh the wall,
and not above a foot deep, and that you put about them some Pigeous-dung and
good mould, and that the plant be cut off a yard above the ground: these are
certain and sure ways of planting of Vines.

The second is Pruning, and that is one of the necessariest things that
belongs unto them, for if they be not pruned they will soon decay and give
over bearing of fruit, and grow out of all shape and form. The time for pruning
of them is in February, for if it should be done before, the cold would nip the
cuttings and kill them, and if it should be done after, the Vine would bleed
out most of its sap, which will hinder its growth, and keep it from bearing
that year. Now the pruning is thus; cut off all such as were of the last years
growth, save such as are leaders, and those must be left to spread further
against the wall, and in cutting the branches off cut them so that you leave
one joint or eye from whence springs the Grape.

For the third, Gelding of the Vine is requisite for the preserving of the
Flowers and the Grape: First Understand that gelding is to pluck away the
sprouts where they grow thick, and the leaves which deprive the grape of its
sap, and keep the benefit of the Sun from it, which the Vine loves above all
plants.

Lastly, Hurtful Distempers which annoy Vines is canker eaten earth, bound and
barrenness of the soil: First, for canker eaten, that is usually at the root,
which is eaten by worms; the cure is to anoint it with tar and Herb-grasse, and
pouring some Chamber-lie on it, which will cure the distemper, and keep the
worm from eating of the root any more. Secondly, If they be earth bound, then
open the earth from about the root in September, and lay a little chaff or bran
about it, and so let it lie till February, and then take the chaff away, and
put good mould in the room. Barrenness in a Vine is sometimes the cause of its
too deep planting, and in the barrenness of the earth; if the cause be in the
earth, it is soon remedied with the taking that away, and bringing better in
its stead; if it be too deep and an old Vine, there is little remedy: I am
forced to end here.

THE GARDENERS PRACTICE IN The Physical and Fruitful Garden, in the Knowledge
of Raising, Growing, and Maintaining of Herbs and Trees contained therein.
First as it treats of HERBS.
Angelica.
IT is called by no other name, and so well known I need not describe it.

This plant is sown of the seed, or set of the slip; the slip is that which
springs from the old mother-root, which may be more properly called young
plants: the time for the getting and setting of these is in the beginning of
March at the first springing, or in September after the old branch decays.
The place of setting of them (if you have a great quantity) is in beds by
themselves laid out at two foot and an half in breadth, two rows on a bed, each
plant afoot asunder; the earth would be very rich, because the plant is of a
speedy growth, and where it is once set it always continues, yet the old plant
dies being six years old, and sends young suckers from its sides, which
keeps the bed always flourishing; and (as I said before) if the earth be not
made rich at the first planting, it cannot be easily hope afterward, because
the plant ought not to be removed.

Secondly, Observe that the branches of Angelica dies every year, and bears
a seed in like manner as the Parsnip does, and the seed is much like it, but
that it is thicker and weightier, it has a stronger sent than the herb, and as
much virtue, and so it is great profit to sow or plant Angelica near any Market
Towns where there live any Apothecaries or strong Water men, for it is the
excellentest of all Herbs for Waters or Cordials, and commonly sold at a dear
rate.

Thirdly, In sowing of it, it is to be noted, that it has a peevish nature,
for if you take never so much pains and care with it it will not grow, and yet
sometimes as it shades naturally of it self, so it will come up if the plants
grow in a moist place; therefore I advise you to cast the seed in a mighty
moist place in August, raking of it lightly, and by the next Spring some of
this seed will come up, and some the next year after; every Michaelmas take
these plants out of that place, and set them in beds, the first year they will
be worth little, the second year they may be cut, and the third year it bears
seed: This is as much as need to be done or understood in the ordering of
Angelica.

Alicompane.
It shoots up with long broad and whitish leaves, hoary Descrip.
and soft in the handling, set upon three foot stalks, with a lesser toward the
top: This plant has diverse great and large Flowers, like those of the
Corn-marigold, and the middle thrim being yellow, which turn into down, and
underneath are small brownish seeds, the root is great and thick, branching
forth diverse ways, black on the outside and white within, and as tart of taste
as Mustard Seed.

This plant is set of the slip which sends from the root, being set in any
kind of earth it will prosper very well and continue in that place always.

Alexander.
Alexander is also called Alexandre and Horse-pisle; it has winged leaves much
like young Elders, and bears its seed in tufts like Parsnips, and it is black
and three square, pretty great and weighty.

It is propagated either of the seed or slip; if you sow it of the seed it is
no great matter when, nor is it material where, it being committed to any
ordinary dug earth, it comes up naturally, and continues there always.

The leaves of it are boiled with Beef, and in the Spring time it is used for a
Pot-herb; the root is used for sauce.

Annis.
It will grow in England if it be carefully manured, but seeing that the leaves
of this plant are for no use, it will be lost labor to raise it, considering
the seed may be bought any where.

All-Hail.
All-hail, or Clowns All-hail, by others Woundwort. It has leaves thick and
round of the breadth of a sixpence, Descrip.
gray, rough and full of sap; the branches that they grow on lie on the ground
much like Germander, but it runs not out so long; it bears a little
bluish Flower, but never leaves seed to perfection; the nethermost leaves
keep green all the year.

This Herb set of the slip in the Spring time in borders, or any ordinary
earth, and it will prosper very well and spring yearly.

Bares-britch.
This Herb does resemble the smooth Thistle, rising up with a stalk, and at the
top the leaves turn something Descrip.
round, and in the middle springs tufty downy Flowers, of a brownish color,
growing in rough husks, and underneath is grayish rough seeds.

This plant grows wild in some parts, but it is nursed up in Gardens for
physical uses; it is usually set of the slip in the Spring, and it flowereth
that Summer, and after it has yielded its seed three times the plant dies.

Balm.
Balm bears a seed which it may be raised of, but the Herb is so common that
it is needless to trouble you with its description. The time that they usually
set the slip of this Herb is in the beginning of April, if in case that you can
get but few of the roots, they may be slipped into many parts, and each part will
grow if it have but part of the branch with it. The place that it is usually
planted in, is in beds by it self of two foot and an half broad, four rows of
it in a bed, and let it have all the bed to it self, and let it be well watered
at the first planting, it requires no more trouble, but springs yearly: The
dead branches would be cut off when Winter comes.

Basyll.
Garden seed Basyll has one upright stalk, rising up to one Descrip.
foot high, whereon are set small branches with two leaves upon a joint set one
against another, whereat spring a small Flower whitish in color, and after it
fades it leaves one seed in a bag, which is black, and something bigger than
Hysop-seed; this Herb has the sweetest sent of all others; at the approaching
of Winter this Herb dies; it is propagated only of the seed; the time for it
is in the later end of April; in this manner, dig a bed finely in a quarter
which is reserved for sweet Herbs, rake it likewise, then sow your seed on it,
and cover it with a little fine mould thinly. Now observe, if that it be like
to rain after, the bed ought to be covered, for if the seed take wet before its
gemination, it turns all to a gelly, and so is lost.

Lastly, This seed comes up the ninth or tenth day, and then it would be
watered in dry weather, till such time as it covers the bed. The use of this
Herb is for broth or for stewing meats, and the like.

Blessed-Thistle.
It is called Cardus Benedictus, Holy-thistle, and Cardus; I suppose it need
not any further description.

This Herb is raised of the seed only in March, it must be sown in a loose rich
earth, in a warm place under some pale, hedge or walk, you should prick in the
seeds with your finger in the bed at three fingers breadth asunder; for if it
should be raked, the beards that are at the end of the seeds would not let them
be covered, and that is the reason I advise you to prick them in with your
finger.

The second season of sowing of it is in the later end of April, then it may be
sown without any trouble in any ordinary earth, and will prosper very well, and
so this Herb dies at the approaching of Winter, then you may save the seed and
sow it in the Spring, in like manner as I told you.

Bares-foot.
This Herb shoots up branches two foot high, with many joints, whereat shoot
out springs with five dark green Descrip.
leaves upon them shaped like a Bares-foot, and pale colored Flowers fashioned
like a cup, hanging with the top downward. This Flower is upon the branch in
May, it has clumped roots which spread in the ground, and are of a stinking
savor.

This Herb is set of this root only, either in the Spring, or in the fall; it
delights in a shadie place, where if you set it, it will grow without any
more trouble, and spring every year after according to the description.

Bugloss.
I suppose this is so well known, it needs no description.

Bugloss may be sown either in March, or the later end of August thinly, for it
spreads much ground, if it be sown in the Spring, it will be late in the
Summer before it come to flower, therefore it is best to sow it in August. It
continues three year before it dies, but the branches die every year, only
the root remains which springs again.

The vulgar uses of this Herb is, the Flowers and the leaves are put into
Claret Wine and Beer, to give it a pleapleasant taste; the Flowers also are
used in Sallets and Syrups.

Burrage.
This Herb is much like the former, but that it grows not to such a stature,
and the leaves are shorter and broader. I need not write any thing of the time
of sowing of it, for sow it when you will it will come up at its natural
season, and if you suffer it to seed, the seed that falls comes up naturally,
and in time will overspread the Garden, therefore I advise you to sow it in
some reversion, or some waste place in the Garden.

Bloodwort.
Bloodwort has leaves shaped and striped like the Hartstongue leaf, but they
are of a red color; these leaves are set on close to the ground, through which
rise stalks like the dock, and bears a seed in like manner, which is red and
three square, glistering like the Sorel seed.

This Herb is sowed of the seed in the Spring time, it would be in a small bed
by itself; it comes up soon after its sowing, and will come to cover the bed
suddenly; it bears not seed till the second Summer after its sowing, and the
fourth year it dies, but it seldom leaves the ground without young in the
stead; for if you suffer it to bear seed, as it falls it comes up naturally:
This Herb is very good in broth, and blood puddings of all sorts.

Burnat.
There is a wild kind, and a Garden kind; of the Garden kind there is only
double and single; one description will serve for both. Burnats have winged
leaves rising thick from the very root, being much crumpled and jagged, and of
a palish green color; through the midst of them rises a stalk two foot high,
whereon are many branches, and at the top of each grows a knob something like
a button, red and white speckled, in which grows yellow seed something like
redish seed; the branch dies yearly.

Of this seed this Herb is sown, or set of the slip in March or April, in the
end of a bed or border by it self, where it will grow and flourish according to
the description: it requires no more care than to cleanse it from weeds, this
herb is used in Claret Wine and in sallets in the beginning of March, for it
springs very early.

Betony.
Garden Betony is so well known I need not write the description of it,
therefore take the ordering of it as follows:

This herb is set of the slip only for it never bears seed to any perfection;
the time for setting of it is in March or April, the place for it is usually in
the edge of borders, or otherwise for to have a great quantity of it for
stilling of it in cordial waters, then in beds by it self without any
curiosity, for it is a hardy herb, and will continue a long time being once
planted.

Camomill.
Is known so well, and the manner and time for setting of it, so I shall wave
that, and speak of the place only; the first fit place that I shall name is
round upon the edge of borders next to gravel walks; the second place is upon
banks of earth made couch-fashion; to the end that a man might sleep upon a
Camomill bed; the third way is, to set walks with it, and of each side of the
walk a water table laid with white sand which is a very pleasant sight: the
fourth way is, to distinguish knots with it, and that is thus, set Camomill in
the same form as you would lay Grass-work, and truly the best Garden that ever
I saw in his Majesty's Dominions had a knot thus set.

Lastly, Be pleased to take notice that Camomill set as was prescribed, must be
kept mown and clipped once or twice a week for the summer time, or else it will
grow out of form and hollow at the bottom and soon decay.

Comfrey.
A description of it is vain, and a direction for the planting of it is
needless, for it will grow in any place where it is set; I only name it to put
you in mind of the planting of it somewhere about your house, for its virtue is
general for man and beast, as the Physicians Herbals will show you, and I hope
you will bestow the labor to plant it once, for inso doing you need not do it
more.

Cives.
Sometimes called Rush Leeks, Chives and Chivet, I hope that by one of these
names there is no man but will know them; the ready way for setting of them, is
to slip them into as many heads as they have, and that will be sometimes twenty
on one bed, so done prick them into a bed finely dug and raked, at two
fingers distance, so that they may come to cover the body themselves, for the
keeping of the ground moist, and for the less expense in weeding, and there
they will always remain; yet they ought to be removed after they have stood
four years, because they will grow so thick that they will want moisture.

Cammell Beg.
The leaves of this keeps close to the ground and something resemble Violet
leaves, but only thicker and of a darker Descrip.
green, and in the middle stands a stalk some eight inches in height,
whereon grows one knapped Flower like the Flower of Betony, the stalk and
some part of the leaves die yearly, and the under leaves always keep green.

This plant is set of the slip only, which must have part of the root and
branch, the best place for setting of it in, is upon the edge of borders for
the keeping of them up; this herb is for special uses being employed
physically.

Chervill.
It is called Merah Chervill, sweet Chervill, and sweet Sisly, it is supposed
there were three kinds of them, that is, the wild Chervill, the sallet
Chervill, and the sweet Chervill; one description will serve for the Garden
kinds.

Both sorts the leaves resemble tongue-grass but of a fresher Descrip.
green color, the stalks rising up a yard high, spreading with white Flowers
at the top, after which comes long black shining seeds, the herb is sweet to
smell and taste, where once it is growing it continues many years, but the
branch perishes in the winter.

This herb is sown only of the seed, that is to say, there is no other way of
gaining of it: there are two seasons for the sowing of it, the one is in the
beginning of April, and the other in the latter end of August, these are the
times: the place is in a bed amongst sweet herbs, in manner as I showed you of
Basil, so done it will come up according as it was described.

Carowaies.
At the first coming up a man at a distance may very well take them for Carots,
but as they grow up bigger they differ more, for the Caroway is of a darker
green and yields its Descrip.
seed like the Fennel.

The time and the only time for sowing of Carowaies is in the latter end of
August, for I have often tried it in the Spring, and I could never have it to
grow, and I sowed but once in August and it prospered very well, therefore sow
it in August, and the next summer it will yield seed, and after the branch
dies, but springs again and yields seed every summer for many years
without any care.

Clary.
The leaves are thick, gross and woolly, and of a light Descrip.
brownish color, very broad spreading upon the ground as it were, and in the
middle rises a stalk of two foot high, with many branches spreading, whereon
are many Flowers like those of Sage, and each Flower leaves its seed behind it
like that of Radish, but something smaller.

This herb is sown of the seed, and it requires a good ground and to grow in a
bed by itself: there is two seasons for the sowing of it, one in the Spring and
the other in the fall; that which is sowed in the fall a hard winter will kill
it, therefore it is best to sow it in the Spring: the vulgar uses of this herb
is for frying with eggs and other things, for it strengthens the back and
increases venery.

Course-Mary.
Or Ale-Coust, and by some Balsom-herb, it is known of a long whitish leaf,
sharp pointed at both ends and finely cut about the edges, the stalk has many
such like leaves though smaller, with a tust at the top when it flowereth like
that of sweet Maudlin, and it never yields seed.

This herb is set of the slip only; I hope I need not stand to show every
particular of it, but as you set sweet Maudlin so set this: the time for it is
in March, and where it is once planted it flourishes every summer for many
years after, this herb is used in Ale and clarified Whey.

Cummin.
Besides it is called Bullwort, Amios, Bishops-weed, and Cummin-royall; for a
better knowledge of it, it grows four foot high, with round stalks, and many
branches growing of them with long green leaves, from the top of the branches
are white fussy Flowers, after this fades the seed soon appears, which is
like Parsly-seed, but four times as big, the root and branch perishes every
winter.

It must be sown in the Spring, in a good earth which is very moist, and it
will prosper as was said: the common use of this seed is, to tole Pigeons to a
Dove-coat; there are besides special and physical uses which I need not to
set down it is so largely spoken of in many Herbals.

Coriander.
It resembles Flax and bears its seed much like it, but Descrip.
it is hollow, something big and very light and of a whitish color, the plant
peritheth as soon as the seed is ripe.

The time of sowing Coriander seed is toward May day, there be those that sowes
half acres of it and more, I suppose I cannot give them directions, but what I
have observed from them I will give you, they usually sow in a light rich
ground, and but thinly, for each plant spreads much ground: the use of this
is for strong waters, the seed of it I mean, whereby those that sow it have
great profit.

Celandine.
The leaves are in the form of Turnip-leaves, of a whitish Descrip.
yellow color and full of yellow sap, the root is reddish and full of yellow
sap also; the branches rise to a foot and an half high, full of yellow Flowers,
and yields small seeds.

And for the ordering of it, I will be short with you; if it be sown in any
place in dug earth, it will grow and prosper, and never forsake you, and if
you did but know the worth of it, you would not neglect the doing of it.

Dragons.
I shall not need to stand long to describe it, for it is very easy to be
known by this, that is, the lowermost part of them are absolutely like a Snake,
and as big as the biggest Snake whatsoever, and two foot from the ground
spreads out winged leaves, made in the shape of a Dragons-claw of a whitish
green color, above that rises that which we may call the Flower; it is made
in the fashion of that they call Cookowpintle, and in this lies much small
seed, which is as small as the smallest, of a brownish color; the branch
fades every Winter, and springs again the first of April, and at the seventh
or eighth year dies root and branch, but it leaves suckers behind it.

Of the sucker this Herb is to be planted in the choicest earth that may be
had, or else it will not prosper; the time for it is about the middle of April;
of the seed also this plant may be raised, but it is very difficult; I cannot
permit the time to explain every particular of it.

Dill.
This Herb is not without its virtue, nor is it fit I should Descrip.
exempt it out of the inventory, and I know that you need not my judgment in
the sowing of it, for nature does it better than you or I; for sow it when you
will it will come up at its natural season.

Evat.
It has long slender stalks rising to three foot high, beset Descrip.
with leaves round about one against another, in shape and color like that of
Arssmart, and on the top stands downy white Flowers, which the wind carry
away; it never yields seed, the leaves have little sent, but as bitter as
wormwood in taste; the root is like Spare-mint root in tufts, spreading far: of
the root this Herb is planted wither in the Spring or Autumn, and it will grow
almost in any place where it is set and never decay: this is a special Herb in
Physic, and will well reward your labor, if you know the worth of it.

Fether-few.
Otherwise called white Wort, in the North of England they call it white Rue; I
suppose I need not give any description of so common an Herb.

This Herb may be set of the (...) either in the Spring or the fall, refuses
no ground, and continues many years without any replanting; if men that live
in the Country, and have Cattle, did but know the worth of this Herb, they
would find that it would do them as much good as a Horse-Doctor.

Fennel.
There be three sorts of Fennel, viz. Fennell-flower, sweet Fennel, and the
ordinary great Fennel: The first two dies yearly being sown of the seed, so I
shall only trouble you with the common Fennel, and I suppose that can be no
great trouble to you; for put either seed or slip in the earth. and it will
grow.

French Honey-suckles.
French Honey-suckles has not long been inhabited in England, therefore I will
give a description. This Herb has leaves a foot long coming forth even from
the root, in some places two inches in breadth, and in other places a hand
breadth, scolloping out with five or six scollops between the bottom and the
top, being of a fresh green color, and smooth; it has branches springing up
to four foot high, with many of those said leaves on them, and many yellowish
Flowers, which leave a brown, rough, flat seed behind them, the nethermost
branches green all the year.

This Herb is propagated of seed or slip, but chiefly of the seed; the time for
sowing of the seed is in April; the place is in a border, where it shall remain
the season being temperate, and the earth good; it comes up suddenly, but it
bears no Flower till the second year.

French-Mallows.
This Herb, has strait stalks, which grow up to three or four foot high; if it
be not cut it has a round jagged crumpley Descrip.
and pale colored leaf, something broader than a man's hand, with many small
white Flowers of the stalks made of five leaves a piece, each Flower yields
one seed, and of a three cornered fashion, and of a gray color.

This Herb is to be sown only in the Spring, not in beds in a quarter where
pot herbs are sown, but in a bed by it self; and if the ground be good the seed
comes up the sixth day, and by August it comes to flower, according to the
description, and when the Winter comes on it perishes, but whilst it is
young it is very good in Sallets, and it is a good pot-herb at all times,
whilst it is green.

Gromwel.
Two kinds there are, the wood Gromwel, and the Garden Gromwel. There is a
great deal of difference betwixt these two kinds; I shall only describe the
Garden kind.

It has woody branches like the Mustard-branches, but Descrip.
slenderer and lower, many short leaves and bluish Flowers, standing in brown
husks, and in each husk after the Flower fades, there appears one seed in a
husk, which are small and of a sky color, glistering like pearls; the branches
perish yearly, but if you suffer the seed to shade, it comes up naturally of
it self.

So if I should give any directions for times and seasons of sowing it, it were
needless, for the description shows it; so there is no more to be said, sow
it when you will, it will come up at its own season. The virtue of these seeds
are incomparable for curing of the stone and gravel, and women when they be in
labor.

Gladin.
It springs up with spiry blades like the flag, and Descrip.
bears a Flower something like the Flower-deluce, but of a yellow color, it
has double roots spreading in the ground.

Of the root this Herb or Flower is set without any curiosity, and in any
ordinary place, and there it will continue always, and flower in July: the
root of it is excellent in Physic.

Gooses-tongue.
A common thing it is to give three or four names to one and the same thing;
for fear there should be any mistake in the name, I will give you this short
description of it: This Herb is in all parts at the first springing like sweet
Maudlin only, it is of a darker green color, and afterward it rises up with
branches spreading, beset with jagged leaves, and tufts atop, of downy stuff
like that of Coursemary; it never yields seed; it has a sweet savor and
stringed roots, whereby it spreads and increases.

This Herb is set of the slip, which is taken from the root, in a bed in a
quarter amongst pot herbs, where it will grow without any industry, and
continue always green, it should have the top branches cut off at the comeing
in of Winter. Note also this Herb is one of the best of pot herbs.

Germander.
It runs with small branches on the ground which will take root; it is set
thick with small leaves, of a brownish color; Descrip
it bears the smallest Flower of any other, and no seed; it keeps green all
the year and never decays. Now this Herb is set only of the slip in border
sides, for the keeping of them up. Others distinguish knots with it; it must be
kept always cut, for it runs and spreads far else. Note it is a
stinking Herb, yet sovereigne in Physic.

Garlic.
It is a needless curiosity to describe that which all men know so well, and
to pen down the virtues, it were double labor, seeing the Physicians have done
it so often; so I will only put you in mind of the setting of it in March, and
taking of it up at Michaelmas for your several uses, so that you might not want
it, when you have occasion for it, and that my Physical Garden should not be
without it.

Horse-Redish.
At its first springing it has jagged and torn leaves, as it were of a light
green color, the next that spring are broader Descrip.
and longer, and only cut a little on the edges, then runs up spindle
stalks, whereon are white Flowers, seldom any seed to perfection.

The manner of planting of this is of the root, and so easy and so plain that
you cannot misle, for put the least piece of the root of it in the ground, and
it will spring up (as was said) and in three years time it will come to be as
big as the small of a man's leg, and then it should be taken up for the virtue
that is in it, or else it will decay, and be worth nothing.

Herb grass.
Herb-grass or Rue: It is a common Herb, yet there is great difficulty in the
planting of it, for it will not grow in any place, let the earth be never so
good, for where it does like it grows very slowly, and so does all sorts of
Herbs and trees that have most virtue in them.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that this Herb is to be propagated of the slip
only, for it never bears any seed, therefore take the observations in the
planting of it, as follows.

In September get the slips of this Herb, which must be slipped from the body,
and not from the branches; this observed, then look out a convenient border,
either under a wall, a hedge or a pale, to the end that it may have shadow, and
if it be possible under the shadow of a Bay Tree; for this Herb is an hot Herb,
and delights least in the Sun of all others; as for example, Pulse which is
cold, as Musmillions and Cucumbers, these are cooler, and desire the benefit of
the Sun, and heat of manure.

Thirdly, You see it is plain, that Herb-grass requires a shady place, where
it may have the Sun only some small part of the day, then ser it (as I told
you) in a shady border, and let the earth be very good, though Authors have
said that it abhors dung, yet I have found by continual experience, that
dung well qualified makes it prosper mightily, so nothing remains but that you
set it so, and it will prosper very well; but the first year and the second it
will grow but very slowly, till it be well rooted, and afterward it will
flourish for nine or ten years, if no accident befall it (as some suppose) that
if an evil woman break any of it, that it will soon fade and die presently
after; if it be so, my judgment is, that there be few or no women can break
off this Herb, but it must of necessity die: To prove whether it be so or no,
it would take up an extraordinary Discourse, which I shall wave, and leave this
virtuous Herb to be propagated by your care for your use and profit.

Hore-hound.
Of these there are two sorts; there are the wild kind, which has a stinking
smell; but that which I here prescribe, and intend to treat of, is the sweet
Hore-hound, which is nursed in Gardens for its Physical virtues: I suppose it
is needless to give any description of it.

The way of propagating of it is of the slip, which has part of the root; the
time for doing of it is either in the Spring, or in the fall, according as
opportunity shall best serve: The manner of it is without any difficulty, even
as I told of Betony, and so done, it prospers very well, and springs every
year after.

Hyssop.
There is only two sorts, that is, the yellow and the green; they differ not in
nature, though in virtue: one direction will serve for both in the propagating
of it, and therein I shall be very brief. The best and the easiest way for
raising Hislop is of the seed.

First, The ordinary way of raising of it of the seed, is in the later end of
April; the place fit for it is in beds two foot and an half in breadth, in the
quarter with the sweet Herbs, in that form, as you may see in the draft-work in
the beginning of this Treatise: I shall save the labor to write the manner of
sowing of it, but so as Basil is sown, so is this.

The second way of sowing of it is in drils, round beds, wherein is Tulips, and
other Flowers of bullous-roots; the seed in like manner is sown in drils, for
the distinguishing of knots, either division-work, or running-drafts. Now take
notice, that Hissop-seed thus sown, or any other way, being thinly covered; it
comes up suddenly, and by the later end of the Summer it will come to seed, if
you cut it not; but I advise you to cut it every fortnight, after it is grown
to a handful high, for it is for profit, pleasure, and for the preservation of
the Herb; for that which is kept from seeding will flourish seven or eight
years, and the other not half so long.

Thirdly, This Herb may be set of the slip, at that time, manner and place, as
was said of the seed, and it will flourish accordingly; if it be well watered
at the first planting, and afterward if the season be dry.

Lastly, Hissop is the best of strowing Herbs, both for sent and for growth,
and being distilled the water of it is very precious.

Housleek.
Housleek or Singreen is an Herb of general uses, and though it be no art in
the planting of it, I name it for its worth, and to put you in mind that you
may plant it upon walls or thatcht houses of the slip in Cow Dung and earth, and
it will prosper very well, and spread and continue with you without any more
trouble.

Jerusalem-Sage.
It has many rugged leaves to the sight and handling, they Descrip.
are at a span in length, sharp pointed at the upper end; the lowermost part
growing close to the earth, spreading every way, and of a greenish gray color;
in the midst grows many spindles, something like Cowslips, with Flowers on
them like those of English-sage. This Flower never yields seed; it is
propagated of the slip, as follows.

In March or September get the slip of this Herb, and set it in a bed of good
mould, and it will prosper, or otherwise it will not. Now observe, after these
slips are rooted, they will continue many years in that place without any more
trouble; and the leaves and Flowers are for sovereign Medicines, although I
cannot find the Physicians have treated of it either by name or description;
yet the virtues are these; it cures sore breasts, applied Poultiswayes, and
made up into salve; it cures all manner of green wounds, and drunk inwardly
helps women in travel, and many other virtues it has, which I cannot
dispense with time to repeat.

Kings-mallow.
Kings-mallows or March-mallows; these are much like the Pot-mallows, or
Hollihock, but a great deal bigger in body, and leaves something rounder; the
branches grow not so high as the other, and something crookeder.

The raising of this Mallow is of the seed in March; the place fit for it is in
some out-border of the Garden, where it may grow without any replanting, and so
at the later end of August next after the sowing, it bears a small Flower in
comparison of the Hollihock, much like it, and afterward the seed (which seldom
comes to perfection) having done so three years, root and branch dies.

Kapons-tayles.
By some named Capons-feathers, and by others Caponherb.

It has winged leaves rising from the root of a foot long, Descrip.
of a fresh green color, smooth to the sight and in handling; in the midst
rises branches to four foot height, weak and bending, with many such like
leaves as the former, though not so big; the top of the branches are huskey
Flowers, of a sad white color, which dry on to the stalk, and never yields
seed; the roots are long and white, full of knots and spreading, which shoot up
young branches every year.

Of the root this Herb is planted, either in the Spring or fall; the fittest
place for it is in a bed with other pot-herbes, and being done, it needs no
more industry, but will prosper according to the description. This Herb is
excellent good for broth, and for Puddings made of blood.

Lovage.
It has stalks growing to a man's height, hollow like Bean stalks, with many
branches spreading from the sides of Descrip.
them, whereon are leaves much like those of Angelica, and of a strong stinking
savor; the branches and stalks perish yearly, and the root sends up the like
again.

Now for the ordering of it I will be short, for the Herb is hardy, and
requires no more than to be set in the earth of the slip, which is taken from
the root, either in the Spring or the fall, and it will continue, as was said
in the description.

Liquorish.
I suppose the root of it is well known of all those that are troubled with
color, that take any thing to prevent it; the Descrip.
branches that springs from the roots are in all respects like young
Ash-plants at four foot high; this may serve for the knowledge of it.

The way of planting of it for profit, as many do now plant three or four Acres
of it (more or less according to their opportunities and abilities) would take
up a large Discourse, and very probable I might outrun my judgment in some
particulars: Those that are Plantaginers of it differ in the way and judgment
of planting of it; so I will wave the quantity, and speak of the nature and
quality. My reason is, because I think that those need not my judgment that
plant such great quantities, so take the way of planting of a bed for a
household use as follows:

In March provide a bed of good earth either light or sandy, and of three spit
deep; such a bed of earth provided, and laid out at three foot in breadth,
then set three chase of roots at a foot distance, each root a foot asunder; now
note, the roots must be but half a foot in length at the most, pricked in with
a diber, so that there be but an inch of earth above them; atop of this you may
sow any salletting the first year, the second year it would have the bed to it
self, and the earth loosened about it, and the third year in January or
February it should be taken up, and in the taking of it up, note that such
roots as run downward are good Liquorish, and those that run side-waies are not
so good, but it is better for planting again than the other, which you may
plant in the manner as was said before in the March following, and by this
industry you may come to have acres of it, as is at the neat houses nigh London.

Lastly, See what profit is made of planting of Liquorish, viz. the
Apothecaries give fifty shillings for a hundred weight of the roots, and upon
this account some have made five hundred pounds upon the increase of six acres
of land.

Lavender-cotton.
Or white Lavender: the branches of it are like Cypruss, but of a white color,
and rises not altogether so high as the Lavender slip does; it bears a
yellow downy Flower, and leaves no seed: the herb is bitter in taste, and
little better in sent.

Of the slip this herb is set either in March or September, after two sorts or
ways, first when it is set for physical uses or for profit, it is in beds in
manner as you set Rosemary: secondly when it is set for pleasure, it is either
in borders or knots, and to see a knot set of Lavender-cotton, drawn in a large
scope of ground, either division or in running draft-work, done by the hand of
an artificial workman, and let grow to a foot high and half, a foot a breadth,
being kept clipped evenly with a pair of shears, is a rare prospect, and casts
the pleasantest sight of all works of a Gardeners inventing, and also this knot
so planted and so kept, will continue so twelve or fourteen years before the
herb dies.

Lavender-spike.
Sometimes called Spike: I think it is altogether needless to write any
description of it.

This herb is set of the slip only, the best time for it is in the latter end
of March in beds of good mould, setting two chase in a bed, each slip at half a
foot distance, and the bed of two foot and a half breadth; it must be well
watered at the first planting or else it will not take root, but if it may be
so ordered, by July most of those slips will spindle up with a knapple like the
Flower of Betony, yielding the pleasantest sent of all other herbs.

Lastly, It is profitable to plant this herb for distilling and for other
physical uses, and especially for oils which are of most virtues approbated to
any pain or distemper of man which comes by aches or old bruises.

Lavender-slip.
This herb which is known so well to be planted of the slip only, with little
labor but it yields more profit: the fittest time for the planting of it, is
in the beginning of March, so that it may take root before the dry weather
comes; and it is also observed, that the sooner of the year it is planted, the
longer it will continue before it decays.

For the planting of it, though it be such an ordinary thing, yet I have seen
errors in it, that is, they plant it too thick, for some I have seen plant
three rows in a border, of two foot and a half in breadth, when one is enough,
therefore I advise those that set it, to set but one, each slip near half a
foot asunder, and also observe to twist the nether end of the slip.

Lemon-time.
I wonder that the Physicians have left this herb out of their Herbals,
considering that it is for several uses, as distilled for waters, and a good
pot-herb and nursed in Gardens also, this forces me to give a short
description of it, that they and you might be acquainted with it.

This herb is much like the pot-Marjerom in shape, but little Descrip.
bigger in leaf and branch than the ordinary green Time, and it spreads upon
the ground, sometimes taking root; the color of it is betwixt a light yellow
and a green, the sent of it is pleasant and sweet, it bears its Flower like
the pot-Marjerom, but never yields any seed; it keeps fresh all the year
and never decays, where it is planted of the slip, which is taken from part
of the root; this may be done either in April or August; the place is sometimes
in beds by it self when it is planted for its use, and others plant knots of it
for pleasure, and being kept clipped often and clean (as Garden knots ought to
be) it out-lasteth the planter.

Mallows.
Or Garden-Mallows, otherwise called Holihocks: in the Treatise of Flowers I
had an occasion to speak of the double kinds of Holihocks, and of their
several kinds and colors, how they are raised and planted for ority of the
Garden of pleasure; these Mallows that I prescribe here are single kinds, and
sown in the physical Garden for physical or kitchen uses.

The time of sowing is either in March or in August, in a remote place or an
out-border; by reason of their high growth they would be unhandsome in the
middle of a Garden, therefore sow them against the pales or wall, and they will
prosper very well in any ordinary earth: now note, that seed which is sown in
March seldom comes to flower that year, those that are sown in August come to
flower the next summer at its natural season, which is in July: and lastly
note, that Mallows spring four or five years, and only loses its branch in the
winter and then it dies.

March.
This herb is much like Parsley at the first coming up, but of a darker green
color and of a stinking sent, afterward it Descrip.
spreads into bushy branches, never rising to above two foot high, carrying
of its leaves to the very top, yielding of its seed in like manner as the
Parsley does in shape and color, but much smaller and of as strong a sent as
the herb: the branch perishes yearly, and springs again for three or four
years and then dies.

This herb is raised of the seed, it is no great matter at what time, for where
it grows, as the seed sheddeth naturally so it comes up again, therefore the
time cannot make much difference: let the place be in a bed which is reserved
for such like strong herbs, as Rue, Wormwood, Featherfew, Savin, Southern-wood,
and Germander, for these like herbs agree best together, and are for the curing
of desperate diseases: but as is said, if the seed be committed to the earth,
if it be but new and sound, it will come up at its natural season, and your
Garden will never be without it: this may serve for the propagating of it.

Now I Will describe some of the virtues of this herb, my reason is this, I have
run my eye over Culpeppers Physician and other Herbals, and I found that the
name and description of this herb was not there, and the virtue of it is so
needful and useful that I must describe it, viz. it cures Fellons and
Gangreens of the flesh applied Poultiss-way, it preventeth in Cattle the
Murrain and the Pestilence, giving them a drench of it: many more virtues it
has which I would wish both Physician and Patient to study how to know them.

Madrath.
Many long four square stalks trailing on the ground it has, something reddish
and full of joints, whereout shoot Descrip.
forth long narrowish leaves rough and hairy, betwixt them rises Flowers pale
and yellowish, after they fade comes small round heads, green at the first and
black afterward, wherein is contained the seed: the root runs down into the
ground even four foot (if it may have good earth so deep,) and spreads many
ways also, and are of a red color.

This is planted of the root in March, in manner as follows:

First, Provide a bed in a warm place for matter of foyl, for it will endure
any air: now the bed being cast something high at three foot a breadth, and
good store of rotten dung under them, then set the roots in manner and
distance, as was shown of Liquorish; so done, the Summer following it shoots
up with branches, according to the description, that would be cut off at the
Winters approaching, and that is all that need to be done till the third year,
and then the root ought to be took up for its use and virtue; the use is for
Diers for dying, and the Physical virtues the Herbals will show you.

Marygolds.
There be double and single flowered ones, and both of them yields seed; and
if it be sown in any place which is dug, it will grow and keep the Garden
full, but if the ground be barren, they will degenerate and turn single.

The use of the Flower of this Herb is for the pot for broth, and the like; and
those that do think of the Winter in the Summer, do gather the Flowers, and dry
them in the shade, and put them up in paper bags for the like uses and others,
viz. for to make Posit-drinks for those that have any distemper at their
hearts: It is also thought that it is as effectual as Saffron.

Mother-wort.
It has brownish strong stalks rising two or three foot Descrip.
high, with many leaves cut deep into the very stem, something like the
Vine-leaf, rough and crumpled, of a sad green color, but many veins therein;
there are many branches and one stalk, which also yield at the tops thereof a
purple colored Flower, as small as that of Balm, but in the same manner as
that of Hore-hound, after which come small blackish seeds in great plenty: The
bottom of the plant keeps green many years before the root perishes.

This Herb will seldom grow of the seed, therefore it must be set of the slip
or sucker, which is taken partly from the root: The time for it is either in
the Spring or fall, in a border or a bed of good earth, where it will prosper
and come to perfection, according to the description.

Nip.
Garden Nip is much like Balm in the leaf, but that they are sharper pointed,
whiter and hoary, growing on four Descrip.
square stalks, shoot up to three foot high, with many small branches set
thereunto, having smaller leaves than those at the bottom. This Herb yields
a strong sent, something sweet like Balm; the Flowers grow in large tufs at the
tops of each branch, something like that of Sparemint, of a whitish purple
color: The root remains in the ground like that of the Mint, and all the
Winter some of the nether most leaves keep green: The seed that this Herb
yields, is like Purslain in all respects, but only it has one white speck,
and that is where it grew to the cod, and at that place it springs its branch
again.

Of the seed or slip this Herb may be propagated; the seed (if it hit) it is
long before it comes to perfection, and it is very tickle in gemination, as I
have found by experience: The best time for sowing of it (if you will go to the
trouble) is in the later end of August; but I think it better to set it of the
slip (if it may be had) for that way it will prosper very well in any ordinary
earth: The time and manner of doing of it, is (as I told you of Balm in the
former part of this Treatise) in a bed by it self.

Orpine.
It has round and brittle stalks with fat and fleshy leaves of Descrip.
a pale green color; the Flowers are white growing in tufts; the roots are
diverse, thick, round tubelous roots, and the branches fade yearly: This Herb is
set of the root only in a bed reserved for it self: The time is either in the
Spring or fall and without any curiosity, being committed to the earth, in its
season it will grow and flower as was said.

Pepperwort.
The root sends up leaves in shape like the Coursemary cut on the edges,
carrying the color of the Horse-reddish Descrip.
leaves, it has a hard small round stalk with many branches like the same,
very thinly set with leaves, and at the top of every branch are small white
Flowers which leaves a small seed that seldom comes to perfection; after the
seed falls the branch dies, and the root remains in the ground, which
sends up the like again: This root is something like the wild Parsnip.

The way of propagating of this Herb is of the root; the time for it is in
March; the manner thus; Cut your roots into short pieces of three inches in
length, so done (a bed of earth prepared for that purpose) then prick in them
pieces of roots at half a foot distance, by May they will shoot up with leaves,
and by the later end of Summer with stalks (as was said:) Now note that these
roots must remain in that place untouched three years, if you would have them
at their full virtue, and then they may be took up, and the roots set again.

Pot-Margerum.
I imagine it is altogether needless to describe it, seeing it is so common an
Herb; therefore take the propagating of it by seed and slip, as follows.

First, Of the seed: The season for it is either in the latter end of April, or
the latter end of August; the place is in a bed by it self, in a quarter with
other sweet Herbs, and done in the manner, as I showed you of Basil.

Secondly, Of the slip, that is done at the same seasons, but sometimes not in
the same places; for we set it on border sides to keep them up, where it will
spring as well as in a bed, and it will continue always where it is once
rooted in bed or border, for it puts forth side suckers which flourish after
the old plant dies: I think it is but lost labor to write any thing more of
it, the Herb being so hardy, and so well known.

Prick-Madam.
Or Prick my Dame. Diverse trailing branches upon the ground it has, composed
of a soft substance, Descrip.
not divided into branches or leaves, but all parts alike, which are round
prickles like those of the Furse, but as big as a Goose quill; if you touch it,
a small matter breaks it, and it is not prickley at all, though it seem so to
be; the color of it is a bluish green, and bears a yellow Flower in August,
and a long seed a little after like that of Muscove, but seldom to perfection.

This Herb is set of the slip in borders sides, either in the Spring or the
fall, one chase in a border upon the uppermost edge thereof; for after it is
rooted it runs upon the ground like Pennyroyal, and takes root with its
branches, therefore it would be kept cut in order by a direct line at the
nethermost part of the border, and then it appears pretily: it keeps green
all the year and continues many so. This Herb is eaten in Sallets in the
Spring time.

Purple-grasse.
In Physicians Herbals I cannot find this Herb named or described, therefore I
will describe this Herb and its virtues.

This Herb runs on the ground like Clover-grasse, with Descrip.
leaves and stalks of a purple-colour, spotted as it were with blackish blood,
and bears a Flower in July like that of the five leaved grass, and of the
same color, wherein is small seeds of a brownish color, which are very light,
so that the wind will carry them away; the topmost branches fade at the latter
end of the Summer, but the undermost spring up again.

The virtues of this Herb are for the curing of inward strains, and such as
spit blood, and it is a sovereign remedy for the Bloudy-flux; a great quantity
of the juice of it give Cattle to drink when they are troubled with the Lask,
it cures them; it is also used for a Pot-herb.

Now for the ordering of it I will be short; it is thus: In the Spring or the
fall get some suckers of this Herb, and set in a place that you see convenient
for such a purpose; let it be but well watered at first, it prospers and
continues always with you in that place, and spreads and increases very
much.

Pennyroyal.
By some Orgament, Run-ground, and Ground-royal; I hope there is no body but
knows it by one of these names without any description.

This Herb is set of the slip only, for it bears no seed, though it bears a
Flower. Now note, although this Herb be very common, and flourishes mightily
where it is once rooted, yet it is difficult planting of it at the first to
have it grow, for if it be planted in dry earth and a dry season, it will not
take root without abundance of water: To save this labor, set it in the
beginning of March in borders sides, and it will prosper very well, and spring
every year after: It requires no more trouble but cutting off the branches
after it has flowered, and how good the vulgar virtues of this Herb are, there
are but few but know it.

Poppy.
There are many kinds of them, and in the Treatise of Flowers I describe what
some of them are, so I shall only speak of the white Poppy in this place,
because it is raised for the physical virtues that are in it.

This may be sown in September, and it will prosper very well in any ordinary
earth, and will come to flower about the later end of May, and that which is
sown in the Spring will flower later, and both sowings after they have yielded
the Flower, and the seed, both root and branch dies; and if you suffer the
seed to scatter, it comes naturally up of it self.

Rosemary.
Of this there is gilded Rosemary, English Rosemary, and Spanish Rosemary; the
last of these is needless to be propagated, or to be discoursed of.

First, For the propagating of our English Rosemary, I will speak of that
briefly: Of seed and slip this Herb is raised, and I think I may very well wave
the Discourse of the raising of it of the seed, seeing the Herb is so
plentiful, and slips any where may be had where there are any Inhabitants.

Now follows the manner of setting of it thus: Prepare borders of good earth,
either round a quarter of Herbs, or in strait borders in quarters; if the earth
be barren it must have good store of rotten dung: This observed, lay it into
two foot and an half beds or borders, and set three chase of the slips, each
chafe eight inches distance, and the slips half a foot asunder; in setting of
them twist the nether end of the slip, and thrust it down so deep that there be
but three inches appear above the earth. The time for this is almost betwixt
January and May, but that which is set after the middle of March, must be
continually watered, or else it will never take root, and that which does by
industry, will decay sooner than that which is set in February, and will not
endure the Winter half so well: we have experience that cold Winters will kill
Rosemary by this last past, as many Gardeners about London can witness by
woeful experience.

Lastly, The seasons are to be observed, and the governing of the young plants
first; if February be not temperate then there is no setting of it, but if it
be, it is the only time.

Roman-Sage.
Roman-Sage, or the Sage-tree: It has a body like a Whipcrap-tree, Descrip.
rising to four foot high, as big as a man's arm, with many branches shooting
forth from the sides, with no leaves but upon the top of them only, which
makes it have a spreading head; the leaves are of a brown color, and in
handling much like Sage, and is made of a round fashion about three fingers in
breadth; the body is of the same color; it yields no seed but a kind of
Berries, which never comes to perfection; this tree keeps its leaf green all
the year.

The slips of this tree if they be set in March in a good earth, there is no
doubt of its growth, and will come to perfection according to the description;
always provided that they be transplanted having stood on year, so that there
may be no want of room and fresh earth.

Rubarb.
Rubarb or Rewborme, or otherwise called Araponick: Of these there are diverse
kinds, which are distinguished into almost as many names, as there is virtues
in them, viz. China Rubarb, Garden patience, or Monks Rubarb, great round
leaved, dock or bastard Rubarb, and English Rubarb, and as many more: If I
should describe them all, it would take up a page or two; so I will only give
a short description how they may all be known when a man sees them.

All sorts of it resemble the Burdock in shape before it spindleth Descrip.
to a stalk. Now observe, there is difference in kinds, as it differs in
colors and stature, but little in form, viz. the China Rubarb has many green
leaves near two foot in breadth, and not much longer, rising upon a foot stalk
from the root, which are of a red color; after this springs the stock with
lesser leaves on it, growing to a yard high, and bears white stringey
Flowers, all in a cluster like that of the Dock, and yields a three square
seed, of a dark brown color, as big as a small Pea, something glistering to
the eye. The time that it flowereth is in June, and the seed is ripe in July;
the branches perish at the coming on of Winter, and the root remains and
sends forth the like branches again.

Monks Rubarb grows up with large stalks, with somewhat broader and longer
green leaves, not dented at all: The stalks being divided into a great many
small branches, which bear reddish Flowers, and three square seed like unto the
other: the root is long and yellow like unto the wild Docks, but a little
redder, and much bigger.

Bastard Rubarb has yellowish green leaves rising from the root on long
brownish foot stalks, among which rises up pretty big stalks about two foot
and an half high, and at the top thereof stands long brownish Flowers,
wherein is hard three square seed much like that amongst Rubarb, though not so
big, yet the root grows something greater. Let this serve for a description,
so I will proceed to the propagating of it, and that in particular.

First, China Rubarb which Physicians make such division in names, and quoil
about the nature of it; so that they say, it is unpossible to produce any
plants in our English clymate, to be so virtuous, as that which comes out of
its natural Country: But I will not dispute this, but prosecute the raising
of it as briefly as may be.

The season fit for the sowing of it is in the beginning of April; the place
must be where it may have the benefit of the Sun, and a shelter from the
cold, the earth as loose, and as fat as may be; such a place provided, cast it
up into a bed, and prick in the seeds half an inch deep; so done, let the bed
be sheltered with a mat at nights, and in three weeks space the seed will come
up by the latter end of May; the plants need not be covered till the next
Winter following, and then it must be sheltered likewise, and in the Spring
following it would be transplanted into a like earth, and that Summer some of
it will spindle to seed, and the third year it comes to its full growth; the
fifth year it has its whole virtue; the virtue is in the root chiefly, and
then it is taken up.

Monks Rubarb, and bastard Rubarb, may be raised of the seed at that time as I
told you of the China Rubarb, with less curiosity and trouble, especially the
bastard Rubarb. True it is, I should insist upon some particulars further in
the ordering of this, but that I have been something large in the information,
so that I cannot permit any more time about it, but must speak something of
others.

Spare-mint.
Of Mint there are many sorts, as Mackarel Mint, Horse-Mint, white Mint, and
wild Mint, these I wave.

Of Spare-mints there are two sorts, that is, smooth Mint, and crudled Mint, or
crumpled Mint.

The way of propagating of them both, is of the root, and in this manner, for
the saving of labor, and the surenesse of the work for to have the roots to
grow, that is thus; when you have prepared a bed or a border where you have a
desire they shall grow, then make three or four drils in the bed with a
planting Hoe, then lay your roots into those drils with the Spire end upward;
so done, fill up the drils again with the head of your rake; let this be done
either in March or September, and those roots will spring without any further
care, and never leave you nor forsake you.

Saffren.
If you please to look into the Alphabetical Table, there is Crokus named, and
in the page Saffron-Crokus expressed; Now what is to be understood by this is,
that Saffron-Crokus, or Crokus, differs not in shape from this, but in
colors, as blew Crokus and yellow, which are sometimes called Saffron-Crokus,
because they differ not in form, but in virtue.

This Saffron which I here prescribe is planted only for its virtue and profit,
which it returns to the Planter thereof, as in Cambridgeshire and
Saffronwalden, where they plant many achers thereof. Now I Will speak a word or
two in reference to the planting of it.

This Herb or Flower is planted of the sucker from the root, for it never
bears seed: The time that it is chiefly planted in is presently after its
flowering, which is in April; the manner is without any difficulty; for if the
root be committed to the earth it will grow so, therefore there needs
nothing, but to set every plant decently in order, so that every plant may have
its proportion of ground which would be four inches.

Lastly, Observe that in the gathering of the Saffron that you must be careful
to see to it every morning, for the Saffron comes up in the middle of the
Flower like horns as it were, and the Sun causes them to perish two or three
days, therefore it is that I counsel you to be watchful over it.

Sage.
I discovered Roman Sage to you, or the Sage-tree. This Herb is the common
English Sage, and of that there is red and green; a man would think that it
were a needless thing to write any thing of the propagating of it, seeing every
one can say, set Sage in May and it will never decay, truly that is a long day,
but if that were true, the last Winter would not have killed the most of the
Sage about London.

But so set Sage in the beginning of May in good earth, cast into beds of half
a foot high, and two foot and an half broad, setting three chase in each bed of
slips, each slip half a foot asunder, watering of it well at the first
planting, till it has taken root, and then this Sage set in May, may not for
six or seven years decay.

Summer-savoury.
So called, because it perishes so soon as the Winter approaches.

This Herb is raised of the seed only; the season for it is in the later end of
April, after this manner: Prepare a bed of earth in a quarter amongst the other
sweet Herbs, and the bed being finely raked, then cast the seed thereon, then
get some fine mould well ridled, and cast thinly thereon, so that it cover the
seed not above half an inch thick, yet I know some Idiots have written, that
they should be covered three inches thick, and in so doing you had as good
cover it three yards thick for any expectation of the growth of the seed. To be
short, the seed sown (as I told you) will come up in a weeks space, and
covers the bed suddenly, and needs no replanting, or any more trouble, but
only cleansing from weeds.

Setterwort.
Or black Eleyvert: it is known of a stinking smell, it is much like the Bears
foot, it has winged leaves, and runs up with stalks like Parsnips, and
bears the seed in like manner, the root lies in a clumper as big as a
bushel; if it have stood long, the root of this herb yields such a strong
stinking smell, so that a man in the digging of it up will be even sick with
it, so that of all herbs or roots of herbs there is none that yields so
noisome a savor: of this root this plant does increase, and if any part of it
be set in any kind of dug earth, it will grow without any further trouble,
and spring every year after, but observe the time, and that may be at any time
but when the branch flourishes, and he that will not observe this, and bestow
this small pains to have this virtuous herb in his Garden, if he have Cattle,
he is a very unwise man, if he did but know what diseases it does prevent in
Cattle.

Stone-crop.
This is not unlike Prick-Madam in any thing but that it is smaller, with
diverse trailing branches upon the ground, set with fat roundish bluish green
sprouts pointed at the ends, it bears a Flower which stands somewhat
loosely, not composed together but stands straggling, this herb also keeps
green all the year.

Of the slip it is propagated by setting it in dry banks, on stonewals, and
mud-wals, for there it delights most to grow, and will shift for it self
wherever it be planted, for it neither cares for heat nor cold, but abides
its place always without any alteration, this herb is good in sallets and for
physical uses.

Shalot.
Or Spanish Garlic: it has heads in the ground like Garlic Descrip.
though not so big, it runs up with blades like that of Chives, but a great
deal bigger and longer, there is never any appearance of any Flower or seed,
but continues according as I described it, the sent of it is strong, being
eaten it never offends the breath. By this short description you may know it
as well as if I had filled up a page with it.

This herb or root is propagated by the off-set or sucker, setting of them in
March in beds of ordinary earth, pricked in each root at a hands breadth asunder
just within the earth, this done, by the next Michaelmas following each root
will increase to be ten, then they ought to be taken up and kept in a chamber
all the winter till the next March, and then set again in manner as was said.

Sweet-Maudlin.
I hope I may spare the pains to write a description of an herb that is so
common, so only take the nature of it, and that is, it bears a seed which is
something downy, wherein I can see little or no perfection, or any kind of
spirit that may tend to growth, yet seedsmen do sell it upon that account and
unexperience, men by it thinking to raise the herb of it, but they are
mistaken, it is the slip and the slip only that it is increased by, and that is
done in the Spring time in this manner; having gotten slips, then prepare a
bed, and set them therein with a diber so thick as they may cover the bed when
it comes to spread, and that will be in a short time after. I need not to give
any farther observations, only remember to clip off the branches when it begins
to put forth its Flower, so that will renew its nature, and make it to look the
more beautiful, and continue the longer.

Seurvy-Grass.
Many thick leaves round and green it has, smooth on the edges; these leaves
are sometimes springing from the root Descrip.
upon stems, and others upon stalks spreading upon the ground, never rising
above a foot in height, and the tops spread with white Flowers, and after they
fade comes bags wherein is contained small seeds.

This herb is sown of the seed only, the best season for it is in the latter
end of August, it mattereth not what earth it be so it be fine, dry and clear
from rubbidge, and have some shelter, it will grow up and prosper very well the
winter following, and it will be the first sallet-herb in the Spring, by May it
comes to flower, and yields not its seed in a good while after.

Sweet-Fern.
It has roots that remain in the ground like those of Spare-mint, Descrip.
spreading and increasing, which sends up sprouts crumpled at the first of a
pale green color, and after it brancheth out into jagged leaves as it were, of
a darker green color than the former, something like that of sweet Sisly,
these grow not but to a small height, and never yields either Flower or
seed; this herb yields as pleasant a sent as Basil, the branches dye at the
coming of the winters cold breath, and the root sends up the like again the
next Spring; this herb is frequent in Gardens in Barkshire.

Of the root only this herb is propagated, by setting of it in ordinary earth
at its first springing, which is in the beginning of April; now I advise you to
plant it in an out-border, because it spreads mightily where it is planted,
so by that means it will not run amongst other herbs that are placed in
quarters.

Sweet-Covey.
Or Muscovey, is an herb that where once it is sown there it continues, by the
reason of the scattering of its seed which springs up again. I need not
describe it nor speak any thing more of the nature of it it is so well known,
for where it has gotten any interest it will hardly be destroyed if you desire
it.

Sweet-Marjorum.
There are two sorts, and that is winter sweet-Marjorum and summer
sweet-Marjorum: first for the summer sweet-Marjorum, that is sown of the seed
in the latter end of April, in beds of good mould finely delved and evenly
raked, and the seed cast with an even hand upon it, then rake it not but cover
it thinly with mould, as I told you in the sowing of Basil; this needs no
further care but watering and weeding, and at the coming of the frost it
withers.

Winter sweet-Marjorum is sown at the same time and in the same manner, and it
continues green all the winter following, and it is for the same use and
virtue as the other is, and a great deal more in estimation, because it can be
had when the other is not.

Sweet-Oak.
Is an herb which perishes yearly, and leaves a seed which is as small as the
Rose-campion seed. I cannot stand to describe every part of this herb, nor
cannot speak of every particular in the observation of propagating of it, for I
have already gone as far as my bounds, so I will only acquaint you with this,
that is, you may sow it when you have sowed the seed of the herb
beforementioned, in the same manner, and preserve it with the same care.

Taragan.
I suppose it is well known, so a description is unneedfull.

This herb is also sown at the same time and season as the former, but the seed
is more difficulter to take in the gemination, but in the fructition much
harder: this herb may be set of the off-set; but seeing that it is of no long
continuance, and of no great virtue but only for its sent, therefore I shall
not dispense with the labor to set down every particular way for it.

Time.
It is not to be questioned but that the generality of men and women do know
this herb, and how and when it may be planted to grow; but yet let me put you
in mind of a decent form in each particular, in the propagating of it by seed
and slip.

First, There is two seasons for it, the one is in mid- April, and the other at
the latter end of August, that which you sow or set in April, especially that
which is sown, will not come to flower that summer, and ought not to be cut
till the latter end thereof, because it should spread the ground and keep the
Sun from scorching of it, at the latter end of the next summer following it
will come to flower and seed.

Secondly, For sowing or setting of it in August, I hold this the best season,
for it will endure the winter, and will have taken good root against the
summer, and be fit to be cut for the several uses when the other is sown; now
observe that this be sown and set in a decent manner, and I shall spare the ink
and paper to set it down, but see as Hysop is done so is this.

The last thing that is to be taken notice of is, that it be kept clipped, so
that it bring forth neither Flower nor seed, for if it does it will not
continue half so long, and this you may know to be true by the Garden knots
that are sown or planted with it, and that being clipped always to make it show
pleasant, continues fresh seven or eight years, when that which is sown in
beds and let run to seed continues not above half so long.

Tansie.
The double kind is planted in Gardens for its vulgar and physical uses, the
place would be in some reversion or outpart of a Garden, for it spreads very
much where it is planted, and abides there always only losing of its branches
every winter. I pray you excuse me for writing any directions for the planting
of it, it being such a vulgar hardy herb it is needless.

V. laren.
Of it there is two sorts in form and color of Flowers, and that is the purple
Valaren and the blew Valaren, they differ in seed as well as in color, yet
they differ not so much in stature and growth but that one description will
serve them both.

It has leaves round and of a dark green, smooth on the Descrip.
edges and all parts else, many of them set on upon one stem much like that of
Box, these are set all upon stalks, and the bigger of them are springing as it
were from the root, and spreading on the ground, the stalk rises to three foot
high, and on the top are many Flowers set one above another of a bluish or a
purple color, glistering as it were, the time it begins to flower is at the
latter end of June, and so continues till after Michaelmas, this causes some
seed to be ripe when Flowers are rich in the branch, the nether most part of
this herb keeps green all the year, and continues many before it dies.

Now for the raising of it my words must be few, that is, this Herb may be sown
of the seed, or set of the slip in the latter end of March or in August, in a
bed by it self in the usual manner of sowing and planting of others, and it
will prosper according to the description.

Wormwood.
Of this there be three sorts, viz. Sea Wormwood, Field Wormwood, and Roman
Wormwood, and the last of these is only cultivated in Gardens for its cordial
and physical uses.

This Herb is set of the slip or sown of the seed; but the sowing of the seed I
shall wave, because nature does it better than I can teach you; the slip is set
in the Spring time, which is taken from the head of the root, it prospers
well in any earth being something shaded.

Winter-savoury.
This is the last Herb in the Physical Garden, as it falls out in the
Alphabetical order, though the virtues are the best of all others for vulgar
uses.

Of Winter-savoury there is three sorts in form of leaves, and only one in
nature and virtue.

I will now give some directions for the propagating of this Herb, though most
men know it, yet it may serve to put them in mind of that which they know, in
mid- April, and the later end of August either of these seasons the seed of
this Herb is sown, and the slip is set; I shall not trouble you with the
manner, but as Hysop was sown in like manner is this; so done it prospers
very well.

THE PHYSICAL GARDEN as it treats of TREES.
A short Description or Direction for the Propagating of each TREE which is
Fruitful and Physical, usually planted in a Fruitful or Physical Garden.
Barberry.
I Will be as short on this and all the rest as possibly may be, so that I may
but give an information. The plain way of propagating of each Tree as this, is
of the sucker, which springs partly from the root, and being taken away in
September, and set in the nursery, where suckers, slips and seedlings are set,
and after they have taken root they may be transplanted into the quarters of
the Garden in uniform order where they are to remain.

Currants.
Currants are generally white, black and red, but yet each of these sorts
differ in greatness as well as in goodness, according to the care as is used
about them, in the raising of them from suckers to fruitful trees; the thing
is plain, yet there are mistakes many times in it, therefore I would willingly
give my evidence in it to insist upon it presently after Michaelmas take your
suckers from your Current trees, and if you have not ground ready for them to
transplant them where they should always grow, then plant them in a piece of
ground by themselves at a foot distance, which may be fitly called a nursery,
let them stand there while that time twelve month, then plant them into the
middle of Strawberry beds at a yard distance, each tree bound to a stake, so
that the wind may not break them, and put them out of uniform order.

Lastly observe, let these suckers be taken yearly from the roots of the old
bearers, or otherwise they hinder them from being fruitful, they must be
pruned also, which is to cut away the superfluous branches which run above the
rest and never bear fruit.

Gooseberries.
Are distinguished into many sorts, usually thus, Dutch and English; first with
the Dutch, there is white and red, which are the worthiest of all other both to
the palate and the eye: of the English kinds there are white and red also, and
many others, but I will only name these, that is, the long yellow and the round
yellow, the amber and the crystal, the nepture and the wild, all these are
set of the sucker, as I told you of Currants in like manner, and transplanted
into like places.

Many arguments of curiosity I could raise in the propagating of them, which
would appear to men of experience to be needless, my self being sensible of
the same I pass that, and only desire you to remember to prune them, so that
the fruit may be the larger, and the trees renew their nature and appear the
more pleasanter.

Mulberries.
Are white, red and black, these trees seldom send forth any sucker neither
are they to be grafted upon other stocks to advance the fruit, but the way is
to get young sprouts from the body, and to set them in good earth in September
or thereabouts, so that they may take root, and at two or three years end to be
replanted into certain places where they may remain, so done it is without
question but these slips or cuttings will come to be trees, and bring forth
fruit according to its mother.

Quinces.
Are supposed to be of diverse kinds by reason that they yield contrary fruits
in virtue and in shape; I shall not end the controversic here by any arguments,
but shall refer you to a Book of mine which is coming forth entitled The
Gardeners Rule, at the latter end of which is a Treatise of fruit trees,
wherein you shall find, that all old errors and unpracticall conceits are
clearly reconciled by reason and argument; so I shall not speak any farther of
the propagating of them here, for then it would be double labor. I name this
plant here, because properly it belongs to a Garden and not to an Orchard,
and more especially to the physical or fruitful Garden.

Rasberries.
Of these there are red and white, which are greater and lesser, fruitful and
unfruitful, according to the soil, air, and ordering that they have. Upon
these words I could draw as many arguments as would fill up a sheet of paper,
but that is not my intent in this or any other part of this Book, for it would
be little pleasing and less profitable.

Rasberries are set of the slips or suckers which it sends from the roots,
which spreads in the ground, these being drawn up in September out of beds
where they stand too thick, so taken up then pruned, which is to cut off the
slips or suckers above the root at a foot and a half in length, and so much of
the root that it be not too cumbersome; having beds of earth prepared of three
foot a breadth, then prick in three chase of these plants at nine inches
distance, very few of these will bear any fruit the next summer, but the second
summer is that which brings the greatest increase if the year be fruitful.

Lastly to be short, Rasberries must be pruned every year, for some always
dye, and the other spring up where they have been long planted.

Roses.
Omitting those that I spoke of in the Garden of pleasure, the rest are these,
the Rose of Monday, the damask Rose, the red Rose, and the white Rose, and some
tell me of a monthly Rose, but I was never satisfied whether there is such a
one yea or no neither by experience nor theoditary, therefore I must wave it
and speak of the rest.

Of the Rose of Monday; this Rose is in all parts like the damask Rose, only
the color makes the difference, for this Rose is damask and red striped, the
propagating of it is by slip or inoculation: if you are not experienced in
inoculation, then be pleased to turn back to the place where it treats of the
province Rose, and there is a guide set down for it, and for the directions for
setting the slip, I hope I may omit the pains for to set it down, for a wise
man may well understand one thing by another.

Now for the ordering of the damask Rose, I will give a few plain directions.

First, If you have them already and would willingly increase them, in the
beginning of February, cut off all the young sprouts as come from the body, and
pluck up all such as shoot from the root, then cut them all at a foot in
length; now in the planting of these slips I shall omit that curiosity of
casting up of beds for them, as I and others have done, so I will give you an
easy and a profitable way, which is to lay a piece of ground level well
raked, then set in those said slips in that ground by a direct line at fifteen
inches asunder, a month after, you may cast some Turnip-seed upon that ground,
and it will not be only profitable for the table, but also shadow the face of
the ground, and keep it from being too dry.

Secondly, These slips thus planted will have taken root by that time twelve
month, and be grown to a greater stature, and may be transplanted into borders
round quarters of herb, or else a whole quarter or quarters of them, and
Strawberries cast into beds, so that the Strawberries may grow under the Roses,
and the Rose-trees to stand at three foot distance one way and five foot the
other, that the Strawberry beds may be three foot broad and two foot paths
between, and the Rose-trees supported with stakes.

Thirdly, Roses may be raised of the seed, but this Rose with more case than
any of the rest, many Authors have set down certain ways for it which are
contrary to reason; if I thought that any man were so undiscreet to put it in
practice, I would lay down some arguments for to prevent such errors.

Next for the propagating of the red Rose, which is by cuttings of the youngest
shoots from the oldest standers, which cuttings ought to be a foot long, and if
they be less they may grow very well; before I show you how to set them,
prepare borders of two foot and a half in breadth, and paths of two foot
between; the beds being laid a foot high, then set a line upon the border, so
that there may be three rows of slips set in the border proportionably, then
prick in the cuttings by the line side eight inches one from another, and so
deep that one half be in the ground and the other above, let them stand
slope-wayes in this bed or border, they may always remain, for they are not to
be removed without great hinderance of the bearing of them.

Lastly, Some directions for the causing of Roses to flower plentifully, that
is to cut them with a pair of shears the first full Moon after Christmas day;
what is to be observed in cutting is, that such sprouts that were of the last
years growth, be cut off at the height of the old bearers; whereunto I add,
that if Roses be planted in wet ground, that they will never flower
plentifully, therefore observe to set them in the dryest soil.

Savin-tree.
I suppose though it be not common in every Garden, yet the strange and
admirable virtues that it has makes it common in every ones mouth, so I will
only speak of the nature and the raising of the plant: first it requires a
place which is somewhat shady, as most plants do that are of a hot nature, and
keeps green all the year; further observe, this tree yields no seed
neither, it seldom or never sends any sucker from the root, therefore it is
only propagated of the slip which is taken from the branches, the time for
doing of this is at the beginning of the winter, the place would be as I told
you its nature requires, in a shady place in an extraordinary good mould, and
if it were helped with Pigeons dung, it would be much the better for to cause
the slips to take root the sooner: now note, that these plants would be planted
at such a distance, as that they might have room to grow when they are great,
for they care the least for moving of any other plant whatsoever.

Strawberry-tree.
This tree should have been placed in my Garden of Pleasure, I hope you will
place it in yours for the rarities and preheminency belonging to it, and it
being but a stranger in England, I will describe it in few words so that it may
be known.

This plant rises near to five yards in height, spreading with many branches
toward the top, which makes it to Descrip.
stand in a stately form, the leaves of this tree are green as the Bay-trees,
and keep so all the year, they are also of the same shape though not half so
big, the ribs of them are something reddish, and the bark of the body of the
tree is of a reddish green color something rough and dented, the middle of the
tree as to say amongst the branches are bare and without sprouts or leaves, at
the top springs berries upon stalks, when they are ripe they are absolutely
like Strawberries, and may be eaten though not half so good, yet they are
usually eaten.

There is no way that I could find of propagating of this tree, but by slips
taken from the branches and set in good mould, to the end that they may take
root and become trees, but most of them thus done seldom take root. There is
another way which is more certain, and that is to make a branch as it grows
upon the tree to pass through a pot which has a hole in the bottom of it, and
then to fill the pot full of earth, and that will cause it to take root as it
grows on the tree, and then it may be cut off and planted in that place where
it should remain.

The End of the Physical Garden.
THE GARDENERS PRACTICE IN THE Kitchen Garden, how to advance the nature and
growth of Herbs, Roots, and Pulse contained therein.
I Have not leisure to insist upon every particular at this time, but if it
please God to permit me life I shall give these rules and directions for the
propagating of those plants mentioned in the Alphabeticall Table belonging to
the Kitchen Garden, thus:

Propagation, 1. The season fit for sowing or planting. 2. The time and place
fit for it. 3. How to order the ground. 4. The quantity and the quality of
seed. 5. The knowledge of replanting of seedlings. 6. The art in slips, suckers
and roots. 7. How to prune, cleanse, and dress plants.

Experiments, 1. The preservation of plants from hurtful distempers. 2. To
produce them early or late. 3. How to alter sent and color. 4. The art of
transforming plants.

So only take these short observations upon these plants as follows in this
Treatise, viz.

Artichokes.
By their distinct kinds, form and virtue, are called thus; the Protector head,
the Rabits head and the Dogs head; or otherwise, red, white, and brown
Artichokes; the red and the brown are propagated by art and care to a huge
greatness in reference to those that are and grow naturally.

The way of propagating of Artichokes is of the slip in an extraordinary rich
soil, not as it is naturally rich but improved with dung, for they delight in
any stiff clayey ground so that it has but dung enough.

Secondly, The time and manner of setting of them is thus, when the ground is
dug and laid level or even, then set the slips in half a foot deep by a
line, so that they stand two foot and a half asunder: the season that is best
for it some suppose it to be in September, but experience tells us, that the
last winter most or all of those slips thus set were killed, therefore I think
it best to set them in March, in that manner as aforesaid.

Thirdly, The preservation of them from perishing in the winter, is to shelter
them from frost and snow, and that is done by trenching of them and laying of
new dung about them which will not freez, but will keep the plant from the
frost.

Sparrow-grass.
If I should enter upon an historical discourse of this herb I should never
have done, I will only acquaint you that this herb is raised of the seed, and
usually after this manner; they prepare beds of good earth of three foot a
breadth, and two foot path between in breadth likewise, then cast in the seed
thinly thereon, this is done in the latter end of March; the next September
they transplant these plants, the seedlings into beds of the same breadth of
extraordinary rich sandy ground, the next summer following it spindleth into
small spindles which are worth little, but the third Spring after its sowing
rises good Sparrow-grass: now note, that every September rotten dung must be
laid upon the beds, and in the beginning of March to be raked off, and the
ground loosened with a forkabout the plant, for if they should do it with a
spade it would cut the roots.

The way of producing of it early is done by raising of it upon hot beds; I
will permit a little time to show you how and when, in the latter end of
February make a hot bed of horse-dung, of three foot high and three foot broad,
and of a length according to your Sparrow-grass you intend to sow; the bed thus
made, then lay-fine mould atop of it so that it may raise it two inches higher,
so done take up the oldest Sparrow-grass roots that you have, that are like to
decay where they stand, and lay them one by one as thick as you can upon this
hot bed, lay as much more earth upon the roots as is under them, cover the bed
with some litter, the fourth day the roots will sprout up young Sparrow-grass,
by reason of the heat of the dung, and the steme being kept in with the litter
which causes this hasty growth: now observe, that when these sprouts are thus
shot up, the litter must be took away, and pent-houses of rods made over the
beds, whereon you shall lay Mats to preserve them from the frost and cold;
remember to give the bed air once a day if the weather be seasonable: so done
you may pull good Sparrow-grass from the bed at the fortnights end.

Beets.
Both red and white are for general and Kitchen uses, they are raised of the
seed, and you may sow it when you please and it will come up, but it is when it
please, and that is at its natural season: you may also sow it in any ordinary
earth and it will grow, but the better the earth is, the better is the herb and
yields the greater increase also; the root will grow to a huge bigness, which
is for many uses, especially the root of the red Beet.

Now I advise you to sow Beet seed in special rank ground in the beginning of
September, and by the latter end thereof it is very probable that some of the
seed will be come up, and the rest will not appear till the next Spring
following: the next summer they will run to seed if you suffer them, and after
they have yielded their seed three times the root and branch dies, yet where
they are once sown, by reason of scattering of the seed, they will not leave
your Garden.

Cucumbers.
Are long and short, the long are counted the best both for salleting and
pickleing: the raising of them is both alike, all the art that I shall
endeavor to lay down in few words here is, the raising of them timely for
salleting, for those that come late in the summer are only used for Gerkings:
to insist upon the raising of them early, about the middle of March, make beds
of new horse-dung of two foot and a half high, and near that breadth, then make
a band of straw or hay and pin it upon the uppermost part thereof, then lay
some fine ridled mould atop near three fingers thick, then cover this bed with
some litter or straw, and make a pent-house over it as I told you of the
Sparrow-grass bed, whereon must lie Mats, then steep your Cucumber-seed in milk
and suet for four and twenty hours, by that time the bed will be hot, then
prick in your seeds at two fingers distance upon the bed, and lay on the litter
again; be careful afterward for once or twice a day to see that the bed be not
too hot, for then it will force gemination too soon and the plants will never
hold it: now observe, that if the seed appears before the third day, then
that bed is too hot and too hasty a gemination, but if they appear not before
the fourth or fifth day, then those plants are like to come to good, if they be
carefully looked after for the future, and that is to set glasses over them all
night and in boisterous days till toward the middle of April, then transplant
them from that bed, into holes or trenches wherein is laid new horse-dung, and
Pigeons-dung if it may be had, with four inches of good mould atop of it, then
set four Cucumber plants in the compass of a Musmillion-glass, and with a glass
over each four plants; let these plants be watered with such water as has
stood in the Sun, wherein has been steeped horse-dung; by these directions, if
you had any knowledge or insight in it before, you may have Cucumbers fit for a
sallet by mid- May if the Spring be any thing favorable, and that is counted
great rarities.

The second and the ordinary way of raising Cucumbers for sallet to have them
about mid-summer, is to raise them in mid- April upon a hot bed, not so hot as
the former, only covered with Mats, and the first week in May transplanted into
holes, as was said before: you need not go to the charge to cover them with
glasses, for any thing else will serve that will only keep the frost from them
anights; let these be watered as the former every evening or every other
evening if it rain not, I cannot stay to treat upon every particular.

Lastly, The ready way of planting or sowing of Cucumber-seed is, to prepare
holes which will hold a Wheelbarrow of good rotten dung or more, let each hole
be four foot asunder, and earth atop of the dung, and then half a score seeds
pricked in each hole, but if four of them come up it is enough, and what more
comes up, pull them away or else they will hinder one another and come to
nothing: note that the time of sowing is about May day, let these be well
watered the summer following and gelded, and by August their fruit will come to
perfection.

Colliflowers.
They are raised of the seed, and I shall spare a great deal of labor in
setting down the directions for it, if you please to look back how beds are
made for Cucumbers, in the same manner and at the same time so make for these,
and they are governed up alike, only these are without glasses: at the middle
of May transplant them into rich and forward ground, setting each plant two
foot and a half distance, watering of them well at the first planting, and by
the latter end of July they will come to flower so that you may have a dish of
them.

The second season of the sowing of Colliflower-seed, is in the beginning of
September, in beds of very good mould; being sown there and come up, at a
months end transplant them into another bed of three abreadth, setting each
plant at a hands breadth asunder in ranges by a line, then make a shelter over
them with sticks and mats, to shelter the plants from the frosty nights the
winter following, the next Spring transplant them in like manner as I told you
of the other, and by mid-summer or soon after they will come to flower.

Cabidges.
Mistake me not, I mean the propagating of Cabidge-seed to be Cabidges again,
which oftentimes through negligence and ignorance turn or come to be Cail or
Colworts: but I cannot stay to reckon up Colworts and Cabidges, how many sorts
there are, and what a great commodity it is, especially amongst the Plow-men,
but I shall proceed with all the brevity as may be possible, what is to be
observed in the sowing and governing of the seed that it degenerate not.

First of all observe the season, that is, if you sow seed for winter plants to
be planted out of the Spring, do it at the latter end of August, in a light
earth, the Moon being at the full, five or six weeks after transplant them into
another earth, laying or setting them at half a foot distance, to the end that
each plant may have its proportion of ground and be restrained of its high
growth; at the latter end of February, and in March at the full Moon, these may
be planted into quarters of earth, where they may stand at a yard distance: now
note, the best ground for these to be planted in, is the strongest clay or mawm
earth, that is, with this provisoe, that there be abundance of dung under it;
these Cabidges must be kept whole with earth about the stalks as the weeds
rise, and the under leaves stripped off to cause the Cabidges to grow the
greater.

Lastly, You may sow this seed in March for winter Colworts, for they may be
transplanted about the latter end of May, or in the beginning of June, in
manner as aforesaid. I cannot go farther, I have spoken more than I intended.

Carrots.
I shall only give three directions for the propagating of them, which vulgar
people are not acquainted with though they may sow of them yearly; the first is
the earth that the seed is committed to, that it be of a like nature and not
wet when it is delved; also observe that the Moon be of the first quarter, the
time of the year is even from the beginning of March till May.

Secondly, Observe the quantity of seed that you sow it not too thick; and for
a better help thereunto, consider your quantity of ground, and then note, that
three pound of seed sows an acre, and so proportionably sow your own.

Thirdly, That you let them not grow too thick, for then they will be very
small and worth nothing: the best way to prevent this, is to hoe them as our
London Gardeners do, so that each Carrot stand ten inches one from another, or
thereabout.

Corn-sallet.
Whether any Country men know it yea or no, I shall not dispense with the time
to describe it; but sow it in your Garden in the beginning of September, in a
good earth, the seed being sound and new, I dare promise you that it will grow
and come to be cut by the next March for Sallets, and by the latter end of
April it comes to flower, and in June the seed is ripe, which if you save it
you may sow it again; or if you let it scatter of it self, sometimes it will
grow naturally.

Goards.
As they are known to be in distinct forms, and something in nature, so they
bear their names according to the Country from whence they are brought, that
is, the Italian Goard, the lowland Goard, and the Cocker Goard; if I am
mistaken in the names, I am not mistaken in the properties, and the form; for
there is one sort which is nigh a yard long, and sometimes as big as the
lowermost part of a man's thigh, with that end which is farthest from the stalk,
and so it comes less and less by degrees. Another sort is long, and both
ends alike for matter of bigness; the other is bigger and shorter; all these
grow in like manner as Pumpkins do, as for stalk and shells, and they say, the
leaves differ not much. Now for the raising of them (if you have a desire) I
will give you my directions, as far as I have observed by others, viz. at the
same time as they set Cucumber-seed, in the same manner they do the Goard-seed,
and what they require afterward I cannot affirm it to you; but it is said, they
are as easily raised as Cucumbers: The stalk and root perishes yearly, as they
do.

Indian suckory.
It is so well known I need not write any thing of its use and virtues, but for
the nature of it, it is very probable I have observed more of it than those
that have cultevated it longer than I have done, and in my observation I have
found it to be of a strong nature; so that if you commit it to the earth in the
Spring or Autumn, it needs no farther care, but being cleansed from weeds, so
it will continue till it has yielded its seed three times, and then root and
branch dies.

English-Beans.
Or great Garden Beans; I name them here, because they are usually set in
Gardens, though sometimes in Fields: In which place soever you plant them in, I
find but one Objection, and that is, some plant them here and there, according
to their fancy, and not by a direct line; the error is this, those that are
set at random and not by a line, they have not their proportion of ground, nor
can you cleanse them, hoe them, or gather them, without great injury in
breaking of them down; therefore learn of the Gardeners and Husbandmen about
London, for if they plant twenty acres together, it is all set in rows by a
line, each row some eighteen inches difference one from another, and the Beans
the other way, some six.

French-Beans.
They are much like the former, but something thinner, and of a tenderer
nature; they are ripe something sooner, and require an hotter soil, these may
be set in the same manner as I described before of the English-Beans. Let that
suffice.

Jerusalem-Artichoaks.
The property of this plant is so that nothing is useful, but the root, and it
remainet hin the ground, some as big as a Hens egg, some bigger, some less, and
of diverse shapes, some long, some round, some crumpled and all full of dents,
and of a reddish color, from which rises a stalk near eight foot high,
resembling that of the Flower of the Sun, though not so big a stalk. This stalk
perishes yearly, the root continues in the ground, as was said. Of the root
these Artichoaks (so called) are propagated, either by cutting of the great
ones into small pieces, or else setting the little roots (descending from the
mother) in beds of earth by themselves, in March without any difficulty, for
they are very hardy and will grow in any place, but they prosper best in a
light mould. Now note, that once a year these roots may be taken up, and the
great ones reserved for to be eaten, and the little ones set again.

Kidney-Beans.
My Country men I suppose call them French-Beans, like Idiots; for why, names
that are given things which are newly found out, are given them, according to
what they resemble, and it is so that this Bean resembles a Kidney, and
therefore it is fitly called a Kidney-Bean; let that pass. There is red,
white, purple, and speckled of them; but the nature of them is one, and my
directions for the planting of them shall be one, and that briefly. In the
latter end of April provide a hot natured ground; if it be something sandy it
is the better, so that it be but well helped with rotten muck the year before;
when the ground is dug, they may be either planted or set in ranges by a
line at eighteen inches distance; those that go to the trouble to set them,
usually take the pains to stick sticks for them to run up upon, to the end to
keep them from the ground for to save their fruit, and to cause it to ripen the
sooner; those that plant them in drils, take no farther care but only hoing the
ground, being hot and dry they ripen very well, and bring good increase.

Lettice.
Many sorts there be, but of all others the French Lettice is the best; but
that being sown in England, it does often degenerate from its own nature,
because it finds not the air and the earth so temperate here, as in its own
Country; therefore if it be raised here, it must be done with care and
judgment; and as for our ordinary English Lettice, it may be it would appear as
light as vanity to the vulgar sort of people, to give any directions for the
raising and governing of them, although there is matter of consequence in the
work, yet I shall wave it, and only put you in mind, that you may sow Lettice
any month, from the latter end of February to the latter end of September: yet
take notice, that those which be sown in the middle of the Summer ought to be
watered, and those that are sowed in September for salletting early in the
Spring, would be covered with straw, or sown under a warm pale that might
shelter it from the sharp winds.

Lastly, If you have a desire to save seed of Lettice, let it be of such as was
sown in September, let them not be cut or meddled with, till the seed be full
ripe in it, and that will be in July.

Leeks.
A short account may very well serve for the raising and governing of this Herb
or root, and so it shall be. Leeks are sown in the beginning of March in a rich
soil, for that it delights in much, in which place they may remain all the
Summer following, and in September be transplanted into a rich soil, laying of
them in rows at half afoot asunder, as the ground was dug: The end of
removing of them, is to cause them to grow the bigger, and so the next Lent
those Leeks are drawn up by the roots for their uses; and if you have any
desire to let them stand for seed, that is a fit place.

Millions.
Millions or Musmillions be these, the black Million, the white Million, great
Roman Millions, water Millions, and many more, a man may raise and bring them
up to be bigger than ones fist, but never come to be ripe or to any perfection,
so I shall wave them and speak of our ordinary green Musmillions which are
raised in England, and come to perfection.

And about these Musmillions here is such a deal of charge, care, quoil and
trouble, such a multitude of arguments, and such abundance of vain conceits, so
that if I could have made an Almanac of my pate, and set down all that I have
heard of them, it would be a sufficient subject of it self; or otherwise if I
should set down all that I have known to be put in practice, I believe that
twenty pages would not contain it, so I shall pass it having no time nor
liberty, neither desire to insist upon it for the present; but in the future I
hope I shall: So only take these few Experiments, whereby I have raised
Musmillions, and sometimes mist, as the proudest, and the greatest conceitedst
man has done, which has been actual in this thing.

The first thing considerable in the propagating of Millions is the season, and
thereabout men differ in their judgments; for some would have them raised at
the latter end of February, or at the beginning of March, some at the beginning
of April, and others not till the latter end thereof* this has been put in
practice, and every one of them have had good success at one time, and bad at
another. Now my experience and my judgment is this, that is, it is best to
raise them at the latter end of March, or about the beginning of April.

The ways for it are various and strange, and one man's judgment differs from
another, in this more than any other thing which is practical in a Garden. I
cannot stand to dispute, but take my following experience for your directions.

At that time as I told it is best to raise them, then make a hot bed of horse
dung, in manner (as I told you) for Cucumbers, but let it be something higher,
and something thicker, at the top thereof if you lay some bran it would be much
the better; so done, get the finest earth that may be, and cover the bed with
it two inches thick or more, supporting of it from tumbling down (as I told you
of the Cucumber beds) then get your glasses, and see how many of them will
stand conveniently upon the bed, then clap them down, the rim of them makes a
mark, within that circle put a dozen or more of seeds, after the bed has stood
a day and been covered with litter, and in the meantime the seeds being steeped
in milk, then set the glasses over them, lay litter between them, and over
them, and round the bed, and mats upon bended poles over that, be watchful the
second and third day that the bed be not too hot, and if it be, then take away
the litter from the sides, and make holes also in the sides to let out the
steem, and when it is qualified that it be not over-hot, then lay the litter
there again, about the fourth day, if it be so ordered, the seed comes up,
which if it come up sooner it seldom holds, and if it lies much longer it
seldom comes up at all; but I will pass that the seed come up (as was said)
give the plants a little air once a day, not by taking of the glasses clean
away, but by lifting up of one side of them for an hour or two, or such a
matter, which will give them a green color, and stay them for spending of
their spirits.

Secondly, After the plants have been a fortnight sprung up, it is very
probable that they may seem to decay or stand at a stay, the reason is, because
they want that supply of heat which the bed did afford to them before, because
it has stood long, and the heat is qualified; the cure is to get new hors-dung
and litter one amongst another, and lay very thick against the sides of the
bed, then under every glass thrust down a small stick to the bottom of the
bed, the use of it is to let up the heat and steem which is at the bottom, and
that which the new laid dung and litter have infused in up, at those holes into
the glasses, which does warm, moisten and revive the plants.

Thirdly, The plants having stood here a month, and preserved with this care,
then prepare beds or ridges to transplant them in, as follows. First, Let the
place be extraordinary warm, sheltered from all winds; then make your beds
thus; Get hay and litter, and make a trench some half a foot deep and a yard
wide, then lay the litter or hay therein, so that it may be half a foot thick;
this done, get new hors-dung, so much of it, that it may raise it two foot in
height above the litter ridg fashion; that done, get sticks of a yard long or
thereabouts, as big as a walking cudgel, drive them into the middle of the bed
at a yard distance, so low that there be but a hands breadth appear above the
dung; this observed, cast the earth that licth by against the sides of the bed,
then riddle fine mould, and lay it atop at a hands breadth in thickness, lay a
little straw thinly upon this bed, and the next evening after transplant your
Million plants four and four together thereon, and observe that they be set
round those sticks, as I told you of, and a glass over each parcel of plants,
upon your glasses lay straw or mats made apurpose.

Fourthly, The plants thus planted out, they are there to remain, and not to be
stirred any more; and in this, especially in the governing of them afterward,
you are to consider three things; the first is, That they have air once a day,
and covered again at nights; let not the glasses be took quite away, but be
moved up on one side, while such time as the Million vines grow too great for
the glass, then you may take them away in some part of the day, and set them
over the fruit in the night. Secondly, Watering is not the least thing to be
considered in it, both as for the time, manner, and for the substance of it;
the best time to do it in, is in the morning soon after the Suns approaching;
the manner of it is not to pour it all over the plant with a watering pot, as
some do, but to put it in a hole, or holes by the root, so that it may soak
leisurely carrying an earthly substance with it; the water also must have the
substance of Pigeons-dung, and hors-dung in it, and standing in tubs in the
ground, so that the Sun may have power upon it to qualify the coolness of it,
and to clarify that unnatural property that it has in it for the advancing of
such a pulse as Millions, that delight only in heat and moisture. The third is,
That they be gelded, and that is to nip off the leaves and fruit that spring
very thick leaving but half as much as Nature commonly puts forth upon every
vine; the end that this is done for, is to cause the fruit to come to
perfection the sooner which remains, and also to have it the larger and ripe
the sooner.

These are the ordinary ways of raising Musmillions, or as I may more fitly
say, the principle things to be observed, yet there remains in each principle
many particulars, which when time shall serve I shall treat of at large: in the
mean space take these plain and serious truths, as you shall find them if they
be put in practice.

Onions.
I may not stand to multiply words where necessity requires not; I suppose that
Onions are so well known that there are few people that need any directions for
the vulgar way of raising of them, yet there is matter of consequence to be
observed in the raising of them for profit and greatness, and in that
particular I will speak a word or two. For the first, consider the quantity of
seed, and the quality of the ground, if it be stiff it requires the more seed,
and to be sown the sooner; if it be light, the latter and the lesser quantity
of seed will serve: to guide you the better therein, ten pound sows an acre
for large Onions, which are to be hoed with hoes of three inches in breadth, so
that every Onion may have six inches compass to grow in: The season for sowing
of them in, is the first full Moon in March; another season is to sow them the
first full Moon in August, so that they may be Scalions by the next Easter, but
they never serve for dry Onions.

Purslane.
I may say of this as Culpepper says of Saffron in the English Physician, page
328. It is well known, says he, generally where it grows: Now I say of
Purslane, if you know it not already, and would willingly have it, then
purchase the seed, and you shall obtain your desire, by ordering of it, as
follows: At May day, or a little before, make a bed of dung a foot high, of a
yard in breadth, as long or as short as you please, according to the quantity
as you would have of them: Get then some riddled mould, and lay thereon near
half an inch in thickness; so done, cast the seed therein with a little mould
upon it, so that it does no more than cover it; if the season be dry after it,
then water it, the seventh day it usually comes up, and after that it must be
continually watered every evening, and by June it will be fit to be cut; these
directions will well serve if they be duly observed, for the raising of it in
its natural season for salletting: but for the producing of it early or late,
and for planting of it for pickling, I shall pass at this time.

Parsley.
Parsley is sown of the seed in March, it delights in a rich ground, and
continues even the longest of all seeds before any of it comes up, but after
it has gotten above the ground, it prospers so, that the more you cut it the
better it grows; the second Spring after it is sown it runs to seed, and
after that it usually dies.

Parsnips.
To speak any thing for the sowing and governing of a small quantity, it would
be altogether needless, seeing hardly any Country man is without them in his
Garden. For the ordering of a great quantity, take it in short thus, viz. four
pound of seed sows an acre, then guide the quantity of seed by your ground at
this rate. Now the manner of sowing of it is several, for some sow the ground
before they dig it, if it be light and sandy, but that I do not approve of: The
best way is to sow it after the ground is dug, when it lies as rough as may
be possible, then the seed may be covered the better: if the ground be stiff
and wet, then lay it as smooth as you can before it is sown.

Lastly, To cleanse these Parsnips from weeds after they be come up, it is
better to do it with a hoe than to weed it by women's hands, for when they are
hoed it takes away the Parsnips where they be too thick, which does as much
hurt as weeds, considering they have not room to grow one by another, it also
looseneth the earth, when weeders would beat it down, and make it the harder;
and that which is more, an acre of Parsnips will be hoed three times for the
price that it will be weeded once.

Peace of all sorts.
Which are usually planted are these, the hasting Spur and the ordinary
Hasting, the sugar Peace, the blew Rousewell and the gray Rousewell, the
sanddige Peace, and the bunch Peace: for to treat of all these in particular is
needless as to the manner: the times of planting of them differ, to have them
early or late; to have forward Peace, plant them at Alhollentide or before in
this manner; when the ground is dug then hoe up ridges at two foot distance,
and in the tops of those ridges make drills with one corner of your hoe,
therein cast the Peace in pretty thick, because the winter following the cold,
mice and worms will be apt to destroy them: the reason why I counsel you to
sow them on the tops of such ridges is, because they should lie dry and warm,
for all kind of forward Peace delight in hot and dry soil.

Lastly, Take notice, that Peace must be hone betwixt the chases the first time,
and the second time the earth and weeds must be raised up about them with the
hoe: there is much more belongs to the planting of Peace for the guiding of
great quantities for profit, which I am very well acquainted with, but too much
engaged to treat of now.

Potatoes.
They are not known in the South parts of England, yet in the North parts they
are planted in poor and rich men's Gardens, for the goodness that they yield to
their tables in the winter when no other roots are to be had; in Ireland they
are so general and so common, that I never saw any man that had land and
habitation there but that he had store of Potatoes for his use, and those which
plant them for profit have twenty or thirty acres of them, more or less
according to their abilities.

It were needless for me to set down the order of planting of them, seeing it
is not generally to be put in practice, for I have not seen of them but in
those places which I named, and it were vanity for me to give them directions.

Pumpkins.
Are known of most Country people, and I may say that there are few of them
but would have great and sound Pumpkins if they took this advice; about May day
or a little before, make a bed of Cow dung and Swines-dung, of a foot high and
three or four foot in breadth, and as long as you please, lay thereon so much
earth as will raise it an inch higher, then prick in your seeds afoot one from
another, so that they may have room to grow, then lay a little chaff atop of
the bed for keeping of the ground and the plants moist, and when the plants are
come up, water them with such water as stands by a dunghill once or twice a
week, this done I hope by Michaelmas that you will have Pumpkins as big as a
Kilderkin of Beer, and being baked and well buttered is good cheer.

Radish
If I should enter upon every particular of what belongs to the raising of
Radish, to have them young and good nine months in the year, it would take up
a large discourse, which I will pass, for I hope you are well acquainted with
the manner, so I will only put you in mind of the seasons: first to have them
early, sow them in the latter end of February, if frost and snow hinder not it
will prosper, and you may have good Radishes by the latter end of April if the
ground be rich and forward, so they maybe sown every month after till July,
for the having of them fresh and young one under another: another season is to
sow them in September for to have them in March. Let so much suffice.

Spinach.
Smooth and prickly, are both so well known I need but name it: this herb may
be sown in as many seasons as I told you of the Radish, and it will prosper
very well in good earth, it would be often cut after it is come up, else it
runs to seed presently if it be sown in the Spring time; but it is much
better to sow it in September, for then it is checked of its high growth, and
isready to be eaten in sallets when others are a sowing.

Skarots.
It may be they have some other name, and if I am not mistaken, Gravous Marcom
calls them Creases, in his Book entitled The whole Art of Husbandry. If you
know them not by neither of these names, you may know them by this, they have
roots resembling Parsnips, many of them upon one head and as big as a man's
middle finger; the branches that spring from it are much like those of Creases,
running upto two foot high or more, whereon the tops grows tufts of small
brown seed something longish: of the seed or the slip Skarots are raised, of
the seed it is difficult, and long before it comes to perfection, therefore I
shall not trouble you with the manner of it: to set them of the slip, it is
done in March, and placed in an extraordinary rich ground: first know what the
slip is that is taken from the head of the root, where many of them are set
together upon white strings as it were, and set in such ground and such times
as I told you, at a foot distance, each plant being kept hoed afterward, at two
years end they may be taken up in great roots and reserved to be eaten, for
they are the best of all others either boiled or baked in Pies, the slips or
suckers may be set again.

Sorrel.
The Garden kind is for many Kitchen uses, it is sown in the Spring time in any
ordinary earth, and it will prosper very well without any further care: I only
name it because I would not have the Kitchen Garden without it.

Small Suckory.
This differs not much from the Indian-Suckory, but that it is much smaller,
and not so sharp-pointed leaves, and the taste is not so bitter. I shall wave
the manner of the ordering of it, because that discourse of Indian-Suckory may
very well serve for this.

Turnips.
Be white and yellow, the ordering of them is one: the seasons for sowing of
them in, is in March, April and June, those that are sown in the two first
months, require a hot, sandy and a light ground, those that are sown in June
desires a stiff clayey ground rather than a ight: now all that is to be
observed in the doing of this is, that the ground be not over-seeded; the just
proportion that good ground will have of good seed, is after the rate of three
pound in an acre, and they must be hoed with a six inch hoe after they have
sprung up to a reasonable height, three hoings serves for one crop
sufficiently.

Tongue-Grass.
Or Pepper-Grass, I think others call it Smallage, it is something like Parsley
at its first springing, but of a lighter green color, afterward it shoots up
with many small stalks, and the tops thereof be set with many white Flowers,
which leaves store of red seed, which if it be suffered to scatter comes up
naturally; this herb when it is young is used in fallets and has a mighty hot
biting taste: for the raising of it, you need but commit it to the earth, and
it grows, and flowereth, and seedeth, and as the seed falls it springs
again of it self without any more trouble.

Now I have done here with the nature of plants and their propagation by seed.

The Conclusion.
I Shall (as it fits the Work and the place) conclude my Treatise upon the
working of Nature and the propagation of the seed Royal.

In the workings of Nature (as God has created and decreed it to stand) Man is
in respect of properties and motions no less than a little World, I may not
write down those properties and motions, for if I did then my Conclusion would
be larger than my Book; but to be short, I find that if a man could rightly
know himself he might comprehend all things else in the Creation, yea the
Creator himself; all wise men witness this truth against such as are Atheists
either in opinion or practice, who hold such a sleepy-headed conceit, that the
Creation was from eternity, and that all things comes from the course of
Nature. For the first of these, the Scriptures make known to the weakness of
our capacity how it was created, but they that are Atheists believe not the
Bible, then let them learn how to confute or confirm these observations
following.

Can thou behold any building or artificial work so rare,
But presently conclude that the band of an Artificer was there?
Can thou see the Earth so great, the Firmament so wide,
The Ocean Seas how they ebb and flow by time and tide?
But presently in thy faithless heart confess and say,
That this great work was undone on one day;
Till one by Wisdom, Glory, Power and Strength
Formed the Heavens, and the Earth at the length,
And by his Wisdom and Love created each living creature,
He is the true God, or the principal of Nature:
And so can thou change the nature of the Cornation-seed
Into a hurtful, stinking Hemlock weed?
Then herein Gods Laws thou may plainly see,
That his work must be acknowledged in each Herb, Flower and Tree:
Thus God that was and is, by his Creation we him know;
And man that was his work him still does show.
Secondly, They say, that all things come by the course of Nature: True, But by
whom had Nature its beginning? I answered you that before; yet to know this
better, look on the greatest Oak-tree, and on the Acorn, such as the Acorn is,
so was once the Oak, and how an Acorn did contract the substance of the earth
into its nature to bring it into so great a growth man knows not, but man
knows it is so: so by the beginning of the nature of one plant and the
perfection thereof, I easily conceive the whole universal world had a beginning
by a higher principle than man, which is God.

Thirdly, They cannot be convinced what keeps Nature still awork: To
understand this consider, when once the simple Atheists eyes first saw the
witty inventions of man in making of Clocks and Engines, thou could not tell
the cause of their going, till thou wast showed the weights that went in a
privy place by opening of the door unto thee, then thou did understand the
cause: so it would be with thee, if the God of wisdom would draw the Curtains
of the skies, then the door would be opened where thou may plainly see Gods
weight of eternal glory, which sets the whole course of Nature awork: Thus
wise men discern one thing by another: then thou dull spirited man, humble thy
self for thy lack of wisdom and reason, and for thy too much ignorance, and lay
thy mouth in the very dust.

And this brings me to my last reason, viz.

The Propagation of the Seed-Royal.
I know all sensible and unsensible creatures does increase by that seed which
is in it self: Now the Seed-Royal is man's seed only, by reason of that union
which is in election to be partaker of with the Godhead: But first understand,
there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body, which makes but one
man, they being united together, for the spiritual body must dwell in the
natural body, then it is fit the Spirit should rule Nature its dwelling place:
But on the contrary, the natural body keeps the spiritual a prisoner in one
corner of the house, for fear he should bring him to the study and obedience of
heavenly principles, then he should be took off the caring and coveting for the
corrupt things of this life, then Satan's kingdom would be destroyed. There is
also a natural seed, and a spiritual; the seed of the body is that which Nature
breeds in the secret members, and it is propagated by the sowing of it in the
secret womb of its mother the flesh, and when it enters into the troublesome
world, it is nursed up with the fruits of its mother Nature: Now the seed of
the Spirit is that which is given a man to improve in the mind, and it is bred
in the soul and understanding, and it is propagated by the sowing of it in the
treasure of the heart, and nursed up with the fruits of its Mother the Church,
then a man must fence it with faith, plant it with reason, dressing of it with
diligence, watering of it with grace, watching of it with patience, sheltering
of it with care, weeding of it with the sword of the Spirit, protecting of it
with prayer, looking for the increase thereof with a lively hope; this done,
the seed of the Spirit will grow up and bring forth fruit to perfection, then
he might gather it with the hand of truth, dispose of it with the eye of
charity, set forth the goodness of it with the tongue of praise; this man's
person is clothed with righteousness and adorned with holiness, his heart is
full of wisdom, his lips utter knowledge, his ears incline to understanding,
his desires and his deserts are the fullness of love, his feet walks in the
way of peace, and at his end he shall be translated into the Heaven of Heavens,
before the blessed and beatifical sight of the glorious Trinity, and there
receive an immortal Crown, with power to rule in unity and love, and to rest
with Saints and Angels in joy and glory to all eternity.

FINIS.
THE ALPHABETICAL TABLE Of all the Plants in the foregoing Treatise, being the
Garden of Pleasure.
FLOWERS.
A
AMorantus, p. 7 Anstartium indecom, 8 Angulshenelus, 9 African, 32
B
BAchelors-Buttons, 10 Bee-flower, ib. Balm of Christ, 11 Bears-ears, 12 Bell
flowers, ib.
C
CAterpillars, 46 Crows-foot, 13 Crokus, 14 Cranes-Bill, 15 Cullenbines, 16
Crown-Imperial, ib. Corn-flag, 18 Cornation-Gilliflowers, 19, to 27 Clove
Gilliflowers, 27 Couslips, 28
D
DAyses, ib. Daffodillies, 29 Dragons-claws, 30
E
EMrose, 31 Everlasting-pea, 33 Everlasting life, 34
F
FLower-deluce, 34, 35, 36 Flower of the Sun, 37 French-marigold, ib
French-pinks, 38 Foxes-glove, 39
G
GLobe-flower, 40 Green Couslips, ib.
H
HOlly-hock. 41 Hearbit, 42 Humble-plant, 43 Hearts-ease, 44
I
JErusalem-Couslips, 45 Indian-wheat, ib.
L
LIllies, 46, 47 Larks-heel, 48 London-pride, 49 Lupins, ib. Ladies-thistle, 50
Love in idle, ib. Ladies-liveries. 51 Ladies-smocks, ib.
M
MArmadel deparve, 52 Muscabions, 53 Monks-hood, 54 Marle-flower, ib.
N
NUrssusus, 55
O
OXslips, ib. Oak of Paris, ib.
P
PIonies, 56 Primrose-tree, ib. Princes-feathers, 57 Poppies, 58 Pinks, 59
Purple-primrose, 60 Pawmers, ib.
Q
QUeens-gilliflower, 61
R
ROse-campions, ib. Rose-rubee, 62 Rocket-flower, ib.
S
STock-gilliflowers, 63, 64 Snap-dragons, 65 Sweet-Williams, 66 Scarlet-beans,
ib. Snails, 67 Snow-drops, ib. Start up and kiss me, 68 Sensitive plant, 73
T
TVlips, 68, to 72 Thrift. 73 Turkey-caps, ib.
V
VIolets, 74
W
WAll-gilliflowers, ib.
The Table of the Trees.
A
APricock, 75 Almonds, ib.
B
Bay Tree, 76 Box, ib.
C
CIprus. ib. Creeping-vine. 79
F
Fig Tree, 77 Figs of India, ib. Filleroy, 78
G
GEsamits, ib.
H
HOliander, 79 Horn-fig-tree; ib.
L
LAurel, 80 Lowary, ib. Lowrex, ib. Lorestinus, 81 Lignae vitae, ib.
M
MIrtil-trees, 82
O
ORangr-trees, ib.
P
POmgraenate-tree, 83 Peach-trees, ib. Perriwinkle, ib.
S
SWeet-bryar, 84
T
TAmarus, ib. The Gillierose, ib. The Province-rose, 85 The Cinamon-rose, ib.
V
VInes, 86, 87
An Alphabetical TABLE of all the Plants in the foregoing Treatise, being the
Physical and Fruitful Garden.
HERBS.
A
ANgelica, 88 Alieompane, 89 Alexander, ib. Annis, 90 All-hail, ib.
B
BAres-britch, ib. Balm, 91 Basyl, ib. Blessed-thistle, ib: Bares-foot, 92
Buglos, ib. Burridge, 93 Blood-wort, ib. Burnat, ib. Betony. 94
C
CAmomil, ib. Comfrey, ib. Cives, 95 Cammel-beg, ib. Chervil, ib. Carrawayes,
96 Clary, ib. Ceursemary, ib. Cummin, 97 Coriander, ib. Celandine, ib.
D
DRagons, 98 Dill, ib.
E
EVat, ib.
F
FEtherfew, 99 Fennel, ib. French-honey-suckles, ib. French-mallows, 100
G
GRomwell, ib. Gladin, 101 Gooses-tongue, ib. Garmander, ib. Garlic, 102
H
HOrse-redish, ib. Herb-grasse, ib. Horehound, 103 Hyssop, ib. Housleek. 104
I
JErusalem-sage, ib.
K
KIngs-mallows, 105 Kapons-tails, ib.
L
LOvage, 106 Liquorish, ib. Lavender-Cotton, 107 Lavender-spike, 108
Lavender-slip, ib. Lemon-time, ib.
M
MAllows, 109 March, ib. Madrath, 110 Marygolds, 111 Mother-wort, ib.
N
NIp, 112
O
ORpin, ib.
P
PEpper-wort, ib. Pot-margerum, 113 Prick-madam, ib. Purple-grasse, 114
Pennyroyal, 115 Poppey, ib.
R
ROsemary, ib. Roman-sage, 116 Rubarb, 117
S
SParemint, 118 Saffron, 119 Sage, 120 Summer savoury, ib. Setterwort, ib.
Stone-crop, 121 Shalot, ib. Sweet Maudlin, 122 Scurvy Grass, ib. Sweet fern,
ib. Sweet-covey, 123 Sweet Margerum, ib. Sweet Oak. 124
T
TAragon, ib. Time, ib. Tansie, 125
V
VAlaren, 125
W
WOrmwood, 126 Winter-savoury, ib.
The Table of Trees.
B
BArberry, 127
C
CVrrants, ib.
G
GOosberries, 128
M
MVlberries, ib.
Q
QUinces, 129
R
RAsberries, ib. Roses, 130
S
SAvin-tree, 131 Strawberry-tree, 132
The Alphabetical Table of all the Herbs, Roots and Pulse contained in the
Kitchen Garden.
A
ARtichoaks, 134
B
BEets, 135
C
COwcumbers, 136 Colliflowers, 137 Cabidges, 138 Carrors, ib. Corn-sallet, 139
E
ENglish Beans, 140
F
FRench Beans, ib.
G
GOards, 139
I
INdian suceory, ib. Jerusalem Artichoaks, ib.
K
KIdney Beans. 141
L
LEttice, 141 Leeks. 142
M
MIllions, ib. 143, 144
O
ONions, 146
P
PVrslin, ib. Parsley, 147 Parsnips, ib. Peace of all sorts, 148 Potatoes, ib.
Pumpkins, 149
R
RAdish, ib.
S
SParrow-grasse, 134 Spinach, ib. Skarots, 150 Sorrel, ib. Small Suckory, ib.
T
TVrnips, ib. Tongue-grasse. 151
FINIS.

