EZEKIEL. 34. 2. THus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, woe be to the
shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed
the flock? I Have read over this short Treatise and conceive that it will be
useful being printed, to convince the World of that soul murdering sin of
Non-Residency.

JO. SEDGWICK.

A REMONSTRANCE AGAINST THE NON-RESIDENTS of great Britain: OR Non-Residency
condemned by Scripture, by strength of Arguments, by Fathers, Councels,
Canon Law, by the Judgment of Reverend and Learned Divines.

THE CARELESS NON-RESIDENT.



LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for Rich. Royston, dwelling in Ivy-lane, 1642.

To all Careless Non-Residents In England, Scotland, Ireland.
THe Locust in Hebrew is called Arbeh, of the numbers and multitudes, for rabah
signifies to multiply. Non-Residents are like a Company of Locusts, for they
multiply exceedingly, there being no County in England but swarms with them.

The Locusts are very fearful and timorous, and therefore it is said of the
horse, Job 39 23. Can thou make him afraid as the Grasshopper? Whereby one may
express the nature of carnal and worldly Non-Residents, that are full of
fear, and at their wits ends, and know not which way to turn themselves, when
they suppose that the Parliament will command them to attend their flocks, and
to feed them in their own persons.

The Locust often shifted his place, Non-Residents have no certain dwelling or
abiding place.

The Locust flock together, so do Non-Residents in Cathedral Churches.

The Locust is given to spoil and devour green things, it was one of the
plagues of Aegip^; Non-Residents devour the tithes of many Parishes in this
Kingdom, and they are not to be numbered amongst the least of those plagues
that God inflicts upon us for our sins.

The Locusts caused Pharaoh and his servants to cry unto Moses, that he would
entreat the Lord to take them away; and our Non-Res^dents cause all good people
to cry mightily unto God, to the Kings Majesty, and to the Honorable House of
Parliament, to reform them, or remove them; that there may not be any careless
Non-Resident in all the Coasts of England.

Search the Scriptures, Exhortat. to Non-Residents.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, but they are they which testify
against you: Why are ye called b Heb. 13. 7.
Watchmen? but that you should be vigilant: Mat. 9. 38.
Harvest laborers? but that you should be painful: Ioh 21. 15. 16.
Shepherds? but that you should have a care of your flocks: 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Stewards? but that you should be faithful. You say that you love your
Congregations, why do you not therefore in your own persons, drive them to the
green pastures of Gods Word, and lead them by the waters of comfort? Psalm. 23^
When Christ in John 21 asked Peter thrice, Simon, lowest ^ho^ me? 1 Plusquam
tua. 2 Plusquam tuos. 3 Plusquam te. More than thine, more than thy self, as
Bernard expounds it: and Peter still any swered, Yea Lord, thou know that I
love thee. Christ gives him this mark to know it by, pasce oves, pasce agnos;
It may be known by thy care in feeding my lambs, and tending my sheep. 1 Cor.
^4.
The Apostle calls Ministers (...) o^ (...), to row, as if they were captives
condemned to the Oars, whose arms must row the ship of Christ to shore, yea
the winds being conspired against them. Why should you so undervalue, and
slight Preaching, as if it were too mean for the dignitaries and rich
beneficed Parsons of our Church, and leave it as the refuse of your office for
inferior Ministers? Read Acts 26. 17, 18 and there you shall find, that the
sum of the Apostles Commission, was preaching; whence we may observe, that
preaching and converting the souls of men, of all the acts of the ministry,
is the most (...). See M. Barnards Sermon upon Acts 26. 17. 18. Deane of Ardag^
in Ireland. (...). Cujus constitutus sum ego praeco and Apostolus. (...). Non
enim misit me Christus ut Baptizarem, sed ut Euangeliza^em.
Apostolical, for further proof, see 1 Timothy 2. 7. both put together, I am
ordained a preacher and an Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles, etc. the very
same words again, 2 Timothy 1. 11. in both see how the Apostleship is supported on
each side with this employment, it is preferred before the administration of
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not, that is, not so much to Baptize,
but to Preach the Gospel: Nay 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. God has set in the Church
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then
gifts of healings, Governments, diversities of tongues, etc. Now wherein has
it so offended, that lately it should be compelled to take the lowest room?

It Is a speech of Gregory, we account those to bear the image of the Apostles,
Censemus c^s qui Apostolorum figuram tenent praedi^are, Gregor.
who are Preachers, and if so, than the more negligent you are in Preaching,
the nearer you draw to the Pope, whose Kingdom most of you establish, and the
further from the Apostles, whom you ought to imitate.

When I read of S. Paul's charge to Timothy, and in what high terms he gives
it, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and in his Kingdom preach the Word, be instant,
etc. me thinks it should make your ears to thingle, that have almost wholly
neglected Preaching, both in your own Cures, and in the Cathedrals, where most
of you live, Veluti pecora, quae natura prona at que ventri obedientia finxit.

Let me be but your remembrancer, of what has been so solemnly and publicly
vowed at Ordination and Consecration; and such a profession before many
witnesses, ought to be of no light esteem: The Ye are the Lords Messengers,
Watchmen, Pastors, Stewards, to teach, to premonish, to feed, to provide for
the Lords family.
exhortation to preaching before the receiving of the Order of Priesthood, the
obligatory promises upon demand for it, the words of Be thou a faithful
dispencer of the Word and Sacraments
Ordination it self, the solemn delivery of the Bible, with a charge to
preach, this being the sum of the Office, why retain you the name without
executing of it?

For excuses; if employment in government be alleged for an exemption,
consider what S. Paul says of himself, See the Book of Ordination.
upon whom came daily the care of all the Churches, 1 Cor 9. 16. Yet necessity
is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gosp^ll, Acts ^9. 9.
and Paul aged too: if disputing and writing be produced for a dispensation,
remember it was S. Paul's work also, as writing not a little, so disputing daily
with the Jews and Greeks. It is recorded of S. Augustine, that he had contention
with Arrians, Ma^ichees, Pe^agians, Donat etc. Yet notwithstanding he did
labor in a constant preaching to his last; and the like might be related of
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Usher, Dr. Willet M. Perkins, and of diverse others; so
that no pretense whatsoever can excuse Non-Residents from the performance of
this function, to what dignity soever advanced, what burden soever ^ravelling
under. The Country people say of a Non-Resident, Oh, he i^ an hand m^n, ^ee
re^pes where he sowe^ not, and gathers where he seat^er^ not, (...) takes pay,
but^ serv^ not in the ^^led, seed^ not ^he flock, but feeds upon (...), preys
upon it, (...).


Of what a shameless disposition are our greedy Non-Residents to take the
profits of many Parishes, for doing little or nothing amongst them, in their
own persons, let them consider what S. Hierome says, Quomodo mercedem
obsequimur, and tamen operarii nequaquam sumus, fructus Ecclesia in quetidiano
ftipendio percipimus, and pro Ecclesia in pradicatione non laboramus, pensemus
quid est sine labor percipere mercedem laboris.

Has God given you gifts fit to teach? A Lookingglasse for Non-Residents.
b^ not negligent idle, and slothful, M. Hei^^^^ (...) Col. 4. 1^.
be not like faithless Captains, who receive continually the Lords pay, and
yet never fight the Lords battles, let not your knowledge be wrapped up in an
idle brain without practice, as Goliabs sword in cloth without use. If the
people curse him that withdraws his corn from the market: how much more shall
they be cursed who by keeping the corn of Gods Word from the Congregation of
his people, bring upon themselves so fearful a sin? Who when as they should
by preaching distill on the people, as the dew upon the grass, and as the
rain upon the herbs (like Clouds which sweat themselves to death) vanish
away in vanity, like breasts without milk, and clouds without water, who when
they should in the womb of the Church, beget many children to God, deserve to
be fined of our Governors, as the old and single men of Rome were by their
Censors cast out, because they brought no children to the Commonwealth.

Respect is due to Ministers, Objections of Non-Residents prevented.
it is true, but not to those of whom it may be said, as our Savior speaks of
the Lilies; Mat 6. 28. they labor not; they only are worthy of double honor,
1 Timothy 5. 17.
who are (...), Luke 10. 7. (...).
1 These. 5. 13,
Quam maxim coaros ducatis propter opus ipso^um.
The Apostle does not say, esteem them very highly in love, for receiving the
Tihes and starving their Substi^utes,
but (...), for their works sake.
laborers, in the Word and Doctrine, maintenance is their due, but it is the
labourer is worthy of his hire. High esteem is their due (...), but for their
works sake. What is the cause of late, the calling of Ministers has fallen
into such contempt? Is it not for not showing themselves workmen, rightly
dividing the Word of truth? What is the cause so few subject themselves to
Christ's Scepter? Is it not because Non-Residents draw not out the sword of the
Spirit, (the Word) but the sword of the Magistrate, for which they never had
any Commission from Christ?

Some of our careless Non-Residents have a The practice of Non Resident.
cure of souls in one place, and live in another like fugitive Captains
forsake their Ensign and Company at Barwick, and flee to Dover: who being with
Jonah commanded for Nineveh, flee to Tarshish, being placed in the Country,
they run to the Cathedrals, they leave their charge, Job 39. 15.
as the Ostrich does her eggs in the earth and sands, forgetting that either
the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them, or at the best
they leave their Congregations, as the Cu^kow does her eggs to be hatched of a
Sparrow or some other bird: Substitutes cannot excu^e ^wors^ ^on-Residents.
Is their unnecessary absence excused because their places are supplied? What
then is the election of Ministers, but a scorn and mockery (as Dominicus Soto
speaks, writing hereof at large) if a man may take a Benefice, and discharge
it by another man? Note.
and seeing Christ sends them as labour^rs, teachers, not ordainers of
laborers and teachers in their places, what is it as Parisiensis speaks, De
vitils, c. 22.
writing much to this purpose, but as if a man should mar^y a woman, under hope
to obtain issue of her, but by another man? What is this but a cross practice
of the Samaritan, Luke 10. 35.
and of Christ: of whom the former, did not commit the care of the wounded man
to his Inne-keeper, till he was to depart himself; the Lord did not commit his
sheep to Peter, Io^. 21 15. Ioh. 19. 26.
nor his mother to John, till he was now ready to commit his soul to God, and
his body to the ground, as Alphonsus de Castro discoursing hereof at large
speaks.

If Non-Residents shall still think that their Curats presence can excuse
their absence, then let them go to the Prophet Ezekiel, and put their fingers
in the print of the Prophets speech, that they may not still be unfaithful,
but bele^ve that it fully concerns them. Ezekiel. 4^. 8.
You have not kept the charge o^ my holy things (says the Lord God) but ye
have set keepers of my charge in my Sanctuary for your selves. Thus does the
Lord plainly reprove them, for substistuting others under them; and therefore
they may justly fear that, which Claudius Espencaeus a Papist, is bold to
write, which I am even afraid to speak, that God shall serve them hereafter,
as they serve him now; they shall be saved by their Vicars, but damned in their
own persons.

Humbly therefore I beseech our careless Non-Residents (if there be any place
for beseeching left) that the commandment of Gods Word might move them, which
wills them to look to their callings, and abide in them; who Ipse, ipse
inquam ove^ perditam quasiuit, etc. Damasus Ep. 4.
himself came to seek the lost sheep, and finding it put it upon his
shoulders, and himself brought it home. Let the example of the Levites, and
all good Overseers excite them; Let the sight of those of the Romish Clergy in
every corner, who travel sea and land to make their Proselites, whet their
resolutions to be more industrious; let the ignorance of the people, and dread
to murder their souls, which Christ has purchased with his own blood provoke
them. Yea let the care of their own quiet, and the peace of their own
Consciences, which shall grievously torment the negligent Pastors in hell,
enjoyne them, and let the assured persuasion of Gods goodness, who has
promised, to honor those that honor him; constrain them, to redress all
unfaithfulness, and to take heed to ^he Ministry which they have received in
the Lord, that they fulfill it: Col. 4. 17.

A PRAYER.
NOw thou that art the good and faithful Shepherd of Israel, be merciful
unto all our careless Non-Residents, and give unto them increase of Knowledge,
give them Faithfulness, give them Zeal, that they may teach thy people in thy
truth; and Reform, or remove those Ministers, that either for Ignorance
cannot, or for Negligence will not, or for Fearfulness d^re not, or for
Wickedness and Ungodliness ought not to Preach thy Word; that true Pastors
being placed in among thy People, which may feed them with Knowledge and
Understanding, thy Church may grow up in perfect beauty to the glory of thy
Name, Amen. And let this be the Prayer of all faith full people, and of men

Thy most unworthy servant JOHN BLAXTON.

GREG. lib. 4. Epist. 8. SAcerdotum nomina accepimus, non ad quietem sed ad
laborem, ut inveniamur in opere quod signamur in nomine. We have received the
names of Priests, not to rest, but to labor, that we may be found in work,
that which we are sealed in name. Errata.
PAge 3. line 5. f. that have r. that they have. l. 10. f. Armenianisme, r
Arminianisme. p. 12 l. 18. for albreed, r. allowed. p. 15. l. 11 f. exalts, r
exacteth, l. 15. r. frame p. 32. l. 24. r. receive. p. 33. l. 120 f. or, r. of
p. 34. l. 11. r. affect. l. 26. r. desire to be Magistrates p 36. l. 4. r.
(...). t. p. 37. l. 5 r. had l. 28. r had he, p. 47. l. 8. r. denegarent.

A REMONSTRANCE Against Non-Residents.
CHAP. I.
Non-Residency described.
Answer.
IT is an ordinary absence of the Minister from his charge: M. Perkins Vol. 1.
page 55.
namely, from that particular Congregation committed unto him.

They that ordinarily reside not upon their Cures are not Pastors, Bishop Lake,
on Ephesians. 4. v. 11. Pastoris nomen significat personalem actionem sicut nomen
medici, Maldonat, ex Hier. and August.
for a Pastor is he that resides upon his cure, and takes care of the people to
instruct them in the knowledge and fear of God, and recals them when they go
astray, and comforts them in perplexities of conscience.

CHAP. II.
In what cases the Minister is permitted to be absent.
Answer.
FIrst, Sickness: M. Perkins ut supra illud noverit dilectio vo^tra, nunquam
me absentem fuisse licenticsa ^^bertate, sed necessaria servitute, Aust. Epist.
138.
The Council of Mentz. 25. Can. If a Bishop be not at home, or be sick, or
upon some exigent cannot be present at his Parish, let him procure one, who
upon Sabbaths and Festival days, will preach unto his charge, and Aug.
testifies Epist. 138. that he was absent on the like occasion.

Secondly, Allowance of the Church, to be absent for a time upon some necessary
and public commodity for the same, Col. 1. 7. Epaphras is their Minister, but
Cap. 4. 12. Amb. 1. 5. and 17. Epist. to Valenti^ian the Emperor.
He being absent saluted them. And Ambrose though he were Bishop of Millan,
yet went he twisce Ambassador into France, to make agreement betwixt Maximus
and Valentinian.

Thirdly, If by reason of persecution he be enforced to fly, and see no hope to
procure the safety of his people: This made Cyprian to absent from Carthage, as
he testifies in his Epistles.

But from hence our Non-Residents cannot justify their ordinary absence from
their Cures.

First, Sickness is not the cause of their absence, for their health serves
them, to live at Cathedrals, and from hence to compass all the Kingdom for
preferments; Esau did never more greedily hunt after Venison, than these men
after Dignities.

Secondly, nor have they Allowance from the Church to be absent from their
Parsonages and Vicarages, in such manner, as they usually are; If they preach
once or twice in a whole year in their Cures, we must believe that have done
God sufficient service and that they deserve many hundred pounds per annu^, for
these great performances.

Thirdly, nor is persecution any cause at all of their absence, for they will
not be persecuted for the Truth, Armenianisme, Popery, and new And yet these
New Canons contain in them many ma^ters contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to
the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the right of Parliaments,
to the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and matters tending to sedition and
of dangerous consequence thereby establishing their own usurpations, justifying
their Altar-worship, and those other Superstitious Innovations, which they
formerly introduced without warrant of Law. See the Remonstrance of the State
of the Kingdom, page 13.
Canons, withal the ridiculous ceremonies of the Church of Rome, they will as
willingly swallow down, if the minds and pleasures of the High Priests be made
known unto them, as they devour 2 or 3 Steeples.

CHAP. III.
Arguments against careless Non-Residency.
1 Argument.
THat which is not honest and of good report, Proposit.
is not to be practiced by the Ministers of Christ's Gospel: For the Scripture
teaches us, Phil. 4. 8. Romans 12. 17. 1 These. 5. 22.
that we should do such things as are honest and of good report, providing for
honest things, not only before God, but also before men; absteining from all
shows of evil. But this careless Non-Residency, Assumpt.
as it is practiced by our lazy Cathedral Priests, and other Non-Residents, is
neither honest nor of good report: Ergo, I prove the Assumption,

First, by Scripture.

Secondly, by Councels.

Thirdly, by the Canon Law.

Fourthly, by the testimony of learned Bishops, and judicious Divines.

First, by Scripture, Ezekiel 3. 18. Ier. 48. 10. Cursed be he that does the work
of the Lord negligently. Esa. 62. 6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which all the day and all the night continually shall not cease: Ye
that are mindful of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he
repair, and till he set up Jerusalem the praise of the World. Acts 20. 28.
etc. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood: for I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover of your
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them.
Therefore watch and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feed the flock of
God which depends upon you, carrying for it, not by constraint, but willingly:
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as though ye were Lords over
Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock.

Secondly, by Councels The Council of Antioch, Non-Residency condemned by
Councels.
the 17 Canon. If any Bishop by imposition of hands inducted into a charge, and
appointed to govern a people, do neglect to take upon him that office, and
delayeth to go to the Congregation alloted unto him, such a one shall be
prohibited from the Lords Table, till he be enforced to attend upon that
charge, or at the least somewhat be determined by a complete assembly of the
Ministers of that Province. The Council of Sardice, the 14 Canon. We remember
that our brethren in a former assembly decreed, that if any Layman remaining
three Sabaths or Lords-dayes, that is, three weeks in a City, did not in the
same City frequent the Church assemblies, he should be excommunicated: If then
such things are not allowable in Laymen, much less in Ministers, for whom it
is neither lawful nor convenient, without urgent necessity, to be absent from
his Parish Church longer than the time above mentioned, to this Decree there
was not one Non-placet, but every one says, it likes us well. The 8 Council
held at Constantinople in the 24 Canon decreed, that Ministers ought not to
have their Substitutes, or Vicars, but in their own persons, with fear and
cheerfulness perform all such duties, as are required of them in the service
of God.

The Canon Law does conclude the same things. Can. And by Canon Law.
siquis vult, Distinct, 36. debent indesinenter, etc. The Bishop (says the
Canon) ought to be continually resident in Gods Tabernacle, that they may
learn somewhat of God, and the people of them, whilst they read often, and
meditate upon Gods Word. Again, in the Canons entitled Pontifices: Et si quis
in Clero, Episcopos, qui Dominici gregis suscipiunt Curam, etc. The Bishops
which take upon them to feed Gods flock, ought not to depart from their duty,
lest they lose that excellent Talent which God has bestowed upon them, but
rather strive with that one talent to get three more talents. And in the 80
Canon of those which are termed the Canons of the Apostles, there is express
mandate, that such, whether Bishop or Senior, who attends not upon their
office in the Church, shall forthwith be removed from that place.

The Calcedon Council, Canon 10. Let no man be ordained Minister of two
Churches, in two several Cities, but let him remain in that unto which he was
first called: and if for vainglory, he shall afterward go to a greater
Congregation, For this thing look the Decree of Damasus, and the Council of
Trent,. 9. Can 8
let him immediately be recalled to his first charge, and in that only exercise
his Ministry; but if one be called to another charge, let him simply give over
the former, and have no inteterest in the same, etc.

But what have our most Judicious and Reverend Bishops thought of
Non-Residency? who have been much wiser than our selves, and have had as just
occasion to look into it: for Non-Residency is no new device, but an ancient
sin, which has been continually practiced in all ages, and in the most famous
and flourishing Nations of the World. The authority therefore of the wise and
learned Fathers of the Church in Non-Residency condemned by Bishops.
former times, ought to be a great motive to sway our judgment in this point.

Doctor Sands, Bishop Sands testimony, Sermon 11. on Ro^. 13. 8. page 87.
Archbishop of York, an Exile, in the reign of Queen Mary, writes thus: The
Minister is a debtor to the people committed to his charge. I am a debtor,
says the Apostle, both to Greeks and Barbarians, to learned and unlearned: the
Pastor is a debtor unto his flock, to feed it so much as in him lies, to feed
it both spiritually and Corporally: Spiritually by Life and Doctrine,
corporally with hospitality according to his ability. Woe be to that Pastor
that pays not this debt: For if the flock perish for want of food, all that
perishing blood shall be required at his hands; a hard reckoning for him to
answer, and a sharp punishment to sustain for not answering.

Bishop Babington, Bishop Babington on Exodus p. 244.
as soon as Christ had sent away his Disciples, says the Gospel, he departed
into a Mountain to pray; let this inform us, how dangerous the absence of the
Pastor is: Ma^ke 6. 46. Exodus 32. 1. Mat 13. ^5.
when Moses was absent, the Israelites fell to great and gross Idolatry,
whilst men sleep, the enemy sows Tares, and what too muh absence of Pastors
has done of evil in England, Note.
who can tell? We are present often in the time of profit, but absent too often
touching pa^nes: the ships therefore over which the Lord has appointed many of
us, are not only troubled as this was, but almost even sunk and cast away by
contrary winds of And by Judicious Divines.
Romish charms.

Master Philips: Atheist and Non-Residents subscribe M. Philips on Matthew 2.
1, a page 49.
to the general places of Scripture, that the Word must be preached in season
and out of ^eason, that if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
pit of perdition; that where the vision fails, the people perish, and that
the price of souls is blood: but that Note.
he himself is in this danger, that takes the fleece, yet feeds not the
sheep: or that he does jeopard his own soul, in suffering the souls of other
to famish, he will instantly and shamelesly deny, their consciences condemning
them in the particular.

Master Gilpin: So long as it shall be lawful for men, M Gilpin in his Sermon
before King Edward the 6, on Luke 2. 41. etc. s. 12^
to have so many livings as they can get, and discharge never a one, and so
long as men may have Livings to lie where they will in idleness far from their
Cure, fatting themselves like the Devils porklings, and let a thousand souls
perish, for lack of spiritual food, God his business shall never be well
applied, nor his Gospel have success in England.

Master Wheatly: M^^ heatly a caveat for the Covetous, p. 56
Some Ministers feed themselves, and not the flock, but (contenting themselves
with the name of Ministers) either through idleness, or disability, do seldom
or never drive the sheep of Christ to the green pastures, and still waters that
he has provided for them: When a Minister having but one Living (either
because he is unlearned and cannot, and slothful and will not, be at so much
pains, or else because he lies in the wind to sent out farther promotion, and
so is taken up in other places about other business) neglects to break the
bread of life unto his people constantly and ordinarily each Sabbath day: or
when a Minister taking upon himself more charges then one, which it is
impossible for him to discharge, leaves one, (or it may be two) to the blind
guidance of a simple fellow that can do nothing better than the meanest of the
Parish, but read a little, and then go with them to the Alehouse for company
when all is done, when, I say, such a thing as this is done, it is of all the
particular unjustices, which I have named, or shall name, the most abominable
to God, and ought to be so accounted also amongst men. For the Church livings
are, as it were the revenus of Jesus Christ, and his endowments, to be disposed
by him: and it is his order that those should live of the Altar, not which
loyter, but which labor at it; Let our Non-Resi^ents mix these truths with
Faith, that they may receive the Devil whom they serve.
and therefore those that labor not, have no interest from him to eat of the
fruits; and if they presume to do it, they fill and fat themselves with stolen
and ill gotten goods, which though they taste sweet in the mouth shall prove
gravel, yea wormwood, yea poison in the bowels.

And thus I have sufficiently proved my Assumption, that careless
Non-Residency, is neither honest, nor of good report, both by authority of
Scripture, as also by Councels, Canon Law and by the testimony of learned
Bishops and judicious Divines. Now since these authorities join in one against
Non-Residency; they who shall oppose themselve in defense thereof, had need to
come well appointed with strong Arguments and sound Reasons; or else methinks
we should hardly believe them in the mean time: the Conclusion that
necessarily flows from the premises, Conclusion.
will be this, that this careless Non-Residency ought not to be practiced by
the Ministers of Christ's Gospel.

2 Argument against Non-Residency.
THey that have no assurance in themselves of their calling, Proposit.
nor the inward testimony of their Consciences, that they are appointed of God
to labor in his Vineyard, are no better than intruders.

But careless Non-Residents have no assurance in themselves of their calling,
Assumpt.
nor an inward testimony in their Consciences that they are appointed of God to
labor in his Vineyard.

Ergo, Conclusion.
they are no better than intruders, and consequently, are to be cast out.

The proposition is proved by that which our Savior says, Man. 1^. 13.
Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted out.

And they that are ordered Deacons or Priests, See the form and manner of
consecrating Priests and Deacons.
have this question propounded unto them; Do you trust that you are inwardly
moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon you this office and ministration, to
serve God, for the promoting of his Glory, and the edifying of his people? To
the which every one answers, I trust so: in the Judgment therefore of our
Church it is necessarily required that Ministers should have assurance in
themselves of their calling.

For the Assumption, that it may be proved sufficiently, let us first consider
how Ministers may have assurance in themselves of their calling, etc. and then
make application of it to our Non-Residents.

Ministers are acertained of their calling.

First, by their gifts; Dr. Will^t on John 17. p 84. M. Heiron. vol. 2 p. 35^:
for they which are deputed to the Lords service, are in some good measure
enabled thereunto: as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3. 6. God has made us able
Ministers of the new Testament.

Secondly, by the employment of their gifts: if they carefully and diligently
use those graces wherewith they are endued, to the edifying of Christ his
Church.

Ministers can have no good assurance, that God ever called them, M. Hild^
s^^^m, on Ioh. 4. p. 261:
unless they can find that the thing that moved them to enter into that
calling, was an earnest desire to do good in it: If any man desire the office
of a Bishop (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 1.) he des^red a good work. It is
true indeed, that the best of Gods servants have been at the first Exceedingly
unwilling and backward; but before they have entered upon this function, they
have been made by Gods Spirit marvellously willing and desirous to be employed
in it: When the Prophet Esaias (who had been a little before greatly dejected in
the sense of his unworthiness and unfitness to this function, Esaias 6. 5.)
heard the Lord say, verse 8. Whom shall I send? or who shall go for us? then I
said, (says he) here am I, send me: by this property Moses knew them, whom God
had called and fitted for the building of the Tabernacle, Exad. 36. 2. He
called Bezaliel and Ah^liab, and every one whose heart stirred him up to come
unto the work to do it. Yea this zealous desire to do good ^ust be in a
Minister at all times when he goes about the Lords work: he must go to it as
willingly as he goes to his meat, when he is hungry, see the 1 Pet. 5. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 24. Without this willignesse there is no reward. Am^rose says,
Voluntarius Minister habet premium, coactus dispensat ^bsequium: The willing
Minister has a reward, he that is forced only employed and used: for
application, since therefore our careless Non-Residents either want gifts to
furnish them for the Ministry or having gifts, want willingness to provoke
them to feed the flock which by Gods providence depends upon them, since they
want a good will to deal unto the people the Gospel of God, since it is not
their joy to do the work of the Lord, and they do not bind themselves
concionably and constantly to perform it; I must conclude, that they can never
be sure of their calling, and consequently, that they deserve to be rooted out.
Shame and contempt should surely pursue all those, who having received their
Talent, Nihil agunt, do nothing^ for the servant that dug his talent in the
earth, Mat. 25. 26, 28, 30.
and employed it not, was censured by his Master, for wicked and slothful, had
his talent taken from him, and for his unprofitablenesse was commanded into
utter darkness, it is the Elder that Rules well, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and Labors in the Word and Doctrine that is worthy of doubl^ honor: the
idler deserves none at all, no not so much as single; he that will not labor
must not eat: and he that will not work in the Vineyard must not look for his
penny. Yea, but they are so much employed otherways, that they have no leisure.

What? no leisure to be Ministers? Why, M. Down on Tit^^ 15. p. 22.
are they Ministers then? to seed upon the flock and not to feed it, is little
better than Sacrilege: and argues a base, sordid, and contemptible mind.

But it may be our Cathedral Non-Resid^nts, suppose that the Reverend Bishops
will suffer them to pass, with seen and albreed: let them therefore seriously
ponder upon the words of Bishop Latimer, Bishop Latimer 4 Sermon. before King
Edward, p. 526.
he propounds the question, whether Non-Residents be worthy of double honor?
And thus resolves it: They are not to be regarded, nor to be esteemed among the
people, and to have no living at their hands. For as good Preachers be worthy
double honor; so un-preaching Prelates be worthy double dishonor: they must be
at their doublets. But now these two dishonours what be they? Our Savior does
show, Si sal infatuatus fuer^t at nihil ultra valet, nisi ut projiciatur for
as, If the salt be unsavory it is good for nothing, but to be cast out and
trodden of men; by this salt is understood Preachers, Non Residents to be cast
out.
and such as have cure of souls: What be they worthy then? Wherefore serve
they? For nothing else but to be cast out: Make them quondames, out with them,
cast them out of their office, what should they do with Cure that will not look
to them? another dishonor is this, ut conculcentur ab hominibus, to be trodden
under men's feet, not to be regarded, not to be esteemed: They be at their
doublets still. S Paul in his Epistle, qualifieth a Bishop, and says, that he
must be aptus ad docendum, ad refellendum aptus: to teach and to confute all
manner of false doctrine; but what shall a man do with aptness, if he do not
use it? It were as good for us to be without it.

3 Argument against Non-Restd^n^y.
THey that neglect the grace of edification, Propos.
are not the faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus.

But careless- Non-Residents, Assumpt.
neglect the grace of edification: Ergo they are not the faithful Ministers of
Christ, and consequently, should be reformed, or removed.

The proposition, Bishop Lake on 1 Cor. 15. 10. p. 267.
I prove by the testimony of Bishop Lake, neither is it a bare and naked
testimony, but it is sufficiently furnished with unanswerable Arguments,
bearing down Non-Residency before them: Thus he writes, Ministers must not
neglecttheir grace of edification, they must not hide their talent, consult
with flesh and blood, be disobedient to the Heavenly visions; they must (...),
stir up the grace of God, blow off the ashes that would over-cast it, sound
the Trumpet, and give timely alarmes, be instant in season and out of season;
being salt, we must ever be seasoners of the world; being light, we must ever
be dispelling the darkness of men; being Architects, we must ever be building
of Gods House: being husbandmen, we must ever be laboring in Gods field:
finally, being shepherds, Note.
we must ever be attending on Christ's flock: so was S. Paul, so must we.
Otherwise Gods grace is bestowed on us in vain: Our Consciences can ^ot yield
us this good testimony which S. Paul gives here unto himself, it will rather
challenge us of our neglect, and the grievousnes of our neglect will be
answerable to the gifts which we receive from God, and God knows there is too
much of this neglect of our calling in many, at whose hands God will require
the blood of many perishing souls.

Be persuaded then, Exhortation (...) Ministers. See D. Saundesson on 1 Cor.
12. 7. p. 117.
all you, whom God has made Stewards over his household, and blessed your
ba^ket and your store, to bring forth of your treasures things both new and
old: Manifest the spirit God has given you, so as may be most for the profit
of your brethren. The Spirit of God, when he gave you wisdom and knowledge,
intended not so much the wisdom and the knowledge of themselves, 1 Cor. 12. 8,
Luke 21. 15.
as the manifestation of them, or (as it is in the next verse) the word of
Wisdom and the word of Knowledge: as Christ also promised his Apostles, to
give them Os and Sapientiam; a mouth and wisdom. Alas, what is wisdom without
a mouth? But alas, Syrac. 20^ 30.
a pot of treasure hid in the ground, which no man is the better for. Wisdom
that is hid, Luke 19. 20. Mat. 5. 15.
and a treasure that is not seen what profit is in them both? O then do not
knit up your masters talent in a napkin, smother not his light under a bushel,
Luke 12. 42. Exodus.: 16. 20.
pinch not his servants of their due provision, put not up the Manna you have
gathered till it stink, and the worms consume it: but above all, squander not
away your rich portions by riotous living. Let not either sloth, or envy, or
pride, or pretended modesty, or any other thing hinder you, from laboring to
discharge faithfully that trust and duty, which God expects, which the
necessity of the Church challenges, which the measure of your gifts promises,
which the condition of your calling exalts from you. Remember the
manifestation of the spirit was given you to profit withal. And since the end
of all gifts is to profit, aim most at those gifts, which will profit most;
and endeavor so to freame those you have in the exercise of them, as they may
be likeliest to bring profit to those that shall partake them. Covet earnestly
the best gifts, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 31. and you have his Comment upon
that Text in the first verse of the 1 Cor. 14. 1. Prophetas interpretes dicit
Scripturarum, Amb. Prophetia, id est, donum interpretandi Scripturas Piscat.
Scol. in 1 Cor. 1. 21. Misticum sensum ed salutem auditorum explanantes, Era^
in Paraphras ad 1 Cor. 14:
fourteenth Chapter, Covet spiritwall gifts, (...), but rather that ye may
Prophecy, and by prophesying, he means the instruction of the Church and
People of God, in the needful doctrines of Faith toward God, repentance from
dead works, and new and holy obedience. It is one stratageme of the arch-enemy
of mankind, (and when we know his works, we may the better be able to defeat
him) by busying men of great and useful parts in by-matters, and thiugs of
lesser consequence, to divert them from following that Unum necessarium, that
which should be the maine of all our endeavors, the beating down of sin, the
planting of ^aith, and the resormation of manners. Controve^sies, I confess
are necessary, the Tongues necessary, Histories necessary, Philosophy and the
Arts necessary, other knowledge of all sorts necessary in the Church: for truth
must be maintained, Scripture perhaps opened, Heresy confuted, the mouths of
Adversaries stopped, Schisms and Novelties suppressed. But when all is done,
Positive and Practique Divinity is it, must bring us to Heaven, that is it,
must pause our judgments, settle our consciences, direct our lives, mortify
our corruptions, increase our graces, strengthen our comforts, save our souls:
Hoc opus hoc stadium: there is no study to this, none so well worth the labor
as this:None that can bring so much profit to others, nor therefore so much
glory to God, nor therefore so much comfort to our own hearts as this. Tit 3. ^.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly (says Paul to Titus) that they which have believed in God, might be
carefulto maintain good works: These things are good and profitable unto men.
You cannot do more good unto the Church of God, you cannot more profit the
people of God, by your gifts: then by pressing effectually, these two great
points, Faith and good Works; these are good and profitable unto men.

The Assumption, viz. that careless Non-Residents neglect the grace of
Edification, is found too true by experience;

For first, they absent themselves from their Cures.

Secondly, if you hunt these Foxes to their Dens, to their Cathedrals, there
they preach not above once or twice in a year, nay they are so far from
preaching themselves, that they discountenance, all faithful Preachers in the
places where they be resident, and upon the Lords day in the after-noones, they
will not go to the Assemblies of the Saints, where they may hear Gods Word,
but content themselves with Prayers in their Cathedrals; Yea if there be power
in their hands, they will suspend such faithful Ministers, as break unto the
people the bread of life, though they themselves are not worthy to be named
with them the same day.

I must therefore conclude, that they are not the faithful Ministers of Christ
Jesus, and humbly I beseech God, to put it into the heart of his Majesty, and
the great Counsel of State assembled in the High Court of Parliament, to
endeavor their reformation, and if they will not be reformed, to remove them.
Amen.

4 Argument against Non-Residency.
THey that by the use of all good means, Proposit.
do not seek to preserve the credit and estimation of their persons in the
hearts of Gods people, deserve not the name of Christ's Ministers.

But Non-Residents do not by the use of good means, Assumpt.
seek to preserve the credit and estimation of their persons, in the hearts of
Gods people.

Ergo, they deserve not the name of Christ's Ministers, and consequently, ought
to be removed.

The proposition is proved by the 1 Timothy 4. 12. Let no man despise thy youth,
and Tit 2. 15. See that no man despise thee, It is therefore the bounden duty
of Gods Ministers to labor to maintain their credit, for if they lose their
reverence and estimation in the hearts of Gods people, their doctrine will do
them no good.

The Assumption will be easily proved, How Ministers may maintain their
estimation in the hearts of the people.
if we take into our consideration the means chalked out unto us by Gods Word,
whereby we may maintain our estimation in the hearts of the people, and I find
in Gods Word three special means, whereby this may be done.

First, by our diligence and care to teach profitably, 1 Means.
that is the chief thing that will procure us reverence and estimation, if we
do our work well, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. Have them in singular love for their works
sake this is that, that the Apostle teaches, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy
self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the
Word of God aright. And 1 Timothy 4. having charged Timothy verse 2, to look to
it, that no man despi^e his youth: he tells him by what means he may
preserve his person and Ministry from contempt and disdain, verse 13. and
standdeth principally upon this, give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
and to doctrine: Verse 14. Despise not the gift that is in thee: but stir it
up, and seek to increase it: and adds Verse 15. These things exercise, and
give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how thou proprofitest amongst
all men. If this care and conscience be in us, we shall be sure to have honor,
though Satan and all the World should conspire to disgrace us, a Proph^t (a
true and faithful Prophet he means) is not without honor, Mat. 13. 57. Mar.
6. 4. If this be wanting, no wealth, no titles, no hospitality, no goodworks we
can do, will be able to preserve us from contempt.

The second Means, 2 Means. Vide M Hildersham on Ioh. 4. p 367.
is by our faithfulness in our Ministry: this differs from the former, for
a man may be a diligent and very sufficient Teacher, and yet not faithful in
his Ministry. This is faithfulness, when we are careful to deliver the whole
counsel of God to his people, not concealing any part of it for favor, or
fear of any man, Jer. 23. 28. He that has my Word, let him speak my Word
faithfully. 1 Cor. 4. 2. It is required of Gods Stewards, that every man be
found faithful. 2 Timothy 2. 2. What things thou have heard of me, the same
deliver to faithful men which shall be able to teach others. This has great
force to procure us reverence in the hearts of all men. When the Pharisees would
give a reason of the reverence they pretended to bear to our Savior, they
give this, Math. 22. 16. Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the
way of God truly, neither carest for any man; for thou considerest not the
person of a man. And when the Apostle charge Titus to look to it, that no
man despise him, he prescribes him this way, to keep himself from contempt,
Tit. 2. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke, with all authority, see
that no man despise thee. Titus might have said, this was a strange direction;
this is the way rather to procure us the contempt and hatred of all men, if we
shall not only teach such particular duties as he has mentioned before, but
apply them also so particularly, by exhorting and rebuking men specially, if we
do it with authority and boldness, as thou speak of. No (says the Apostle
fear it not, this will gain thee estimation and honor in the hearts of men,
yea, of all men: yea, even of them that were most offended with thee for they
faithfulness, if they belong to God: And this is that, that Solomon says,
Prove. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the length,
than he that flattereth with his tongue.

The third and last Means we are to use and maintain 3 Means.
our honor and estimation in the hearts of Gods people, is to make our selves
an example and pattern to them, in all the duties of holiness toward God,
and righteousness toward men: and to show care of this, not in our selves
only, but in all that are of our family also. This direction is given, Tit. 1.
6. ^e must be unreproveable; and not so only, but his children also must be
faithful, not scandalous for riot, neither disobedient. See the great force
that this has to gain reverence to our persons and Ministry, in two
examples, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that
believe, an example in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in Faith and
in pureness. The other is in John Baptist; see what honor the holiness of
his life did gain him with all men, Mar. 6. 20. Herod reverenced John, because
he knew him to be a just man and a holy.

Now to apply this to our Non-Residents, Application.
they do not carefully use these means to preserve the credit and estimation
of their persons in the hearts of the people.

Ergo, they deserve not the name of Christ's Ministers, and consequently, should
be removed.

5 Argument against Non-Residents.
THe faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus must labor Propos.
to be fruitful and profitable in their Ministry.

But careless Non-Residents, Assumpt.
do not labor to be fruitful and profitable in their Ministry:

Ergo, they are not the Faithful Ministers of Christ.

I prove the Proposition by 4 reasons:

First, God has placed us in this calling, See M. Hildersham on John, 4. page
289.
and given us the gifts we have to this end. Even for the perfecting of the
Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians 4. 8. 12. The
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.
7.

Secondly, every man should count it his misery to be unprofitable, it is noted
for a great part of the misery of our estate by nature, that we are altogether
unprofitable, Romans 3. 12. How much more a Minister? Matthew. 21. 30. Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.

Thirdly, Nothing will yield us that comfort in life or death, as this; not all
the wealth we have gathered, nor the credit and applause we have had, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 19. They whom he had won to God were his hope, and joy, and crown of
rejoicing.

Fourthly, this is the chief thing that will assure us, that God has indeed
called us to be Ministers of his Gospel, and ^pproveth of our Ministry, when
we are fruitful, when the Porter (the Holy Ghost) appears unto us, and
gives entrance unto our Ministry in the hearts of the people, John 10. 3. as
we know he did to Paul's Ministry in the heart of Lydia, Acts 16. 14 We have
heard all the Ministers of the new Testament are called Reapers. The servants
to whom God committed his talents, if they were good and faithful servants,
gained somewhat to their Master, Mat. 25. 23 Thus Paul approves himself to be
an able Minister of the Gospel, the Corinthians that were converted by his
Ministry, were his letters of commendation written in his heart (yielding him
much inward comfort and assurance of his calling) and also known and read of
all men, such an evidence of his calling, as was apparent unto all men, 2 Cor.
3. 2. This he calls the very seal of his Apostle-ship, 1 Cor. 9. 2.

The Assumption, viz. Non-Residents labor not to be fruitful and profitable
in their Ministry, proved by six Reasons.
that Non-Residents do not labor to be fruitful and profitable in their
Ministry, I thus prove:

First, because they are not diligent and painful, both in study and in
preaching. Give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; neglect not
the gift that is in thee, but both by diligence in Study and in Preaching,
labor to stir it up, and increase it, says the Apostle unto Timothy* 1 Timothy
4. 13. 14. But this blessed Counsel of the Apostle they disrespect, as is
manifest to all men, Ergo.

Secondly, when they do teach (which is but seldom, they teach that wherein
they themselves may show most learning or eloquence) not which may be most
profitable, and of use to them that are committed to their charge. Contrary to
Tit. 2. 1. and 3. 8.

Thirdly, they do not apply their Doctrines to the present estate and condition
of their hearers, as they are commanded, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

Fourthly, they do not take heed to their lives, as they are required, 1 Timothy
4. 16. for they swell with pride, and are unsatiably addicted to outward
things, reaping most greedily, where they sow sparingly.

Fifthly, they are not earnest with God in Prayer, that he would make their
Ministry fruitful, as Paul was, Ephesians. 3. 14. they were never acquainted with
fervency in Prayer, and therefore in stead of praying, they say, Let us pray
for, etc.

Finally, they do not enquire for fruit, and deal with their people in
private, to see how they profit by their labors, as did our Savior with his
hearers, Mat. 13. 51. And the Apostle, Acts 20. 20. who did not only teach
publicly, but from house to house. And indeed how can they do thus, since they
visit their Congregations but once or twice in the year, and then having
gathered up the profits of their Livings, they speedily return to their Dens
of idleness, that they may consume the same in rio^ous living?

I conclude therefore, that they are not the faithful Ministers of Christ, and
consequently, that they ought to be reformed, or removed. Faxi^ Deus.

6 Argument against Non-Residency.
ALl Faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus are, and Proposition.
must be painful and laborious in their Ministerial function.

But Non-residents are not painful and laborious in Assumption.
their Ministerial function.

Ergo, Conclusion.
they are not the Faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus.

I prove the Proposition;

First, That they are laborious in their Ministry, the examples of Christ, his
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops and Martyrs of the purest time, do
abundantly prove: Luke 4. 16. 31.
It was Christ's custom to enter in their Synagogues on the Sabbath days, and
to read and expound the Scriptures to the people. Acts 17. 2. 2^. 4.
It was S. Paul's manner to reason in the Synagogues, and to open the Scriptures
on the Sabbath days. Upon Sunday (says Justin Martyr) all the Christians that
are in the Cities or Countries about, Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
meet together, and after some Commentaries of the Apostles, and writing of the
Prophets have been read, Tertull. Apol. 3 9.
the Senior or President does by a Sermon exhort the people, and ad monish them
to the imitation and practice of those Divine truths, which they had heard and
read unto them.

And Saint Austen tells us of Ambrose that he Eum in populo verbum veritatis
recte tractantem omni die Domin^co audiebam, August. Confess. lib. 6. cap. 3.
heard him rightly handling the Word of God unto the people every Lords day.

Yea it should seem by the Homilies of Saint Chrysostom that he did
oftentimes preach daily unto the people, Si ad Ecclesiam frequenter ve^ias,
a^rem divine literis ad moveas, explanationen mandatorum Coelestium capias,
(...) scaro, ita spiritus verbis divinis convales^et Origin. Hom. 9. in Levit.
and therefore we frequently meet with his (...), yesterday this and this I
taught yon, and Origin intimates this frequency of expounding the Scriptures
in his time, if says he, you come frequently unto the Church of God, and
there attend unto the Sacred Scriptures and to the explication of those
heavenly Commandments, thy soul will be strengthened, as thy body with food. I
will close this point with the assertion and profession of holy Austen, that
he was never absent from his Episcopal service and attendance, Illud n^verit
dil^ctio vestra, nunquam me abse.. t^m fuisse, licentiosa liberate, sed
necessaria servitute. Aug. Epist. 138.
upon any licentious and assumed liberty, but only upon some other necessary
service of the Church.

Secondly as faithful Ministers are painful in their ministry, so they must
be painf^ll and laborious. There are no names given unto Ministers, but they
are words of employment and of labor. For preaching comes of Praeco, to be a
proclaimer in the market place; so are they called Trumpeters, for that they
must blow the silver Trumpet of the Lords word, Esa. 58. 1.
that it may sound and ring in the ears of the people, Cryers, so as they m^st
be no tongue tied fellows, Esa. 4. 11. Ezekiel. 34. 10. 1 Pet 5. 4.
for they are no fitter for this office, then is a blind man to be a Pilot,
they must be as Shepherds, which in Juda were feign to watch all night to
preserve their flocks from Wolves: Watchmen, who must take heed, Ephesians. 5. 20.
least through their sloth the Fort be surprised. Embessadours having a great
message to deliver from the King of Heaven: Angels, as Christ is called the
Angel of the great Covenant: and Revel. 3. Write unto the Angel: that is,
Revel. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 15.
the Minister of such a Church: workmen because they be builders of men's
consciences: Stewards, 1 Cor. 3. 10.
to provide meat for the Lords inheritance: we are Stewards of no meaner a gift
than the grace of God, and the wisdom of God, that grace which by Saint Peter
is called (...) a manifold grace: and that wisdom which 1 P^^. 4. 10. (...).
3. 10.
by Saint Paul is called (...) the manifold wisdom of God: We are the
depositaries and dispencers of the most precious treasures which were ever
opened unto the sons of men, the incorruptible and precious blood of Christ,
the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, the word of the grace
of God, 1 Cor. 4. 2.
and of the unsearchable riches of Christ. Now it is required of Stewards that
a man be found faithful, that he defraud not Christ of his purchase, which is
the souls of men, nor men of their price and Privilege, which is the blood of
Christ: that he neither favor the sins of men, nor dissemble the truth of
God. Mat. 5. 14.
Ministers are the light of the world, and therefore their duty is to shine
forth by heavenly Doctrine to enlighten Gods people; they are the salt of the
Earth, Mat. 5. 13
and therefore their duty is to season with wholesome Doctrine, the weak souls
that bendto corruption, 1 Cor. 3. 19.
they are builders and therefore must edify the body of Christ, the house of
God. They are Captains, and therefore it is their part to fight Gods
battles: Heb. 13. 17.
and as good Leaders and Chieftaines to instruct Gods people well in this
spiritual warfare. In Saint Paul's time it was a curse of damnation not to
preach: which cannot be appropriated to Paul himself, it being a duty required
of all that labor in Christ's Vineyard, and 2 Timothy 4. 2. He adjureth Timothy to
preach insta^tly: so that as John as the forerunner, and Timothy as an
Evangelist, were to preach with vehemence, so are we as Pastors to cry the
same cry: for it never yet pierced deep enough, nor entered far enough to
make men watchful over their lives. The assumption is too true, the Conclusion
therefore must of necessity be yielded unto, viz. that Non-Residents are not
the faithful Ministers of Christ, and consequently, that they ought to be
removed.

CHAP. IV.
Answers the Objections made by Non-residents for the maintenance of their
idleness.
Obje. 1. THough Non-residents be ordinarily absent Obje. 1.
from their people, yet there is no place of Scripture expressly condemning
Non-residency as a sin.

Answer. We have the authority of Gods Commandment, Answer. See Doctor Tailor
on Titus page 727.
Acts 20, 28. binding all Pastors carefully to attend unto the flocks, of
which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers: and this not at the quarter or
half years day, to gather in the profits and to feed themselves, but to feed
the flock, the Church of God which Christ has purchased with his blood. I
would know whether this precept requires the personal presence of the Pastor
or no? if any man say, Non-Residents would be excused by their substitutes.
that he is as good as present in his sufficient substitute: I answer, that
the most do not prove it so sufficiently, but some rakeshame of men, some
Ieroboams Priest of the basest of the people, But may not be excused by hem for
three Reasons.
that cannot tell otherwise what to do with himself. But if they did; the
Text is not satisfied, which requires his own attendance, neither injoyneth a
Pastor to see his people fed, For three Reasons.
but to feed them. I would further here demand, whether that Commandment given
to Archyppus, belong not to all the Pastors of the New Testament, Take heed to
the Ministry that thou have received in the Lord, 1 R.
that thou fulfill it? which if it do (as no forhead can deny it) then with
what face can any man take a Ministry upon him that another may fulfill it;
the like commandment is given by Solomon, Prove. 27. 23.
be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds: which
not obscurely implies the presence of the Pastor, who must not only teach, but
teach aptly, and apply not only true, but fit Doctrine according to the state
and condition of his people.

Secondly, the excellency of the Object tieth the Pastor, 2 R. Heb. 13. 17.
to more than ordinary attendance: his calling is to watch over men's souls:
were it but to watch over men's bodies and goods, it were no less then
capital, for any man to leave his station at his own pleasure wherein his
Captain has set him: and how can this unfaithfulness in them who are set in
the Lords watch Towers, but be by so much the more perilous then the other, by
how much the soul is more precious then the body, and the loss of the soul
infinitely surpassing the loss of the body?

Thirdly, 3. R.
the straitness of the account that is to be made for the people, cannot but
bind him that has any conscience left in him to ordinary residence, and
attendence in his own person, hence the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Heb.
13. 17.
They watch over men's souls as they that must give account. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
And the Apostle Peter wishes them so to feed the flock depending upon them,
that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they may give up their accounts
with joy.

Now with what joy can he give up his accounts, who with the hireling has
left his people to the Wolf: who never knew their estate, who never came but as
a stranger amongst them: never or seldom known by voice unto them: yea scarce
known by face to many of them: That which will dye let it die, Zachar 11. 9.
He is none of his brothers keeper, slender is that account which that Captain
can make to his Prince, who having received his pay to guide and train such a
number of Soldiers, leaves them in the plain field to the spoil and
violence of the enemy: or at the best, sets a base fellow over them, fitter
to guide cattle than to train men up to such services; such another account
must needs here be given up, but neither of them will go for payment.

Fourthly the love of Christ were it present, Negligenter pascens convincitur
non amare summum Pastorem, Damas. Epist. 4. Non-Residents want
would constrain Ministers to feed his sheep: Peter says Christ, love
thou me? feeds my sheep: were there love to the flock, it would not suffer
them to run into ruins, nor to fall awry from their zeal faith, virtue:
neither should the Pastors absence open the door to Wolves and deceivers, to
Priests and Jesuits, 1 Love.
who in such places have free scope to poison and destroy. 2 Faith.
Were faith present to rule the heart, it would extinguish the drought of the
world, and would be working by love toward Christ, and his people, accounting
obedience to God above thousands of gold and silver. 3 Contentedness.
If true contentation were there, such an appearance of evil would be avoided
as Covetousness is, which is a filthy vice wheresoever, but especially in a
Minister, who is as the eye in the body, wherein such a blemish or rather such
a beam is not more perspicuous then scandalous: and yet is the root, as of all
evil, so of this ordinary Non-residency. 4. Humility.
If true humility were present, it would not suffer the impostume of pride to
grow upon a man by multiplying of livings: which experience teaches, to be
like a collection of many bad humors into one member, which make it to swell
above the just proportion of the other members. If fidel^ty took place, 5.
Fidelity.
he would be diligent to till the Lords field as he has promised: he would
as a faithful Steward be providing necessaries (not for his own) but for Gods
family: as a good Physician he would be ministering to the sick and diseased
souls, he would be binding up the broken spirits, he would be seeking and
saving that which is lost, yea he would go before the Sheep of Christ and
lead them in and out: for all this he has promised before God and his people,
and undertaken it in his own person. If Equity and Justice ruled him, 6.
Equity and Justice.
he could not suffer the people who sow carnal things unto him, not to reap
spiritual from him; he could not take so much wages of God, Note.
and do him so little work for it: he could not receive his pay, and fly
from the battle: he could not so greedily eat the milk of the flock, and
give them little or no food: he could not so wrongfully keep back the hire
of the laborers, who reap the Lords fields, neither could he live of that
Altar which he does not serve, 7. Right reason.
2 Cor. 9. 13. Lastly, if right reason ruled him he would easily discern what
unnatural and monstrous thing it were, that either sundry bodies and
congregations should have but one eye, or else that this eye should be
ordinarily and for most part many) miles distant from the body. Right reason
would also show him how impossible a thing it is, for one Shepherd to keep
more flocks then one: how unreasonable a thing it is, for any man to perform
service in one place, and take wages in another, what a shameful thing it
were, to marry a wife in hope to beget children by another man's help: what an
equal thing it is, that he does not his duty in his own person, but by a
Deputy, should also go to heaven by a Deputy, but not in his own person: as
merrily and wittily, Iodicus a famous french Preacher, witnessed by Espencens:
Perald. 2. Tom. tract. 4. in avar. part. 2. cap. 11.
from all which I may conclude this reason with the words of a Papist, that
seeing neither nature is the principle or ground of Non-residence: for that is
contented with a little: nor yet grace, which is contented with less;
therefore the corruption of the heart of man is the chief counselor and
perswader unto it, neither is his reason to be neglected: for though a man
(says he) dare live a Non-resident, yet would he not willingly die one, and as
for the matter of Substitution whereon the whole frame of Non-residencie is
set, as on a foundation: he says, he sees not why one man might not have as
well an h^ndreth livings, as one by this plea, for he might get substitutes
enough: Note.
neither does he see any reason but women might also be capable of Church
livings (by this plea) as well as men, Doctor wil^et in 1 Samuel cap. 14. ver. 28.
for they also might perform the duties by Substitutes. But I remit the Reader
to the Author, as also to other of our later Divines who have largely and
learnedly handled the same argument.

THough we preach but seldom, Objection 2.
and are seldom seen in our several Congregations, yet when we we do preach
amongst them, our Sermons are full of learning, even to the admiration of our
hearers, the sermons usually preached in the Country are but like our ordinary
communications, but our Sermons are stuffed with all manner of learning, we have
abundance of quotations and allegations out of Fathers, Schoolmen and other
learning, which no question edifies much, and therefore we may be the better
borne with, and ought not to be accused of idleness, though we preach but
once or twice in a year.

Let Non-Residents know, Answer. Mr. Down on Tit. 2. ver. 15.
that they justly displease good men, because they propound to themselves, not
Gods glory, or the edification of the Church, but their own praise and
applause. To what end else is this vain ostentation, of Wit, Eloquence,
Reading, and all variety of learning? wherein first they prevaricate with
Christ, pretending to woo the souls of men unto Christ, but indeed intending
to win reputation to themselves.

Secondly, they fail the hope and expectation of their brethren, who repairing
to them for instruction, received no more benefit by their Sermons, than
Calicula's guests did by his golden banquet, which only delighted the eye, but
neither pleased the palate, nor satisfied the stomach. Wise and wholesome is
the Counsel of Saint Hierome, when thou teach in the Church, non clamor
populi sed gemitus suscitetur, stir you up not the applause but the groans of
the people, Lachrymae anditorum lauds tuae sint, let the tears of thy
auditory be thy praises, Act^ 2. 37.
if thou can with Peter prick the people at the heart, and make them say,
Men and Brethren what shall we do? if by discoursing of righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come, Acts ^4. 25
thou can make Felix tremble, thou shall both glorify God, and procure
honor unto thy self. But if neglecting the glory of God, thou aim at nothing
but thine own praise and commendation: God will sure power down contempt upon
thee, for his mouth has spoken it, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them thot honor me will I honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed.

Our careless Non-Residents should from Schoolemasters learn a point or
discretion; Good Lessons ^o: Ministers.
they range their Scholars into Forms, Bishop Lake.
and though themselves be never so learned, yet they read unto their several
Forms, no deeper points than they are capeable of: if they should do
otherwise, well might they show their learning, they would show no discretion,
neither would the Scholars be the better for that which they should teach
them: and let these men remember that it concerns them so to distinguish their
auditors.

Some learned Divines will not use the Latin or the Greek tongue, Master
Harris Absaloms funeral Epist.
when their hearers have not Latin or Greek ears: and they will content
themselves with the delivery of GODs word, because their Auditors are content
to take GODs bare word, without any further band or Testimony: and may not
Non-Residents, preaching in a Country Parish, imitate such a worthy Divine as
this?

They say a plain Sermon is but like their ordinary Communication, their
meaning is, when they are in a good mood that is not to be understood, of all
times, and in all places, for to my knowledge; they usually rail upon
faithful Ministers when they are at their Tables, at their Dice; and in their
conference with their idle companions, but let these Cathedral Non-Residents
know, that there be many Ministers in the Country, that preach twice upon the
Lords day constantly, and keep also a Lecture upon a week day, and if their
Sermons be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, they will every one of
them excel in worth those Sermons that they bring with them into the Country:
such as effect nothing else but quaint and curious phrases, or are unmeasurable
in their allegations out of all Authors, both Ecclesiastical and profane, or
^ore aloft in unnecessary speculations far above the capacity of their
auditors, these over do, and, magno conatu magnas nugas, take great pains,
and eviscerate themselves, as it were, to weave a web, which when it is
ended, is fit for no other use, but only as an unprofitable thing to be swept
away.

THough we be Non-Residents, Object. 3.
yet we have done God good service executing the office of Magistrates, and if
we might still be Magistrates, we would cut down sin and iniquity with the
sword of Justice.

He is of a shameless forehead that will deny your desire to Magistrates,
Answ.
how did they struggle for the sword of Justice at Salisbury? enquire of the
Citizens, and they will tell you, but it is unlawful for Ministers of the
Gospel to be Magistrates: this appears by the words of our Savior
expressly forbidding his Apostles to be Rulers of Nations, and leaving it to
Princes, the Kings of Nations rule over their people) and they that be great
ones, exercise authority, with you it shall not be ^o: that is, Mat. 20. and
Mark. 10.
you shall neither bear rule, nor exercise authority over your brethren.

Object. The word is (...): they overruled their Subjects with injustice and
violence; Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection page 17^.
you shall not do so.

Answer, Christ in that place does not traduce the power of Princes as unjust
or outrageous, but distinguishes the calling of his Apostles from the manner
of Regiment, which God has allowed the Magistrate: Christ says not Princes be
Tyrants, you shall deal more courteously than they do: but he says Princes
be Lords and Rulers over their people, by Gods Ordinance you shall not be so:
Luke 22.
again the word which Saint Luke has, is (...) without any composition. They
be Lords and Masters: and Saint Paul confesses of himself and other Apostles
(...) not that we be 2 Cor. 1.
Lords or Masters of your Faith, yea the Compound (...) is with power and force
to rule men whether they will or no, not with wrong and injury to oppress
them: and therefore the conclusion is inevitable, that Princes may lawfully
compel and punish their Subjects which Bishops may not.

This distinction between them is evident by their several Commissions which
God has signed: the Prince, not the Priest; bears the sword; Romans 13.
Ergo the Prince, Mat. 26.
not the Priest is Gods Minister to revenge Malefactors: Peter himself was
sharply rebuked by Christ for using the sword, and in Peter all Pastors and
Bishops are straightly charged not to meddle with it: All that take the sword
shall perish with the sword: and of all men a Bishop must be no striker: for
he that should feed his Masters household fall to striking, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit.
1. Mat. 24. 2 Timothy 2.
he shall have his portion with Hypocrites. The servants of God must be gentle
toward all, instructing those that resist, with mildness, not compelling any
with sharpness: their function is limited to the preaching of the word, and
dispensing the Sacraments, which have no kind of compulsion in them, but invite
men only by sober persuasions to believe and embrace the promises of God: to
conclude, Pastors may teach, exhort and reprove, 2 Timothy 3. and 4. S^e Bishop
Lake on page 408. Exodus 19. Bishop Sm^ith his Sermons page 236. Doctor Willet
in Romans page 613.
not force, command or revenge: only Princes be Governors, that is, public
Magistrates to prescribe by their Laws, and punish with the sword such as
resist them within their Dominions, which Bishops may not do, thus far
Bishop Bilson, with whom accord many other Reverend Bishops and Divines, see
the margent.

When there were buyers and sellers in the Temple, our blessed Savior made a
whip of small cords, and drive them out: I wish with all my heart, that our
Non-Residents, that neglecting their calling, thrust themselves into the
calling of the Magistrate, may be whipped out of their holes and dens where
they hide themselves, and by violence be forced to feed their sheep, and if
they will not feed them with the Bread of Life, and give unto them the Waters
of Life to drink, let them be removed ipso facto, for all such wicked errors.

MAny Divines have been zealous in preaching against Non-Residency, Objection
4.
and yet afterward have been Non-Residents themselves, Ergo, upon second
thoughts, Non-Residency is not to be condemned.

Answer, Answ.
Saint Paul tells us, that Demas has forsaken him, and embraced this present
world, yet Demas did not well to forsake the truth, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
neither do they.

THe Laws of the Land allow us in some cases to be Non-Residents, Ergo,
Objection. 5.
it is lawful.

Answer, This permitting of Non-Residency, argues that Non-Residency in it
self is evil, and the rule of conscience must be fetched, not from the Laws
of men, but from the word of God. The Non-Resident is herein like the Jews,
who said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, John 19. 7. when
they could not say, by Gods Law he ought to die: they said by our Law he ought
to die: so when the Non-Resident cannot say, by Gods Law I may be a careless
Non-Resident; he says by man's Law, I may rob the Parish of their Tithes, and
give a miserable allowance to a poor substitute, this is the poorest defense
of all the rest, for if Gods Law forbid thee, can the Laws of man excuse thy
negligence and sacrilege?

SOme of us deny their people their due, Objection 6.
namely of spiritual inspection and instruction, that they might follow their
studies in the Universities, and so be the better fitted for their charge.

Yet Timothy for the Churches behoof, Answ. Master ^ike on the Heart page 235.
forsook Paul's company, his dear Master, with whom he had abode still,
neglecting the Church, he wanted not this pretense, that he did it to furnish
himself with greater store of knowledge; for Paul might have been instead of
many Universities unto him, take notice therefore of the deceitfulness of our
hearts, which shows it self in forging of idle reasons to s^tisfie, and bear
out Non-Residents in the neglect of such duties as are required at their hands
by the word of God

The Apostle desired to see the Romans: Doctor Slater in Romans 1. 11.
(...) I long to see you. It signifies such a desire as is impatient of
delays, whence note the affection of a true Pastor toward his people: how
holily impatient their desires are of detainment from their people: Why good
Ministers will not be Non-Resident
pressed partly by necessity laid upon them, partly constrained by the love of
Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
partly commiserating the state of their people; 2 Cor 5. 14. Mat. 9. 36.
to which might be added the knowledge of their people several estates, for
their better fitting to divide the word aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. To which pattern
how suitable their practice is, that under pretense of fitting themselves to the
work of the Ministry, wilfully absent themselves from their charges, I would
they themselves would rather seriously consider, than give others cause to
complain. I know it is true that a Pastor ought to labor for fitness to
discharge the great work he has undertaken, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
but this I marvel how men can think themselves sufficiently fitted to take
upon them care of souls, and yet by their absence under pretense of study,
acknowledge their present absolute unfitness, ^o teach and exhort their
people: or secondly, how they can imagine by private study in schools of the
Prophets, better to furnish themselves, for pastoral performances, than by
diligent employment of their talents already received amongst their people.

IT is in vain to write against Non-Residency, for first this will bring you
hatred, Object. 7.
secondly they will in one word confute you, and say (...): thirdly they will
not be reformed.

Answ. Answ.
First my friends shall know that I love them by hating their vices, if they
love themselves, they will love those that hate their sins: if they love not
themselves, it matters not though they love not me. Secondly it is an easy
matter for Non-Residents to con^ute me in one word, as some of the (...)
Residents, that are most careless Non-Residents conf^^ed Doctor Twisses Book
against the Arminians, with such like words as these, did ever man write so
simply? and yet many millions of these Non-Residents are not worthy to carry
his books after him.

Thirdly, if they will not be reformed, yet they may be vexed in their
consciences, and persuaded not to open their mouths so impudently in defense
of their idleness, as usually they have done.

CHAP. V.
Propounds certain Questions to be answered by Non-Residents.
Quest. 1. Whether they can say with the Apostl^, I seek not yours but you?

Quest. 2. Whether by their idleness they have not lost their abilities to
preach, there being no life nor power in their Ministry for the most part no
more than when a little child says grace?

Quest. 3. Whether they use to make mention of those that are under their
charge in their prayers, praying for their establishment and profection in
grace? as Paul did, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3.

Quest. 4. Why do they acco^nt such precise Puritans, as say to them, as Saint
Paul commanded the Colossians to say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry
which thou have received in the Lord that thou fulfill it? Col. 4. 9. 17


Quest. 5. Are you not more careful to enquire whether your Curats be
conformable to the Ceremonies of the Church, than whether they be diligent in
preaching? and do you not diswade them from preaching twice upon the Lords
day, and discourage them from taking so much pains for the souls of the
Flock, which your poor Substitutes feed, and you fleece?

Quest. 6. Does not the Apostle by these words, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
who is sufficient for these things? give us to understand that the Ministry
is a heavy burden: but if you may lay the burden upon the shoulders of poor
Curates, is it not to you an easy burden?

Quest. 7. Does not your Non-Residency declare, that when you desired the
Office of a Bishop, or a Minister, you desired not a good work, 1 Timothy 3. ^.
as you should have done, but a good dignity, good riches, good revenewes?

Quest. 8 Do not Non-Residents give entertainment to the sins of Sodom,
viz. to Pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and do they
strengthen the hands of the poor and needy?

Quest. 9. May not Non-residents think that the gain got by spiritual
promotions, joined with spiritual destructions, are more shameful and
infamous than the gains of the Usurer and Promoter?

Quest. 10. Are there not in Hell already, who curse the day that ever
careless Non-Residents were borne, through whose cruelty they are fallen into
Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the fire never goes out?

Quest. 11. May it not be truly said, that you love your Congregations, as
Laban loved Jacob, only to get riches by him, and not for any love to the
Person of Jacob or David; else would not your love be seen by your pains in
the Ministry of Christ Jesus?

Quest. 12. If by your dishonouring God in your places, and unfaithful walking
in your callings, God has justly dishonored you, and made you ^ase and vile,
abject and contemptible in the sight of the people, may you not blame your
selves?

Quest. 13. The Apostle tells us, that the Elders that rule well are worthy of
double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 71.
especially they which labor in the word and Doctrine: by this double Honor
is meant, the Honor of reverence and of maintenance, what reverence therefore
or maintenance do you deserve, that voluntarily absent your selves from your
flocks?

Quest. 14. Pharaoh King of Egypt saw in a dream seven ill favored Kine,
that did eat up the seven fat Kine, and when they had eaten them up, it could
not be known that they had eaten them, but they were still as evil favored,
as they were at the beginning: Is not this Judgment of God upon you also, when
you have swallowed up that profits of many good benifices in the Country, are
not many of you at the years end, as poor, as your poor Curates, does not
God curse you with a curse?

Quest. 15. Do as thou would be done by, is a Principle in Nature, and it
must be understood and expounded, according to the grounds of a good
conscience, dictates of right reason, and directions of a just and rectified
will: but you idle and lazy Non-Residents, would not that your Curates should
have the profits of your livings, and that the souls of the people should be
fed with your continual pains and labors, they affording unto you a poor
and miserable maintenance, Ergo, why do you that to your Substitutes, that you
would not have done unto your selves?

Quest. 16. Experience of all Histories and times shows us* what advantages
the Devil has won, upon godly and industrious men otherwise (as upon David
in the matter of Uriah, and many others) only by watching the opportunity of
their idle hours, and plying them with suggestions of noisome lusts, at such
times, as given themselves, but some little intermission, from their ordinary
employment: how will he not then lead captive at his pleasure, those
Non-Residents, whose lives are nothing else but a long vacation, and their
whole care nothing but to make up a number, and to wast the good creatures of
God?

Quest, 17. It is well known in this our Land how both Church and
Commonwealth groned under the burden of those heavy lubbers the Monks: the
Commonwealth, whilst they became Lords of very little less (by their
computation, who have traveled in the search,) then the one half of the
Temporalities of the Kingdom: and the Church, whilst, they engrossed into
their hands the fruits of most of the best Benefices in the Realm; allowing
scarce so much as the chafe toward the maintenance of those that tread out
the Corn: the Land is purged of these overspreading Locusts, for which we
praise God, and should we not have as great cause, to break forth into the
mention of Gods praise, if our Non-Residents, that relish ease, and under
pretense of praying in Cathedral Churches etc. leave off the Ministry, and
live upon the sweat of other men's brows were wholly removed?

Quest. 18. It is said of the Soldiers, that they bowed the knee before Jesus,
and mocked him, saying, God save the King of the Jews, Matthew. 27. 29. and do
not our careless Non-Residents resemble these wicked soldiers in mocking
Christ, when they will bow the knee before him, put off their hats, and make
legs at the name of Jesus; but they will not in their own persons feed his
sheep, in their own persons though they be commanded so to do, John 21. 15.

Quest. 19. A learned Divine lays down the lamentable face of our Church in
respect that so many of her children, Doctor Sutton on Romans 11. p. 254.
who should be like Barnabas, prove like Benoni, a heaviness and woe unto her:
he tells us (which we find true by woeful experience,) that too many
Ministers disgrace the Ministry, many that are scrued (as it were) into this
office, are the great blemishes of it; sometimes in doing something else,
semetime in doing nothing, sometime in doing evilly: and does not this saying
of this Reverend Divine whisper in the ear of careless Non-Residents, and
persuade them to meet God by repentance and a reformed conversation?

Quest. 20. When Saint Paul says to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 20.
I would I were with you now, he shows, that the presence of Pastors with
their people is a thing most necessary. And there are two reasons thereof, one
is to prevent spiritual dangers, Perkins in ^ocum. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Ephel. 6. ^.
12.
which are manifold and continual, in that the Devil seeks continually whom
he may devour: and we fight against Principalities and powers in heavenly
things, in this respect Pastors are Watchmen and Overseers. Secondly, the
pre^ence of Pastors with their people, serves to redress things amiss, and
to recover them that be in Apostasy: as Saint Paul says in this place, were
it not therefore to be wished, that this mind of Paul were in all Pastors,
that with one consent they might say to their people, I would I were with you
now?

Q^est. 21. When Saint Paul says, Gal. 4. 20.
Least I should run in vain, he gives us to understand, that the Ministry of
the word is not a work of ease, or pleasure, but a labor: nay a continued
labor, like to the running of a race: were it not therefore to be wished,
that the Ministers of the Gospel would so labor and walk in this calling,
that they might be able to say with Paul, I have fought a good ^ight, I have
finished my course, etc. and if they will not labor, why should they have
their wages for doing nothing?

Qu. 22. When Saint Paul says, let him that is taught in the word, make him
that has taught him, Gal. 6. ^ 6.
partaker of all his goods; is this the meaning of the Apostle, (...)
communicate all thy goods with thy teacher: that is, with a Non-Resident that
lives at a Cathedral, and visites his Parishes once or twice in a year with a
hungry Sermon?

Quest. 23. The means that you Non-Residents allow unto your Substitutes,
seldom exceeds thirty pounds per annum, though your Benefices be worth two
hundred, or three hundred pounds by the year, usually you allow twenty or
sixteen pounds per ann^m, to the ox that treads out the Corn, and muzzle
his mouth from receiving any more. Do you think that this base allowance,
proceeding from your base Spirits, is sufficient to defray all charges, to
satisfy all payments, to answer all expectations of wife and children for
portions, of Strangers for Hospitality, is this sufficient to keep them and
their children from begging or starving? for God's sake let the laborers have
their due wages, shall not the Parliament do well to compel you thereunto?

Quest. 24. It is the Ordinance of God, 1 Cor. 9. v. 14
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: but you
careless Non-Residents do not constantly preach the Gospel. Ergo why should
you live of the Gospel?

Quest. 25. The Apostle Peter, exhorts Ministers to feed the flock of God, etc.
his reason is: and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive
an incorruptible Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 4. May lazy Non-Residents
expect this Crown promised, when they neglect the work of the Lord, in the
Lords House, to the Lords servants, upon the Lords day, and receive an
honorable maintenance for the same?

Quest. 26. When the Bishop gave unto you the Order of Priesthood, See the
Book of Consecration of Deacons Priests etc.
he demanded of you these questions: First whether you would give your
faithful diligence, always so to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and
the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has
received the same, according to the commandments of God, so that you may teach
the people committed to your charge, with all diligence to keep and observe
the same? and you answered, I will so do by the help of the Lord. Secondly,
he demanded, whether you would be ready with all faithful diligence, to
banish and drive away all erroneous and strange Doctrines, contrary to Gods
word, and to use both public and private monitions and exhortations, as well
to sick as to the whole, within your cures as need shall require, and occasion
be given? and you answered, I will, the Lord being my helper. Now resolve me
these questions, first whether these promises made by you, in the sight of God,
of the Angels, and before many witnesses: proceeded from honest and upright
hearts, since you live from your particular Cures, no necessity compelling you
thereunto? Secondly, and whether God will not call you to a fearful account
one day for the breach of these honest promises? Saint Hierome condemning such
undiscreet hastiness, says, Hierom. iin cap. 5. Eccles.
melius est non promittere, quam promissa non facere: and melius est ancipitem
diu deliberare sententiam, quam in verbis esse facilem, in operibus difficilem:
it is better not to promise, then not to keep promise: and it is better
doubtfully and long to deliberate, than to grant easily, and perform hardly.
Gregory observing this fault in the Jews says, Exodus 24 3. G^^g (...) 31. cap
^9.
Iudaeorum populum locustae significabant, subitos saltus dantes, and protinus
ad terram cadentes. Saltus enim dabant, cum praecepta Domini se implere
promitterent, ad terram cadebant, cum factis degenerent: the people of the
Jews were signified by the Locusts, which used suddenly to leap up, and
forthwith to fall down to the earth again: they did (as it were leap up,
when in words they promised to do all things, which the Lord had said, but
they fell to the Earth again, when in their deeds they denied the same, and
may not we truly say the careless Non-Residents amongst us, are signified by
the Locusts, who make many promises when they enter into the Ministry, but
when they have the charge of souls, they cry out with these rebels, Psalm. 2.
Let us break their bands, and cast their cords from us, and therefore I will
thus conclude.

From all careless Non-Residents good Lord deliver us. We beseech thee to
hear us good Lord.
FINIS.

