A ROYAL POSITION, Whereby it is proved, that it is against the Common Laws of
ENGLAND TO Depose a KING: OR, AN ADDITION TO A BOOK, Entitled, RESOLVED UPON
THE QUESTION: OR, A QUESTION RESOLVED

Concerning the Right which the KING has to Hull, or any other Fort or place
of strength for the defense of the Kingdom.

By PETER BLAND of Grays-Inne, Gent.

London, Printed for JOHN FIELD. 1642.

To his ever Honored Uncle, HENRY SHELLY Esquire, one of the Members of the
Honorable House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
SIr, 'twas not the hope of adding either to your houour, or my own profit,
(but my certain knowledge of the encouragement which any pious endeavors
shall receive from your religious self) that made me not hazard, but presume
on your acceptance: were my Position contrary to what it is, I might then be
sencible of a fear, and suspect its welcome; because I am confident that
nearness of relation cannot bribe your judgment, no not to purchase but a
slight view from your observing eye. But being as it is, no way contradictory
to what I affirmed before: I hope it will not breed in you the least suspicion
of a change in my affections: Sir my hope of your acceptance, is not grounded
upon the agitation of so poor a principle, as that of Kindred, for I am sure
that your judicious and always just censure, will not be pleased with that
from me, which from another would prove distastefull; therefore (for my part) I
shall not be refractory, but submit to your profound judgment, and whether you
approve or disprove, I shall still remain what I ever was,

Your faithful Servant and Nephew, PETER BLAND.

A Royal Position.
I must confess it is no way pleasing to me to dispute the power of a KING,
for had I fortunes of my own, so far as those would reach, I would nere urge
property against my Sovereigns Commands, and no man ought to complain of my
grievance but my self, and if I were content to lose that which the Subjects
Liberty calls Meum, I hope it is no prejudice to that it calls Tuum: But when I
look upon the general cause (as at this time) it is otherwise; therefore now I
hold every man bound to lay particular cases aside, and sacrifice his best
endeavors, for a timely composure of these general and unseasonable
distractions, and the best way I could think on is this, viz. Neither for
private ends on the one side, to flatter the King, by giving him more power
then the Law has settled in him; nor for by-respects on the other side, to
abate of the Kings due, and give it to the Parliament; but with Allegiance to
the one, and submission to the other (as near as I can) give both their right.

And truly I cannot be made sensible that I have done otherwise, only 'twas
my misfortune to fall under the misapprehension of diverse, who (from an
Argument I used in the former Impressure) have raifed a consequence as
dangerous, as the Subject of discourse was nice.

The Accusation against me is, that I did implicitly hold it lawful to Depose
a KING: the ground of their Accusation is this:

In the former Impression, Fol. 13. this objection was urged, viz. The KING
has the Kingdom by way of Trust, now by Law a Trust cannot be Countermanded;
therefore Sir John Hothams keeping of Hull against the Kings Command was
illegal.

To which my Answer was thus, viz. I do confess that by Law a Trust cannot be
Countermanded; but yet I shall take a difference between the Trust of a private
man's estate, and the trust of a Kingdom, and if that difference should not
hold, I showed the mischief that would ensue, for then our case were in short
but thus:

We have entrusted the King with the whole Kingdom, and this trust cannot be
in any part countermanded by us again, and if so, then the Kings estate is as
good as absolutely his own (I mean) for his commanding power, though not for
his disposing power; and if so, then we cannot make use of our own staff, when
we are in fear of being beaten by a foreign Force, because by that means,
that is, by the Kings Commanding Power, the Parliament; that is, the whole
Kingdom may be bound to the peace.

But now some will here object that we ought not to have such a thought of the
King, as to think that he would by his commanding power bind us to the peace,
when a foreign Force is coming against us.

To this I answer, that 'twere poor policy for him to do it, but that it is no
dishonor to the King for me to suppose, that some Traitorously minded
Favorite, may at such a time persuade him to use his Commanding power,
pretending some advantage to the Crown (as all Traitors do) when nothing is
more intended then their own Traiterous ends; therefore it was the wisdom of our
Ancesters the Law makers, to keep the power out of his hands, not so much for
fear what he would do of himself, as what others might possibly persuade him
to do.

I must confess I might have answered the objection, with the authority of
Parliament who did employ Sir John Hotham, but not imagining any would draw
that consequence (they accuse me with) from the differenc I answered with, I
waved that answer I might have given from the power which the Parliament have
above the Law, If the Law had bin so, that in case of the trust of the Kingdom,
it could not be in any part countermanded.

But truly I cannot have any ground in that difference for that conclusion:
For I took the difference in answer of an objection, concerning a particular
place, as Hull, not concerning the whole Kingdom; and though it may be lawful
in that particular case (by reason of some great mischief or inconvenience
which might otherwise ensue) yet it may not be lawful in the general; for who
knows not but the Law will rather suffer a particular inconvenience then a
general mischief.

Besides, I meant not an absolute and perpetual Countermand of that particular
place neither; for that were utterly to extinguish and take away the Kings
Right for ever; but I meant a temporary Countermand only, that was, as long as
(in the judgment of that Great Counsel the PARLIAMENT) the urgency of the
necessity did require it: and many things we find are and may be done for a
certain time, which cannot be done for ever; as in case of the Peers of the
Realm, it is the Birthright of a Baron to Vote in the House of Lords in time of
Parliament; yet we see and find it adjudged, that a Baron or an Earl or any
Peer of the Land, may be disabled to sit during his life, or during such a
time, but yet his heirs cannot be disabled so long as their veins are filled
with Noble blood.

Besides, I meant that that temporary Countermand can never be done but by the
Parliament neither; and if they should not have power to do it being the
Kingdom representative, then the King had more power then the Kingdom, which is
absurd says Fox, Vol. primum. Fol. 879.

And thus I have explained my self, sufficiently I hope to prevent farther
mistakes, and to show that for my part, I shall for ever pray that the Crown
may stand as firm upon His Majesty's Head as ever 'twas, and may it long
continue there, and for ever to his Posterity after him.

And yet I fear there are many fiery zealous spirits who embrace the tenet, and
are glad to find any premises from whence they may but with some color draw
their conclusion: nay and such as may have honest hearts too, and be earnestly
desirous of a Reformation, only the zeal of their houses may eat them up; but
for such as do hold the opinion, I am sure they have no encouragement from the
Parliament, neither can any thing that the Parliament has done be any ground
for their uulawfull hopes, and from me they shall have no more fuel to
increase their flames then this, viz. It Is against the Common Laws of England
to Depose a King, a thing that was held damnable by no less then two Acts of
Parliament, the one in Edward the seconds time, the other in Edward the thirds
time.

Had I had the gift of foretelling the diverse objections and conclusions, that
would have been raised (by the several Readers) from my Arguments, I would
have laid them so, that no Conventicling Tubman should have made my words his
text, raising from thence so damned a Doctrine; but that was impossible, and
therefore seeing I could not then avoid it, let me now labor to clear my self
by striving to convince others that hugg the tenet, which I shall do by two
Arguments:

First, from the Common Law of England, which says the KING can do no wrong,
the reason is good, because all his active Offices are disposed of, and he
never executes none of them Himself, and therefore what ever wrong is done,
it is done by his Officers, and they are to answer for it, and therefore the
Parliament lays the fault upon his Evil Counselors, not upon the King
himself: now then I say, if the King can do no wrong, then you must allow that
he does none; and if so, how then can any man hold it lawful to Depose him;
surely you will not be so unjust as to hold that he may be deposed without a
cause, and suppose a cause you cannot, for the Law will not allow of such a
supposition.

Again, it is a rule in Law, that unumquodque ligamen eo ligamine disolvitur quo
ligatum fuit, now that Ligamen of institution or ordinance of Royal Dignity
(as you say your self) was not only humane but partly divine, for as you say
jure Coronae, the King was man's appointed, so you likewise say, that jure
personae, he was God Anointed; now if it be so that he be as well Divine as
Humane, how then can Humane Laws undo any more then what human Authority did
at first institute? now according to this argument if you Depose a King, you
must thwar^ that rule in Law, and contra principium negantem non est
disputandum.

The next argument is from Gods Law, which is the better way for weak man,
either to humble himself under the affliction God lays upon him, or stoutly to
his power oppose him; surely you will grant that to stand on tiptoes against
God, is not the safest way; why then for arguments sake, let us supponere quod
non est supponendum, admit that a King himself be as bad as bad may be; or
which is most usual, admit that he be drawn and persuaded by his Counselors
to do that which is illegal, and to the great prejudice of his Subjects, why
now is not this a scourge laid by God upon the Kingdom, to suffer the King to
be thus persuaded and possessed? Surely yes, why then do you think it the best
way to Depose that King presently, as if you would have the Land flow with
milk and honey in despite of God? or as if God did not know whether he sent
him when he first bestowed him upon this Kingdom at his Birth; or whose child
he should be when he first framed him in the womb; in my opinion (I am sure I
my self am) you may be zealous against the Cavaliers, and yet not envy the
King, and certainly you may worship God aright without crucifying his Son, you
may honor God and not dishonor the King.

Again, if God punish a Son with a sharp and cruel father, were it fit for
that son (thinking to enjoy a greater liberty then before) to kill his father,
and so Depose him as I may say (for every man is a King in his own family) as
if God could not whipp him with another lash: apply it to your selves.

Yet mistake me not, I blame you not for your good affections, and for being
assistant to the Parliament, but rather for commendation tell you, that if any
thing can be meritorons (in my opinion) that is, only this caveat I give to
the vulgars (for knowing and learned men* I hope will not entertain a thought
of it) that their private hopes or inward thought reach not beyond the intent
of the Parliament, for fear lest their honest endeavoures should fail
(notwithstanding your large contributions) by reason of your unjust intents.
You do well to stand for your Mother Englands right, yet take heed you destroy
not your Fathers the Kings; for Gods command of obedience to your Parents, does
not except against the honor you owe your Father.

And thus I have discharged my own conscience concerning that point, whether I
have pleased others or not I know not, and indeed care not; I could never yet
study to please the roving fancies of the giddy multitude any farther then
truth and that little knowledge I have would guide me; no, though the greatest
recompense of a glorious, but fading world, were by my own thoughts presented
to me.

And now seeing I am upon publishing an addition, I shall correct some of the
chiefest faults of the last impression, so pass by the rest being but faults
of the press.

The chiefest was indeed occasioned by my own neglect in leaving a whole leaf
out of the Printers copy, and it was this:

In the 7. leaf of the first impression there was an objection raised; but the
answer was omitted, the objection was this:

Some that endeavor to destroy the trust, and maintain that the King has his
right to Hull, et per consequens, to all the Kingdom by descent, do urge the
place in Calvin's case, where it is said the King holds the Kingdom of England by
Birthright inherent by descent from the blood Royal, whereupon succession
does attend.

To which objection I answer, that those words whereupon succession does
attend, is a direct comment upon that place; for the King is the Heir apparent
of King James his Father, now being so, he is capax coronae, that is, he is his
Fathers successor too; and so he holds the Kingdom by succession: now the
successor is the Heir of the Kingdom, Dan. fol. 28. not the heir of the King
only, and that is the reason it is usually said, To the King, his heirs and
successors, where the word heirs is first named, because he is first heir to
the King, by title of descent before he can be heir to the Kingdom, that is,
before he can be his successor; so that there is a difference between
Haereditas and successio, for they signify two several capacities, the first
signify his natural capacity as he is King jure personae, that is, as Gods
Anointed, the other signifying his politic capacity, or his jus corona, that
is, as he is man's appointed.

Bracton speaking of the King and his Oath, and how that he swears to
administer Justice to all his Subjects, to the utmost of his power; go;
forward and says, Et ad hoc creatus est and electus, which two words, creatus
and electus, do fully prove the former Distinction; that is, they prove him to
be Gods Anointed, jure personae, and Man's appointed, jure coronae; Bracton,
cap. 9.

I find the same Distinction made good too, out of holy Writ; Saul and David
were both Anointed by Samuel, but yet the peoples consent was so necessary,
that they had not the Crown till they consented to it, for David was twenty
years without the Crown after he was anointed, and the text says, Saul fought
a Battle before his creation, 1. Sam. 11. 5. and yet he was anointed before the
Battle: so that the word creation in that text, justifies what Fortescue says,
Fol. 31. the intent of the people is the primum vivens, having within it blood,
that is to say, politic provision for the utility and wealth of the same
people, which it imparteth as well to the head (that is) the King, as to the
Members.

There are some that have gotten a new objection, which is not without some
ground I must confess, and it is this; It Is said in Calvin's case, Cook Lib. 7.
Fol. 13. A. that before any judicial or municipall Laws were, Kings did dare
jura of themselves, and decide causes according to natural equity, and were
not tied to any rule; or formality of Law, and yet they were Kings, and then
say they could not have any politic capacity, for that being but fictio
juris, can be no ancienter then the Law whose fiction it was.

To which I answer, that the very place my Lo: Cook there cites for his proof
is a sufficient comment upon that place, for he there quotes Fort. cap. 12. and
13. which very places are quoted in the former impression of this book, Fol 10.
by which you may see that he spoke of other Kingdoms, not of Kingdom of
England, who raised themselves into a Body, and so got the start of other
Nations.

Many other things I should also correct of the former impressions, but I
cannot in regard I am forced to print this addition by it self; otherwise I
should have corrected them all, and have brought the additions in their right
places; but that Printers must now be pleased, who like Players touch naught
but what will take: Newly revived, is quite forgoten with them, nay and with
the Stationers too, but when they cheat a Puisne with a new cover upon an old
book, with leafes pasted together to conceal an aged blott, never Printed but
once before, is not for their turn, they abhor the beast, yet est natura
hominum novitatis avida is their Creed though the Beasts language: An ingenious
Stationer told me 'twould not sell without a new Title, (which made me change
the dress of this addition) yet he may be none of those that can find no ears
for a Sermon at the second preaching unless the text be changed.

And thus I am willing to submit to an inconvenience for their profits, rather
then my words should be made the ground of Arguments so terrible as to shake a
Crown, and so maliciously envious and irreligous, as to strike at Royal
Dignity.

FINIS.

