A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLAND of JAMAICA;

With the other Isles and Territories in AMERICA, to which the English are
Related, viz.

Barbados, St. Christophers, Nievis, or Mevis, Antego, St. Vincent, Dominica,
Montserrat, Anguilla, Barbada, Bermudes, Carolina, Virginia, Maryland,
New York, New England, New Foundland.


Taken from the Notes of Sr. Thomas Linch Knight, Governor of Jamaica; and
other Experienced Persons in the said Places. Illustrated with Maps.

Published by Richard Blome.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, and sold by the Booksellers of London, and
Westminster, 1672.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES II.
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
THIS small Treatise, or Description, of Your Majesty's Dominions and
Territories in America, humbly presents its self unto Your Royal Patronage, by
the hands of

Your MAJESTY'S most humble and obedient Subject and Servant, Richard Blome.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving the Favor of some Notes from my Honored Friend Sir Thomas Linch
Knight, about the Description of the Island of Jamaica, whose Worth and
Ingenuity has lately merited from his Majesty the Government of the said Isle;
as likewise the opportunity of several Papers relating to the Affairs and
Description of the other Isles and Territories in America, wherein the English
are concerned, which I received from the hands of several of my Friends who are
related thereunto, I thought them very fit to be Published. The said Notes and
Papers I have digested into a clearer and more compendious Method; being brief
Descriptions thereof, which this small Treatise only aims at; and not to
trouble the Reader with large and unnecessary discourses no ways proper for the
Design in hand: for by that means, I might (by the help of a large Print which
some Publisher of Books call Ornamental) have put them to an unnecessary charge
in Buying, and as great a trouble in Reading. I have also added some Maps for
the more utility thereof, which were taken from the Latest Surveys.

Rich. Blome.

Errata.
In Page 126. Line 8. the word [not] to be omitted.

A NEW SURVEY, OR, Description of the Island of JAMAICA.
THe Island of Jamaica lies betwixt the Tropicks in the 17. Its Situation.
and 18. Degrees of Northern Latitude; and bears from off the Island of
Hispaniola Eastward, about 35. Leagues.

From the Island of Cuba Northwards, about 20. Leagues.

From Porto Bello Southwards, about 160. Leagues.

From Carthagena South-easterly about 140. Leagues.

From Rio de la Hache in the Continent South-easterly, 160. Leagues.

The form and Extent of the Isle.
It is something inclined to an Oval Form, Its Form Extent.
being from East to West 170 Miles in length; and from North to South in the
midst where it is broadest about 70, it waxing narrower and narrower at both
extreme ends.

From East to West along the the midst of the Isle runns a continued Ridge of
lofty Mount^ins which are full of fresh Springs, whence flow the many Rivers
that so plentifully waters the Island, to the great refreshment and
accommodation of the Inhabitants.

The Soil, Fertility, etc.
It is in most parts (especially the north) of a rich and fat Soil, Its Soil,
and Fertility.
being of a blackish Earth, in many places mixed with a Clay, and in some, as
the south West Parts, it is of a more red and loose Earth, but every where
incomparable apt to produce, and liberally to answer the Cultivators cost and
pains for what is planted; being always Springing, and its Trees and Plants
never disrobed of their summer Livery, every month being to them as our May, or
April.

Here are many Savanas which are intermixed with the Hills and Woods, Savanas,
formerly Fields of Indian Maiz.
(especially in the North and South parts, where are great store of wild
Cattle) which by report were sometimes Feilds of Indian Maiz, or Wheat, which
when the Spaniards became Masters of the Isle, they converted to Pasture for
the feeding of their Cattle; bringing hither from Spain, Horses, Cowes, Hoggs,
and Asenegros for a Breed, after they had destroyed all the Natives, or
Indians, which according to calculation, did amount to about 60000. which
Cattle did exceedingly increase, witness the great herds of Horses, and other
Cattle, that are now wild in the Woods; besides the great quantities of Cows
that have been Killed by the English, since they became Masters thereof: And
these Savanas are the most barren, as being so long made use of without
Tillage; yet does they produce such great Plenty of Grass, that the English are
constrained oft-times to burn it up.

The Air, and Temperature.
The Air is here more temperate then in any of the Caribbee Isles, The Air and
Temperature
as seated more Northerly, and of as mild a temperature (as to Heat) as any
place between the Tropicks, being always cooled with fresh Breezes, that
constantly bow easterly, and refreshed with frequent Showers of Rain, and such
Dews that fall in the night (much quickening the growth of what is Planted) that
it may truly be called temperate and healthful; and by reason of its continual
Verdure (as I have before noted) exceeding Delightful.

And it is observed that the west and east Parts of the Isle are most subject
to Rain and Winds; and the Woods being also thick, and close, renders the
Air less agreeable, then the North and South Parts, which are more plain and
open, and less subject to Rain and Winds. The Mountains which run along the
middle of the Isle from one extreme point to the other, are much Cooler then
the other parts, insomuch that often times in the mornings there is small white
Frosts.

This Island is in no parts troubled with those storms of Wind called
Huricanes, Huricanes not in this Isle.
which all the Caribbee Isles are much pestered with, having sometimes by the
violence of those Gusts, their Ships forced out of their Roads; and on Shore,
their Houses blown down, and provisions, etc. rooted out of the Earth.

The Weather.
The Weather of this Isle is less certain then in the rest of the Caribbee
Islands; the most observable wett seasons are in November or May; The Winter
known only by Rain and Thunder
there being no seemable Winter but by a little more Rain, and Thunder, in the
winter months.

The winds here constantly blow all the day from nine in the morning easterly,
and become more fresher as the Sun mounteth higher, by reason of which, at
midd-day Travel or Labor is sufferable. But from eight at Night to about eight
in the Morning, it frequently blows Westerly; and with these Winds, or Breezes,
the Vessels get out of the Harbors, and ply to wind-ward.

There is scarce any sencible lengthning or shortning of the Days or Nights,
Days, and Nights almost equal.
but are almost always of an equal length.

The Sea ebbs and flows seldom above a foot.

Hurricanes are here never known, as before I have noted; nor has any Vessel
been lost, or cast away on the Coast, since the English were Masters of it.

The Commodities, which this Island Produces.
This Isle has, and produces many excellent Commodities and that in exceeding
great Plenty, as Sugars so good, that they outsell those of the Barbados 5. s.
per Cent. there being at present about Sugar Works, Sugars.
which may produce yearly 1710 thousand weight of Sugar, those still
increasing, and diverse others a going up.

Cocao, the principal, Cocao.
and most beneficial Commodity of the Isle, which I shall anon take occasion to
speak of more at large; and that by reason of the aptness of the ground to
produce and bear it above other places: here being at present above 60. Cocao
Walks; besides abundance of young Walks which are a growing up, and still more
a planting, so that in time it will become the only noted place for that
Commodity in the world, which is so much made use of by us, and other Nations,
but in far greater measure by the Spaniards who alone are enough to take of the
product of the Isle; so that there is no fear that it will become a drugg, and
lie upon the hands of the Planter.

Indico this Isle produces very good, Indico
there being at present more then 60. Indico Works, which may produce about
50000. weight of Indico per. Annum, and do likewise much increase.

Cotton here has an especial fineness, Cotton.
and is by all preferred before that of the Carribbee Isles.

Tobacco is here indifferent good, Tobacco.
being esstemed better then that of the Barbados, but it is not much planted,
only a sufficiency to serve themselves; the other Commodities being more
benificial.

Hydes, Hydes
of which great quantityes have been Yearly made, and are found to be very
large and good. Tortoise Shells.


Great store of Tortoises are taken on this Coast, whose meat (being excellent)
they eat, and their Shells so much esteemed here in England for several curious
Works, finds good vent.

Here are great variety of Woods for Dyers, Curious Woods.
as Fustick, Red-Wood, a kind of Logg-Wood, etc. also Caedar, Mothogeney,
Brasilletto, Lignum-Vitae, Ebony, Granadilla, and many other excellent sweet
smelling, and curious Woods fit for choice Works, whose names are as yet not
known; nor indeed their excellencies; but are exported in great quantities.

Copper, Copper.
they are assured is in this Isle, for they have seen the Ore, wrought out of a
Mine here; and by the Spaniards report, the Bells that hung in the great Church
of St. Iago, were cast of the Copper of this Island.

Silver may probably be here, Silver.
as well as in Cuba, and in the Maine; and the English have been showed where
the Spaniards had found a Silver Mine, behind the Mountains west of Cagway.

Ambergreece (according to the Spaniards report) has been often found on this
Coast. Ambergreece.


Salt, Salt.
this Island might make great quantities, there being already 3. good and very
large Salt-ponds, containing near 4000. Acres of ground; but as yet they make
no more then for their own use: although there was made in one Year about
10000 Bushells; and the manager thereof, Cap. Jo. Noye, did affirm that he
could have made as many Tunns if they had had Vent.

Saltpeter has been found in many parts of the Island. Saltpeter.


Ginger grows better in this Isle, Ginger.
then in many of the Carribbe Islands; of which here is sufficiency planted.

Codd-pepper which is so commonly used in all the West Indies, Cod-Peper.
grows plentifully here.

Piemente, Piemente.
or Jamaica Pepper, a spice of the form of East India Pepper, very Aromatical,
and of a curious Gousto, having the mixed taste of diverse Spices, grows here in
great plenty, wild in the Mountains. But the Spaniards did set a high esteem
thereon, and exported it as a very choice Commodity, as indeed it is; and now
it is begun to be planted by the English, and will become a good Commodity.

Drugs are here in great abundance, Druggs.
as Guacum, China-Roots, Sasapharilla, Cashia Fistula, Tamerindes, Vinillos,
Achiots or Anetto, which is like to prove a good Commodity. Gumms.
Here are also dive^^ Gums, and Roots, wherewith experienced Planters do cure
many Hurts, Ulcers, and Distempers of the Body. And by the report of an
intelligent Doctor, which made it his business to search after such things,
here are likewise Contrayerna, Cyperas, Aloes, Assole Pie, Adjuntum, Nigrum,
Cucumis, Agrestis, Sumach, Acacia, Miselto, with many other Druggs, Balsoms and
Gums, whose names are not known, or remembered: but the Planters begin to be
more expert in these Drugs, and endeavor to increase them, and supply England
therewith.

Cochaneil is produced by a Plant that grows in this Isle, Cochaneil.
but as yet the English want experience to husband it; easterly Winds, and many
other things being Enemies to its growth, besides the difficulty of making it.

These with some others are the Commodities that this Island produces, which
if well improved, would soon become the best, and Richest Plantation that ever
the English were, (or are like to be) Masters of.

I shall in the next place give you an Account of the management of a Cocao
Walk, with a calculation of its Costs, and Profits, as it was lately estimated
by that judicious and great encourager of the Planters, S. Tho. Modiford
Baronett, late Governor of the said Island.

Directions about a Cocao Walk.
First, take up 5 or 600. Acres of Land, which be sure choose in a good place
proper to produce the Cocao, which will cost for the Surveying and Patent 010
l. 0 s. For 3 Negro men, and as many Negro women at 20 l. per head 120 l. 0 s.
For 4 White Servants, with their Passage and Diet for a year 080 l. 0 s. For 20
Axes, 20 Bills, and 20 Hoos for them 005 l. 0 s. For 6. Negroes Diet, for Six
months at 2 s. per Day, until you have some provisions Grown in your
Plantation. 018 l. 5 s. For an Overseer to look after the Servants, for his
Wages* and Diet at 40 s. per Month 024 l. 0 s. In all 257 l. 5 s.
And for the employing these Servants in your Plantation as follows:
supposing them to Land, and to be on the Plantation the first of March, and
that they have by the middle of that month (as they may very easily) cleared a
convenient place, and built fitting houseing for the lodging them. Then put
them to falling, cleaning, and planting a Potato piece of 4. Acres, which ten
hands will very well do by the middle of April: after this, you may clean, and
plant with Rue and Plantin-Trees, until the last of February, which is above 10
Months; in which time they may with ease have cleansed and Planted 21. Acres,
besides keeping them clean which are Planted and are still a Planting; and in
this time, which compleats the Year, you may be full of Potatoes and Corn, and
within 2. Months of the new Year, with Plantins, and a small stock of Hoggs,
and Fowls; so that you will be at no more charge for Provisions for your
Servants. And then to keep this clean, and to plant the Cocao-Walk, and for
five more Negro Men, and 5. Negro-Women to buy about the first of March
following, at 20 l. per Negroe comes to 200 l.

And in that Month you will have Planted Cocao-Trees out of the Nuts, or Seed,
betwixt all the Rows of the Plantin-Trees, that are 6. Foot high; so that by
the first of June, the whole 21 Acres that were planted the last Year, will be
full of Cocao-Trees, and by that time you will have (besides much other work
done) 21. Acres of Cocao-Trees in the ground; which in less then 4. years, from
the Planting, will begin to bear Cods, and in a year after, produce complete
Cropps. And according to experience, an Acre does produce every year about
1000. pound Weight; which at Jamaica is worth 4 l. per Cent. which for the 21
Acres, does amount unto 840 l. per Ann. Although this last year, by reason
their Cropps were blasted, it is at present far dearer, the Hundred weight at
London being now worth 18. pound Sterling.

The charges of gathering and houseing the Cocao, is inconsiderable, only
Cloths or Baggs to put it in, which with some other incident charges, may be
reckoned at the most (as all things else have been) to Amount to 42. l. 15. s.
more, which makes up just 500. l.

Note, that all this that is Planted, is done in 15. months, and the Cocao
bears not completely until the sixth year from the first beginning, or coming;
so that you will have four years and nine months at liberty with your Servants,
either to increase the Cocao-Walk, building of convenient houses, and making
of Garidens for pleasure; or else you may fall on Ginger, Indico, or some other
Commodity for present profit, which perhapps may be necessary for such as
cannot forbear their Money, until the Cocao Walk does come to perfection as
aforesaid: after which, you will find sufficient profit as is expressed,
Sickness, Of Servants.
Mortality, and running away Excepted. Yet it cannot be expected, but that as
the Island increases in this Commodity, they must somewhat abate the present
Price, and content themselves with a more moderate Gains.

And according to this Calculation proportionably a greater or lesser
Cocao-Walk may be undertaken, and performed.

Their Cattle.
In this Isle are greater abundance of Cattle then in most of the English
Plantations in America; as Horses, Horses.
which are here so plentiful, that a good Horse may be bought for 6 or 7 l.

Their Cowes are very large, Cowes.
and so numerous, that although there has been every Year so many Killed, yet
their number seems not much to be lessoned.

Assnegroes and Mules (both wild and Tame) are very many, Asnegroes. Mules.
which are found to be very serviceable to the Inhabitants.

Their Sheep are large, Sheep:
and tall, and their Flesh good, but their Wool is long, hairy, and little
worth.

Goats are many, Goats.
which thrive exceedingly well, the Country being very fit for them.

Hoggs are here in exceeding great plenty, Hoggs.
as well those wild in the Mountains, as tame in the Plantations, whose Flesh
is far better tasted, and more nourishing and easier to be digested then those
of England; which is the reason that it is so much eaten in this Island; as
indeed throughout the West Indies.

Their Fish.
This Island has both in the Rivers, Excellent Fish in great plenty.
Bays, Roads, and Creeks, very excellent Fish, and in such abundance that it
contributes much to the feeding of the Inhabitants; and those that frequent
this Isle, say, that they have few or none of those sorts common to us in
England; but such great Variety of those appropriated to the Indies, that it
would be too tedious to Repeat the names of them, if they were known or
Remembered.

The principal sort is the Tortoise, which they take plentifully on the Coast;
Tortoise.
and about 20. or 30. Leagues to the Leeward of port Negril, by the Isles of
Camavos, in the months of May, June, and July, do resort great store of Ships
from the Carribbee Isles to Victual and Load with this Fish, it being reputed
to be the wholsomest and best provision in all the Indies.

Their Fowls.
Here are very great plenty of tame Hens, great variety of Tame and Wild Fowl.
Turkies, and some Ducks; but of wild Foul infinite store, as Ducks, Teale,
Wigen, Geese, Turkeys, Pigeons, Guine-Hens, Plovers, Flemingo's, Snipes,
Parats, Parachetos, with very many others, whose names are not known.

The Fruits.
There are great plenty of choice and excellent Fruits in this Island,
Excellent Fruits.
as Oranges, Pome-granates, Cocar-Nuts, Limes, Guavars, Mammes, Alumee-Supotas,
Suppotillias, Avocatas, Cashues, Prickle-Aples, Prickle-Pears, Grapes,
Sower-Sops, Custard-Aples, Dildowes, and many others whose names are not known,
or too tedious to name, besides Plantains, Pines, etc.

Their Herbs, and Roots.
Here likewise grows very well, all manner of Summer- Garden-Herbs and Roots
common to us in England, Herbs and Roots.
as Radish, Lettis, Purseley, Cucumbers, Melons, Parsley, Pot Herbs, also
Beans, Pease, Cabbages, Colly-Flowers, etc.

Their Diseases.
It has been experimentally found, Jamaica very healthful.
that there is no such Antipathy betwixt the constitutions of the English, and
this clime, for the occasioning Sickness to be Mortal or Contageous, more than
in other parts; for if a good Diet, and moderate Exercises are used, without
excess of Drinking they may enjoy a competent measure of Health.

The Diseases that Strangers are most incident to, Diseases strangers are most
subject unto.
are Dropsies (occasioned often by ill diet, drunkeness, and slothfulness)
Calentures too frequently the product of Surfits, also Fevers, and Agues,
which although very troublesome, yet are seldom Mortal.

And the reason of the great Mortality of the Army, at their first arrival, was
their want of Provisions, together with an unwillingness to labor or
exercise, joined with discontent.

Hurtful things.
There are upon this Island, very few obnoctious Beasts, Insects, or Plants.

Here is the Manchonele, Manchonele.
which is a king of a Crab, so common in all the Caribbee Isles.

Here are Snakes, Snakes, Guianas.
and Guianas, but no poisonous quality is observed in them.

In many of the Rivers, and Land-Ponds, are Alligators, Alligators.
which are very voracious Creatures, yet seldom do they prey upon a Man, as
being very easy to be avoided, for he can only move forwards, and that he does
with great Swiftness and Strength, and is as slow in turning. Some are 10, 15,
or 20 foot long, their backs are scaly and impenetrable, so that they are
hardly to be killed, except in the Belly or Eye. They have four Feet or Finns
with which they go or swim. They are observed to make no kind of Noise: and the
usual course for the getting their Prey, is to lie on the banks of Rivers, and
as any Beast or Foul comes to drink, they suddenly seize on them; and the
rather, for that they do so much resemble a long piece of dry wood, or some
dead thing. And as these Allegators are thus obnoctious on the one hand, so are
they found to be useful on the other, for their Fat is a Sovereign Ointment for
any internal Ach or Pain in the Joints, or Bones. They have in them Musk-codds,
which are stronger scented then those of the East Indies, and by this their
strong smell, they are discovered, and avoided; which ^s supposed the Cattle by
instinct of Nature, are also sencible of, and do by that means often shun them.
They lay Eggs in the Sand lay the waterside, which are no bigger than a
Turkeys, which they ^over, and by the heat of the Sun, the young ones are
hatched, who naturally creep into the water.

Here are also Muskettoes and Merry-wings, Muskettoes.
a sort of stinging Flies that are troublesome in some parts of the Isle,
Merry-wings.
but are seldom found in the English Plantations.

Their Harbors, Roads, and Bays*
This Island abounds with goo^ Bays, Roads, and Harbors: the Principal
amongst which are

Port Royal, PortRoyal.
formerly called Cagway, situate on the extreme en^ of that long point of Land
which makes the Harbor, which is e^ceeding commodious for Shippin^ and secured
by one of the stronge^^ and most considerable Castles th^^ his Majesty has in
all Americ^ in which are mounted about 6^ pieces of Ordnance, and is we^^
guarded with Soldiers. It is land locked by a point of Land that run 12 miles
South-East from the mai^ of the Island, having the great R^ver that runs by Los
Angelos, and^ St. Jago falling into it, where Ship^ do commonly water, and
conven^ently wood. The Harbor is 2. or 3. leagues cross in most places, and
has every where good Anchorage, which is so deep, that a Ship of a 1000 Tunn
may lay her sides to the shore of the Point, and load, and unload with planks a
Float: which commodiousness, does make it to be the most frequented by Men of
War, and Merchants Ships of any in the Island, and as much inhabited by the
Merchants, Storehouse-keepers, Vintners, and Alehouse-keepers, being the only
noted place of Trade in the Isle, and does contain (since the English became
Masters of it) about 800. Houses, being about 12 miles and a half in length,
and the houses are as dear-rented as if they stood in well-traded Streets in
London; yet it is situation is very unpleasant and uncommodious, having neither
Earth, Wood, or Freshwater, but only made up of a hot loose Sand, and being
thus populous, and so much frequented, as well by Strangers, as by the
Planters, in the negotiation of their Affairs as being the scale of Trade,
provisions are very dear. This Town or Port is seated about 12 miles from the
Metrapolitan Town of the Island called St. Jago, or St. Jago de la vega, or the
Spanish Town; of which I shall treat anon.

Port-Morant in the Eastern Point, Port-Morant.
a very Capacious and secure Harbor, where Ships do conveniently Wood, Water,
and Ride safe from the Winds, and about this place is a potent Colony of the
English seated.

Old-Harbour Westwards, Old Harbor.
from St. Jago, a good Bay for Ships to Ride in. Point-Negrill.


Point-Negril in the extreme Western Point, very good and sufficiently
convenient, and secure to windward, in which men of war do often ply, when they
look for the Spanish Ships, whence a little North-west, was seated the Old town
of Melilla, founded by Columbus, after the shipwreck there; which was the 1st
place that the Spaniards settled at, and afterward deserted.

Port-Antonio seated on the North, Port-Antonio.
a very safe land-lock't-Harbour, only the coming in is somewhat difficult, the
Channel being narrowed by a little Island that lies off the mouth of the Port,
being wholly taken up by the Right Honorable, Charles Earl of Carlisle, Visc.
Howard of Morpeth, Lord Dacres of Gilsland, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of
Cumberland and Westmerland, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.

Here are several other good Bays, Other good bays and Harbors.
and Harbors, along the Coast of this Island; the names of which are set down
in the Map, amongst which, these are very commodious and good, viz.

In the South-part
Michaels Hole. Micary Bay. Allegator Pont. Point Pedro. Palate Bay. Lewana
Bay. Blewfelds Bay. Cabaritaes Bay. All very good and Commodious Bays for
Ships.

In the North-part
Porto-Maria Ora Cabessa Cold-Harbour Rio-Nova Montega-Bay Orang-Bay All very
good Bays for Shipping.

The Towns.
There are at present but three Towns of considerable Note in the Island, to
wit,

St. Jago, St. Jago.
or St. Jago de-lavega seated 6 Miles within the Land North-West, in a Plain,
by a River, and about 12. miles from Port Royal already treated of, which makes
another of the 3 Towns. This town of St. Jago when the Spaniards were Masters
of the Isle, was a large City, and of great Account, containing about 2000
Houses, and for Divine Worship, had 2 Churches, 2 Chapels, and an Abbey; which
when the English first took the Isle (under the conduct of General Venables)
were destroyed to about 4 or 500 Houses, and its Churches and Chapels to a
fewer number, and those that remained were sufficiently Spoiled and haraced.
But since the English have made a settlement, this Town is now of considerable
account; where the Governor resideth, and where the chief Courts of Judicature
are held, which makes it to be well resorted unto, and Inhabited; so that most
of its ruinous Houses are in a fair way of being repaired, and in hopes to
arrive to a greater largeness then formerly it was, here being several fair and
well built Houses: and the Inhabitants live in great Pleasure, where they have
their Havana, in which the better sort recreate themselves every evening in
their Coaches, or an horseback, as the Gentry do here in Hide Park.

Passage seated on the mouth of the River, six miles distant from St. Jago, and
as many from Port Royal, where there are about 20 Houses, built for the
convenience of going to Port Royal; and here is a Fort raised by the English,
the better to secure the same.

In the time of the Spaniards, here were several other Towns which are now of
no Account; of which said Towns, these three following were of most nore, viz.

Sevilla feared on the North part of the Island, Sevilla.
once beautified with a Collegiate-Church, whose chief bore the title of Abbot:
amongst whom was Peter Martyr, who described the History of the West Indies by
Decates.

Mellila seated in the North East, Mellila.
where Columbus mended his Ships at his return from Veragua, where he was near
Ship-wrackt.

Orista reguards the South Sea, Orista.
in which are many Rocks, and amongst their Banks, some Isles, as Servavilla,
Quitosvena, and Serrana, where Augustine Pedro Serrana lost his Vessel, and
saved only himself, and here in a solitary and lone Condition passed away 3
Years; at the end of which time he had the company of a Mariner for 4 Years
more, that was likewise there Ship-wrackt, and also alone saved himself.

And although there are for the present no more Towns, 14 Precincts or
Parishes in the Isle.
yet the Island is divided into 14 Precincts, Divisions, or Parishes, which are
set forth in the Map; many of which said Precincts are well Inhabited by the
English, where they have very good Plantations, especially all the southern
part from Point-Morant in the East, almost to Point-Negrillo in the West, so
far as the ridge or chain of Mountains that runs in the midst of the Isle;
nor are its northerns Parts, (especially near unto the Sea) without Inhabitants
and Plantations, though not so thick as South-wardly about St. Jago, but of
late have much increased. And for the better Satisfying the Reader, Sre the
Mapp.
the Parts throughout the Island where the English have made their Settlements,
are Marked and distinguished in the Map by Ciphers.

I cannot certainly affirm the number of the English in this Isle, but
according to the last survey taken and returned into England some Years since,
by Sr. Thomas Modiford, late Governor, each Precinct, or Parish contained as
follows:

A general Account of the Precincts, or Parishes, Families, and Inhabitants in
Jamaica, taken by order of Sir Thomas Modiford, then Governor as aforesaid.

Parishes. Families. Inhabitants. The Names of the Precincts or Parishes in the
Isle.
Port Royal 500 3500 St. Katherines 658 6270 St. John's 083 996 St. Andrews 194
1552 St. David's 080 960 St. Thomas 059 590 Clarindon 143 1430 1714 15298

Note, that the Four Parishes on the North-side of the Isle, to wit, St.
George's, St. Mary's, St. Annes, and St. James, as also the Leeward most Parish
called St. Elizabeth, together with these two not named, both adjoining on St.
Elizabeth's; the one Eastwards, and the other Northwards, was not as then so
particularly surveyed, by reason of their distance, and new Settlements,
nevertheless they were found according to Calculation, to amount to about 2000
Inhabitants. But all these parts, as also those seven aforenamed are now
exceedingly increased, being supposed to be increased to double, if not treble
the number. And the great encouragement of gaining Riches, with a pleasant
life, does invite every year abundance of People to Inhabit here, quitting
their concerns at Barbados, and other our American Plantations; so that in a
short time without doubt it will become the most potent and richest Plantation
in the West Indies.

And besides the aforesaid number of Inhabitants in the said 14 Precincts or
Parishes, there are reckoned to belong to the Island; of Privateers, Hunters,
Sloop and Boatmen (which ply about the Isle) at the least 3000 lusty and stout
Fighting Men, whose courage has been sufficiently evidenced in their late
exploit, and attempt made against the Spaniards at Panama.

Their Laws
Their Laws are assimulated (as near as may be) to those of England, Their
Laws.
having their several Courts* Magistrates, and Officers, for the executing of
Justice on criminal Offenders, and the hearing and determination of Causes or
Controversies betwixt party, and party.

Having thus made a short desscription of the Island, as to its Situation,
Fertility, Commodities, Harbors, Towns, and Precincts, with an estimate of the
number of its Inhabitants: In the next place, I shall give you the state of the
Isle, when the Spaniards were possessors thereof; and wind up my discourse with
some seasonable considerations relating to the English Affairs in America, with
reasons to justify the first design in taking it, and why his Majesty should
keep and support it. And of these in order.

The state of the Spaniards in this Island,
The Spaniards first settled on the North-west part of the Isle, The Spaniards
First settlement.
under the Conduct of Columbus, and built the Town of Mellila, but disliking
the Situation, removed to Oristana; and finding that also to be ill seated,
and unhealthful, again removed, and settled at St. Jago, or St. Jago de la vega,
where, with the assistance of the Indians, they built a fair Town or City,
which I have already treated of. And in this Town Inhabited all the Spaniards
that were in the Isle at the Landing of the English, keeping their slaves at
their several small Plantations, or Stanchas, who failed not to bring them
store of Fruits and Provisions, which they luxuriously spent in their houses,
never intending any thing but to live at ease and plenty: The Spaniards
inclined to Idleness.
For on this large and fertile Island, there was no Manufacture or Commodity
made, except a little Sugar, Tobacco, and Cocao, and those few Ships that came
hither, traded generally for Hydes, Tallow, Jamaica Pepper, and Cocao, but not
to any considerable account. And the number of Inhabitants did not exceed 3000,
of which, half (if not more) were Slaves. And the reason why it was so thinly
peopled, was, because the Spaniards generally desire to be in Nova Hispana, or
Hispaniola; but chiefly, because this Isle was held* in proprietership, by the
heirs of the Duke of Veragua-Columbus, who received the Revenues, and placed
Governors, as absolute Lord of it. And at the first, it was planted by a kind
of Portugals, the society of whom, the Spaniards abhors.

Upon the approach of the English-Army after their landing, the Inhabitants of
St. Jago deserted the Town, and betook themselves to the Mountains, pretending
a Treaty with the English, until such time as they had secured their Women and
Goods, and then did they make several attempts, and upon surprisals, murdered
many of the English; but the Spaniards soon growing weary of that wild and
mountainous course of Life, perceiving small hopes of expelling the English,
diverse of the Grandees got into Cuba, who by the Viceroy of Alexico's order,
were commanded back, with a promise of a speedy and considerable supply of men;
upon which they returned, somewhat encouraged, and dispersed themselves by
Families, that they might the better get provisions, and avoid the being
discovered by the English; but this necessitous and unusual course of life,
killed many of them, and discouraged the rest; for that in all this time there
came to their succor, but too Soldiers, and those refused to join with them,
as being so few and sickly; so that they marched back to the North of the
Island, and at a place called St. Chereras, did fortify themselves, every day
expecting a new body of Men to join with them: But the English discovering
their quarters, marched against them. Some few months after, about 30 small
Companies of the Spanish Forces arrives, and immediately very strongly Fortify
Rio Nova, having Ordnance, and great store of Ammunition, yet were they
speedily and succesfully defeated by the Valor of the English under the
Conduct of Leiutenant General Edw. D'oyley. And this grand disaster, with many
petty ill successes caused the Spaniards to despair of regaining the Island,
and to ship off most of their Plat^^ and Women; and the Negroes finding the
greatest part of their Masters to be dead, killed the Governor, and declined
all obedience to the Spaniards, appointing a Black for their Governor. And
such was the necessity of the Spaniards, that instead of giving them fitting
correction, they were constrained to Court them for their assistance; but all
their policy would not prevail upon them, for soon after did they submitt to
the English Government, and made discoveries of the Spaniards and Negroes that
would not come in with them, and did further assist the English in the taking
of them, in which they have been exceeding succesful.

In the year following, the Spaniards quite deserted the Island, except it were
about 30 or 40 of their Slaves, who betook themselves to the Mountains, but
being afraid of a Discovery, and to be pursued to Death for some Murders they
had committed, built themselves Conoas, and in them fled to Cuba, and never
since has any considerable attempt been made upon them.

The English being thus become Masters of the Island, formed themselves into a
Body, or Colony: Then did they they begin to settle themselves in Plantations,
whilst others betook themselves to the Sea as Freebooters or Privateers, the
better to secure themselves against the Spaniards, and force them to a peace by
their frequent annoying them, in seizing such their ships which they could meet
with, which proved very succesful unto them. And this caused the Isle to be
much talked of, and had in esteem by the English, who sent them supplies of
Men, Provisions, and necessaryes. And thus by little and little it became to be
so potent as now it is.

Governors since the English were Masters of the Island.
This Island (since the English have been Masters of it) has had four
Governors.

The first, Leiutenant General Edward D'oyley, who before his Majesty's happy
Restoration, was Commander in chief of all the English Army by Land and Sea in
America.

The second, the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Winsor, who is now Lord
Leiutenant of the County of Worcester.

The third, Sr. Thomas Modyford Baronet.

And the fourth, and present, Sr. Thomas Lynch Knight.

Some Considerations relating to the English Affairs in America, with Reasons
to justify the first design into the Indies.
1. Consideration.
Spaniards would never contract a Peace with the English in America.

2. Consid.
They have always taken our Merchants Ships sailing on these Coasts, or forced
them into their Harbors by distress of Weather.

3. Consid.
In the Reign of our late King (when we had Peace with them throughout Europe)
they Sacked St. Christophers, Mevis, Providence, Sta. Cruz, and Tortugas,
murdering and carrying away most of the Inhabitants into slavery; for which
they never made any repairation.

4. Consid.
The Indians, who are the natural proprietors of America, do abominate and hate
the Spaniards for their cruelty and avarice; and upon every occasion will show
their willingness to give themselves and their Countries, freely into the power
and protection of the English.

5. Consid.
The pretented first discovery cannot give them a legal power over the genuine
right of the Natives, nor were they the first discoverers of all those
Countries that they pretend unto.

6. Consid.
The Popes Donation is of little validity, for he has given them the Crown of
England, which of the two he might more legally do, then the Indies; for that
the English have been subject to his power, the Indians never.

7. Consid.
Possession is not of force to create (thought it confirms) a Right, nor can it
so alter the property, as to make usurpation (for some time to continue) as a
legal, and just pretense of Dominion.

8. Consid.
It is against the fundamental Laws of Spain to make a peace, and allow of a
Trade into the Indies; now there being no medium, war must needs be justifyable
where a Peace is not allowable.

9. Consid.
Their barbarous cruelty in compelling our Merchants, and others which they
have took prisoners, to turn their Religion, and to work at their Forts and
Mines at Mexico, and elsewhere, from whence they can never return, murdering
diverse, when upon a Treaty, and after promise of fair quarter, and not
Exchanging or Ransoming any, although the English have freely given them some
hundreds of Prisoners, does sufficiently justify any attempt or mischief we can
do against them, either in seizing on their Ships, or the landing on their
Countries, and the sacking, burning, or taking their Towns and Countries, and
the dispossessing them thereof.

Some Considerations why his Majesty should keep, preserve, and support this
Island.
1. Consid.
Jamaica is large, and capacious, whose extent I have already noted; so that it
is capable of receiving very great numbers of People.

2. Consid.
It is seated in the heart of the Spaniards American Territories; so that the
Spanish Ships coming into the West Indies, and sailing from Port to Port,
either make this Isle, or may be immediately met by the Ships which ply on this
Coast, which renders it to be of great importance to Us, as well as to the
Spaniards: for all the Plate Fleet which comes from Carthagena, steer directly
from St. Domingo in Hispaniola, and from thence must pass by one of the Ends of
this Isle to recover Havana, which is the common Rendevouze of the Armado,
before it returns home through the Gulf of Florida. Nor is there any other way
whereby to miss this Isle, because they cannot in a reasonable time turn it up
to the windward of Hispaniola, which, though with great difficulty, it might be
done, yet by this means they would loose the security of the said united Fleet,
which meet at Havana, from all parts of the Bay of Mexica, Nombre de dios, and
elsewhere, and so accompany each other home.

4. Consid.
Jamaica is found to precede all the English Plantations in America, in the
very Commodities that are proper to their several Colonies, and produces also
of its own Cocao, Hydes, Tortoise-shells, Wood for Dyers, Gums, Druggs, and
other Commodities already treated of; and for Fruits, Fowl, and Fish, infinite
store, many of which are unknown unto them. Likewise, such abundance of Horses,
and Cowes, that none other of the English Blantations can equalize them.

And as this Island is found thus advantageous in the furnishing us with such
good Commodities, Commodities Imported, and its Trade
so is it no less profitable in the taking off our Manufactures, and
Commodities, as well of the product of this Kingdom, as those from Foreign
parts. That is to say, all sorts of Stuffs, Fabrics of Silks, Linen both fine
and course, Hatts, Gloves, Thread, Tape, Pinns, Needles, Stockings, Shoos; all
sorts of Apparel; Wine, Brandy, Strong-Beer; All sorts of Utensils of Iron, and
other Metals for Carpenters, Joyners, Smiths, Coopers, Mill-Wrights, and other
the like Tradesmen, that are found useful for the Planters service, Also, Iron,
Brass, Copper, Steel, Lead and Tinn unwrought; All sorts of Arms and
Ammunition: Also, Servants, and Negro-Slaves: And in a word, all Commodities
that are necessary, and useful either for the Back or Belly, are here
Vendible. And is observed, that the better the Commodities are (especially
Apparel and Ornaments for the Back) the sooner and better are they Vended.

Consid
It appears to be a place of no small concernment, for it has not only
subsisted at the beginning, but bettered its Condition, being settled by an Army
(the worst kind of people to plant) that have had such grand discouragements
from England, as want of pay, provisions, and recruits of Men; yet amongst
themselves talked of all encouragements to Plant, the establishment of Justice
and Government, besides, the frequent attempts of the Spanish Forces; and if it
thus thrived under these, and such like considerable obstructions, it is more
then propable, it will in a short time become a great and profitable Colony
both to the King and Kingdom; for when well planted, it may bring into his
Majesty some hundred thousand pownds per Annum. Barbados (which is so little
compared to this) yiedling about 10000 l. per Annum, and employing about 150 or
200 Sail of Ships yearly.

5. Consid.
This Island being so large and so fertile, it is capable of the receiving
those great numbers of people, that are forced to desert the Caribbee Isles:
Their Plantations being worn out, and their Woods wasted; as likewise those
multitudes of Vagrants and Beggars that are so great a charge and shame to the
Kingdom, if Transported thither, (would by their labors) live both honestly,
and plentifully; here being observed to be no beggars, nor such loose Vagabond
people.

6. Consid.
This Island being well settled, will be capable of it self to carry on a War
against the Spaniards in the West Indies (as occasion requires) because of the
conveniences of its Ports, and its strength of Inhabitants and Shipping, having
already about 20 or 30 Sail of Privateers; and will in a short time be so
numerous and potent, that they will become so obnoxious to the Spaniards, that
probably they will rather admit of a Trade into his Ports (which would prove a
grand advantage both to them, and this Kingdom) than suffer so disadvantageous
a War. And having thus forced a Trade, would gain the acquaintance of the
Natives, and learn their Customs, and method of Trade, being much inclined to
love the English rather than the Spaniards.

7. Consid.
Jamaica seems to be approved above any of the other Plantations, in regard so
many from all the English Collonyes have Transported themselves and their
Estates to it, who like it so well, that they have no cause or desire to remove.

8. Consid.
There is now a considerable progress made in the settling of this Isle, there
being upon it many Plantations of Cocao, Sugar, Indico, Cotton, and Provisions;
and Inhabited with many thousand of of people. The Planters (for the
generality) now living in great delight, and enjoy all things necessary for
Food and Raiment in a liberal measure; and were it well Inhabited, it would
very much consume the English Manufactures, and encourage Navigation and
Merchandise.

9. Consid.
It cannot be imputed a disadvantage, that Jamaica lies so far off, for
thereby are more Ships employed; and by consequence, more Saylors, Shipwrights,
Ropemakers, and many other Tradesmen maintained, whose dependence is thereon.
Furthermore, if it lay not so far, we could not expect such Commodities as it
produces, being appropriate to the Clyme; neither is it a small advantage to
have such Commodities within his Majesty's Dominions (though at a distance)
that are both valued and needed by his Subjects and Neighbors, especially the
Cocao.

10. Consideration.
And lastly, to conclude, The English have one more considerable advantage by
this Isle, and that is, the Coast of Virginia, being subject to gusts of Wind,
the Ships laden with Goods and Passengers, have been often forced forth to
Sea, and so disabled, that they could not ply to any of the outward Caribbee
Islands, but have been constrained to bear up, and put into the Spanish Leeward
Ports; and likewise, some of our Merchants have been forced out of the Caribbee
Isles by Hurricane's (which are there common) and so disabled, that they could
not keep Sea, but (as all Vessels thus distressed) have put into some of the
Spanish Leeward Ports, where they have always, been made Prizes. Now, Jamaica
being so far Leeward, is a convenient Harbor for all Vessels thus distressed;
and did some few years since save Three Virginia Ships full of Passengers and
Goods, and formerly others; as also some driven by Hurricanes from the Windward
Islands: All which, without the convenience, and assistance of this Isle, had
perished.

map of Barbados

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of BARBADOS.
BARBADOS the most considerable Colony the English has amongst that Frye of
Isles called the Caribbee Isles, or the Antilles.

Its Situation.
It is seated in the North Latitude of 13 degrees, Its Situation.
and 20 min. and although but of a small circuit, (being accounted not above 8
Leagues in length, and 5 in breadth where broadest, being of an Oval Form) yet
is it a potent Colony, being able as occasion requires, to arm 10000 Fighting
men, which, with the strength that nature has bestowed on it, it is able to
bid defiance to the stoutest Foe, having been several times (but in vain)
assaulted by the Spaniards.

Its Rivers.
This Isle is not over-plentifully watered with Rivers, Rivers.
or Fresh Springs, there being but one that may appropriate to it self that
Name, or rather a Lake, which runs not far into the Land; yet
notwithstanding, the Inhabitants are not destitute thereof, for the Country
lying low, and for the most part even, there are several Pools or Ponds;
besides, most Houses have Wells or Cisterns which are always supplied with
Rainwater.

Here is also a River, which the Inhabitants call the Tuigh-River, from the top
of whose waters is gathered an Oil, which serves them to burn in Lamps.

Its Fertility.
This Isle is exceeding Fertile, Its Fertility.
bearing Crops all the year long, and its Trees being always clothed in their
Summer Livery, and the Fields and Woods in their Verdure, renders it very
delightful to the Inhabitants. But the two principal seasons of the year for
Planting, is in May, and November, but the Sugarcanes are planted all the year
round, the making of which, is not only very chargeable, but also as dangerous,
and subject to casualties, either in the Boyling-house, with the Coppers and
Furnaces; in the Filling-room, in the Still-house, or in the Cureing-house.

Its Commodities.
The Commodities that this Isle produces, Commodities.
are Sugars, (which though not so white as those of Brazile, yet better when
refined, being of a fairer grain) Indico, Cotton, Wool, Ginger, Logwood,
Fustick, and Lignum-vitae. And these Commodities, especially Sugar, Indico,
Cotton, and Ginger, are here in such great abundance, that about 200 sail of
Ships and Vessels, both great and small, have yearly their loading; which after
Imported in the several Ports of England, and Ireland, is again in great
quantities exported to Foreign parts, to our great enrichment; and the rather,
for that they are not permitted to Trade with any other Nation but the English,
and such of his Majesty's Subjects in New England, Virginia, and Bermudoes: And
in exchange of those Commodities, they take such as are necessary for the use
of man, as well for the Back and Belly, as for their Houses, and Plantations;
with many of which, they are supplied from New England, Virginia, and the
Bermudoes; together with Servants, and Slaves, as I have noted at the latter
end of the description of Jamaica, about page 73. together with several sorts
of Commodities and Provisions, which Jamaica has no occasion of, as Horses,
Camels, Assinegroes, Cattle; also salted Flesh and Fish of several sorts;
Butter and Cheese; but by reason of the great heat of the weather, it will soon
stink, and become unfit to eat; so that instead of Butter, they make great use
of Oil for their Sauces.

The Days and Nights are almost thorowout the Year, Days and Nights almost
equal.
of an equal length, the Sun Rising and Setting at 6. except about October, and
then there is some small difference.

The Temperature of Air.
This Isle is very hott, Temperature of Air.
especially for 8 months, yet not so, but that Travel, and Labor is
sufferable; but were it not for the cool breezes of Wind which Rises with the
Sun, and blows fresher as the Sun mounteth up, it would be unsufferable. And
these Breezes always blow from North-East, and by East, unless it be in the
time of the Turnado, and then for a few hours it chopps into the South, but
returns to the same point again. And it is observed, that although the people
do so much sweat, yet they have not that faintness as with us, in the months of
July and August; neither are they so thirsty, without occasioned by excess of
Labor, or Drinking of strong Liquors, which the People are here too much
addicted unto, to their great hurt, which if moderately taken, would be as
great a preservative to comfort their inward parts, which are left cold, and
faint, through their sweating. Besides, our bodies being accustomed to colder
Climates, our spirits are not so vigorous without them in a moderate manner.

The Air, The Air moist.
though hot, is very moist, which causes all Iron-tools, as Knives, Swords,
Locks, Keys, etc. to rust, so that without constant usage, they will soon
become eaten up with rust. And this great heat and moisture, does cause the
Plants and Trees to grow so large, and high.

Their Fruits.
Here are abundance of Fruits of several sorts, Their Fruits.
as Dates, Orenges of two sorts, the one sweet, and the other sharp,
Pomgranates, Citrons, Limes, Lemons, Macows, Grapes, Juneper-Apples, Papayers,
Momins, Monbains, Acajous, Icacos, Cherries, Raysins, Indian Figgs, Cocos,
Plantins, Bonanoes, Guavers, Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Custard-Apples,
Millons, both land and water, and Pine-Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies.

Their Fish.
Here are great store of Fish in the Sea, Their Fish.
as Snappers, Crabs, Lobsters, Terbums, Macquerels, Mullots, Cavallos,
Parrat-Fish, Cony-Fish, and green Turtles, which of all others are the most
delicious, with several other sorts appropriated to this and the rest of the
Caribbee Isles. But the Rivulets, or Ponds, have few or no Fish in them.

Their Beasts.
Here are no Beasts or Cattle but what are Tame, Their Beasts.
and brought them; as Camels, Horses, Assinegroes, Oxen, Bulls, Cowes, Sheep,
and Goats, and Hoggs, which are here in great plenty in every Plantation, it
being their common food, whose Flesh is esteemed very good and delicious; but
as for Beef, and Mutton, it is very dear, as having but a small stock, but
might be soon increased, would they spare ground enough for Pasturage for them
from their other occasions.

Their Herbs and Roots.
Here grows diverse sorts of English herbs, Herbs, and Roots.
and roots, as Rosemary, Lavender, Lavender-Cotton, Mar^erom, Winter-Savory,
Time, Parsley, Tansey, Sage, Purcelane, etc. and for Roots, Cabages, Colworths,
Collyflowers, Turnips, Potatoes, Onyons, Garlic, Radishes, Lettice, Taragon,
Marigolds, etc.

Their Birds and Fowls.
Here are several sorts of Fowls, Birds and Fowls.
as Turkeys, Hens, Muscovy-ducks, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, etc. and for small
Birds, great variety; as Thrushes, Black-birds, Sparrows, etc.

Their Insects and Animals.
Here are several Animals, Animals, and Insects.
and Insects, as Snakes a yard and a half long, Scorpions as big as Rats, but
no ways hurtful to man or beast; Lizzards, which are exceeding harmless, much
frequenting the houses, and loving the company of men; Musketoes, Cockroches,
and Merriwings, which are very troublesome in the night in stinging; also, here
are land-Crabs in great abundance, which are found good to eat. And here is a
small Fly which they call Cayouyou, whose Wings in the Night, as it flies,
casts forth a great luster, and the Indians do commonly catch them, and tie
them to their hands or feet, and make use of them instead of a Candle, which is
forbidden them.

Their Trees.
Here are great variety of Trees. Trees.
fit for several uses, as the Locust, Mastick, Red-wood, the
prickled-Yellow-wood, the Ironwood-Tree, and the Cedar Tree, which are fit for
building. Also, the Cassia, Fistula, Coloquintida, Tamarine, Cassavie, of which
is made their bread; the Poyson-Tree, and the Phisick-Nut, these have a
Physical, and some a poisonous Virtue in them. Also, here are these Trees
following, the Calibash, the Shell of whose Fruit, serves to carry liquid
things in, being of the nature of Goards; the Mangrass-Tree, which is of an
exceeding greatness; the Roucou, of whose bark is made Ropes, as also Flax,
which being spun, is employed to several uses; the Lignum-vitae, the Palmeto,
which is very large, and beautiful to behold; with several others.

Several Caves.
In this Island are diverse Caves, Several Caves.
some of which are very deep, and large enough to hold 500 men; and these Caves
are often the Sanctuaries of such Negro-slaves that run away, in which they
ofttimes lie a good while ere found out, seldom stirring in the daytime,
although they are such unwholesome places, by reason of the great damps that
are found in them. And it is supposed, that these Caves were the Habitations of
the Natives.

Its Division and Towns.
This Island is severed into Eleven Precincts, Its Division, and Towns.
or Parishes, in which are 14 Churches and Chapels, and here are many places
which may not unaptly be called Towns, as being composed of a long and
spacious Street, which are beautified with fair houses; and indeed the whole
Isle for these many years, is so taken up with Planters (there being no wast
ground to be found) that it is thorowout beset with Houses, at no great
distance from one another.

Its chief Towns.
1. St. Michaels.
St. Michaels formerly called the Bridg-Town, or Indian-Bridg, situate at the
bottom of Carlisle-Bay in the Leeward, or Southern part of the Isle, which Bay
is very capacious, deep, and secure for Ships, being large enough to entertain
500 Vessels at one time, The Town is long, containing several Streets, and
graced with abundance of well built houses. It is very populous, being the
Residence of the Governor, or his Deputy, the place of Judicature, and the
Scale of Trade, where most of the Merchants, and Facttors in the Isle have
their Storehouses for the negotiation of their Affairs; and from these
Storehouses or Shops, the Inhabitants are supplied with such Commodities as
they have occasion of, in exchange of theirs, which are the product of of the
Isle. The Town is ill seated, the ground being lower than the banks of the Sea,
by which means the Spring- Tides does flow over, and there remaining, does make
a kind of of a moorish bogg, which does occasion it to be more unhealthful than
the other parts of the Isle. This Town for its defense, and security of the
Ships, has two strong Forts opposite to each other, with a Platform in the
midst, which also commands the Road, all which are well Fortifyed with great
Guns, etc. The principal of these Forts is called Charles Fort, being seated on
Nedhams Point.

2. Little Bristol.
Little Bristol, formerly Sprights Bay, situate about four Leagues Leeward
from St. Michaels, has a commodious Road for Ships, is a place well
frequented, and traded unto, and is strongly Defended by two powerful Forts.

3. St. James, formerly called the Hall, seated not far from Bristol, has the
accommodation of a good Road for Ships, and is a place of a considerable Trade,
for its defense, besides a large Platform, has fortified Breast-works; and in
this Town is kept for the Precinct, the monthly Courts.

4. Charlestown.
Charlestown, seated windeward of St. Michaels, about two Leagues: And on
Oyster-Bay, it is secured by two strong Forts, the one to the Windward, and the
other to the Leeward, of the Town and Road, with a Platform in the midst. This
Town has the accommodation of weekly Markets, and here is kept the monthly
Courts for the Precinct.

The other Parishes are of less note.

Other Places on the Seacoast.
Other Places of Name along the Seacoast of this Isle, Other Places on the
Seacoast.
beginning Easterly, and so encompassing the Isle, are as follows:

Fowl-Bay, Austins-Bay, Maxwells-Bay, where there is a small Isle, Blackrock,
The Hole, Spikes-Bay, Balises-Bay, Long-Bay, Clarks-Bay, and Constance-Bay.

The Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants of this Isle may be Ranged under 3 heads or sorts, The
Inhabitants
to wit, Masters, (which are English, Scotch, and Irish, with some few Dutch,
French, and Jews) Christian Servants, and Negro-Slaves. And these three sorts
are exceeding numerous; for, according to a Calculation not long since made,
the Masters, and Servants, did amount to about 50000, and the Negroes to about
double the number.

The Masters, for the most part, live at the height of Pleasure

The Servants, at the expiration of 5 years, become Freemen of the Island, and
employ their times according to their abilities, and capacities; either to get
a small Plantation, or to work at day-labour in other Plantations, or else to
exercise their Trades, if so capacitated.

The Negro-Slaves are never out of their Bondage, Negro-Slaves.
and the Children they get, are likewise perpetual Slaves. They have but mean
allowance of diet, clothes, and lodging; and although held to such hard Labor,
and so ill treated, yet are they well contented with their Conditions; and if
their Master is but any thing kind, they think nothing too much to be done for
them; and therefore it is great pity to wrong such poor Creatures.

The chiefest Stock of a Planter, consists in his Servants and Slaves, but
especially the Slaves, who are more numerous. And these they Buy on Shipboard,
as men Buy Horses in a Fair, and according as they are handsome, lusty,
well-shapen, and young, either the men or women, they give more or less; the
general Rates for the Christian-servants being about 10 l. but if one that has
a good Trade, as a Carpenter, Joyner, Smith, or the like, then far more:
Likewise, a Female that is young and handsome, is highe^ valued. The general
Rate for the better sort of Negro-men, is 20 l. or 25 sl. sterling; and for
Women, about 15 l. for the increase of stock of Negroes, they generally take as
many Men as Women.

The Maintenance of the Servants and Slaves.
The Maintenance of the Servants, and Negro-Slaves, as to their Diet, Apparel,
and Lodging, is very inconsiderable.

For their Food, Their Food.
they are contented from weeks-end, to weeks-end, with Potatoes, Loblolly, made
of beaten Maize mixed with water; Cassader-bread common in all the Indies,
Bonavist, and such like food that the Plantation affords; as for Meat, they
are seldom troubled with it, except at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, and
they have Hoggs-flesh, according to the custom of the Island; but of late, the
servants are allowed weekly, a small quantity of Swines-Flesh, or salted Flesh,
or Fish; and when any of the Cattle dye of any distemper, or by accident, it is
given to the Negroes, who feed like Princes on it.

Their Drinks are Mobbie, Their Drink.
made of Potatoes soaked in water; Perino, made of Casavie-Root and water;
Crippo, Kill-Devil, Punch, made of water and Sugar; Plantin-drink, made of
Plantins and water; Beveridge, made of Spring Water, Sugar, and the juice of
Orenges; and wine of Pines, which is only made of the juice of the Fruit, which
is exceeding good and delicious; but this sort, as also the Beveridge, and
Punch, the servants are not much troubled with.

But as for the Master-Planters, Merchants, Factors, and Strangers, their Fair
is far otherwise, having their curious-made Dishes, as Custards, Cheese-cakes,
Tansies; also, Sturgeon, Anchoves, Caviare, Botardo, Neates-Tongues, besides
Poultrey, Fish, Fowl, Mutton, Beef, Kid, Porke, Beans, Pease, several Roots,
and other good Dishes. And, besides the several sorts of Liquors already named,
Wines, Strong waters, Brandy, and English-Beer; so that they find no want, and
do not consider the condition of those poor wretches, their Servants and
Slaves, who are constrained to so hard a labor.

The Apparel they allow their Servants yearly, Their Apparel.
for the men, are 6 pair of Drawers, 12 pair of Shoos, 3 Monmouth-Caps, 6
Shirts; and for the women, 4 Smocks, 3 Petticoats, 4 Coifes, and 12 pair of
Shoos, besides, a Rug-Gown to each, to keep them warm, in the night, and to put
on them when they come sweating from their labor. To the Negro-men, they allow
but 3 pair of Canvas-Drawers, and to the Women, but three Petticoats.

But for themselves (especially the better sort) they are exceeding profuse and
costly.

The Lodging of these poor wretches is worst of all, Their Lodging.
for having labored all the day in so hot a Country, without any nourishing
Diet, at night they must be contented to lie hard, on nothing but a board,
without any Coverled, in their Hutts, or rather Hogsties; but Christian
Servants are something better Treated, being allowed Hamocks.

Every Sunday, (which is the only day of Rest, and should be set apart for the
service of God) they employ either in the getting of the Bark of Trees, and
making of Ropes with it, which they Truck away for Shirts, Drawers, and the
like; or else spend the day in Recreation, as Dancing, and Wrestling, which
they much delight in, though they are no great Proficients in either; for in
their Dancing, they use antic actions, their hands having more of motion than
their feet; and their head, than either; nor do the men and women Dance
together, but apart; the Music to which they Dance, being a sort of
Kettle-drums, one bigger than another, which makes a strange and various noise,
but whither Harmonious, I leave to the judgment of the Reader.

It is thought by many, that the Christians should be in danger of being
murdered by the Negro-Slaves, who so much overtop them in number, and the
rather, for that they are so cruelly used, and for that reason, many are
fearful to venture to dwell here. But this Objection may be thus answered; that
first, they are such as were brought from several parts of Africa, and do not
understand one another Language; and then they are stirred up with an inb-read
hatred against one another, it being the custom in those parts, for several
petty Kings to go to Wars against one another; and the Prisoners that are taken
of each side, they sell unto us, and other European Nations that come to
Traffic with them; also, they are not permitted to touch, nay, hardly to see
a Gun, or any other weapon; and being kept in such a slavery, they are fearful
of beginning such an Insurrection, it being present death for any that shall in
the least be found to act, or contrive such a thing.

The Management of a Plantation, The Management of a Plantation.
ought to be the Masters care, yet few of them (except those of the meaner
degree) are without their Overseers, who takes off that trouble from them,
whose Office is to call them to work by the Ring of a Bell, at 6 a clock in the
morning, to appoint them their sevesal works, to give them due Correction upon
any Misdemeanour, or Idleness; he likewise dismisses them at 11 a clock, to go
to their Dinner, and calls them again by One a clock by the said Bell, and
discharges them at 6 at night.

What I have said in this Treatise of Barbados concerning their Servants, and
Slaves, may be said in that of Jamaica; for the Servants, and Slaves, are their
greatest stock; those they Buy, the Servants for a Term of years, the Negroes
for ever; their Apparel which they allow to either being much the same, but
their Diet better; and for their labor, it may be said to be much the same,
the Island producing the same Commodities.

The Island of Barbados very strong.
This Island is very strong, The Island very strong
as well by Nature as Art, being sheltered with Rocks, and Shoals; and where
nature has not thus defended it, it is Fortified by Trenches and Rampires,
with Pallisadoes, Curtains, and Counter-Scarfes; besides, round about the Isle,
reguarding the Sea, is standing- Wood: Here are also, for its further Defense,
3 Forts, one for a Magazine for the Ammunition, and Powder to lie in, and the
other two for places of Retreats, as occasion serves. They have also for their
further security, a standing Militia, consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and
five of Foot, which are Stout, and well-Disciplined men, and always to be
Ready on beat of Drum.

The Government of this Isle.
This Isle is Governed by Laws assimulated to those of England, The Government
of the Island.
for all matters either Civil, Ecclesiastic, Criminal, Maritine, or Martial;
yet not without some few Laws appropriate to themselves, which are not
repugnant to the Laws of England.

For the Execution of these Laws, they have their Courts of Judicature.

The Law is administered by the Governor, or his Deputy, and Ten of his Council.

The Isle is divided into four Circuites, The Isle divided into four Circuits.
in each of which, there is an Inferior Court for civil Causes, from which,
Appeals may be made to the Supreme Court.

Here are also Justices of the Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and
Tything-men.

And for the Administration of Justice, here are yearly 5 Sessions.

At the Governors pleasure, he calls an Assembly for the making of New
Laws, (so, as not contrary to those of England) and for the abolishing of Old;
which said Assembly is much in the nature of our Parliament, and does consist
of the Governor as Supreme, his Ten Council as so many Peers, and two
Burgesses, chosen by the Commonalty out of each of the Parishes.

The present Governor is the Right Hon. The present Governor.
William Willoughby, Baron Willoughby of Parham.

As concerning the nature of the Sugarcanes, how to Plant them, their growth,
cutting, grinding, boiling; the conveyance of the Skimmings into the Cisterns,
how to distill it for Spirits; how long it stays in the Cureing-house, before
it be good Muscovado-Sugar; together with the making it into Whites, is not my
business in this small Treatise, to give the Reader instructions therein, See
Mr. Ligons Book of Barbados page 87.
referring to Mr. Richard Ligons Book of the Description of this Isle.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of St. CHRISTOPHERS.
ST. Christophers, Its Situation, etc.
so called from Christopher Columbus, the first discoverers thereof, situate
in the Latitude of 17 degrees, and 25 min. in circuit, about 75 miles: The
Land lies high and mountainous in the midst, from which springs several
Rivers, which oft-times, by reason of the Raines that falls down the
Mountains, are overflown to the detriment of the Inhabitants.

The Soil, Commodities, etc.
The Soil is light and sandy, Its Soil, and Commodities
and very apt to produce several sorts of Fruits, Provisions, and Commodities;
as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, etc.

This Isle, by reason of its several great and steepy Mountains, between which,
are Springs of hot, and Sulphurous Water, with horrid Precipices, and thick
Woods, renders it very impassable through the midst: And the steepy Ascents of
the Mountains, are divided into several Stages, or Stories, where are spacious
ways.

On the Seaside there is a Salt-pit called Gul-desac, and not far from the
said Salt-pit, there is a small Istmus of land, which reaches within a mile
and a half of the Island of Nievis, or Mevis.

This Island is a place exceeding delightful, The Isle very delightful, and of
a pleasing Prospect.
and of a most delectable Prospect to the Eye of the beholder; for if the Eye
be directed downwards, from the top, it has a Prospect of curious Gardens,
which gently descend to the Seaside; and in reguard of the continual Ascent of
the Isle, the lower Stage or Story, does not debar the Eye of the pleasant
Prospect of that which lies at a Remoter distance, which is terminated by
those high Mountains: And that which makes the Prospect the more delectable in
the several Plantations (which are bounded with Rows of Trees always in their
Verdure) are the fair Houses covered with glazed Slate.

The Division of the Isle, and how Possessed.
The whole Isle is divided into four Quarters or Cantons, The Isle Possessed by
the English, and French
two of which, are possessed by the English, and two by the French; which parts
are not so well watered, as those of the English, but are better for Tillage,
and not so Hilly.

The English are more Populous then the French, and have two fortified places,
one commanding the great Haven, and the other a descent not far from Point de
sable.

The French have Four strong Forts, of which one has Regular Works like a
Citadel, that of most note commands the Haven, and is called Basse-Terre.

Both the English, and the French, keep constant Guard at their Forts, placed
at the entrance of the Paths which leads to the several Wards, for the better
security of each other.

Here are five Churches in those parts belonging to the English, Their Churches.
viz. one at Sandy-point, one at Palm Tree, another near the great Road, and
two at the Inlet of Cayoune, with many fair Structures.

The French, besides their several Habitations, dispersed up and down in their
quarters, have at Basse-Terre (near the Haven where Ships lie at Anchor) a Town
of a good bigness, A Town Possessed by the French
whose Houses are well built, of Brick, Freestone, and Timber; where the
Merchants have their Storehouses, and is well Inhabited by Tradesmen, and are
well served with such Commodities, both for the Back, and Belly, together with
Utensils for their Houses, and Plantations, as they have occasion of, in
exchange of such Commodities which are the product of the Island. Here is a
fair, and large Church, as also a publique-Hall, for the administration of
Justice: Here is also a very fair Hospital, built by the General, for such
people that cannot get cure at their Houses; where they are well maintained and
attended by Doctors, and Physicians, for the recovery of their Healths. Here is
also a stately Castle, being the Residence of the Governor, most pleasantly
seated, at the foot of a high Mountain, not far from the Sea, having spacious
Courts, delightful Walks, and Gardens, and enjoys a curious prospect.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of NIEVIS, or MEVIS.
THe Island of Nievis, Its Situation.
or Mevis, lies not far from St. Christophers, as I have before noted, and in
the Latitude of Seventeen degrees, and Nineteen minutes.

It is but small, Extent.
being not above Eighteen miles in Circuit.

There is but One Mountain in the Isle, and that is seated in the midst, which
is of a great height, but of an easy Access, and clothed with Trees from its
Somett to the bottom; and about this Mountain, are the Plantations which reach
to the Seashore.

Springs of Water.
Here are diverse Springs of Fresh Water, A Spring of Mineral water, and Baths.
and one Spring of a Hott and Mineral Water; not far from whose Springhead are
Baths made, which are much frequented for the curing of several distempers of
the Body of man.

It is indifferent Fertile, and has store of Deer, and other Game for Hunting.

The Isle is Inhabited by about three or four Thousand, who live well, and
drive a Trade for such things as they have occasion for, by exchanging such
Commodities as the Isle produces; as, Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Tobacco, etc.

It is a well-Governed Colony, where Justice is duly administered, and all Vices
severely punished.

For the Worship of God, Their Churches, etc.
here are three Churches; and for its further defense, and safety, it has a
Fort, whereon are mounted several Pieces, for the security of the Ships in the
Road, or Harbor, called Bath-Bay, as also the the public- Storehouse.

This Isle, as the rest of the Caribbee's, are troubled with Muscheto's,
Chigos, Murigoins, and other Stinging Flies, which do much Annoy the
Inhabitants.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of ANTEGO.
THe Island of Antego, Its Situation.
is seated in the Latitude of 16 degrees and 11 min. It is in Length, Extent.
about six, or seven Leagues, and about the same breadth in many places.

It is of a difficult access, and very dangerous for Shipping, by reason of the
Rocks which encompass it.

It has some few Springs of Fresh Water, The Number of Inhabitants.
besides which, the Inhabitants, which are about 8 or 900. have made several
Cisterns, and Ponds, for the preserving of Rainwater.

The Isle does abound in Fish, Fish.
amongst which, is the Sword-Fish which of all others, would be the chief in
the Sea.

Here are great plenty of most sorts of Wild Fowl, Fowl, and Cattle.
and not wanting in Venison, and Tame Cattle.

The Commodities that it affords, Commodities.
are Sugar, Indico, Ginger, Tobacco, etc.

The Lord propriator of this Isle is, the Rt. Hon. Will. Ld. Willowby of
Parham, who is Governor of the Island of Barbados, and some other Isles.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of St. VINCENT.
THe Island of St. Vincent, Its Situation.
lies in the Latitude of Sixteen degrees.

It is about 20 miles in length, Extent, and Fertility.
and Fifteen in breadth, of a Fertile Soil, yielding abundance of Sugarcanes;
which grow Naturally without Planting.

It is well watered with Rivers, and affords many safe Roads, and convenient
Bays, for Shipping.

The English have here some Settlement, but are not very powerful.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of DOMINICA.
THis Isle is seated in the Latitude of Fifteen degrees and a half. Its
Situation,


It is about 12 Leagues in length, Extent.
and 8 in breadth.

On the West side of the Isle, there is a convenient Harbor for Ships.

It is very Montainous, yet not without many Fertile Valleys, producing several
Commodities, but chiefly Tobacco, which is planted by the English; but the
Natives which are Canibals, and very Barbarous, does much hinder the coming of
the English to settle here.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of MONTSERRAT.
MONTSERRAT, Its Extent, Situation.
an Island of a small Extent, Fertility, etc.
not exceeding Ten miles in Length, and of a less Breadth.

It is seated in the Latitude of 17 degree: It is much inclined to Mountains,
which are well clothed with Caedar, and other Trees and the Valleys, and
Plains ar^ very Fertile.

This Isle is most Inhabited by the Irish, who have here a Church for Divine
Worship.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of ANGVILLA.
THis Isle is seated in the Latitude of Eighteen degrees, Its Situation,
extent, etc.
and One and Twenty Minutes.

It Extends it self in length, about Ten Leagues, and in breadth about Three.

The Inhabitants are English, which are Computed to amoun^ unto two or three
Hundred, who are but poor, the Isle being said not to be worth the keeping.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLAND of BARBADA.
BARBADA, Its Situation, Fertility, etc.
or Barboude, situate in the Latitude of of Seventeen degrees and a half.

It is an Isle of no great Extent, not exceeding Fifteen miles in Length, nor
is it of any considerable Account to the English, who are the Possessors of it:
Yet is it found to be of a Fertile Soil, and to be well stored with Cattle,
Sheep, etc. and may produce several good Commodities, were it well managed, to
the advantage of the Inhabitants.

A DESCRIPTION OF The ISLES of BERMVDES, OR, The Summer-ISLES.
EAst of Virginia, Their Situation, and Name.
and Carolina, which is a part of Florida, lies the Isles of Bermudes; so
called, from John Bermudes a Spaniard, by whom they were first discovered. They
are also called the Summer-Isles, from the Shipwreck that one George Summers
(an Englishman) there suffered.

These Isles lie distant from England, about 15 or 1600 Leagues, from Madera,
1000, or 1200; from Hispaniola, 400; and from Carolina, which is the nearest
part of Land, about 300 Leagues.

Their Extent.
Of these Isles, St. Georges Isle.
the greatest called St. Georges, is 5 or 6 Leagues long, and almost thorowout,
not above a quarter, a third, or half a League broad, the others are much less.

Their Form, etc.
All these Isles together, form a body like a Cressent, and enclose very good
Ports, Several good Ports:
the chief among which, are those of the Great-Sound, Herringtons Inlet,
Southhampton, and Pagets; which, with their Forts of Dover, and Warwick, take
their names from the several Noble men that were concerned as undertakers.

The Fertility, Commodities, Fruits, etc.
The Earth is exceeding Fertile, Its Fertility.
yiedling two Crops yearly; their Maize they gather in July, and December.

They have excellent Fruits, Their Fruits.
as, Oranges, Dates, Mulberries both White and Red; where breed abundance of
Silkworms which spin Silk.

Their chief Commodities are, OOranges, Couchaneil, Their Commodities.
and Tobacco, with some Pearl, and Ambergreece, and with these they drive some
small Trade.

They have plenty of Tortoises, which is their ordinary food, whose Flesh is
very delicious.

Their Hoggs, Hoggs.
which the Spaniards formerly carried thither, are greatly increased.

They have many Fowls, Fowls.
and Birds, amongst which, a great many Cranes, with a Sea-Fowl that breeds in
holes like Rabbets.

They have no Fresh Water for their occasions, Defective in Fresh Water.
but that of Wells, and Pits, which Ebbs and Flows with the Sea, there being
neither Fountain nor Stream in these Isles.

No Venomous Beast.
In these Isles are no Venomous beast, Their Spiders.
their Spiders are not poisonous, but are of sundry and various Colors; and in
the hot weather, they make their Webs so strong, that oft-times the small Birds
are entangled and catched in them.

Caedar Trees.
Here are Caedar Trees, which differs from all others in several respects, but
the wood is very sweet.

The Air and Healthfulness.
The Sky is almost always Serene, These Isles exceeding healthful
and when darkened with clouds, it commonly Thunders, and Lightneth: And the Air
is very Temperate, and so exceeding healthful, that it is rare to hear that any
one dies of any Distemper, but only Old age; insomuch that many have removed
from England hither, only for the enjoyment of a long, and healthful life* And
those that have made any long continuance here, are fearful o^ removing out of
so pure an Air.

The Inhabitants.
The English first settled themselves on these Isles about the year 1612. The
Inhabitants and strength of the Isle.
and have now established a powerful Colony, there being at present, about four
or five Thousand Inhabitants, who have strongly Fortified the Approaches, which
with the Rocks in the Sea, renders them Impregnable.

map of Carolina

A DESCRIPTION OF CAROLINA.
CAROLINA, a New established Colony, of the English, being that part of Florida
adjoining to Virginia, Its Bounds, and Situation.
which makes its Northern bounds in the Latitude of 36 degrees; and extends
it self to the Latitude of 29, which makes its extreme Southern bounds; on the
East it is washed with the Atlantic Ocean, and on the West, it has that large
Tract of land which runs into the Pacifique Ocean.

Its Temperature, and Healthfulness.
It is a Country blessed with a Temperate, This Country very healthful.
and Wholesome Air, the heat in Summer, nor the Cold in Winter, (which is not
so much as to check the growth of Plants, Trees, etc. The several Fruits, and
Plants, having their distinct seasons, being no ways offensive to the
Inhabitants. Neither is the Air thus Temperate, and Agreeable, to the Natives
only, but it is as Favorable to the English: And being thus healthful, has
Invited several persons from the Bermudes to settle here; who dwelling in so
pure an Air, durst not venture in any other Country. Nor do those from the
Bermudes only remove hither, upon the assurance of a happy life, joined with
the gaining of Fair Estates, but also, many English from most of the American
Plantations, it being generally esteemed one of the best Colonies that ever the
English were Masters of; for here is Health, Pleasure, and Profit to be found,
which cannot be met with in so large a measure, in any Country of the Indies.

Their Fruits, Herbs, etc.
The Soil is Rich, Their Fruits*
and Fertile, and produces excellent Fruits; as Apricocks, Peaches, Grapes,
(of which the English have made good Wine) Olives, Walnuts, Apples, Pears,
Plumbs, Cherries, Figgs, Mulberries, Strawberries, Water-Mellons, Marachocks,
Quinces, and other Fruits known to us in Europe, which for goodness are no
ways Inferior to them; and in the Southern part, Oranges, Limes, Pomgranates,
and Pome-Citrons. And indeed, the Earth is very apt to produce, and bring to
Maturity, Corn, all sorts of Garden-Herbs, and Roots, etc.

Its Commodities.
The Commodities which this Country does, Commodities.
and may produce, are Wines, Oils, Silk, (Mulberry-Trees growing in great
abundance in the Woods) Cotton, Indico, Ginger, Tobacco, etc. And it is
believed, that here may be made of the three first Commodities, viz. Wines,
Oil, and Silk, such great abundance, to theirs, and this Kingdoms enrichment,
that besides what we shall use our selves, we may have wherewith to furnish
Foreign Parts.

Their Trees.
Besides the Mulberry-Trees, Trees.
here are those of Caedar, Oak, both White and Red, Poplar, Bay, Ash, and Pine;
with several others whose names are yet unknown.

Their Rivers, Fish, and Fowl.
The Country is very well watered with Rivers, Rivers.
there being between Cape-Carteret, and Port-Rasal, which is not above 60
miles, 5 or 6 great Navigable Rivers, which discharge themselves into the Sea,
besides several others of less Remark. And these Rivers are plentifully stored
with excellent Fish of sundry sorts, which being the same as are found in
Virginia, which comes next to be treated of, I shall omit the nameing of them
here.

Here are also great plenty of Wild-Fowl, Their Fowls.
as Geese, Cranes, Swans, Herons, Curlews, Heath-Cocks, Oxeys, Brants,
Dotterels, Widgeons, Teals, and Duck, and Mallard in an undestroyable quantity.

Provisions in the Woods.
The Woods are well stored with large Turkeys, Phesants, Partridges,
Turtle-Doves, Wood-Pidgeons, with great variety and plenty of small Birds. Also
in the Woods, are great plenty of Deer, with abundance of Hares, Coneys, etc.

Here are diverse delightful, and spacious Savanas.

The Natives of Carolina.
The Natives of Carolina, The Disposition, etc. of the Natives.
according to the observation of Mr. John Ledener (who made three several
journeys from Virginia, to Carolina, about the year 1670. on purpose for a
discovery of those parts, and the better understanding the nature and
disposition of the Inhabitants) are said by him, to be a people of a ready
wit, and though Illiterate, of a good understanding. For the Account of time,
(he says,) they make use of Hieroglyphics, and Emblems of things; likewise
they instruct their Children in such things as relates to their Families and
Country, which is so preserved from Generation, to Generation; where a battle
has been fought, or upon the settlement of a Colony, they raise a small
Pyramid of stone, which does consist of the number slain, or settled at such a
Colony. For Religious Rites, either Devotion, Sacrifice, or Burial, they make a
round circle of short Strawes, or Reeds, and according to the placing of the
said Strawes, or Reeds, it is known for what it was made; and to meddle with
such Circles, is esteemed no better than Sacrilege.

He says, they worship one God; as Creator of all things, to whom their
High Priest offers Sacrifice, but believes he has something else to do, than to
reguard Humane Affairs, but does commit the Government thereof to lesser
Deities; that is, to good and evil Spirits, to whom their Inferior Priests
makes their Devotion, and Sacrifice. He says, they believe the Transmigration
of the Soul, and when any one dies, they Interr with the Corpse, Provisions,
and Housholdstuff for the Elysium or next World, which they fancy to be beyond
the Mountains, and Indian Ocean. He further says, that from four women, they
believe all mankind Sprung, and do therefore divide themselves into as many
Tribes; and in their Marriages, they are very Superstitious.

He says, they are generally well-proportionate; they are great Favorers of
the English, living together in Love and Friendship, and upon all occasions,
ready to contribute their assistance unto them. They are generally of a good,
and honest meaning, no ways addicted to Vice, or to ExExtravagancies,
contending themselves with a mean Diet and Apparel for their present
subsistence, not taking much care for the time to come. He further says, that
they are much addicted to Mirth, and Dancing; they are also much prone to
Honor, and Valor, which they place above all other Virtues, which does
occasion them to be so continually engaged against one another in Wars: and
that side which Fortune Crowns with Victory, Triumphal Jollaties are
performed by them.

The Country (he says) is divided into several petty Kingdoms, Its Division
into Kingdoms.
and the People in the one, keep no good Correspondence with those that border
upon them, and on the least occasion, wage War one against another.

In this Country of Carolina (he says) that there are several Indian Towns
which are generally the Habitation of the King, that commands the Territory.

The Proprietors of Carolina.
This Province or Country of Carolina, The Proprieters of Carolina.
was first Possessed by the English, about the year 1660, and became a
Proprietorship; which his present Majesty K. Charles the Second, granted by
Patent to the Right Noble, George Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron
Moncke of Potheridge, Peachampe and Teys, Knight of the Noble Order of the
Garter, Captain General of his Majesty's Landforces, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. The Right Honorable, Edward
Earl of Clarendon, Viscount Cornbury, and Baron Hide of Hendon, etc. The Right
Honorable, William Earl of Craven, Viscount Craven of Uffington, Baron Craven
of Hamsted-Marshal, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Middlesex, and Borouh of
Southwark, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
etc. The Right Honorable John Lord Berkley, Baron Berkley of Stratton, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland for his Majesty, etc. The Right Honorable, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Baron Ashley of Winbourn St. Giles, Chancellor of the Exchequor,
under-Treasurer of England, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. The
Honorable Sr. George Carteret of Hawnes in Bedfordshire Baronet,
Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc. Sr. William Berkley of in the County of Knight
and Baronet, and to Sr. John Colleton of London, Knight and Baronet; and to
their Heirs and Successors.

And the said Lords proprietors, having by their Patent, power to establish a
Government, and make Laws for the better Regulation thereof, and the inviting
of Inhabitants, have formed a Model, (which by the general consent of all the
Proprietors) was drawn up by the Right Honorable the Lord Ashley, a person of
great Worth, and Prudence; whose knowledge in matters of State, and the
Settlement of a Government, is sufficiently praise worthy by all perso^^* Which
said Model is so well fr^med for the good and welfare (...) the Inhabitants,
that it is estee^ed by all judicious persons without compare; but the said
Model, b^ing too long to be set down in th^^ small Treatise, I must be
constra^ned to omit it.

The Settlements of the English.
Here are at present two considerable Settlements of the English, for so short
a time, the one at Albemarle-River in the North, and the other about the midst
of the Country on Ashley River, which is likely to be the Scale of Trade for
the whole Country, as being situate very Commodious for Shipping, and in a
healthful place.

map of New England, Virginia, Maryland and Newfoundland

A DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA.
Its Bounds.
VIRGINIA particularly now so called, Its Bounds.
has for its Southern Limits, Carolina; for its Eastern, the Atlantic Ocean;
for its Northern, Mariland; and for its Western, that vast tract of Land which
runs into the South Sea.

Its Name.
This Country was said to b^ first discovered by Sr. Franc^^ Drake (as indeed
all this Tract o^ Seacoast) Its Name and why so called.
and was so named by Sir. Walter Rawleigh, (a great promoter of this
discovery,) in honor of Queen Elizabeth, who the^ Reigned.

The Settlement of the English.
Much time was spent in the discovery of this Country, with vast expenses in
the setting forth of Ships and not without the great loss o^ many a poor
wretches life, besore it could be brought to perfection; but at length, through
the Industry of Capt. Smith, a great Promoter of the English settling at
Virginia.
Captain John Smith, and other worthy persons, who took great pains for the
advancement of these discoveries, fortune began to smile ^n her, and about the
Reign of King James, a Patent was grant^d to certain persons as a Corpora^ion,
and called the Company of Adventurers of Virginia. Afterward other Patents
were granted to them for larger Extents of Land excluded in the former; ^ut the
said Corporation committing of several, and frequent Misdemeanors, and
Miscarriages, the said Patent about the year 1623 was made Null; since which it
has been free for all his Majesty's Subjects, to Trade into these parts.

Its Air and Temperature.
This Country is blessed with a sweet and wholesome Air, and the Clime of late
very agreeable to the English, Virginia nowvery healthful.
since the clearing o^ Woods; so that now few dies o^ the Countries disease,
called the Seasoning.

The Soil.
It is every where interlaced with delectable Hills, and rich Valleys and of a
Soil so Fertile, that an Acre of ground commonly yields 200 Bushels of Corn,
and is very apt to produce what is put therein, as English Grains, The Soil
very Rich.
Roots, Seeds, Plants, Fruits, etc. besides those appropriated to the Country,
and other adjacent parts of America.

Their Fruits.
Here are excellent Fruits in great abundance, Excellent Fruits.
which may be compared with those of Italy or Spain, as Apricocks, Peaches,
Mellons, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cherries, Grapes, Figgs, Pomgranates, Quinces,
Maracocks, Puchamines, Chestnuts, Walnuts, Olives, Straberries, Rasberries,
Goosberries, and Mulberries in great abundance.

Of their Apples they make Syder; of their Pears, Perry; and of their Grapes,
Wine.

Their Roots and Herbs.
They have several sorts of Roots, Plenty of Roots, and Herbs.
as Potatoes, Carrets, Turnips, Artichoaks, Onyons, Cabbages, Collyflowers,
Sparagus, etc. And most sort of Garden-herbs, known to us in great plenty.

Their Fowls, and Birds.
Here is great plenty of Foul, Abundance of Foul.
as wild Turkeys, which usually weigh 6 stone; Partridges, Swans, Geese, Ducks,
Teal, Widgeons, Dotterels, Heathcocks, Oxeyes, Brants, Pigeons, Cranes,
Herons, Eagles, and several sorts of Hawks. And for small Birds* innumerable
quantities of sundry sorts, as Blackbirds, Thrushes, Redbirds; and above all,
the Mockbirds, which counterfeiteth the notes of all Birds.

Their Wild Beasts, and Tame Cattle.
They have great store of wild Beasts, as Lions, Bears, Leopards, Tigers,
Wolves, and Dogs like Wolves, but brake not; Virginia well stored with Beasts,
and Tame Cattle.
Buffeloes, Elks, whose Flesh is as good as Beef; Rosconnes, Utchunquois, Deer,
Hares, Bevers, Ottors, Foxes, Martins, Poulcats, Wesells, Musk-Rats, Flying
Squirils, etc. And for Tame Cattle, Cowes, Sheep, Goats, Hoggs, and Horses in
great plenty.

Their Fish.
Here is great plenty of Excellent Fish Variety of Fish,
as well in the Sea, and Bay of Chesopeack, as in the Rivers, viz. Cods,
Thornback, Sturgeon, Grampuses, Porpuses, Drums, CatFish, Basses, Sheepsheads (
which makes broth like that of Mutton) Cony-Fish, Rock-Fish, Creey-Fish, White
Salmons, Mullets, Soles, Plaice, Mackrel, Trouts, Perches, Conger-Eels,
Herrings, Crabs, Oysters, Shrimps, Cockles, Muscles, etc.

Commodities.
Commodities which this Country does, The Product of the Country
or may produce, are Hemp, Flax, Hops, Rape-Seed, Anniceseed, Wood, Madder,
Potashes* Honey, Wax, Silk, (if they would make it, Mulberry-Trees here
growing in such great plenty) Saxafras, Sarsaparilla, several swee^ Gums, and
Balsomes of Sovereign virtues, several sorts of Plants* Woods, etc. used by
Dyers, here are veins of Alomes, Iron, and Copper, sundry sorts of Rich Furrs,
Elk-skins (which makes excellen^ Buffe) and other Hides; Pitch, Tarr, Rozen,
Turpentine, Butter, Cheese, and Salted Flesh and Fish, which find vent at the
Barbados, and other Caribbe Isles; but above all these, their chief Commodity
is Tobacco, which they are sure to find vent for, and is the Standard by which
all other Commodities are prized; but it were well for the Inhabitants if they
would employ their time, about the making of Silk, or some other Commodities,
which in a short time would be found more advantageous unto them, and then
their Tobacco would not be so great a Drug as of late it is, insomuch that the
Merchant ofttimes had rather lose it, then to pay the charges and Duties of
Freight, Custom, Excise, etc.

Here grows a kind of Flax, called Silk-grass, of which the Indians make
Thread, and Strings, and is good to make Linen Cloth, and Shifts, and would
make excellent strong Cables.

Their Trade.
Here all Tradesmen, especially Handicrafts finds good encouragement; and for
those Commodities aforesaid, the English (who have the sole Trade) bring them
all sorts of Apparel, all manner of Utinsills, Their Trade.
belonging to Household-stuf, or necessary in their Plantations, or otherwise;
also Wine, Brandy, and other strong Drinks; likewise all Silks, Stuf and Cloth,
both Linen and Woollen, which they convert to several uses according to their
Fancyes, being now supplied by Tailors.

Their Trees.
Here grows sundry sorts of Trees, of the red and white Oak Black Walnut,
Several good Woods.
Cedar, Pine Cyprus, Chestnut, Poppler, Ash, Elm, etc. many of which are very
good for the building of Ships, and other uses.

The Rivers.
This Country is well watered with several great, and strong Rivers which lose
themselves in the Gulf or bay of Chesopeak, which gives entrance for shipping
in this Country, as also to Maryland next adjoining; which said Bay is very
large, Capacious, and Comodious for Shipping, being said to run up into the
Country northwards near 75 Leagues; its breadth in many places, being 5, 6, or
7 Leagues, and sometimes more, and 6 or 7 Fathom deep, and its opening to the
South between Cape-Henry, which begineth Virginia, and Cape-Charles on the
other side opposite, being about 10, or 12 Leagues wide.

The principal of these Rivers beginning at Cape-Henry, Its chief Rivers.
are Pawhatan, now called James-River, being very large and Commodious for
ships, and found navigable about 50 Leagues. Pamaunke, now York-River, also
large and Navigable, about 20 Leagues. Rapahanock or Toppahanock, likewise a
good River and Navigable, about 40. Leagues, which is the last River of
Virginia Northwardly, that falls into the Bay of Chesopeack.

Their Towns.
Upon, or near, these Rivers for the convenience of shipping, the English are
seated, which at present do amount unto the number of about 30, or 40000, and
have some Towns, the chief amongst which, is James-Town, James Town.
or rather James City, commodiously seated James-River; the Town is beautified
with many fair and well built Brick Houses, and as it is the chief town of the
Country; here is kept the Courts of Judicature and Offices of public
concern; not far from which, at Green-Spring, resideth the Governor Sir
William Berkley.

Next to James-town may be reckoned that of Elizabeth, Elizabeth Town.
seated at the mouth of the said River, a well built Town.

Also Dales-gift, Dales Gift.
Wicocomoco, Bermuda, and others.

The English Government.
This Country is Governed by Laws agreeable with those of England, Virginia
under a good Government.
for the deciding of all Causes both Civil and Criminal; which said Laws are
thus made by the Governor, appointed by his Majesty, with the consent of the
General Assembly, which does consist of his Council, and the Burgesses chosen
by the Freeholders.

And for the better Government, the Country, which is possessed by the
English, is divided into several Counties, in each of which are Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, which are from time to time
appointed by the Governor; The names of the Counties are those of Carotuck,
The Counties.
Charles, Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New-Kent, Lancastar, Middlesex,
Nansemund, Lower-Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, Rappahanock, Surrey,
Warwick, Westmorland, Isle of Wight, and York, and in each of these Counties,
are held petty Courts, every month from which there may be Appeals to the
Quarter-Court held at James-Town.

The Natives or Indians.
Virginia was, and yet is the habitation of diverse sorts of Indians, which have
no dependence upon each other, being of particular Tribes, and having their
peculiar King to Govern them; every Indian-Town, or rather poor Village, being
the habitation of a King; and these People do rather live at enmity, than amity
together. And as to their Dispositions, Manners, Religions, etc. there is found
a difference, but most of all in their Languages; so that those People may not
improperly be called so many several Nations.

They are generally a sort of people well proportionate, stout, of a swarthy
complexion, their Hair black, and flaggy, which they wear long; they are of a
ready Wit, very Subtle, and Treacherous, not much addicted to labor, being
too great lovers of their ease; they are much given to Hunting, and going to
Wars with each other, their Weapons being the Bow and Arrows, at which they are
very expert, being good marks-men; but of late they have got the use of Guns,
and other Weapons, through the folly of the English in showing them. They are
very loving and obedient to their Kings; in matters of Religion, they observe
strange Ceremonies, and their Priests (which are esteemed Conjurers) makes
Sacrifices for them. They believe the Transmigration of the Soul, and have
strange fancies about the Creation of they World, they believe there is a God,
but think he has something else to do then to concern himself with things
below, as too inferior for him, and do therefore not Worship him; but the
Devil they worship out of a fear, least he should destroy them, as having the
power of them.

Their Apparel is but mean, Their Apparel
only contenting themselves with something to cover their Nakedness; and for
the better defending themselves from the weather, they anoint their Bodies with
certain Oils mixed with Bears Grease.

Their Houses are no better then our English Hogsties, Their Houses.
and are made of Boughs, and covered with Bark of Trees; and in the midst
thereof, is placed their Chimney, or Fireplace.

Their Diet in meaness, Their Diet.
is answerable to their Houses, not endeavoring to please their Pallets with
curious Sauces, or pompering their Bodies with provokative Meats.

A DESCRIPTION OF MARYLAND.
Its Situation and Bounds.
THe Province of Maryland lying between the degrees of 37, and 50 minutes, or
thereabouts, and 40 degrees of Northern Latitude. It has for its Bounds on the
South, Virginia, (from which it is parted by the River Patowmeck, whose
Southerly bank divides the Province from Virginia;) on the East, the Atlantic
Ocean, and Delaware-Bay; on the North, New England, and New York, formerly part
of New England, lying on the East side of Delaware-Bay; and on the West, the
true Meridian of the first fountain of the River of Patowmeck.

The Bay of Chesopeack giving entrance to Ships into Virginia, Chesopeak Bay.
and Maryland, passes through the heart of this Province, and is found
Navigable near 200 miles; into which falls the Rivers of Patowmeck, Patuxent,
Ann-Arundel, (alas Severn) and Sasquesahanough, Its Rivers.
lying on the West side of the Bay; and to the East of the said Bay, those of
Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomoke, and several other Rivers and Rivulets, to the
great improvement of the Soil, and Beauty of this Province.

The Country of late, since the Felling of the Woods, and the Peoples
accustoming themselves to English Diet, is very healthful and and agreeable to
the constitution of the English, The Country very healthful
few now dying at their first coming, of the Countries disease, or Seasoning.
And as to the Temperature of Air, the heats in Summer, receive such seasonable
allayes from gentle breezes, and fresh Showers of Rain; and the Cold in Winter,
is of so little durance, that the Inhabitants cannot be said to suffer by
either.

The Soil, etc.
The Country is generally plain and even, yet rising in some places into small
and pleasant Hills, which heighten the beauty of the adjacent Valleys.

The Soil is Rich and Fertile, naturally producing all such Commodities as are
in the precedent discourse set down as peculiar to its neighboring Colony,
Virginia; as all sorts of Beasts and Foul both Tame and Wild; For the Beasts,
Fowl, Fish, Fruits, etc. See in the Description of Virginia.
Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots, Herbs, Gums, Trees, Balsomes, etc. as likewise
all Commodities produced by Industry, are here found in as great plenty and
perfection: But the general trade of Maryland depends chiefly upon Tobacco,
which being esteemed better for a Foreign Market than that of Virginia, finds
great Vent abroad, and the Planters at home; in exchange thereof, are furnished
by the Merchant with all necessaries, for himself, his House,Family, and
Plantation.

Their is a Competent stock of ready money in this Province both of English,
Their Coyns, and way of Trade.
Foreign, and his Lordshipps own Coin, yet their chief way of Commerce is by
way of barter, or exchange of Commodities, which may be judged to be no ways
inconsiderable, since 100 sail of Ships from England, and the English
Plantations, have of late Years been known to trade thither in one Year.

The Natives.
The Natives, as to their Complexion, Stature, Customs, Dispositions, Laws,
Religions, Apparel, Diet, Houses, etc. are much the same as those of Virginia,
already treated of; being likewise many different Tribes, or sorts of People,
and each Governed by their particular King.

The Government, etc. of this Country.
This Province of Maryland, his Majesty King Charles the first in Anno 1632,
granted by Patent to the Right Honorable Caecilius Calvert, Lord Baltemore,
and to his Heirs and Assigns; and by that Patent created him, and them, the
true and absolute Lords and Propriators of the same, (saving the Allegiance and
Sovereign Dominion due to his Majesty, Maryland well Governed.
his Heirs, and Successors;) thereby likewise granting to them all Royal
Jurisdictions, and Prerogatives both Millitary and Civil; as power of enacting
Laws, Martial Laws, making of War, and Peace, pardoning of Offenses, Conferring
of Honors, Coining of Money, etc. And in acknowledgement thereof, yiedling and
and paying yearly to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, two Indian Arrows
at Windsor Castle in the County of Berks, on Easter Tuesday; together with the
fifth part of all the Gold and Silver Oar that shall be found there.

For the better inviting of people to settle here, his Lordship, by advice of
the General Assembly of that Province, has long since established a Model of
good and wholesome Laws for the ease and benefit of the Inhabitants, with
tolleration of Religion, to all sorts that profess the Faith of Christ: which
has been a principal motive to many to settle under that Government, rather
then in another where liberty of Conscience was denied them.

Its division into Countyes.
This Province where it is peopled with English, is severed into 10 Counties;
to wit, 5 Eastwards of Chesopeak Bay, The Names of the Countries
as Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, Sommerset, and Talbot; and 5 westwards of the said
Bay, as Ann-Arundel, Baltemore, Calvert, Charles and St. Mary's. And in every
one of these Countyes, there is held an inferior Court every two months for
small matters, from which there lies Appeals to the Provincial Court, held at
St. Maryes. Here are likewise certain Magistrates appointed by his Lordship in
each County, as Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, etc.

Their Towns.
The Inhabitants (being in number at present about 16000) have begun the
building of several Towns, which in few Years it is hoped may come to some
perfection; as Calverton, Herrington, and Harvy-Town, all Commodiously seated
for the benefit of Trade, and convenience of Shipping, but the principal Town
is St. Maryes, S. Mary's Town.
seated on St. Georges River, being beautified with diverse well built Houses,
and is the chief place or scale of Trade for the Province, where the Governor
his Lordships Son and Heir, Mr. Charles Calvert has his House, and where the
General Assembly, and Provincial Courts are held, and Public Offices kept;
but at present the said Governor does reside at Mattapany, about 8 Miles
distant where he has a fair and pleasant House. And for the better assisting
the said Governor, in matters that concerns the Government of the Province, he
has his Council, etc.

A DESCRIPTION OF New York.
Adjoining to Maryland, Northwards, is a Colony called New York, from his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, the Proprietor thereof by grant from his
Majesty, and is that part of New England which the Dutch formerly seized, and
called the New- Netherlands.

Its Fertility, etc.
It is a Country, of a Rich and Fertile Soil, This Country very Fertile.
well watered with Rivers, as is Maryland already spoken of, and is found to
produce the same Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fruits, Commodities, Trees, etc. and in
as great plenty.

Its Town.
Here is one very considerable Town, first built by the Dutch, and called
New-Amsterdam, New York
which name is now changed to New York: It is well seated both for Trade,
Security, and Pleasure, in a small Isle called Mahatan, reguarding the Sea,
made so by Hudsons-River, which severeth it from Long Island, which said River
is very commodious for Shipping, and is about two Leagues broad. The Town is
large, containing about five hundred well built Houses; and for Civil
Government, it has a Mayor, Alderman, a Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace for
their Magistrates. For the further security of this Town, here is raised a Fort
called James-Fort, which is very strong, and well Defended and Maintained with
Men, and Ammunition. The Town is Inhabited by the English, and Dutch, and has
a considerable Trade with the Indians, for the Skins of Elks, Deer, Bears, etc.
also for those of Bever, Otter, and other Furrs; and does likewise enjoy a good
Trade with the English.

The Natives.
This Country is also possessed with sundry sorts of people, not much unlike
the Indians of Virginia, being well- proportioned, Stout, Swarthy, Black
haired, very expert in their Bow, and Arrows, which are their chief weapons of
War. The Disposition of the Natives.
They are courteous to the English, of a ready Wit, and very apt to receive
Instructions from them; upon the least Offense, the man turns away his wife,
and marries again, and the Children begotten by her, she takes with her, the
man not regarding them. Fornication is here permitted. They observe several
Ceremonies in their Religious Rites, and are said to worship the Devil, whom
they greatly fear. Their Priests are no better than Sorcerers, who strangly
bewitch these silly Creatures. When any woman finds her self quick with
Child, she keeps her self chaste, or untouched by man until her delivery, the
like she observes in the time of her giving Suck. A strange custom which our
European Dames would not well like of! They are very obedient and loving to
their Kings: They believe the Transmigration of the Soul; and concerning the
Creation of the World, have a strange fantastical opinions. They are much
addicted to Dancing, Sports, and Recreations, observing Festival Times.

Their Habit is but mean, Their Habit and Diet, etc.
as the rest of the Indians, yet do they Paint and besmear their Faces with
several Colors by way of Ornament.

There Diet and Habitations are also as mean.

They are much addicted to go to Wars against one another, and do seldom give
quarter to any but the Women and Children, whom they preserve, and make use of
for the increasing their strength.

A DESCRIPTION OF New England.
Its Situation.
NEw England is seated North of Maryland, which according to the report of
Capt. Smith, has 70 miles of Sea Coast, where are found diverse good Havens,
some of which are capable to harbor 500 Sail of Ships from the fury the of
Sea, and Winds, by reason of the interposition of several Isles (to the number
of about 200) which lie about this Coast.

And although this Country is seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, Its
Situation.
yet is the Clime more uncertain, as to Heat and Cold, then those European
Kingdoms, which lie Parallel with it; and as to Virginia, this may be compared
as Scotland is to England.

The Air.
The Air is here found very healthful, The Air.
and very agreeable to the English, which makes them possess many potent
Colonyes.

Its Inhabitants.
This Country is possessed by diverse sorts of People, The Disposition of the
Natives much like those of Virginia.
who are Governed by their particular Kings, and do much differ in Customs,
and Manners, from one another, as those Indians inhabiting in MaryLand,
Virginia, and other parts of America. And do live generally at variance with
each other. They have their several Towns and settlements, and their Riches
does consist in their Furs, and Skins, which they sell to the English.

When first inhabited by the English.
This Country became first to be a Colony of the English about the Year 1605,
being granted by Patent from King James, to certain proprietors under the name
of the Plymouth Company; but diverse years were spun out, with great expenses,
and not without sundry casualties befalling on the Adventurers, before it
became any thing considerable, and in a settled condition.

Their Rivers, and Fish.
This Country is well watered with Rivers, the chief amongst which, are
Agamentico, Conectecut, Kinebequy, Merrimeck, Mishuin, Mistick, Neraganset,
Pascataway, Pemnaquid, Tachobacco, etc. and in these Rivers, together with the
Sea, Excellent Fish.
are taken excellent Fish, as Cod, Thornback, Sturgeon, Porpuses, Haddock,
Salmons, Herrings, Mackeril, Oysters, Lobsters, Crab-Fish, Tortoise, Cocles,
Muscles, Clams, Smelts, Eels, Lamprons, Alewives, Basses, Hollibuts, Sharks,
Seals, Grampus, and Whales.

Their Fowls, and Birds.
Here are great variety of Fowls, as Phesants, Partridges, HeathCocks, Turkeys,
Geess, Ducks, Hernes, Cranes, Cormorants, Swans, Widgins, Sheldrakes, Snipes,
Doppers, Blackbirds, the Humbird, Loon, etc.

Their Beasts, both Tame and Wild.
Their Wild Beasts of chief note, are Lions, Bears, Foxes, Rackoons, Mooses,
Musquashs, Otters, Bevers, Deer, Hares, Coneys, etc. and for Tame Beasts,
Cowes, Sheep, Goats, Swine, and Horses.

Amongst the hurtful things in this Country, Hurtful things.
the Rattle-Snake is most dangerous. Here are also several sorts of Stinging
Flies; which are found very troublesome to the Inhabitants.

Their Trees, and Fruits.
Here are sundry sorts of Trees, Fruits.
as the Oak, Cyprus, Pine, Chestnut, Caedar, Walnut, Firr, Ash, Asp, Elm, Alder,
Maple, Birch, Sasafras, Sumach, several Fruit Trees, as Apples, Pears, Plumbs,
with several others that are growing in Virginia, and Maryland, which I have
already took notice of.

Their Commodities, and Trade.
This Country affords several sorts of rich Furrs, Commodities and Trade.
Flax, Linen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tarr, Cables, Masts, and Timber to build
Ships, also several sorts of Grain, etc.

The Inhabitants drive a considerable Trade to Barbados, and other our
American Plantations, in supplying them with Flower, Biscuit, Salt, Flesh, and
Fish, etc. and in return bring Sugars, and other Commodities, as well for their
own use, as to sell again. They also drive a considerable Trade with England
for wearing Apparel, Stuffs, Silks, Cloth, several Utensils for their Houses,
Iron, Brass, and such like things that are useful to man and not found amongst
them.

As to the Coyns, Weights, and Measures of New England, and the rest of the
American Plantations belonging to his Majesty, they are the same with those of
London, but as to Coyns, they are not much made use of in Trade, their way
being bartering of one Commodity for another; but at Jamaica they have plenty
of Spanish Coins, and at Barbados those of England.

The English now Inhabiting in New England, are very numerous, and powerful,
having a great many Towns, many of which are considerable.

The English Government.
The Inhabitants are Governed by Laws of their own making, The Government of
the Inhabitants of New England.
and have their several Courts, and places of Judicature, and assemble
together, at their set times, and places, as well for the making of New Laws,
abolishing of Old, Hearing, and Determining of Causes; as for the Election of a
Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants, Burgesses, and other Magistrates,
(every Town having two Burgesses) each County Annually Electing such like
Officers, for the looking after the like Affairs in the said Colony. And in
matters that concern Religion, and ChurchGovernment, they are very strict and
make a great show, being much of the stamp of the Ridgid Presbyterians.

The Towns.
Here are several Towns, Boston.
as Boston, the Metropolis of New England, Commodiously seated for Traffic on
the Seashore; It is at present a very large and spacious Town, or rather City,
composed of several well-ordered Streets, and graced with fair and beautiful
Houses, which are well Inhabited by Merchants, and Tradesmen, who drive a
considerable Trade for such Commodities as the Country afforeth to Barbados,
and the other Caribbee Isles, as also to England, and Ireland; taking in
exchange such Commodities as each place affords, or are found useful to them.
It is a place of a good strength, having two or three Hills adjoining, on which
are raised Fortifications, with great Pieces mounted thereon, which are well
guarded.

Charlestown, Charles Town.
seated on and between the Rivers Charles and Mistick; it is beautified with a
large and well built Church, and near the River side is the Marketplace, from
which runs two Streets, in which are diverse good Houses.

Dorchester situate near the Sea, Dorchester.
where there falls in two Rivulets. An indifferent Town.

Cambridg, Cambridg
formerly New-Town seated on the River Merrimeck: this Town consists of
several Streets, and is beautified with two Colleges, and diverse fair, and
well built Houses.

St. Georges-Fort, St. Georges Fort.
seated on the mouth of the River Sagadebock.

New Plymouth, seated on that large Bay of Potuxed.

Reading, Reading.
commodiously seated about a great Pond, and well-watered, and Inhabited. In
this Town are two Mills, one for Corn, and the other for Timber.

Salem, Salem.
pleasantly seated betwixt two Rivers.

Other Towns placed Alphabetically.
Berwick, Braintree, Bristol, Concord, Dartmouth, Dedham, Dover, Exeter,
Falmouth, Gloucester, Greens-Harbour, Hampton, Hartford, Haverhil, Hingham,
Hull, Ipswich, Lin, Maulden, New-bury, New-Havon, Northam, Norwich, Oxford,
Rowley, Roxbury, Salisbury, Sandwich, Southampton, Spring-field, Sudbury,
Taunton, Water-Town, Wenham, Weymouth, Woburne, and Yarmouth.

Most of these Towns bears the names from those in England, and many of them
are of good account, being commodiously seated, either on the Seashore, or on
Navigable Rivers, and are well Inhabited. And most of those Towns are known to
the Indians by other Names.

A DESCRIPTION OF NEW-FOVND-LAND.
NEwfoundland is an Island in Extent equal to England, Its Situation.
from whence it is distant little above 600 Leagues, lying near half way
between Ireland, and Virginia.

It is situated betwixt the degrees of 46, and 53 of Northern Latitudes, and
it is only severed from the Continent of America, by an Arm of the Sea, like
that which separates England from France.

Its Bays, Rivers, Fish, Fowl, Beasts, etc.
It is Famous for many spacious and excellent Bays, Its Bays and Rivers.
and Harbors, and within the Land for the variety of Fresh Springs, whose
waters are exceeding delicious.

It is enriched by nature, Its Fish, Fowls, Beasts,
with plenty of Fish, Land, and Waterfowl, and sufficiently stockt with Deer,
Hares, Otters, Foxes, Squirils, and other Beasts which yield good Furrs: And
though not overrun generally with Woods, it does afford (besides store of
Fuel) abundance of stately Trees, Trees.
fit for Timber, Masts, Planks, and sundry other uses.

The soil and Climate.
The Soil in most places is reputed fertile; the Climate wholesome, though the
rigor of the winter season, and the excess of Heats in Summer, does detract
something from its due praise.

How Inhabited.
The North and West part of this Country the Native-Indians Inhabit, Its
Inhabitants.
though but few in number, and those a more rude and savage sort of People then
those of New England and other places in the adjacent Contenent, already taken
notice of.

New Foundland first discovered by the English.
The Island, The English the true Proprieto^s of NewF^und-land
of Newfound Land was first discovered by the English, who are the true
Propriators thereof, excluding all Foreign right, and justifying the same to
belong to the Crown of England only, whose Interest has been there continued
by several, under the Reigns of diverse Kings and Queens.

In the year 1623, The Ld. Baltemore the proprietor of Avalon in New Foundland.
Sir George Calvert Knight, then Principal Secretary of State and afterward
Ld. Baltemore, obtained a Patent of part of New Foundland; which was erected
into a Province, and called Avalon; where he caused a Plantation to be settled,
and a stately House and Fort to be built at Ferryland, and afterward
Transported himself and Family thither, and continuing the Plantation by his
Deputy, till by descent (after his Lordships decease) it came to his son and
heir the Right Honorable Caecilius, now Lord Baltemore, who by Deputies from
time to time, was no less careful to preserve his Interest there, which (though
during the late troubles in England, it was by Sir David Kirkes means, for some
years discontinued, he was soon reinvested in the same by his Majesty's most
happy Restoration.

There is no part of New Foundland generally more happy for multiplicity of
excellent Bays, and Harbors, then this Province, and where vast quantities of
Fish are yearly caught by the English, especially at Ferryland, and the Bay of
Bulls. But the whole Coast of the Island, affords infinite plenty of Codd, and
Poor-John, which is the chief Commodity of the Isle, which is grown to a settled
Trade, for these many years, to the enrichment of all those that Trade thither.

A great bank of Land.
East of Newfoundland, A great bank of Land.
over against Cape-Ray, at the distance of about 70 miles, lies a great Bank
of Land, of about 300 miles in Length, and not above Seventyfive in Breadth,
where broadest. It lies under the Sea many Fathoms deep, so the Ships of a
considerable Burden may ride over it: and about this Banck lies dispersed
several small Isles, called by St. Sebastion Cabot (the first discoverer) Los
Baccaloos, or the Isles of Cod-fish, from the prodigious quantities of Cod-Fish
there found, which were said to obstruct ^he passage of his Vessels.

The Trade to this Island.
The French, A great Trade here driven.
Dutch, Biscaners, and other Nations that yearly Trade hither amounting to
between 3 or 400 Vessels, are assured to find sufficient Freight of Cod and
Poor John, which they find good vent for in the Streights, Spain, France- and
other Countries to their great profit and encouragement.

And were the English diligent to inspect the advantage that might accrue to
this Nation, by settling Plantations on the Island, and raising Fortifications,
for the security of the place; we might give Law to all foreigners that come
to Fish there, and in few Years engross the whole Fishery to our selves: the
greatest Balance perchance of Foreign Trade.

FINIS.

