Licensed

Roger L'Estrange,
^^^emb. 20. 1670.
THE VISION OF THEODORUS VERAX.

BY Bryce Blair, Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake at the Crown in Fleetstreet. 1671.

To the most Illustrious and High born Prince, James Duke of Monmouth and
Bucclugh, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
SIR,
IT has ever been amongst the first of my wishes and desires, to render my
self known, (and if possible) acceptable to Your Grace, by some special and
signal Service: But seeing (through the malevolence of an angry, and frowning
Fortune) that honor is denied to me; yet, generous Prince, do not disdain to
look upon the effects of my ambition, (poor and inconsiderable as they are)
with a propitious eye. If I be presumptuously bold, in this testimony of my
profound respect, I hope your Grace will impute it to no other cause, but to
your generous, courteous, and affable deportment to all, which disdains not the
meanest and obscurest, as well as the more glorious, and resplendent objects. I
throw my first Labors, and Rustic* yet Maiden-Muse at your Graces Feet; and I
humbly implore, that both may be shrouded under the wings of Your Noble
Patronage, where they shall find a sufficient Protection, against all carping
Zoylists, and ill affected Detractors, which will be an infinite satisfaction
and honor to

Your Graces Most Humble and devoted Servant, B. BLAIR.

THE VISION OF Theodorus Verax.
I Am to treat of what never was, or shall be done; Because a Dream is but a
Dream.
either for the Style or the fancy, None will be offended, who loves mirth and
sport, friends of old to learning, and to the Muses. It is but a Dream, and
that I may declare without reflection. If it be a Crime for me to dream, then
must we accuse nature it self; for it is as impossible to restrain our roving
fancies (especially when we are asleep) as it is to bind the very winds.

For what all day we do or
think, we keep
The same, oft-times, in mind
when we are asleep.
The night does receive both our cares, and delights, and represents the same
as it were in a standing fog or mist, when sleep creeps in upon us. For though
the efficacy and power of the soul be divided, and distracted into several
parts by sleep, yet it is in its force, and being deluded by vain fancies, in
the very shadow of death, goes about the functions of this life, the counsels
of men, yea and idle toys. So that mortals have not tranquillity always, without
toil and labor. When the day is ended, we take the remainders of our cares,
and toys to bed with us, and either they strike our sleeping members with
fears, or tickles them with joy. But now I beg in to go on: if any has
pleasure in a Dream, let him bestow the loss of a little time therein.

It was in the latter part of the night, when (being in a deep sleep) I thought
I was walking amongst certain Hills near a City, diverse and spring-like
pleasures had clothed the Earth (the cold winter being gone,) and when in the
entry of a thick Grove I was thinking upon the Nymphs of the Woods, and was
moving my fancy to write a Song to Sylvanus: I am carried into a great Cave
whereinto a natural row of trees made one entry: the leaves whereof did cast a
shade over the same: Close by, and at the top of a most clear Fountain there
was Tables made of Turf, Garlands strowed on the Ground, and certain remainders
of a sumptuous banquet. The ground as yet wet with Wine, did make it appear
that there had lately been a Feast in that place. There came a certain
Marriage-sound, and Light from the farthest end of the Cave; whereby it was
evident, that there were some of the Nymphs brought to her Marriage-chamber by
her new Bridegroom. As I was admiring this secret place, I espied some Verses,
written on the nearest Beech Tree.

There is a power, or pleasure, that does bind
The minds of mortals; beasts of every kind,
Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea,
Are prone (we know) to charming Venery.
Pleasure's a Princess everywhere, we find
The same in Rivers, stately Trees and Wind.
You Country people, now give over to think
Of daily toil, be merry, dance and drink.
Give unto Uenus, and your garden God,
First fruits of Corn and Wine, make no abode
Till it be done, the Fields has Gifts in store;
For without such, feasting shall be no more.
By riot does the God of Banquets still
Preserve his power, his pleasure to fulfill.
The Country Gods has also power in this,
To riot, since it is so, is not amiss.
Love and bright Venus to rejoice does move,
Love grows by Venus, Venus grows by Love.
Their Verses, and Predictions needs must be
Sacred, a God does write them on a Tree.
I had just done reading, when behold one of a most magestick presence did show
himself to me, out of the space betwixt the light and the darkness, I thought
him to be the very image of all the graces. His habit and countenance, did
denote him to be both Man and Woman, and his original to be from Mercury and
Venus: the rest of his apparel could both effeminate a Man, and augment
wantonness in a Woman: His Head beset with Roses, and Gems, his Hair perfumed,
and trimmed up in curled Locks, did sweeten the very Air. But frequent and tart
Vomits, the symptoms of an overburdened stomach, did deform all those
pleasures. I did easily conjecture him to be some God of Banquets, and an
unknown preses of joy. For he was of a delicate complexion, and did seem to be
very merry, he was pleasant in his carriage, young in his years, and ruddy with
wine, and was picking his teeth with a silver pin, as if the relics of some
of the meat had been sticking therein. In the mean while he comes straight up
to me (you would have thought that some Egyptian Statue had been moving;) and
that he might seem to despise riches, he trampled upon Jewels throne before him
as he walked. A Boy did follow him at a little distance, who, being of a lively
countenance and brave attire, did resemble Luxury. A delicate Maid also (that
the female sex might not be wanting) did attend him, carrying in her hand a
Cymbal garnished with Gold, and whatever the Muses, and my Lady Pleasure did
invent to stir up wantonness in the minds of Mortals. Those two did observe the
motions, and footsteps of their Master; for presently (he having given them a
sign) they come up to him and began to sing. This unusual, and altogether
divine melody, did ravish me, and being overcome with the sweetness thereof, I
began to fall asleep, when behold this Androginus (for such an Androgini people
in Africa of both k^nds. Hermaphrodites.
one I took him to be) did hold a Torch to my eyes, and did dissipate all
clouds of heaviness therein. Then beholding me with eyes wherein anger might
be seen; are you ignorant, says he, that watching is due to my sacrifice;
neither is the Sun as yet set, and begin you to sleep? If you do not know my
divine power, amongst men I am esteemed a God, and the genius of Love and Joy.
I am the God Comus God of Banquets.
who have taught mankind to revel, and gormandize. I have advanced my Empire
far and near, and am everywhere worshipped and adored, ever since the Sybarits
People of Sybari^ in sensual deliciousness passing all others.
began to be famous through the world. Now my sacrifices mentioned by Writers,
are performing with luxury and pleasure. And in fine, all the Kingdom of
Pleasure is mine; neither is any happy but he who belongs to me. My garb also
becomes me, for I have got the fertility of either Sex, and I know both how to
give and receive pleasures. Men worship me as a God, Women as a Goddess; but
both adore the same Genius; neither is this without reason. The image of Venus
in Cyprus, he is hair on its face, in a Woman's attire, of a Man's stature, and a
Scepter in its hand, that she might seem to be both Man and Woman; and Venus
being my Mother, I could not declare my self to be her Son, unless I were able
in both the Sexes. Now what a punishment is the life of man without pleasure.
Therefore if you be wise, shun the one and catch hold of the other: Consider
for what end nature brought you to the world; it was not to torment your spirit
with a severe virtue, nor to thrust your self out of the fellowship of
felicity; but to make it happy by all sorts of pleasure, and to nourish it with
delights, as a most tender spark of thy short life.

Thou art a mortal, wish to be
so still,
That thou may take thy pleasure at thy will.
I suffered the boldness of such a profane speech, with impatience, and did
detest this unlucky God as a dismal prodigy; Flight was in my mind, but wings
in my desires: when behold I was environed with, and lifted up in a thick
cloud, and so carried away by a strong gale of wind, so being buried in the
thick fog, in an instant I am carried to an unknown world.

Thick Gloomy walls Cimmerians People about Bosphorus north East from Greece:
their Country is always very dark by reason of the far distance of the Sun;
also a people in Italy between Cu^^^ and Bajee, who dwelt in Caves and were
environed with very high hills.
do possess,
Who never hates bright day, so much the less
Do they enjoy bright Titans glorious light;
Because oppres'd with darkness and long night.
And had scarce touched the Earth with my Feet when the Cloud did vanish, a
part whereof sat down as wearied with its journey, on the woody bank of a
neighboring rivulet; and another part of it augmented the darkness of the
Heavens, I began to look about me, and at the farthest end of a valley, I
discern a huge and stately House.

Great stately structure, that might well uphold
The Gods, and Heavens, ease Atlas now grown old.
The entry glorious with Laurels, and Lamps, did declare it to be the Palace of
Comus. I was now almost at the foot of the stairs, when one calls me; I looked
behind me at the Voice, and saw my most intimate Friend Aderba hard by me*
brought thither by the same power: after I had saluted him, I told him I was
glad to see him in that place, where I might have him for a Witness, and
Companion of my Fortune; and him especially, whom I made a partaker of my heart
and studies formerly. Having embraced me most affectionately, I shall be yours,
my good friend Theodorus, says he, while I breath. But now truly this I know
not, whether I am, or am not, or whether I be altogether separate from the
society of the living; For I have my mind as well as my eyes clouded with
darkness: I know not whether fate, or sleep deludes me, I think I am born of a
cloud, out of which I am thrown into another world, where the dead walks, and
darkness is adored; Aderba spoke this with a low, dull, and hoarse voice; so it
did plainly appear, that some nocturnal power had influence on his speech; and
when I beheld him at a nearer distance, I perceived that the blood fled out of
his face whilst he spoke. So taking him by the hand, Courage, say I, my
Friend, and rowse up your spirits, we are safe if we will but play the men.
There is darkness always where ever you close your eyes as well as in this
place. But this is a place of horror, says Aderba, and I believe can afford
Ghosts and Spirits as well as Hell it self; when I found him in that humor, I
did endeavor to drive away his vain fear by an answer in Verse.

For what is our virtue, and our purity,
If with black darkness, we affrighted be?
I will be bold to speak, what can fears do
Beset with darkness, if we will allow
Virtue her right, and what is to candor due.
Therefore let us take courage, and go where our common destiny leads us. Do
you not see this excellent and stately Palace of Comus? Let us go through it.
This boldness shall both be profitable, and pleasant unto us, or else I am
deceived in my opinion. I had not well spoke those words, and was beginning to
move, when a great and terrible Dog assaults us both, out of the neighboring
Cave.

His threefold bark resounding in the sky,
Did us surprise with fear, most suddenly.
We were apt to believe that it was Cerberus, Therefore turning to Aderba, tell
me now, say I, that we are dead, that this is the entry of Hell, and that it is
defended by the rage of this three throated Monster; but because he is not
bound with chains, we must bind him with silence: Play you the part of Sybilla.
Melle soporatam and medicatis frugibus offam Objice.

Throw him a Loaf that does the entry keep;
And I shall enter, when he is fast asleep.
Aderba laughed at my preposterous jest; but making no delay, he took up a
Stone, wherewith he did give the Mastive a great stroke in the forehead: The
Dog expressing the smart of his wound by his confused howling, was coming upon
us, with a staggering pace, to revenge his hurt; But Aderba suppressed his fury
with a second stone, and laid him along upon the ground. You would have thought
that Gargittius The Dog that kept Gerion's Cottel, whom Hercules slew when he
flote the cattle.
the Dog of Gerion had fallen, whilst we were lying upon him; as he was looking
on the ground, I perceived a Golden Collar about his neck, beset with nails of
Iron, and in its border this inscription.

The Dog Lyrus, the brother of Cerberus, the delight of Comus, the watch of
this Palace, whoever hurts me with stone or stick, shall know that there is a
God offended, and may expect the Destiny of Hecuba. Who after the destruction
of Troy was (as Poets tell) turned into a Dog.


When I had done reading, we are undone, says Aderba, looking upon me, and in
a labyrinth, unless Fortune show us some sudden way of safety. Now was Aderba
making ready for the conflict, and was preparing himself to receive some
company or other of Ghosts or Spirits, when we hear the Palace Echo with sudden
cries and tumults. I was not a little struck with this Alarm, and was expecting
to be transformed, The Destiny of Hecuba to be turned into Dogs.
when behold a great multitude of drunken Revellers sets themselves in order to
meet their King, who was now coming. Then the Dog Lyrus lying on the ground
before as if he had been dead, stirred up either with the Lights (for there
were Torches carried before them,) or with the noise; got to his feet, and
wholly disposed to fawning, did shake his joyful tail, as if he would make
sports to his Master; Aderba thought it fit to make use of so good an occasion:
Let us thrust our selves into this Company, says he, while we may; for this
very hubbub it self will open some port of security to us In the mean while
enters Comus, attended with two Ladies, Riot, and Wantonness. To what purpose
shall I declare his Pomp and Magnificence? His Garments richly perfumed, did
cast forth a most sweet smell. Love, and Madam pleasure did follow him; the
Graces, Delights, Comeliness, and Joy, did follow Love and Pleasure; with
Saturity was her sister Ebriety, with her hair loose, her face red like the
morning, shaking a Javelin with her hand; and in fine, resembling Bacchus in
every action: Near those were madness, fury, brawling, chiding and fighting,
then vomit, Crudity and Diseases.

Et subit and mortes, atque intestata senectus. But there were some who shined
with Majesty amongst that infamous Rabble, Seven men who were called Epulones,
Whose duty it was amongst the Romans to furnish banquets for Jupiter and the
rest of the Gods, and in this place for Comus.
Tribunes of this Multitude. Last of all, came a Company of Prodigals, and
Gluttons. There was one who resembled Sardanapalus. The last King of Assyria,
who so exceeded in effeminate wantonness, that he was went to sit spinning and
carding amongst light and shameless Strumpets.


Another Lucullus, A Noble Man in Rome, famous for his prodigality in feasting
another Heleogabolus, One of the Roman Emperors who lived a most sensual and
voluptuous life.
and another (least there should not be Philosophers amongst them) who
represented Epicurus, The chief of the sect of the Epieures, who esteemed man's
chief felicity to consist in the pleasure of the sioul and mind.
a seemly thing indeed, to hide Luxury in the bosom of Wisdom, and to seek a
veil and protection for vices, from a favorable authority. More innocent is
that saying, which affirms, that Epicure taught what was both just and grave;
for that pleasure he speaks of may be made but a little fault in him; for what
ever Laws we prescribe to virtue, the same did he to pleasure. He commands us
indeed to obey nature. But what is enough to Nature will be but little to
Luxury: What Is the matter then? He who calls sloathful idleness, and the
courses of gluttony, and lust, a happiness, seeks a good Author to a bad
subject; and when he comes that length, being induced with a seeming favorable
authority, he does not follow that pleasure he hears spoken of, but what he
fancies to him self. So the Master receives the disgrace of vice from his
Followers, and Epicurus is in the Society of Comus because Epicurians indeed
are there. At the heels of all followed gloomy night, darkness, sleep, silence,
dullness, terror, and fear, who dispersed themselves and vanished in the entry,
at the brightness of the Torches, and everywhere glistering Gold.

Mean while with noise did all the Palace ring,
Some makes the purple beds, and some do bring
The brave and costly Carpets, and another
Does with his hand the fine smooth Tables cover.
The whole house was busied with joyful service, there were so many Cooks, and
Servants of all sorts, that they might have made an Army.

To roast with Spits some did their work it make;
Others did fine flower out with Baskets take.
Aderba was at a stay with admiration, but I told him unless the image, and
speech of the God did deceive me, they were the solemn sacrifices of Comus, and
that they were performed, for every man to behold. Prepare your self to see and
give your applause, you may be one of the Teachers of their Mysteries, say I to
him. Let alone to speak of that, replies Aderba; yet if you desire me to be a
beholder, I shall be Argus not Aderba, and shall imprint this ridiculous scene
in my mind. Let us in the mean while go into the inner part of the house,
whilst the heat of this raging and noisemaking multitude is in its height,
where we may satisfy our growing curiosity more secretly. I consent, and with
much ado opens my way through this crowd. Aderba did follow me, and seeing the
most part of this Multitude disguised, he whispered me in the ear, that people
began to mask themselves They are women for the most part, an unhandsom, and
whorisshlike custom.
now the better to effectuate their bad designs. I being moved with the thing,
takes an old man standing near me by the arm, and asked him, whether those
people had ugly faces that they behoved to hide them. You see, says he, the
marks they have; by those bonds is the rage of their mouths, and teeth bridled.
They are dangerous Getulian The Author compares them to such Monsters for their
bad lives.
Monsters whom you take to be men; but it is a fine thing to live under a
Vizard, to fain a countenance, that your mind may not be known, to put on
hypocrisy, that your manners may be commended: yet with such Cardinallike
Ornaments does Comus adorn his Priests. Being entertained with this drolling
speech, we came to the next entry. Here did a youth stand, with a great Bottle
of Wine in the one hand, and a big Cup in the other, filling the liquor to
those who entered. After he had saluted us with a belching, smelling of Wine;
and Nectar, if you be dry, says he, take a Drink of this Wine: Aderba took the
first pull, and turning to me, taste it, says he, and stir up a desire of
Eternity in your mind.

For now since Heavenly Nectar I do drink,
That it is an entry to new life, I think.
He had scarce spoke, when I washed my throat with the same; This divine
Liquor, say I, would stir up thirst in men already drunk. But to let you know
the delights of our house, says the youth again, this wine is so common with
us, that our very slaves lashes it out like water, and with that word desired
us to go into the banquettinghouse. In the entry whereof we see the naked
statue of Venus, made of white marble, as if she had been coming out of the
foaming waves. To what end shall I hide her shape to the detriment of her
beauty? In this Marble, Venus was represented to the life. Cupid hard by her, a
Boy of lascivious carriage, like to his Mother, armed with wings, Bow and
Flames, wherewith he burns and torments the hearts of poor lovers, did with a
blind force shake one of love's darts. Near the wall upon the right hand was
the figure of Bacchus, fresh and lively, with the ripe fruits of the Vintage,
he had a Javelin in his hand, but its point was made ineffectual by a knot of
Ivy, hanging therein: upon the left hand was Ceres, having her head dressed
with Garlands, made of the ears of Corn, pouring out in a large Cup, the happy
fruits and golden plenty of the Fields. There you might also behold the
solemnities of a wedding, by which I understood that we were come to the
Bedchamber of Comus. For there were new-married Virgins walking veiled, with
their marriage Rings on their hands, and seeming to sing marriage Songs. So
having taken a view of this holy place, This is spoken Ironice.
we returned into a stately Gallery, where we fed our eyes with new causes of
admiration. Here were Zeuxis, Paccasius, Apelles, Famous Painters.
and all the rest of that occupation. Here were Lysippus, Phidias, and
Praxitiles, All Famous Carvers.
so we did behold the wonders of mere Art, either drawn or carved. As I was
going slowly, and looking about the Gallery, I see one at the end thereof
walking with a superstitious pace. He seemed sometime to speak, sometime to
hold his peace, when he was meditating he stood like a statue, incontinently he
walking hastily, and throwing his arms across, he did confound his whole speech
with his foolish gesture. He was making a Song in praise of darkness, which he
had never seen sober, That is to say he was always drunk before four in the
afternoon, which holds good oftentimes in the person of a cracked brained demi
poet.
and did so much extol it, that he had almost obscured the whole Heavens, and
was like to have turned the world into another Chaos. So he begins.

No Sun as yet did give the
world its light;
Nor yet did grow the Horns
of Luna bright.
And again,
That Alcmena should not
great Jove escape,
He turned himself into her
husbands shape.
And again, Mars did frequent his Venus, Love his Phyche; and now, says he,
(when poetical Fables failed him) the god Comus is given in Marriage to Nox.
Because revelling is for the most part done in the night, therefore the Author
makes a marriage betwixt the god thereof and darkness.
So when he had run over the subject of what he had to say, and ended his
speech more obscure than night it self, he took out of his pocket a little
stone book, and began to mutter some ambiguous words. I thought I had been at
Athens in the School of the Stoics: But coming up to him with a cheerful
countenance; I pray you Sir, said I, (if I be not troublesome to you) tell me
if Learning dwells in this place? He coming as it were out of a deep study, Are
you inquiring concerning Learning, says he? yes yes she dwells here: The
Treasure of Wit, and Learning is in very great esteem amongst the Cimmerians.
Bacchus gives us confidence, and eloquence, drink and be merry in this place a
short time, and you shall presently become a Poet. It is not so difficult a
journey from hence to Parnassus A Mountain in Greece famous by the Poets for
the Muses dwelling there.
, as every man thinks. Endeavor to make but a Satyr, or Epigram, gather
together a number of lies and calumnies, scoff at the virtues of others,
flatter vices, and corrupt manners, and you shall presently become a Poet. This
he spoke, and was going to describe the whole family of Apollo, when some
servants come, and tells us, that Comus was s^ down to Table, and that he
waited for his Guests. Whereupon in an instant Aderba and I are left alone.
What do we stand for, says Aderba, to me? we may go in with them without fear.
For though you have no stomach for their dainties, yet we may behold their
vanities; and with that we followed the rest into the great Parlour. At a
little distance did Comus sit down by himself, and all the rest of the company
sat down, according to their Age, Sex, and Dignity.

Ipsa sinus accincta Ceres Bacchusque laborant Sufficere. To what purpose shall
I give you a relation of his magnificent Dainties? his Meat was corresponding
to the Dignity of his House; albeit the Marble-pavement had diverse Emblems cut
thereon, albeit the roof of the House did glister with gilded Pictures, yet his
Dishes did outstrip all those, both in Art and Value.

Loud sounding Cymbals, and melodious Lutes
Did sweetly sound, as also Pipes and Flutes.
But casting my eyes about the Room, I spied an old Man of a lively
countenance, upon whom when I had looked more attentively, Is this my very
good, and dear Friend Tabutius, or do my eyes deceive me? yes says he, very
joyful to see me; you behold your friend, full of years, and brought here from
the very Insubrians, A People inhabiting a region of Gallia Cisalpius, now
called Lombardie.
And does sleep, say I to him again, carry such an old age upon its wings? It
is so says Tabutius, and I am now reflecting seriously upon my youth, as if I
had not changed my habitation but my age. In the mean time up comes Aderba; and
throwing his arms about his neck, whilst he was speaking, did kiss him most
tenderly; but Tabutius taking us aside to the furthest part of the room, began
his Speech in this manner.

This Cimmerian God is not unknown to me; in my youth, my blood did boil within
me, as well as in others: I spent some part of my time in sports and revels. We
have no spring without blossoms; but it is not granted by nature to blossom at
all seasons; Therefore having laid aside all trifles, I set my self to serious
matters, to quietness, and to learn wisdom. I beheld the type of a dissolute
and corrupt life, only to reprehend, and laugh at it. Imagine me to be Ulysses,
whom all the Sirenes The three Daughters of Achelous and Calliope, who on a
rock of the Sea were wont to sit, and by their sweet Songs to draw Passengers
to them, whom they slew
cannot allure. But it behooves you to be strangers to this place, they have
been younger it seems than Tabutius; for young men are sooner taken with
Luxurious and Venereal delights than old men are.
and not so much as frequent the same in your thoughts. This Comus is a
fomenter of vice, insnares the spirits of men with delights, and effeminates
them: These two whom you see there, Luxury, and Lasciviousness, are vices, and
extinguish what ever is good in man. What is the rest of that wanton rabble,
but noxious blasts of wind, that can hardly blow upon you without danger of
infection. There is no love here, but dissimulation, no true friends, but Lords
and Masters. Do you not behold their pleasant, and jovial countenances? under
those do they hide their envy and malice. If you be not cautious, their feigned
courtesy will deceive you: Neither can you so much as admit of a benefit from
them without hurt; Comus he is banished candor, and ingenuity, but he is made
dissimulation and deceit free Citizens. They are courteous until they think
they have obliged you; But then they assume the command, and if they have not a
friend altogether conformable to their will, they begin to hate him. But to
speak the truth, ambition did first introduce those faults, and the good use of
feasts, and friendship was lost, after the moderate offices of humanity were
stained with Luxury, I had rather speak by example than by words. You know your
selves that love and frugality are not inconsistent. In a Feast there should be
neatness, but a comely and well-beseeming neatness. Without prodigality,
trouble, or ostentation. Dishes to refresh, not overcharge the stomachs of your
Guests, they should not suffer the smoke of their Kitchins to allarm the
Sentinels, as if their houses were ready to be turned into flames, nor should
they let all their neighbors know that they are to feast their Guests. As a
wise man lives, so does he likewise care for his friend, and disposes him to
sobriety no less by his example than by his words. But to what purpose is a
grave Speech against luxury, if his Actions be disagreeable to his Speech,

Qui Curios sumulant and Bachanalia vivunt.
Who fames himself a Curio A Gentleman of a grave austere and unspotted life
amongst the Romans.
to be
In speech, but lives most prone to Luxury.
I hate those men, who have wise Speeches in their mouths and folly in their
minds, have a care that your good behavior do not disagree from your natural
inclination thereto. He can easily confute luxury in words, who has begun so
to do in his good carriage, and I dare do it, especially amongst you, whom I
know inclined to virtue. Such friends would I desire always present with me, to
such would I still keep a free Table.

But of a Gormandizer I Am aware,
Who cares not for my small and homely fare.
I so prepare Meat to my Friends, and orders my Feast, as if I were to Sup
alone; neither is it a shame for me to show my frugality, wherewith none but
unsober men will be offended. To what purpose is it to be so prodigal, and to
be at as much charge for one Supper, as a man's Estate will afford him for many
days? how sweet is that fare that only expels hunger, that nourishes, but
not destroys the vigor of the mind, that feeds but does not overcharge: A Guest
should be sent away, that as he came, so the next day he may return. He pays
too much for his Supper who loses his health thereby: and he takes too great a
price for the expense he has been at, who uses authority to endanger men's
healths by eating and drinking. But says Tabutius, let us go to the next room,
where we may discourse with more freedom, and greater secrecy? So he leads the
way and we follow. Here was nothing but quietness. The Torches and Lamps did
cast a dull light. Sleep had sweetly diffused it self amongst them. Some whom
the fume of the Wine had intoxicate, were lying along the chairs, others lying
with their heads together on the Pavement were as yet hugging their jugs.
Aderba pleased with the sight, what, says he, are those also Poets? But I told
him, that Comus was the Muses Apollo in this place. Then Tabutius looking with
a great gravity, spoke in this manner all those shows which you see, and have
seen are deceitful and hurtful; yet with such is the mind of man, through bad
custom corrupted. Therefore consult your reason, and despise such impostures;
for there is no true liberty but in wisdom, nor glory but in virtue.

To shun a vice is virtue, sure you will grant,
Wisdom begins when we do folly want.
If you regard your liberty, be strangers to this place, to sit, drink and
babble are the solemnities of their Feasts: by such is sobriety overcome. But
if we will obey her precepts, whatever is above hunger, and thirst, will be
noisome to us; And is it not a great trouble to a sober man to sit all day and
all night at a Banquet? It would be a folly to relate their flattering speeches
when they in vite you. They will tell you that you shall sit as short time as
you please, you shall eat and drink what you will; and that there shall be no
Cups pressed upon you more than if you were at home; but when they begin to
grow warm with wine, then they change their speech.

Come, pray you, eat and drink and merry be,
And please your sensual appetites with me.
Spare some hours to your Genius and friends, say they, let serious matters
alone till to morrow, you should not overwhelm your minds with clouds of care;
for Feasts were ordained to this end, for men to refresh their wearied minds
with mirth.

Old Cato's Virtue did grow warm
With Wine oft-times, etc.
Imitate him, and lay aside your severe gravity for a short time, that you may
return more fresh, and lively, to your cares and troubles. They must be obeyed,
though against your will, and so the Dinner is prolonged till late in the
night, and the Supper till the morning; and Meat finds no rest to digest for
drinking.

Then the Guests themselves (for the most part) are as lascivious, as the
Masters of the Feast; for the very Air cannot please them, unless it smell with
ointments and perfumes, and that nothing may be wanting to lasciviousness, you
would think that all Arabia Because the best perfumes in the world are in
Arabia.
were removed to the Cimmerians. Before they sit down they must wash, neither
is this without prodigality. For Comus By Comus is here to be und^rstood the
prodigal customs of the times.
he is found out a better Liquor to wash with than water, (which yet Pindarus
calls the best,) composed of the juice of flowers. They care not for pure
water, wherewith men by a wholesome instinct of nature, did use to quench their
thirst. Then there is a complementative contest about their Seats; every one
seemingly refuses the place, but they would all have it with equal desire. Here
did Tabutius make a pause, and as if he had been gathering matter of a further
discourse, he desired us to lay up those serious matters in our minds, whereof
he had been treating, and withal did give us an invitation to walk. With that
he rises himself, and leading us along slowly, he promised us a long narration.
We had taken two or three turns through the room, when one of those who were
sleeping, did awake, and being troubled that the Lights burned so dully, he
runs and pours more Oil therein, by which darkness, in a moment was expelled.
So that with the new Light, there was also a new occasion given to Tabutius to
enlarge his broken off discourse. But whilst we are preparing our selves to
hear, behold our good friend Eupantus comes running out of the dining Room,
dragging his Cloak after him as if he had been in great have, yet showing
Virtue not Luxury in his countenance. He was beginning to speak, but Tabutius
prevented him; how now says he, do you forsake the delights, and mirth of Comus
after this manner? where are your Garlands? and why do not you mask your self
as well as others? I would do any thing, replies Eupantus to get out of this
place; for I have not found the God Comus here, but hissing, and reproach;
Calumny he is thrown her drunken poison upon me. So many tongues, so many
stripes, which could hardly be digested by the stomach of some self-denied
Philosopher. I was welcomed with this unexpected punishment, before I knew my
Crime; But asking what my fault was, they answered that I had offended the God
of Feasting by a twofold impiety. Then Tabutius interrupting him; by what
impiety I pray you, says he? the very same replied Eupantus, whereby you taught
me two virtues: to wit, sobriety and silence. I offended indeed, because I did
eat, drink, and speak little; and I was reprehended as a Scholar of
Pythagorical gravity, because I did hold my peace. This is to be regrated, that
you should be calumniated, and reproached, because you knew to bridle your
tongue. Yes says Eupantus, banishment is prepared for me by the Tribunes of
this drunken rabble. Therefore I am resolved to prevent them, and to be gone
this same night, that it may be known I go of my own accord, and not by
compulsion. After such like speeches were ended, he inquired for his friend
Virus: did you not see him says he to Tabutius? For they say he is also
wandering in this place of darkness; but he will fall into some misfortune if
he do not beware, and get him gone quickly. Lay aside your fear for Virus, says
Tabutius: he has been circumspect enough, and is gone already, and we are
going the same way. Go you before in a good time, and we will follow you.
Whereupon incontinently bidding us farewell, he went out of the Palace by a
postern Gate. Then Tabutius thinking upon the adventure of Eupantus, began to
reassume his Discourse in this manner.

This talkative humor, (for the want of which Eupantus was reprehended,) is
now one of the greatest faults committed in a Feast, and it is become so
impudent, as to assume the name of virtue; too much talk he is repressed
Eloquence, and boldness, modesty. But O such speeches! there is nothing that is
serious, good, or grave therein, and words proceeds from their mouths with
great imprudence. Herein are they blame worthy, not to premeditate what they
speak, and to speak unadvisedly what proceeds from their mouths only.

Quod enim in cord sobrii,
Hoc ipsum in lingua ebrii.
What a man does sober think,
The same he vents when he is in drink.
As the mind of man, so is his speech: one speaks of his Merchandise, another
of his Actions at Law, the third of his Riches, and another of his Pleasure and
lusts, and another boasts of his Pride and Arrogance. Modesty, Ingenuity,
honest Poverty, and wisdom are ill-spoken of, as Enemies to Vice. Whatever any
man speaks or does in a Feast, is blown in the ears of the whole Assembly, and
a number of drunken critics, slanders men's Reputation, and blames the judgment
of others, because they are deceived in their own. There are some of them
again, who regards nothing but their Gold, nor no man but themselves. They look
upon Learning as idle toys, and despise not only Learning it self but the
effects thereof. But seeing we have begun to speak of Learning and its effects,
let us (laughing at their idle opinions) make a little, but useful digression
concerning the same. It is an excellent effect of Learning, when a man gives
his good life, and carriage, as an example to others, when his writings are not
so much regarded as his deeds. It Is more commendable to be good, than learned,
though both be praiseworthy. It Is the goodness of your wit may make you
learned, but it is the excellency of your soul free from terrene passions, and
taken up with more pure, and spiritual objects, must make you good. So you
should exercise your wit to make your mind glorious; none are content with the
blossom, all seeks the fruit. Erudition is the flower, and wisdom is the fruit.
But we are oft-times deceived with the shadow of unprofitable studies; for what
we do only for pleasure, is either unprofitable, or hurtful; and to be curious
to know trifles, is no better than to know nothing at all: Quae sive contineas
nihil tacitam conscientiam juvant: sive proferas, non doctior videberis sed
molestior.

But now we have walked enough, let us take our Seats, says Tabutius, and begin
our speech where we digressed. Feasts says he, for the most part are the very
Seminaries of babbling. Sometime they cry out, now they speak all at once.

Fit strepitus tectis, vocemque per ampla volutant
Atria.
I detest that company, where you cannot hold your peace without reproach, when
it would be a folly to speak. And it is a folly to speak, when none are silent.
As one loses his labor, who plays on an Instrument near to a great fall of
water from a high place; so it fares with that man, who would begin any good
discourse in Comus To begin a grave discourse amongst a company of drunken
babblers.
Company; Therefore I think he speaks best who holds his peace. Yet this was
Eupantus his crime; but if we would look aright into the thing, it was because
he was sober, and had not put his judgment out of its proper place through
intemperance. Now I have said that garrulity proceeds from ebriety. It was a
good saying of Bias, when at a Feast one called him a Fool, because he was
silent: but what Fool can hold his peace, says he, above Cups. I will add also
the answer of Zeno, mentioned by Plutarch, as a great Elogy of silence. A
certain man of Athens, feasting some of Philip King of Macedon's Ambassadors,
did also invite certain Philosophers, when all were speaking, and every man
putting in his fine witty tale, only Zeno was silent; The Ambassadors admiring
the same, yet entertained him courteously, and drinking to him, desired him to
show them, what they should say to their King concerning him. Nothing, says he,
but that there was an old Man in Athens, who could be silent in his Cups. Let
us follow therefore and put in practice that laudable Speech, and despise those
drunken, and foolish babblers, to whom the very name of a grave, and quiet man,
is hateful. Learned Antiquity did oppose silence, to ebriety; and Philosophers
did give this definition of Ebriety; vaniloquentia in vino, A babbling in Wine;
drinking, says Plutarch, is not very blameable, if it be done with silence.
But a drunken Man cannot but play the Fool, and is still prating in all places.
How deservedly is Eupantus to be commended, who did preserve the authority he
had over his judgment, in the midst of such talkative madness. There should be
some amongst so many who should give ear, and they cannot do so unless they be
silent. Yet I do not approve of a speechless Feast; it is comely they speak if
they time it rightly, and do not speak too much, but with sober men, with few,
and with their equals: but in Comus his Feasts there is ebriety, multitude, and
disparity. Feasting now adays, is neither thought fine, nor pleasant, wherein
ebriety is not predominant. Ebriety (says Seneca most excellently) kindles and
discovers every Vice, it removes Shame, that is ofttimes an hinderance of bad
practices; For there are some who abstain to do evil, more through shame than
fear of punishment. Where too much Wine has intoxicated the brain, what ever
ill lies hid in man, comes out suddenly. Ebriety does not beget Yes it both
begets and brings forth vice.
but brings forth vice. The libidinous man, in drink, does not wait for a Bed
to satiate his Lust therein; the hasty man does bridle neither tongue, nor
hands; pride domineers in the proud, cruelty in the cruel, and envy in the
envious. After this manner they live, and they go by Cups, as by degrees, to
foolish madness. One drinks your good health, another your Mistresses, another
your good fortune, every man quaffs it out; and if you do not the like, you
wrong the God of Banquets, and your Friends. He who drinks to you, as he was
made quaff it out, so he presses you to do the like, or else must do it for
you, whereby he cannot favor another man's health, unles he drown his own, and
so vices begun when men are in drink, grow strong when they are sober. Then
begin they (being mad with drink) to sing wanton and lascivious Songs, which is
followed by a confused bellowing of the whole multitude. But how opportunely
he is the series of my discourse brought me to speak of this! for do you not
hear this very same kind of Music, either I am deceived, or the same is
performing we are speaking of, and with that holding his peace, he did give
both of us liberty to go, and behold, while he himself took a little repose.
Then taking Aderba by the hand, let us go, say I, and behold with our eyes this
foolish custom. So making no delay, I came to the door, leading Aderba along
with me, where we did see with our eyes, all that Tabutius had told us to be
true.

But another show, worthy the taking notice of, represented it self to us an,
old woman full of years and wrinkles, carrying in her visage, the deserved
punishment of her former impiety, that is a nose shorter, than what nature had
given her, dragging a great Munkey in a chain, which did so observe the motion
of its Leader, that men would have thought the old woman had been teaching the
beast to dance a Carrant. Comus in his merry humor commanded this old Hag to
come to him, whom he most kindly saluted again Because a Bawd is one of Comus
his especial Favorites.
and again. This honor made her so bold as to place her self at the head of
the Table, and as the only Priest of Venus, enjoined the whole company to live
and love. Whereupon Aderba seeing the confidence and impudence of this deformed
Pander, inquired of an old man standing near him, what she was. This woman said
he, was of old the Nurse, now the Mother and Friend of Comus; all her business
is to make new marriages every day, and to find out convenient places for
Lovers, where they may enjoy their stolen embraces with security; nay, she is
able to bring Jupiter and Diana together without the help of a golden shower,
and that you may know her fidelity to the bawdy interest, she has lost her
Nose in the Service. Then said Aderba, I pray you Father, do me the favor to
tell me how she came by that misfortune, whereupon the old man taking us aside,
and conjuring us to secrecy, began this Story as follows.

There was a Lady in the Country of the Cimmerians, wife to a person of
Quality, and in her, had beauty, and chastity (Graces seldom found in one
person) centred themselves, according to the common opinion of all. But as
Vices are oft-times veiled with virtuous Pretensions; so this Lady, chaste till
married, was immediately inflamed with an unlawful affection, (such is the
efficacy of immoderate lust) and placed that kindness due to her husband, upon
a soldier, whom she had seen accidentally in a Bath. At first her Husband
admired what occasioned the coldness of her conjugal duty, and obscured the
usual serenity of her pleasant countenance, endeavoring by all caresses
imaginable, to banish out of her thoughts, those melancholic symptoms of a
troubled mind: But when he could by no means reduce her to her former
complacency: he presently suspected some new love was striving with his, for
the sovereignty. For although she did carefully conceal her licentious passion,
with the veil of hypocrisy; and endeavored by her discreet deportment, to
suppress her lascivious desires, yet the perplexity of her mind, her unquiet
nights, her intterrupted discourses, and several other tokens of a heart
inflamed with lust, were sufficient arguments to him of her adulterous desires.
Besides this Gentleman, raging with jealousy, did take such notice of her
behavior, that Argus did not more carefully observe the motions of Io the
mistress of Jupiter whom Juno turned into a cow, and set Argus who had one
hundred eyes to watch her
then he did hers. And at last to try her fidelity, he pretends a journey,
thereby thinking to detect her disease, and confirm himself in his opinion. So
taking Money, and other necessaries for three weeks stay; away he goes the next
morning, The Lady (loath to lose such a fair opportunity of obtaining her
desires,) sent for this old woman, as the fittest instrument whereby to put her
designs in execution, to whom she discovers her passion, will, and pleasure,
and giving her a piece of money, promised her larger rewards, after the
performance of the business. The time appointed by them for hergallant to come,
was the same night; so away she goes in search of the Soldier, and finding
him, did inform him of the passionate love the Lady had for him. Whereunto he
consented, being forward enough of himself; and therefore promised to be
walking before the Gate, at the time appointed. In the mean while least her
love should grow cold, she provided a Bed, Banquet, and excellent Wines,
wherewith to entertain her martial Gallant. The Sun did leave our Horrizon, as
ashamed to be a witness of their wickedness, when the Soldier mindful of his
appointment, makes have to the Lady's House, but the Gate being shut (for he
was not to knock) he walked too and again, till it should be opened to him. In
the mean while, the Husband (lurking in some Friends House all that day) at
night made homeward; and when he came near the Gate, he perceived a Soldier,
walking before the same, whom he imagined to be the Mars of his Venus; so he
went in, making as little noise as possible; and running in a fury into his
Wife's Chamber, he finds her sitting, solacing her self with the thoughts of
her approaching content: but her Husbands sudden return did strike her with
such a terror, that she sat like a Statue (such influences has sudden
surprizal upon the spirits of women, that it deprives them of their natural
vigor,) her guilty conscience fearing his rage and jealousy should force him
to give her the just reward of her merits. On the other side, his passion had
so deprived him of his natural faculty of speaking, that he was forced only to
breath out that reveng which his rage would not suffer him to utter in words.
Neither need he use many to convince her of her bad intentions, for her
preparation, and her good meat already upon the Table did accuse her, and then
the lusty young Soldier walking before the Gate, all high presumptions of some
dishonest intention. But to be short (resolving to make that a night of torment
to her, which she had ordained for pleasure,) he stripped her naked, and so led
her to a Pond, in the middle whereof he tied her fast to a post, thinking by
that means to cool the heat, that had occasioned her malady, and his jealousy.
There stood the Lady like Andromede A Lady of exquisite beauty, tied to a Stake
at the Sea shore to be devoured by a Sea monster, but rescued by Perseus.
expecting some new Perseus, to rescue her from the fury of a jealous husband;
but the anxious Husband goes to bed, there to pacify his troubled mind with a
little rest. All this while, the Soldier (who had promised to himself, the
sweetest delights Venus could afford,) was impatiently expecting the opening of
the Gate, and when he had waited long in vain, he goes to the old woman's house,
where he finds her half naked, going to bed; at what rate, says he, must I buy
this promised delight from the Lady? I have spent the better part of the night
in waiting for the opening of the Gate, but it may be a deep sleep has made
her forget her appointment, go your way, and desire her to let me know her
pleasure, and if she have a mind I should come, I am ready; if not, to defer it
till her convenience shall serve. Without delay the old woman putting a Mantle
about her shoulders, and taking the young man by the hand, lead him to a
postern door, and with a Key she had got from the Lady, she goes in; but she
had not gone far, till a lovely milk-white Statue presented it self to her
view, whose snowlike whiteness did give light, in the obscurity of the night.
This unexpected sight did at first surprise the old woman; but finding it to be
the Lady (without so much as condoling her misfortune,) she delivers the
Soldiers Message to her, which in spite of her present condition was yet very
acceptable to her. The Lady no less crafty than fair, begins to accost the old
woman with persuasive language, promising her great Rewards, and giving her
assurances of perpetual friendship, if she would untie her and help her to have
private conversation with her Gallant. To be short she is persuaded to suffer
her self to be tied to her place (a show if exposed to public view, would have
forced laughter from the most dejected of men.) The Lady puts on the old woman's
Clothes, and goes with all speed to enjoy her long desired pleasure. The
Soldier imagining her at the first to be the old woman, desired to know the
Ladies commands; but her voice discovered her to be his wished, and long waited
for prey, where we leave them to enjoy those pleasures, which love could
afford. Now we return to the Gentleman, whose pensive spirit wearied with long
watching, did at last give place to sleep. He dreamed his wife had got lose,
and not regarding her honor, was acting with the Soldier, and that he was
transformed into a Satyr; whereupon awaking suddenly, he felt with his hand if
his body was not overgrown with hair Because Satyrs are so.
, or if he had horns and feet like to a Satyr. But if he had not Satyrs
horns, yet questionless by this time he had the horns of a Cuckold; Then
leaping out of his bed, he runs to the window (as it were to examine the truth
of this dream) and calls his wife by her name, but the good old woman
understanding too late, the danger she had put her self in, thought it her
safest way not to answer, thinking by that means to keep her self unknown; but
the Gentleman more enraged at her obstinate silence, takes up a Knife lying
upon the Table, runs down to the place where she was, takes his supposed Wife
by the Nose, and cuts it clear off, then throwing it at her face; base woman
says he, worthy of a greater punishment and disgrace than this, take that and
present it to your Lover, as a token of your affection toward him; and so
rewarding his wife, (as he thought according to her merit) he returns to his
bed, there to think of this bypast action, and to find some quiet for his
troubled mind. What shall I say of the poor old woman? she is almost dead with
the pain of her wound, and the fear of a further mischief, not daring to vent
her grief by howling for fear of being discovered. At last, the Lady took her
leave of her Soldier, and returned to undergo what fortune had decreed for
her, but coming to the Pond, the sadness of the old woman's condition, made her
admire the cruelty of her Husband, esteeming her self most happy to have
escaped his fury; and now she endeavors to consolate the old Woman, and
bidding her take a good heart, and tells her, that as scars of wounds were
marks of Honor to the Sons of Mars; so that of hers, would be an everlasting
sign of her fidelity to the interest of Venus, adding also, that she would
supply the defect of her natural Nose, with an artificial One of Gold. With
this last promise, the old Woman a little pacified, (who could have been
content to lose her ears also for that metal) tied the Lady again; and taking
up her clothes, away she marches; the Lady had not stood long at the Stake,
till (recollecting her spirits, dispersed with the fear of Husbands further
rage; the old woman's misfortune, afforded her this trick, whereby to inveigle
the understanding of her jealous Husband; and therefore, at first, with a low
and mournful voice did speak up to him in this manner.

Night's Queen, Heavens lamp,
Jove's Wife, and sister bright,
Why did I lately pay vows in your sight?
Goddess of Mari'ge are you called and sees
Such horrid cruelty with your bright eyes,
You twinkling Stars, proofs of my honesty;
Wax you not pale at much wronged chastity?
Behold here bound and naked do I stand,
Wounded unjustly by my Husband's hand.
I seem not chaste, though chaste indeed I be,
Wronged by the rage of Husbands jealousy;
Why do I live? what furies do possess
My spirits? I love to die, yet not the less,
I would die chaste, as any in my station,
If I cannot live with my reputation.
I love to die, and seek a man-like death,
But when I would, I cannot stop my breath;
Lucretia chaste, to be so, still declares,
When she, by death, did ease her self of cares.
But if (alas) this may not granted be,
My Beauty, and my Nose restore to me.
Do not despise, great Queen, my bloody tears;
And do revenge my Husbands causless fears,
Let him feel the rage of thy Deity,
And do restore, what his cursed cruelty
Did from me take, who, strange durst be so bold
On's Wife in raging manner to lay hold.
And now great Goddess I do humbly pray
Thy wronged power that ever know he may.
After she had spoke in this manner, she seemed for a while to have some
private discourse with the Deity, and to speak to her more familiarly than a
little before. Then with a loud voice, directing her speech to her Husband,
Come hither, said she, thou most cruel of all men, who intended the eternal
disgrace of thy most chaste Consort; and behold that Juno, in token of my
innocence, has restored this face to its former beauty, which thou, by thy
tyrannical hands, had most impiously deformed. The Gods knows my innocence;
therefore I do not regard what a wicked man either does or thinks. O blessed
night, more glorious to me than all the former days of my life, still to be
celebrated by me while I live; go on officious tears, and run on another
account. My face ought now to be wet with rivers of joy, after it is restored
to its former beauty by the special favor of the Gods. But I call upon you,
cruel and bloody Hangman, come hither and understand thy wickedness; that thou
may avert the wrath of the threatening Goddess, if it be possible, by thy
sudden repentance. The Gentleman being in a great confusion at her discourse,
knew not what the matter could be; at first he thought it to be some dream, or
illusion of the night, and that such Miracles might rather be dreamed of than
be in reality. But when he found certainly that he was awake, and had his mind
free, nor did the woman abstain from her railings and curses, all his
fierceness was overcome by a vehement fear, and the thoughts of her innocence
did succeed it. Rising therefore out of his Bed, he lights a Candle to try the
truth of the matter. And without delay, he goes down stairs, and comes to his
wife, at whose sight, being bound, he now trembles. Then beholding her face
with the help of the light, he finds it whole, and sound, without so much as a
scar. Whereat standing stupid with admiration, he began both to detest his
wickedness, and to fear the sudden vengeance of the angry Goddess Juno.
. Incontinently throwing himself on the ground, wet as yet with his wifes
blood, he breaks out in tears and cries. And with the same fervency,
deprecating the wickedness of his impious fury, he loses his most chaste
Spouse, and as a signal testimony thereof, brings her again to her bed. So the
Lady recovered both her Nose and the affection of her Husband. But the old
woman, bribed with Money, packing up bag and baggage, did remove to the Palace
of Comus, that the whole business might be the better concealed. She dwells now
in this place, and using the old Trade, she is daily preparing crafty venereal
Scenes. If you have a fancy for any man's wife, for a maid, or for a widow, she
will find a way to bring you together; and by her means you shall find the full
pleasure of love. For you must understand that in this land of darkness, there
are both Noble men who have handsome Ladies, and young lusty Gallants ready to
do them all service imaginable.

The Old Man ending his Story, with a joyful laughter, did join himself to the
rest of the multitude. Then did we return to the place from whence we came with
a cautious celerity, and find Tabutius sleeping where we left him, who
receiving us with heavy eyes, did ask us if we had seen enough of Comus
distracted folly, and told that he had been sleeping while we were absent,
which he would expel with another discourse. I had begun to speak of Ebriety,
says he, now perhaps you have seen part of it. But what good man would not
loath it? They lose their judgment lest they should find their feet, when it is
time to depart, you must be carried or at least go staggering from the Table,
lest you seem not to be kindly entertained. It is also almost natural to some
to begin and end the day in drinking. Their thirst begins betimes in the
morning after their precedent night surfeit, neither can it wait till Dinner.
They hate the day, and sit up whole nights, that they may enjoy the benefit of
light in darkness, with the greater delight. They rejoice

Crassos transire dies lucemque palustrem. They had rather make To make light
in darkness with the multitude of camps in their drinking Rooms.
day then have day; for they esteem more of Torches, and Lamps, than of the
glorious Sun, and they enjoy the night, but lose the day; for when we watch
when we should sleep, we must of nenessity sleep when we should watch. And
least any thing should be wanting to their folly, they guard themselves against
ebriety by all devices imaginable; and herein is the victory purchased by art,
he is the bravest fellow, and deserves praises, and laurels best, who is able
to see his Pot-companions overcome, and lying at his feet, although he be
scarce able to stand himself? But when you have obtained the victory, and when
after they have given it over, and are lying either sleeping or vomiting at
your feet, and when by true valor forsooth you have overcome them all, yet the
full bottles shall overcome you. Then comes palleness and a trembling of the
members, and a more pitiful leanness, torments you, through ebriety than
through hunger. Then faintings and such like staggerings, though sober, as when
they are in drink. After those comes Dropsies, and a swelling in the belly,
while the womb receives more than it is able to contain; then there is a
breaking out of a waterish bilous humor, and a wasting of the body, pains in
the joints, a debilitation of the nerves, and a palpitation therein: Then
follows Vertigo's in the head, the pains of the eyes, and ears, the torments
in the brain, and the several sorts of some raging, some lent fevers. So that
multitude of diseases are the punishment of Luxury. For if we will follow the
opinion of Physicians, we will find that all those dreggy clouds of sickness,
are sent forth of the fen of intemperance. A great part of mankind does destroy
the strength of the body by their excessive pleasures, so they bear the evils
of extreme old age before their time. If Ebriety would cease, the life of man
should be more happy, and our Clergy need not be at the pains of making so many
elaborate Funeral Sermons. Good Gods! how violently does wronged Nature revenge
her self? Scarce does miserable mortals injure their bodies by their riot, but
they find the punishment thereof. We may therefore the more easily forgive this
soul fault of drunkenness, because they suffer so much for what they do commit
in that nature, their very sin turns their punishment. What need I speak more
to you, to make you detest this vice? Let them drink and debauch, but know
assuredly, that pain, stupidity, weakness, diseases, and death it self, shall
be the inseparable concomitants of their intemperance. When Tabutius had put a
period to his discourse, we were entertained with a pleasant sight. One of
those infamous fellows who were sleeping in the room beside us, burning with
drought, gets to his feet, and snatches a Pot out of the arms of one of his
companions lying next him, and when he had taken a great pull of the liquor,
sleep coming upon him again, he laid himself down on a high seat, where again
he was falling asleep, supporting his head with his hand, which did also follow
his nods; but when it began to be heavier than his breech, he fell headlong
from the bench, and dashed his pate against a bottle full of Wine, wherewith
the Vessel breaks; and giving the fellow a great wound in the forehead, did wet
those were lying by him: some of those awakned with the sudden noise take their
Comrade up, stays the blood, and incontinently binding up the wound with a
linen cloth, carries him away; Then Aderba addressing himself to Tabutius, we
have seen a fine sport says he; but whether worthy of laughter, or
commiseration I know not. But now return to your discourse says he to
Tabutius; and because you have spoken enough concerning ebriety, let us hear
you speak against the multitude of Guests at a feast; for (as I do remember,
you did dislike of that in the second place. Whosoever does make a Feast, says
Tabutius, should invite but few. But now they think it a credit to have a
multitude of Guests. Yet which of the Muses, or Graces ever had multitude in
estimation. If we like to be merry, and the innocent pleasure of honest
divertisement, we must not think to find those amongst a multitude; yet we see
that great numbers are affected by all; and as Crassus One of the Roman Consuls.
used to say, that no man was to be esteemed rich, but he who could maintain a
whole Army upon his own charges; so may I say that none is rich, but he who can
make a Feast upon his own expenses. Every man affects this splendor even with
the ruin of his fortune, that he may frame himself to the examples of
lasciviousness, and follow the fashion of the times and place wherein he lives.

The third fault is inequality, and that is for the most part in a multitude,
when people are invited of diverse inclinations, fortunes, sex, age and dignity.
Let this saying of Epicure, be always in your memory; to take heed first with
whom you eat, and drink, before what you eat and drink. Now here sits the
ignorant with the learned, the rich with the poor, the man with the woman, the
old with the young, and the noble with the plebeian. As you cannot mix water
with fire without noise, so neither those without babbling. The worst amongst
them takes upon them to speak, and the better sort takes all the authority upon
them. Yet the baser sort finds their protectors, and thinks it a disgrace, that
their liberty should either be despised, or neglected. Therefore I think it
prudently done to be silent, and more prudently done not to go to such meetings
at all, especially if you are to feast with drunkards, a multitude, and not
your equals. Friends are as equals, they are ordinarily but few, and joined
together by virtue, and sobriety. Amongst such, discourse and hilarity are
without offense; For as waters are more pleasant, which run with a gentle, and
easy noise, so are Feasts, wherein are honest, pleasant, and well timed
discourse, which are three virtues in a speech proceeding from so many graces.

An honest discourse is, what is spoken without giving offense, and whereto
modesty has prescribed laws, offense comprehends, flattery, and scoffing,
either against those who are present, or absent. Scoffing (according to
Quintilian) is a reflecting speech with laughter. Flattery is a dissimulation,
and deceit in men's words, which is worse than scoffing; Modesty and
shamefastness, enemies to both those vices, does exclude rudeness and
obscenity. Let all those faults and crafty deceits in your speech, be removed
far from you; for whether you express them in plain terms, or veil them with
your own fancy, they remain the same in effect. But lest any man should accuse
me of too much gravity, I would sometimes make my guests merry, by my jovial
discourse. It will be both a merry and profitable discourse, if it polish the
mind as well as delight the ears. I would have innocent sports, the graces and
the muses at Feasts, but not prone to riot and lasciviousness, I would have
wisdom also present, but not deformed with the stern countenance of a
capricious gravity. For the soul has sometime its own honey and nectar, and
this divine mistress of all virtues, does sometime proffer you the cup of
honest pleasure. We should not, says Varro, have discourse in Feasts,
concerning too serious and anxious matters, but delectable, and profitable
ones, whereby our wit may be made more pleasant and fine; Which surely falls
out, if we discourse of those things pertaining to the common profit of our
life, and which would be no ill spent time, to speak of them in our ordinary
affairs. And in fine, it is both profitable and pleasant to instruct, and be
instructed, if it be timed aright. I would have a speech in the first place,
arise upon an apt occasion, and good ground. That it seem neither catched
before it come to you, or intruded, or affected, which is worst of all.

There are three forms of speaking: dissertation or reasoning, narration, and
question. When you reason, though you desire praise therein, yet you must seem
to decline the same. Let your voice be pleasant, and fluent, and your gesture
taking. Speak in such manner, that you may show your self ready to hear; yea to
be corrected, if any man speak better than your self: you should stir up your
hearers to give their opinion, with some pauses, now and then, in your
discourse.

In a Narration you must be serious in true matters, pleasant in what is
feigned, and perspicuous, and brief in all Discourse of what concerns others
with praise; of what concerns your self with modesty: self vaunters are
loathsome to all company. As some men's stomachs loath some meats, out of some
secret antipathy; so do such men offend the ears of their Hearers. For
(according to Socrates) we must not make use of those meats, that do not stir
up an appetite in us, so we must evity those speeches, by which we foment our
own praise, more then the delight of our Hearers.

Now remains the Question to be treated of, which has an answer annexed
thereto. Let that be easy, familiar, and suitable to your company. As the
clouds obscure the light of the Sun, so has difficult questions the same
effect upon hilarity.

Your Questions must be easy, (says a Wise man) known Problemes, decent
Interrogations, and not too sbtile, lest they confound the ignorant. It Is a
folly to play the Divine and Philosopher, at a Feast, especially when we are
warm with wine. But I will forbear to enlarge any more upon that Subject, and
will speak something of an answer to a Question, because it is annexed thereto.
Whereof there are three sorts. The first is a necessary one; when we say we
know or we know not. The second is a courteous one, when we mix our answer with
civility. The third is a superfluous one; when we go over the banks, so to say,
and when the Question is overwhelmed with a torrent of garrulity, you shall
hear it demonstrated by a homely example. You go to the house of Socrates to
inquire if he be at home, some brisk fellow will give you the necessary answer,
he is not; another more civil, will give you the second answer, he is not at
home, he is gone to the haven; and if he think not that sufficient, he will
add, some of his friends in Ionia are landed, and he is gone to welcome them.
The third again, to whom prating is always pleasant, will confound his answer
with a long speech, as if it could not be known that Socrates was from home,
unless he did deviate from the Question, by making a narration of the whole
state of Greece. Are you enquiring for Socrates, says he, he is not at home,
he went to the haven betimes in the morning, to entertain some of his Ionian
friends, to whom Alcibiades, residing at Miletus, with Tissaphernes the King of
Persia his Lieutenant, did write, who before helped the Lacedaemonians, and now
in favor of Alcibiades, succors the Athenians; Alcibiades is about to agree
Tissaphernes with the Athenians; that he may have liberty to return to his
Country. So enlarging his discourse, he repeats the whole Eighth Book of
Thucydides, until the taking of Melitus, and Alcibiades his second banishment.
But I need prescribe no more Rules of this nature, you are a rational man, and
therefore take what answer you think will please best, according to the
Subject, Person and Place where you are. I shall end my discourse with this of
Quintilian. We should beware, says he, that our answer be neither petulant nor
proud, nor disagreeing with the time, and place, and that they seem not
prepared beforehand, or brought from home with us.

Tabutius had scarce made an end of speaking, when the door opening, we see a
man set in his head thereat, with a visor on his face, representing Jupiter,
who so soon as he saw us, came suddenly into the room, and saluting each of us,
through his visor, he complemented us with his nods and gestures. Incontinently
taking me by the hand, he filled the lap of my Cloak, with a shower of sweet
hail Deserts in Comus his Feasts.
; I admiring the matter, and what Cimmerian Jupiter are you, said I, who strike
me with such a sweet tempest. Then uncovering his face, Behold me your friend,
says he, having changed my habit, but not my affection. I looking upon the
man, as if my eyes had deceived me; are you here also, said I, Hyleus? and what
means this bravery? There are nocturnal Plays to be celebrated here this night,
says he, and I am to make one therein. There will be some here presently, who
will dance the old and pleasant dances of the Muses, and Graces. Then did he so
run out in the praise of dancing, both by his countenance and gesture; that he
could hardly refrain from the same, whilst he was speaking to us. While we were
lending our eyes and ears to his folly, in comes a Black-a-moor Boy, with a
Torch in his hand, his very color made him one of darkness companions. His
deportment did denote him to be one of Hyleus his train. This Boy coming up to
his Masters ear, out of breath, and whispering something therein, did name one
Cherestratus and Myrtilla, whereat Hyleus being greatly moved, having scarcely
saluted us, and reassuming his disguise, flings himself into the banqueting
Room. Then began Tabutius; Love is not without madness, and a burniug lust
stirs up this young man to nocturnal Revels. So it is always in Comus his
Feasts, after they have eat and drunk more than plentifully, then comes their
dancing, the last dainties of their lascivious hilarity. For after the Table is
drawn, those Rites must be performed, though with a staggering motion. But what
can be done with a good grace, where they cannot keep a decorum or measure,
through their ebriety; yet there are some fine handsome Maids to be commended,
who sits the whole time of the Feast, like Statues, and will not drink Invito
Como says the Author, because it is not in the power of Comus himself to
compel Virgins thereto.
, these dance sober; yet they suck in that wantonness when they are sitting,
which they pour out in abundance when they are in motion. For it is not with
them, according to the Latin Proverb: Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus;
without good meat, and drink, lust grows cold. Look to that fervent and
masculine impudence of young women, and behold if you can see any decent The
Author does not altogether disappro^e of dancing, but of that which is not
decent.
dancing therein, whereby you have reason to doubt whether drunken men, or
women who are sober, play the fool most. O tempora, O mores! Maids come to
Marriages and Feasts, where they languish, and grow pale, through mature lust,
and those who are palest are the most courted, they affect this death-like
color with the greatest folly imaginable: But my Muse favor me and speak.

O happy paleness! once hel's slave, and then
Grim Pluto's Page, and darkness Partisan:
An index of infamous leachery;
Brother to ghostly death, fear and envy;
But now a Page, a Friend and Servant still
To Venery and Lust, blind Cupid will
Call him his brother; pleasing Virgins fair,
And mari'd women, o strange! Neither are,
Thought lovely, if this paleness they have not:
O happy paleness! once bright beauti's blot.
But let us return to the dancing young Ladies, their Lovers takes confidence
in their dancing, every man counrts his Mistress, takes her by the hand, and
dallies with her.

He strokes her breasts, and takes her in his arm,
Gives her a kiss, says this will do no harm.
The custom of kissing, or saluting, is honest in it self.

There Is nothing can be burned by smoke;
But fire will both burn and choke.
We cover this fire with smoke, that we may sport our selves in the shadow of
pleasure with the greater delight. This is not the end of the journey, but some
steps thereto.

Qui cubare vult panget saltem suavium. But he who has a mind for a Maid, makes
dancing, (ofttimes) an introduction thereto, and leads his Lady as his Bride,
she follows him keeping the same measure, which inflames the young Gallant. So
it comes to pass, that young women's bellies deceive men oft-times, as well as
their painted faces; she will dance as a Maid who is presently to become a
Mother, who will bring forth a Child, before she know a Husband, or perhaps a
Father to it. To augment her Dowry, she brings both Cow and Calf to her
Husbands House. And before the Husband has well begun to manure the Ground, the
Seed is almost ripe. I have known some of them, who, in the very heat of their
nuptial Rites, did call for the help of Juno, and Lucina Women in travel used
to call for the help of those Goddesses.
, and were brought to bed, in the very embraces of their new Husbands, and that
same night, and in the same bed, both a Bride, and a Woman lately delivered.
But if Men would do as a young Gentleman did of my acquaintance, there would
not be so many, who bring up the children of other men. This man did not think
a woman his wife, whom he had married after another man had defloured her. She
who came as a Virgin, was found (though too late) to be with child, and was
brought to bed the second month after their marriage. This, though it vexed,
yet did not cause the Husband bewray his mind, by any harsh usage to her, or to
her Child, but comforting her, and mitigating her anxiety, by flattering
dissimulation; do not vex your self, my dear, says he, and let not your
untimely birth trouble you, the sixth part of a year may make you a Mother, and
me a Father; Nature gives not always the same time to bring forth, yea she
grants a shorter time then two months to some creatures. But to be short, after
the new-married Lady had recovered her strength, and had sacrificed to Juno The
first time that women lately delivered went abroad, they sa^ fi^ed in Juno, as
the Goddess of Marriages.
, then did her Husband at length declare himself. Therefore to remove the
disgrace from his Family, he commanded her to be gone; for his affairs urged
him to have another wife. She obeyed him (though against her will) and so
departed; but because (having tasted the sweet pleasure of conjugal embraces)
it was hard for her to want a Husband, she filled her Father^ house with her
complaints. The report of this divorce comes presently to the ears of the
Governor of the place, who was Uncle to the Lady, he taking it as a great
wrong done to him, in the person of one of his Family; sends for Battus (for
that was the Gentleman's name) and after he had blamed this his rash act, in an
eloquent and grave Speech, he did endeavor to reconcile the young Lady to her
Husband, partly by threats, and partly by entreaties. Then Battus, who until
that time had been silent, began to speak very smoothly. I always thought it,
says he, an uncomfortable thing to live without a wife, and that it was
laudable, and praiseworthy.

Liberos hominem educare, generi monumentum, and sibi.

For a man to bring up Children to be a Monument to himself and kindred.
Therefore I suffered my self to be married to this woman, after I had examined
the burden of marriage, and strength of my Estate; As I was resolved to reckon
as many Children as years, as the greatest expense I could be at, and thinking
my self able to give an aliment out of my Rents, and Estate, sufficient to
entertain so great a number, I accepted of both Wife and Dowry. But O what a
sudden, and prodigious fruitfulness! Scarce two months were at an end, when I
hear the crying of a young Child; I was a Father before I had well laid aside
the name of a Bridegroom; and without doubt she who brought forth in her second
month, would have augmented my Family every year with six Children, so I should
have had an Army of them, in a very short time; but I was not a Crassus to
maintain them. God forbid I should throw my self, and my Children into poverty.

Therefore, Sir, I beseech you to pardon me, and to seek a richer Husband to
your Niece, who is able to beget, and bring up Children, not only every two
months, but every month once. So he eluded the Governors fair speeches, broke
his severity, and punished the trick put upon him, by his discreet and witty
answer.

Tabutius would have gone on in his Discourse, when a loud noise makes all the
Palace Echo; Whereat those who were sleeping in the room, rising hastily, did
rush into the great Hall; But Tabutius smiling, This is the end of Comus Feast,
Go you and behold; but as for me, I will not lose my repose for any new sight.
While we are rising, in comes Hylaeus his Boy to the Room, who could scarcely
draw his breath with running. What makes you so afraid, said I? and where is
your Master? Fury possesses my Master, says he, and I am undone, unless I
save my self by flight. But do you not know, said I, to him again, that your
Master is our good Friend? if you have done any fault, and be flying from your
Master's wrath, we will intercede for you. Take that pains for another, says
the Boy; for I am innocent. My Master with an inconsiderate boldness, has begun
a conflict, which I think he will not end so well; and just now, being obliged
by the (I know not what) punctilio's of honor, to take reparation of an
affront done him by his rival, he has stirred up a number of drunken people
against him. O what a madness is this! He might have been content with the most
ardent affection of Cires; and forgot his perfidious Myrtilla. But (alas) I am
partly the cause of it, who told him that Cherestratus was here. To gain my
Master's affection, I have thrown him into manifest danger. After those words,
Tabutius taking the Boy by the hand, desired him to relate that business more
distinctly from the beginning. The Boy was not hard to be entreated, albeit he
would rather have fled. Then taking his breath a little, he begins his Story in
this manner.

There was one Cherestratus, a rich, and generous young Gentleman, adorned with
Learning, and the knowledge of his Arms, who passionately loved a Noble young
Lady, of an exquisite beauty in our City; But she had placed an ardent
affection long before, upon my Master, who did not, for a time, much regard it.
Those things fall oft-times out in Cupid's Kingdom, and one beauty pleases not
all men; But Cherestratus, concealing his passion from Myrtilla (so was the
Lady called) for some cause or other; the greatest part of his consolation was,
to solace himself under her windows, in the night time, with the sweet Idea of
his earthly Goddess. His friend Panentus, finding out his Malady, did endeavor
to cure him thereof, by alluring him to come to the Country, thereby to draw
the fuel from his growing fire, by pleasant Country divertisements. In the
mean time, the mind of the Lady is exasperate, by the harsh usage of her
Mother, (for Myrtylla did live under her custody, after the death of her
Father) and when she could not digest the contumely, (assuming confidence) she
resolved by a clandestine flight, to put her self in the power of her
Sweetheart Hyleus. Her waiting woman Circe, a comely and witty Maid, did
augment her Ladies temerity with all her Rhetoric. This woman saining one day
to go to the Temple, did secretly steal into our house, and having declared to
my Master, her Ladies intentions, began to entreat him not to forsake a Lady,
afflicted by the too rigid severity of her Mother, and that he would assist
her, who loved him; for Jupiter would be moved (says she) to come down from
Heaven, to assist such a Beauty. Then taking forth a costly Gold Chain, (which
did once belong to the Father of her Lady, wherein the skill of the Artificer,
had represented by diverse colors of Gems, the rape of Proserpina,) presented
it to my Master, as a pledge of her Ladies fidelity. My Master taken both with
the Gift, and the Bearer thereof, condescended to all her Ladies desires, and
obliges his honor to fulfill her commands. But while he is speaking to the
Maid, she admiring his good mine, incontinently falls in love with him.
Notwithstanding she goes on with her Design, and this way of their flight did
please them best, that after the Setting of Sun, Hyleus should come to the Gate
of Myrtilla's Lodging, receive her at the entry, and so carry her away. The
Plot being laid, and Circe gone, my Master commands his Steward and Cook, to go
to his nearest Country House, and there provide an excellent Supper. He makes
two of his Comrades conscious to his Enterprise, whom he sends a little before
night, to one of the City Gates, that they might covenant with the Keeper
thereof for a free passage. He himself mounting on a Thessalian Horse, goes to
Myrtilla's lodging; when he was come into the street, and near the house, he
made his Horse stand, and there expected the out-coming of his Lady; But she
being detained, beyond her expectation at home, could not so soon withdraw her
self from the sight of her Mother. So Hyleus rides by the house into the next
street, for fear of suspicion, with an intent to return shortly the same way.
But now Circe, who knew her self to be in love, would needs go along with her
Mistress to find out Hyleus, the affection to her Mistress did color her other
pretenses. But the Lady began to entreat her, not to hinder their common
desires, by her unseasonable service; for how, says she, can I deceive my
Mother, if you go along with me? and how will one horse carry us both? but
comfort your self, you shall come this same night; For when I am gone, I shall
cause Hyleus send some of his Servants, who shall carry you away with the same
diligence. The Maid being encouraged with such words, did commend the advice,
and was content to stay behind. Now Cherestratus, who had spent some days with
his friend, in great torment of mind, could not suffer the want of his Mistress
sight any longer. Then making to the fire that inflamed him, he gives Paneutus
the farewell, takes his Horse, and comes to the town in all have. He made the
day and the way alike long, darkness did cover the last part of his journey,
and the City Gates were shut before he could reach. He began to ride about the
walls to seek an entry, and coming to that port, which was standing open for
Hyleus, he entered thereat. Then, as having gotten his entry by some propitious
Deity, he makes a vow with great confidence, that if he could gain any ground
on the heart of Myrtilla, he would hang on Golden Cupid to the statue of Venus;
So putting spurs to his Horse, he gallops straight to the Ladies house. He came
a little after Hyleus past by, and making the Horse stand still just before the
entry, he salutes the same with a sigh. But behold at the very same moment the
Gate open, and the Lady prepared for her flight, seeing the Horse, came running
to the Gentleman, and with a low voice tells him that she was ready, and that
she had rather live for the time to come with her Lover, than in the power of
her Mother. So without delay mounting behind him, she embraces her lovely
Centaure (...) of (...) by the Mount Pel^an, who first ^d^^sed to break Horses
for War, whereby it came to pass that they being seen by other (...) were
supposed to be (...), which had the upper part (...) a man, and the nether part
of his body like a Horse, (...) this place it is taken for a man on Horse back.
with her right arm. The youth, adoring fortune by a tacid acknowledgment,
turns his Horse, and spurs him forward the same way he came, desiring greatly
to carry his lovely prey to some place of security. So away they come to the
port, whereat they got not any hinderance by the companions of Hyleus; for not
being called on, they did not take any notice of those they knew not. But
Cherestratus rode on, at a round pace, and did not so much as make a stop until
he was ten miles out of the City; then he began to think of enjoying the fruits
of his labor. The calm night, and the pleasantness of the place did invite
him; for the Moon newly risen, and the twinkling Stars had overcome the horror
of the night. Hard by there was a pleasant Meadow encompassed with a continued
row of Trees, and full of white and yellow Flowers, you would have thought that
there had been Stars upon the Earth in emulation of the Heavens. Venus did seem
to sport with love, on the green and tender grass. Cherestratus setting the
Lady down, dismounts himself, and tying his Horse to a Tree, gives his Myrtilla
the first complements in kisses, she lifting up her eyes, could not discern the
object of her joy in the face of her imbracer; but when she did not find it to
be Hyleus, she had almost fallen into a swoun. Then did she with cries, and
tears accuse Fortune, and began to tear her beautiful face and hair. But
Cherestratus after he had employed the help of both tongue and hands, did first
persuade her from doing violence to her face; Then did he endeavor to make her
pliable, by his amorous complaints, Have pity upon me, says he, else I am
undone: this is not the first night of my affection; therefore be not less
pitiful then fair. Will you withstand the decrees of fate? you are fallen almost
by Miracle into the hands of your Lover.

Do you resolve to resist my true love?
Does not the place wherein we are, you move.
By such like Speeches he stopped her tears, and buried her words amongst her
sighs. In fine, Myrtilla being moved with such manifest testimonies of his
affection, and obeying the will of the Gods, (as she thought) did admit of his
Love. He thereby growing the bolder, and beginning with kisses, ended with the
full fruition of his desires.

A little after Myrtilla's flight, my Master returns, and coming close up to
the Gate, he hears a noise. For the Ladies flight being known through the
house, the disconsolate Mother was requiring her Daughter from the Maid, and
filling the whole house with fury. But she flying the old woman's threats,
having unlocked the Gate, comes running out, and thinking the man on horse back
to be the same appointed to carry her away, she presently gets on behind him.
On the other hand, Hyleus thinking he had Myrtilla behind him, comes rejoicing
to his companions at the Port. Those Gentlemen, congratulating his good
fortune, accompanied him to his Countrey-House, which was at the entry of a
Wood, not above a a mile from the City. I had just brought a lighted Torch to
the entry, when Hyleus going to salute his supposed Mistress, did with his eyes
find his error. Being in a great confusion, he began to expostulate with the
Maid; And what deceit is this? says he, do you sell the embraces of your Lady
after this manner? had you no Lovers in the City or do you despise men of your
own Quality, and will have none but Gentlemen to Gallant you. Circe admiring
how she could be carried thither by Hyleus. Pardon me, says she, I came a
Virgin, and hope so to return; yet I might have followed my Mistress as a
Servant, and run the same fortune with her. What, says Hyleus, came Myrtilla
out of Town before you? If you seek only sport, replied the Maid, and would
hear from me, what you did your self, I tell you she was carried away, and you
brought me hither a little after. But O the bounty of a courteous Mistress! who
suffered her Maid Circe, to be carried away by Hyleus; that the Maid might
share of the happiness of her Mistress. Then did Hyleus consider too late, that
his most beautiful prey had been snatched from him, either by secret fraud, or
chance. herefore being exceedingly vexed, both with his disappointed love, and
the affront he had received, he asked his companions, whether they had seen an
Horseman at the Port, and a woman behind him. We saw one, say they, and without
doubt Myrtilla was behind him, and he took that way, which leads to the passage
betwixt the mountains nearest the City, if you please to follow, you may
overtake them before they be far gone. Whereupon they immediately remount, and
so depart with all speed, leaving Circe behind them. We brought her in, and
desired her to sup, which she refused; she gives liverty to her tears, and
laments the misfortune of Myrtilla, that she might more freely sigh for Hyleus,
and so loathes all our dainties and civilities. In the mean time Hyleus comes to
the same Meadow, wherein the new Lovers had consummated their Marriage, and
were as yet lying sleeping on the ground; who, after he had espied a Horse tied
to a Tree, he looked about him, and sees the two Lovers in each others arms.
Knowing the Lady to be his fair fugitive, he alights from his Horse, with an
intent to pull away Myrtilla, and run her new lover through in her sight. But a
more happy Superior power did mitigate this cruelty: For his companions coming
up, knew Cherestratus, and their ancient friendship did move their hearts to
mercy; therefore restraining the violence of Hyleus, with their gentle
speeches, they persuaded him to wait for the awaking of the lovers, and by
their own confession to know the truth of the matter. When this counsel did
please them, they bind their Horses together, and lie down; but wearied with
their journey they immediately fall asleep. You would have thought, that sleep
leaving the two Lovers, had transfused it self into Hyleus, and his fellows.
For Cherestratus awaking at that same very moment, and by chance looking to
that place, where at a little distance their horses were standing, tied
together, he did admire what had brought sadled Horses there, at that time of
the night. Then arising, and going on a little, he finds Hyleus sleeping.
Returning to Myrtilla, he told her that Hyleus was sleeping hard by them, and
thereby had given them the opportunity to fly the second time. But my dear,
says he, be not afraid, but get upon this Horse, I shall take care, that they
return home, without further harm, because they have not interrupted our sweet
repose. The Lady, though trembling, obeys, and now she begins to be afraid of
Hyleus as much, as before she had loved him. So much could one night do on a
woman, whereby we may be infallible Arguments conclude, that Cupid is but a
bastard whom Venus did not bring forth. But Cherestratus being informed
concerning the Chain, could endure no love-token to be in the possession of his
Rival, and as if he had not possessed his Myrtilla, except he had that costly
token of her covenanted flight in his power, he went and privately took it from
his neck. Then going to the Horses, he took the Bridles off the heads of the
first and second, and threw them into a River running hard by, and mounting
upon the third, which was that brave Thessalian Horse, whereon Hyleus rode, he
followed his Myrtilla at a full gallop, and brought her straight to the country
of the Cimmerians. Hyleus at last awaking, got to his feet, and highly troubled
with the second flight of the two Lovers, did chide his companions as the
causes thereof. But presently missing his Chain, his former grief and anger
turned into fury, and resolved now to follow Cherestratus no more as a Rival,
but as a mortal Enemy. Then they went to their Horses, where at length, my
Master did understand, that he was either to be content with Circe, or nothing
at all. And because the power of the fates did seem to have appointed Myrtilla
for another then Hyleus, they began to think of turning home, and so without
delay making use of any thing instead of their Bridles that were lost, they
return all three upon two Horses. But my Master taken with the comeliness of
Circe, did almost (for a while) forget Myrtilla, if his love had not grown cold
by his too much satiety.

He came as you see into the company of Comus, where he finds Cherestratus, and
sees Myrtilla again, which was the occasion of the quarrel. But what do I hear?
Their fury increases in the inner part of the house, pardon me, for I must be
gone, and seek some place of safety. So Aderba, and I go to see the event of
the business, leaving Tabutius, meditating on the Boys narration. But his words
were short of the truth. For it was no more a Feast, but a Conflict; such as
was of old betwixt the Lapiths and Centaurs, we see Hyleus

Magno Lapithis cratere minantem. And again Cherestratus no less furious in
anger, than passionate in his affection, in a posture both of offense and
defense. But one of the Cooks standing by, did demand his Sweetheart Circe of
both the Rivals, and when words would not do it, snatching the Dishes upon the
Table (the effects of his luxurious act,) he began to throw them amongst them.
One Bilbius also, a tongue-valiant man amongst the Cimmerians, came upon the
head of a scurvy company of Jesters, but the durst not come nigh they menacing
points of the two young, and furious combatants; yet they had almost dashed out
their brains with stones at a distance. But we did admire more at one of the
dancers, who in the heat of the conflict, having his head wreathed with a
branch of Laurel, did urge the affection of a comely Maid, and to seem worthy
of her affection, he would also play the part of a Poet, and so began to sing
this Song to his Lute.

My Dear, because a Poet, thou me hates,
And is not moved with the famous fates
Of the Pierian Muses. 'Cause men do
Esteem Poets but Fools, thou 'l think so too.
Pardon, my joy, if that my Verses be
Cause of thy scorn, me leave them, thou shall see.
The heat of gl^ry does not urge me so*
But to enjoy thee, I Will all things forego;
I do delay. Be gone my Muse, be gone
To the artick Pole, or the torrid Zone.
It Is praise enough to please her, if that she
To love and to embrace will suffer me.
Some one, perhaps, who spies our lovely sports,
Our sweet embraces, kisses of all sorts,
Will write our Loves, and happy they 'l me call,
If out of thy heart, dear, I do not fall.
For to grow old in love, men shall us s^e,
The greatest joy, with thee to live, and die.
After he had ended his Song, Aderba breaking out in laughter, I Will perish
says he, if ever this fellow made a Verse in his life; For he courts his
Mistress with another man's labor; your friend Laopyrgus made those Verses,
when he went to try if he could express the affection of a Lover. As Aderba was
speaking, in comes the the same Laopyrgus, with a troubled countenance, and
first pulling the Lute from this Demi-poet, he afterward threw his Garland from
his head, at our feet. Aderba taking it up, (before I knew of it) set it upon
my head. But the Maid, afraid at this sudden accident, did flee from her abused
Lover, and following the Garland, as if she had thought her self safe under
that shadow of Daphne Taken here for the Lawrel-tree.
threw her self in my arms. I putting her gently from me, you are mistaken,
said I, for I was married long ago; but if you seek more Verses in praise of
your beauty, this man you see here, is a Poet; or if you seek a Lover, he is
yet unmarried; and with that I desired her to go to Aderba. But in the mean
while, in comes a strong big Fellow, catches hold of her, and so carries her
away to the wanton embraces of Comus. At last, the counterfeit-Poet gathering
courage, and snatching a Pot out of a fellows hand, threw it with great force
at Laopyrgus, but he shunned the violence thereof by the agility of his body
Author does not give you the cause of the conflict of all this mul^^tude, but
that of Hyleus and Cherestratus; therefore we must con^^ct^^ it to be some
taking part with the (...) rival and s^^^^ with the other.
. The women also mingled themselves with the men; some to lament the blood of
their friends with doleful cries, and others to fight, and to augment the fury,
and amongst the rest was the old woman who wanted her Nose Nor was she content
to show her fury by her cries, but pulling a Pole out of one of the Porters
hands, did with the same lay about her with more than feminine force; and
though her thrusts were ineffectual, yet by her blows she made many plain-fac'd
people like her self. As if she had been revenging the loss of her Nose in this
Conflict; she filled all places where she came with tumult and fear. When two
of Hyleus his companions had felt the bloody effects of her rage; at last, up
comes two strong fellows, and according to the example of her Nose, with two
blows cut off both her ears; While she is howling and crying for her loss, in
come a Company of huffing Hectors, amongst whom was the Soldier who had
debauched the Noblemans Wife, and did seem to exact from her Adversaries, not
only her Ears, but her Nose also, thinking by that attempt to ingratiate
himself so in her favor, as should move her to bring him, once more, into the
embraces of his Mistress. At last the Tables were overthrown, and the Meat
thereon trod under foot; Some were beat down with Stools, some were defending
themselves with Spits, and all were raging with diverse sorts of Weapons. Then
Comus, leaving his Pleasure, comes into the midst of this raging Multitude to
appease them; but their exasperate minds could by no means be induced thereto.
Their fury increased, and did threaten some sudden mischief. But the God
(because he found himself neglected, and despised) did vanish, together with
Luxury and Lasciviousness. But their fury still continuing, they made use of
the Torches, and Lamps, whereby all the Lights were put out. Then did Night,
Darkness, and all that black Multitude, which stood at the Palace Gate, break
in, and all this Cimmerian darkness did vanish. But I awaking out of Darkness,
Silence, and Sleep, did find all this to be but a Dream.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. Line 5. for Their read those. p. 9. l. 13 for threne r. thrown. p.
14. l. 15. for hates r. have. p. 22. l. 3. and 4. for lying r. looking, and for
looking r. lying. p. 105. l. 14. for gods r. god. p. 117. l. 14. for evity r.
evit.


