AN ARGUMENT IN JUSTIFICATION OF The five Members ACCUSED By HIS MAJESTY.
Wherein is proved, that the raising of this present Army by Authority of
Parliament, is not Treason. By which it likewise appears, that never any King
of England received loss or damage by any Parliament, from the first that ever
was called, to this present Parliament. By PETER BLAND of Grays-Inne, Gent.

London, Printed for JOHN FIELD.

A Dialogue between a Doctor of Divinity and a Student at Law, Concerning the
KING and PARLIAMENT.
DOctor. Sir, being acquainted with your ways of employment, and knowing you
to be a Lawyer, I shall desire some satisfaction from you concerning a
Parliament, it being no way belonging to my own study, whereby I may resolve my
self: and first I desire you to tell me, who may be Burgesses or Knights in
Parliament.


Student. I wish all Divines were of your temper, not to meddle with that which
belongs not to them; and to answer your question; the son and heir of an Earl
may be, and so was the Lord Russell: Eliz. 6. or the son and heir apparent of
a Baron, and so was Mr. Henry Brook; for the eldest son of an Earl is not a
Lord, only by the courtesy of England he is called so, but in any Declaration
or writing he has no more then his legal addition given.


Doct: But may not a Divine be chosen for a Burgess, for he has no voice in
the upper House unless he be a Bishop.


Stud. No Sir he may not, and therefore Alexander Nowell was refused, being a
Prebend of Westminster, whereupon a Writ issued to choose another in his room
for Leo in Cornwall.


Doct. But I have heard that the Country has a free chise, and if they choose
a Divine and he is returned, may the House put him out, and have they power to
send out Writs?


Stud. In 23 Eliz. it was ordered, that during the Session, no Writs should
issue to choose Knights or Burgesses, but by Warrant of the House to the Clerk
of the Crown, and 18 Martii, 23 Eliz. it was agreed by the House, that if a
Burgess be incurably sick, another may be chosen in his place by license of
the House, but not if he be easily sick, or sent of his Majesty's service,
unless the House will allow of a new Election.


Doct. What then Sir if one man be chosen for two places, which must he serve
for?


Stud. He must serve for that place which first chose him: Sir Henry Piercy was
chosen Knight for two Counties, and thereupon it was adjudged by the House,
that he should serve for that County which first chose him: 13. Eliz. and in 7.
E. 6. one Cavell was returned for Ludders-hall and for Travayny, and he
appeared for the first, and a Writ issued to choose another for Travayny.


Doct. Well Sir, you have satisfied me for the Election of Burgesses, and who
may be, now tell me what they do usually require at the Kings hands, when they
are all met and a Speaker made.


Stud. The first thing that they require at the Kings hands, is that which was
required by the Commons in the thirteenth year of Henry 8. to wit, that if any
man of the Commons House should speak more largely, then of duty he ought to
do, all such offenses to be pardoned, and that to be of record.


Doct. If that be granted, then they may speak of the King what they please;
and he must be pardoned.


Stud. No Sir, the reverence which a vassal owes his Sovereign is intended
(in that motion) for to be proved in every speech, what ever it be it must
import the good of the King and his State; and so long it may be easily
pardoned, otherwise not; for in Queen Elisabeths time, who gave freedom of
speech to all Parliaments, when Wentworth made those motions that were but
supposed dangerous to the Queens estate, he was imprisoned in the Tower, and
there dyed.


Doct. I thought every Burgess or Knight of the Parliament house had a
privilege that they could not be imprisoned.


Stud. No more they cannot at the suit of any common person, where the offense
does not touch the King directly, as by a Trespass against another, or the
like; but a man shall not have the privilege of the House for a criminal
offense that immediately touches the King.


Doct. If he shall not have the privilege of the House for such an offense as
immediately touches the King, who then must commit him, the King, or the House
of Parliament whereof he is a Member.


Stud. As to that question, I shall not give you my own opinion, but I shall
show you what Presidents have been done, if the Books be true that I go by: Sir
Edward Warner (Lieutenant of the Tower) was sent out of his house to the Tower
for an offense done before the Parliament was summoned: And Sir William Cecill
then Secretary, said that the Queen was then assured by her Justices, that she
might commit any of the House during the Parliament, for any offense against
her Crown and Dignity; and that they showed diverse Presidents thereof; and
Pearne was committed to the Marshalsy for words, without any notice given to
the House; and Master Cope, Master Leukenor, Hurlston, and Master Braynbridge,
and others were committed to the Tower by the Queen, for that before the
Parliament they had sundry conventions for the preferring in Parliament a Book
touching the Rates of the Church, and a form of an Act for establishing the
same: Which also they did print, prefer, and urge in Parliament; but it seemed
that if they had treated thereof only in time of Parliament (being Burgesses)
they should not have been impeached: in 28 Eliz.


Doct. What then do you think of the Kings accusing of the five Members?


Stud. Sir, you must know that the accusation laid by His Majesty against them,
is not within the compass of any of those Presidents; and we need not stand to
give any reasons to prove how it differs from them presidents, because the King
Himself has acknowledged it; and what dishonor can His so doing be to so
Religious a Prince, when as he himself is subject to error, being considered as
man? nay, in that point He has excelled the goodness of His Royal Ancestors,
which act I hope shall be perpetually Recorded in the hearts of all His
Subjects, for a testimony of His Grace and goodness, and for a pattern to all
succeeding Princes.


Doct. But why did not they then except of a Pardon?


Stud. Then the Kings mercy had been apparent, of which we have other great
evidences; but His willingness to acknowledge His errors (which is as great a
virtue in Prince) had been concealed, and so he had been (in that respect)
less glorious: besides, had they received a Pardon, being not guilty, they had
ipso facto lost their personal estate by the Statute, unless some words of
Art had been put into the pardon, which is not too late yet to be done.


Doct. Then it seems that in former times the King had a power over the
Parliament, unless I misapprehend them, pray tell me, has he not now a power
over them?


Stud. I shall tell you what I have read, and farther I cannot go: The House
had agreed in 23 Eliz. to have a common Fast, whereof the Queen misliked not
for the matter, but for the innovation of order, without her privity, and
without Ecclesiastical Authority; for which cause, the Commons submitted
themselves, and she gave them their pardon: And Sir Walter Raleigh says, the
three Estates do but advise, as the Privie-Councell does; which advice if the
King embrace, it becomes the Kings own Act in the one; and the Kings Law in the
other; for without the Kings acceptance, both the public and private advices
be but as empty Egge-shells. Again, if there be any difference for alteration
of a Bill between the Lords and Commons, then usually some special persons of
each House meet and confer, that one House may understand the meaning of the
other; but a Bill that is signed by the King, and sent to the Lower House, may
not be altered in any part thereof, without His Majesty's license; but if a Bill
come from the Lords, and not signed by him, it may be altered, by noting what
should be taken from it, or added unto it: from whence learned Doctor I desire
you to gather your own satisfaction: and in 4. and 5. Phill. and Mar. The
Speaker showed that it was the QUEENS pleasure, that the House should proceed
no farther with the Bill for the Revenues of the Queen, because it extended to
diverse which had accounted, and then Peter Wentworth and James Dalton moved,
whether this did not restrain the Liberty of the House; upon which after many
arguments, they resolved to cease till some other time: now the Queen revoked
her said Command, and gave them liberty to proceed; but upon consultation
amongst themselves, they spared to proceed any farther.


Doct. But pray Sir, tell me your opinion freely, Is it dangerous for the King
to assemble the three States; for thereby former Kings have always lost
somewhat of their Prerogative: and because you shall not think that I speak at
random, I will begin with elder times, wherein the first contention began
betwixt the Kings of this land, and their Subjects in Parliament.


Stud. Sir you would do me a singular favor in your so doing.


Doct. You know that the Kings of England had no formal Parliament, till about
the eighteenth year of Henry the first, for in his 17th year for the marriage
of his daughter, the King raised a Tax upon every hide of Land by the advice of
his privy Council alone; but you may remember how the subjects, soon after
this Parliament, began to stand upon terms with the King, and drew from him by
strong hand and the sword, the Great Charter.


Stud. You say well Sir, the great Charter was drawn from the King by the
sword, but hereof the Parliament cannot be accused, but the Lords.


Doct. Then afterward King John promised to restore King Edwards Laws, and
also to confirm the Charter of Forests, and the great Charter upon his
absolution; but after his return out of France, in his 16 year he denied it,
because without such a promise he had not obtained restitution, therefore he
said his promise was constrained, and not voluntary: what say you therefore,
was he not bound in honor to perform it?


Stud. Certainly no, for it was determined the Case of King Francis the first
of France, That all promises by him made, whilst he was in the hands of Charles
the Fifth his enemy, were void, by reason the judge of Honor, which tells us he
durst do no other.


Doct. But King John was not in prison.


Stud. Yet for all that, restraint is imprisonment, yea, fear it self is
imprisonment, and the King was subject to both: I know there is nothing more
Kingly in a King, than the performance of his word; that is, his word that is
freely given; for binding of a King by Law upon the advantage of his necessity,
makes the breach it self lawful in a King (says Sir Walter Raleigh) his
Charters and all other instruments being no other than the surviving witnesses
of unconstrained will, Princeps non subjicitur nisi suae voluntate libra, mero
motu and certa scientia; necessary words in all the Grants of a King;
witnessing that the same Grants were given freely and willingly.


Doct. But what say you to the Parliament of Westminster in the 16 year of the
King, when notwithstanding the Wars of France, and the great charge he had been
at in repulsing the Welsh Rebels, he was flatly denied the Subsidy demanded.


Stud. I confess Sir, That the House excused themselves by reason of their
poverty, and the Lords taking of Arms; but you spoke Sir of danger of
Parliaments: Now in this Parliament there was a denial, but there was no
danger at all; yet in the end of that year, at the Assembly of the States at
Lambeth, the King had the fortieth part of every man's goods given him freely
toward the payment of his debts, and those people who the same year had
refused to give the King any thing, when they saw he had supplied his own
necessity out of Delinquents and corrupt Officers which he called to account,
they willingly yielded to give him satisfaction; and indeed it is impossible for
a King of England to greaten and enrich himself by any way so assuredly, as by
the love of his people; for by one years-Rebellion, or civil Wars, the King
has more loss, than by a hundred years observance of Magna Charta, and the
other Laws that are in force; for in those times of War, Kings have been forced
to compound with Rogues and Rebels, and to pardon them; but by Parliaments; the
Kings of England never received loss or prejudice.


Doct. But what say you to tha denial in the 26 year of this Kings Reign,
sven when the King was invited to come into France by the Earl of March who
married his Mother, and who promised to assist him in the Conquest of many
places that he had lost?


Stud. It is true, that a Subsidy was then denied, and the reasons are
delivered in English Histories; who say, That with a world of payments there
mentioned, the King had drawn the Nobility dry; and besides, That whereas not
long before, great sums of Money were given, and the same appointed to be
kept in four Castles, and not to be expended, but by the advice of the Peers;
it was believed, that the same Treasure was yet unspent.


Doct. Good sir, you have said enough; judge you your self, whether that were
not a dishonor to the King to be so tied; as not to expend his Treasure, but by
other men's advise, as it were by their license.


Stud. Surely (noble Doctor) the King was well advised to take the money upon
any condition, and they were fools that did propound the restrain't; for it
does not appear that the King took any great heed to those overseers: Kings are
bound by their Piety, and by no other obligations. In Queen Mary's time, when
it was thought that she was with Child; It was propounded that the Rule of the
Realm should be given to King Philip, during the Minority of the hoped Prince
or Princess; and the King offered his assurance in great sums of Money, to
relinquish the Government; at such time as the Prince or Princess should be of
age: At which motion when all were silent in the House, the Lord Dacres (who
was none of the wisest) asked who should sue the Kings Bonds? which ended the
despute; for what Bond is between a King and Vassal, more than the Bond of the
KINGS Faith?


Doct. What say you then to the twenty eighth year of that King, in which when
the King demanded Relief, the States would not consent, except the former
Order had been taken for the appointing of four Overseers for the Treasure;
As also that the Lord Chief Justice, and the Lord Chancellor should be chosen
by the States, with some Barons of the Exchequer and other Officers.


Stud. Why Sir, Admit the King had yielded to their demands, then whatsoever
had been ordained by those Magistrates to the dislike of the Commonwealth, the
people had been without remedy; whereas while the King made them, they had
their appeal and other remedies; It is an excellent thing for a King to have
patience, and give way to the fury of men's passions.


Doct. Was not the King denied a Subsidy in the forty first of his Reign?


Stud. No Sir, for although the King required Money as before, for the
impossible conquest of Scicily, yet the House offered to give fifty two
thousand Marks, which whether he refused or accepted, is uncertain; And
whilst the King dreamed of Scicily, the Welsh Invaded and spoiled the Borders
of England; for in the Parliament of London, when the King urged the House for
the prosecuting the Conquest of Scicily, the Lords utterly disliking the
attempt, urged the prosecuting of the Welsh-men: Which PARLIAMENT being
Proroged, did again Assemble at OXFORD, and was called the mad PARLIAMENT,
which was no other than the Assembly of Rebels; for the Royal Assent of the
KING, which gives life to all Laws formed by the three Estates, was not a
Royal assent, when both the King and Prince were constraind to yield to the
Lords; A constraind consent is the consent of a Captive, not of a King; and
therefore there was nothing done there either legal, or Royal; for if it be
not properly a Parliament where the Subject is not free, certainly, it can be
none where the King is bound, for all Kingly Rule was taken from the King, and
twelve Peers appointed to Govern the Realm; and as other Writers have it, 24
Peers, and therefore the assembly made by Jack Straw and other Rebels, may
as well be called a Parliament, as that at Oxford, Principis nomen habere non
est esse Princeps, for thereby was the King driven, not only to compound all
quarrels with the French, but he quitted his Right to Normandy, Anyou, and
Main.


Doct. But what needed this extremity, seeing the Lords required but the
confirmation of the former Charter, which was not prejudicial to the King to
grant?


Stud. Yes Sir, but they insulted upon the King, and would not suffer him to
enter into his own Castles; they put down the Purvey or of the meat, for the
maintenance of his house, as if the King had been a Banckrupt; and gave order,
That without ready money he should take up a Chicken; and though there is
nothing against the Royalty of a King in these Charters, yet it is so contrary
to the nature of a King to be forced, even to those things which may be to his
avantage, as that the King had some reason to seek the dispensation of his oath
from the Pope, and to draw in strangers for his own defense; yea, jure salvo
coronae nostrae, is intended inclusively in all oaths and promises exacted from
a Sovereign.


Doct. But you know it is dangerous to call in other Nations both for the spoil
they make, as also because they have often held the possessions of the best
places, with which they have been trusted.


Stud. It Is true Sir, nothing is so dangerous for a King, as to be constraind
and held as prisoner to his Vassalls; for by that Edward the Second and Richard
the Second lost both their Kingdoms and their lives.


Doct. Why, those were both Deposed by Parliament, were they not?


Stud. Yes Sir, being prisoners, and being out of Possession; It is an old
contrary Proverb (that might overcomes right) a weak title that wears a strong
sword, commonly prevails against a strong title that wears but a weak one;
otherwise. Philip the second had never been Duke of Millaine, nor King of
Naples and Sicily; but sir, errores non sunt trahendi in exemplam, when I
defend Parliaments, I speak of peaceable, Regal and lawful Parliaments.


Doct. What say you then to the Parliament held at London, about the sixth year
of Edward the Seconds time?


Stud. I say, that King was not bound to perform the Acts of that Parliament,
because the Lords, being too strong for the King, enforced his consent; for
these be the words of our own History, viz. They wrested too much beyond the
bounds of reason; and at the Parliament in the 13 year of that King, the Lords
that were so moved came with an Army, and by strong hand surprised the King,
they constraind (says the Story) the rest of the Lords, and compelled many of
the Bishops to consent unto them; yea, it says farther, That the King durst
not but grant to all that they required.


Doct. What say you to the Lords in Richard the Seconds time, when he was first
besieged in the Tower, the Lords came to the Parliament, and no man durst
contradict them.


Stud. Certainly in raising an Army, they committed Treason, and though it did
appear that they all loved the King (for they did him no harm having him in
their power) yet our Law does conster all levying of War without the Kings
Commission, and all Force raised to be intended for the death of the King, not
attending the sequel, so says Sir Walter Raleigh; but Mr. Doctor, for this
war that our present Parliament do maintain, I must tell you, that you must
take this for a general rule; That the immortal Policy of a State, cannot
admit any Law or Privilege whatsoever, but in some particular or other, the
same must necessarily be broken; therefore I hold not Sir Walters opinion for
good Law in the case of our times; for the supreme reason bears out their
practice of many things without the advice of the Law; and where the Law by
forecast has not provided remedies for future dangers, Parliaments are forced
to assist themselves by their Privileges: And besides, who can show a greater
Right or Title to the exposition of that Statute, and determining what is a
levying of War within that Statute, and what not; then those that can expound
with the same authority that the thing expounded was made by; however I am
sure, That as those Parliaments wherein the Kings of this Land have satisfied
the people, have been ever prosperous both to King and people; so where Kings
have restrained the House, the contrary has happened.


Doct. Well Sir, but is it not the best way to compound a Parliament of the
Kings servants and others, that shall in all obey the Kings desires?


Stud. Certainly no, for it has never succeeded well on the Kings part, nor on
the Subjects; for from such a composition do arise all jealousies and all
contentions; it was practiced in elder times, to the great trouble of the
Kingdom, and to the loss and ruin of many; In later times 'twas used by King
Hen. the eight; but every way to his disadvantage, when the King leaves himself
to his people, they assure themselves that they are trusted and beloved of
their King; and there was never any people so barbarous, as not to answer the
love and trust of their King.


Doct. Well Sir, notwithstanding all this, who dares to advise a King to call a
Parliament; for if it should succeed ill, those that advised the King to it,
should fall into the Kings disgrace; and if the King be driven into any
extremity, they can say to the King, that because we found it extremely
unpleasing to his Majesty to hear of a Parliament, we thought it no good
manners to make such a motion.


Stud. As to the first part of your excuse, let me tell you; that there was
never any just Prince that has taken any advantage of the success of
Counsels, which have bin founded upon reason; to fear that, were to fear the
loss of the Bell more then the loss of the Steeple; and were also the way to
beat all men from the study of the Kings service: But for the second part of
your excuse, where you excuse your self upon the Kings protesting against a
Parliament; let me tell you, that the King upon better consideration may
encounter that finesse of yours; therefore 'twill be better for a King to trust
his own reason and excellent judgment, which have not deceived him in any
thing wherein His Majesty has employed them; take counsel of thine heart
says Solomon, for their is none more faithful unto thee then it.


FINIS.

