61 THE ANATOMY of the Elder, cutting out of it plain, approved, and specific
remedies for most chiefest maladies, by Dr. Martin, Blockwich, recommended by
the Royal Society; octavo.

London, 1677
Anatomia Sambuci OR THE ANATOMY OF THE ELDER: Cutting out of it Plain,
Approved, and Specific Remedies for most and chiefest Maladies; Confirmed and
cleared By Reason, Experience, and History.

Collected in Latin By Dr. MARTIN BLOCHWICH, Physician Ordinary of Oshatin.

Translated for the benefit of all, and Recommended by the Royal Society.

Nullum numen abest, si ^it prudentia --
LONDON, Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's; and
Tho. Sawbridge, at the Three Flowers de Luce in Little Britain, 1677*

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
THe Ornaments of Nature are so many and mavelous, that they not only submit
the mind of Man in a devote honor to that Being that preserves this variety
in so sweet a consort; but force also our thoughts to pursue the inquest of the
several ties and dependencies of this beautiful proportion, that at last we may
come to the knowledge of things in their causes and connection. This Pythagoras
most properly termed Philosophy. And indeed Nature has not been in this,
neither in any other of her works, empty: but has bestowed on us largely all
means fit for the accomplishment of our wishes. Amongst which Experience and
Reason deservedly challenge precedence: Experience, being beholding to Chance
and Imitation, is pleased to impart her Observations to Reason; who not being
discourteous, does assist her with her own Principles, and so mustereth in the
fields of Learning Noble Squadrons of Conclusions against their common enemy
Ignorance.

This is vigorously illustrated by the Relation of famous Galen; A Viper by
chance being stifled in Wine, and a Leprous person drinking it, was cured. A
Philosopher hearing it, used the same means, and was rid of the same Malady.
Chance in the one, and Imitation in the other, asserted the experience: Which
Reason now in others makes plausible use of.

From this Base is the Noble Frame of Medicine raised to so great a
magnificence: For the Ancients, being by event or advice delivered from their
sickness, hung up votive Tables in the Chapels of their Gods, drawn with the
Lineaments of their Disease and Remedy. Out of these approved, yet scattered,
Records did the divine Hippocrates gather those Theorems, which all Posterity
adore and embrace as the highest Masterpiece of this skill.

And our Author seems in this his Treatise of the Elder to tread the footsteps
of that more than mortal old man: For here, as in a curious Landscape, he has
clearly and methodically represented to your view the Experiments and Virtues
of this humble Shrub; whether by chance discovered to the Commons, or by
improvement to the rational. In whose ragged Cote are contained, I dare aver,
rarer and safer Medicines, than the robbed Indies enrich us with; and though
they seem but homely, and the Products of Peasants; yet are more safe and
effectual for our bodies and diseases, than the most renowned Exoticks: For
Nature, with a plentiful Horn, has provided each Climate proper Medicines.

This being considered by the ingenious, it will not only enforce upon them a
grateful remembrance of the Author for collecting, but of the Translator also
for imparting his Experiments to us in our Mother Tongue.

For my own part, though I might put in for my share, if not of Thanks, yet of
Acceptance, for this Bill of Revival, if I may so term it, which brings you at
present a new sight of that Translation, which, with many other things of great
value, seemed lately buried in the rubbish of our Cities Ruins, I shall
content my self with performance of a work conducing to the Service of my
Countrymen: and hope that this second appearance of so useful a Piece will be no
less acceptable to them, than the first. I am sure it cannot be less useful, if
the frequent and urgent enquiries with which the Book was demanded, when out of
Print, deceive me not, But without peradventure, the great Experience which
has lately justified the Virtues of the Elder Tree (such, I dare say, as has
far exceeded the knowledge of Elder Times) will make for me with them that
know, as many do, that from its Berries is drawn a Spirit of such use and
request in some parts of the Land, that not only Shops, but Private Houses
also, are thought ill furnished without it. I will not therefore by a tedeous
Preface detain you any longer from the benefit of this excellent Discourse, of
which it is not the least commendation, that it can sufficiently commend it
self.

November. 1. 1669.
For his honored Friend, Alexander Pennicuik of New-Hall, sometime Surgeon
to General Bannier, and late Surgeon General to the Auxiliary SCHOTCH ARMY.
SIR,
THe Ornaments of Nature are so many and mavelous, that they not only submit
the mind of man in a devote honor to that being that preserves this variety,
in so sweet consort; but force also our thoughts to pursue the inquest of the
several ties and dependencies of this beautiful proportion, that at last we may
come to the knowledge of things in their causes and connection. This Pythagoras
most properly termed Philosophy. And indeed Nature has not been in this,
neither in any other of her works empty; but has bestowed on us largely all
means fit for the accomplishment of our wishes. Amongst which Experience and
Reason deservedly challenge precedence: Experience being beholding to Chance
and Imitation, is pleased to impart her Observations to Reason; who not being
discourtious, does assist her with her own Principles; and so mustereth in the
fields of Learning Noble Squadrons of Conclusions, against their common enemy,
Ignorance.

This is vigorously illustrated by the Relation of famous Galen; A Viper by
chance being stifled in Wine, and a Leprous person drinking it, was cured. A
Philosopher hearing it, used the same means, and was rid of the same Malady.
Chance in the one, and Imitation in the other, asserted the experience: Which
reason now in others makes plausible use of.

From this Base is the Noble Frame of Medicine raised to so great a
magnificence: For the Ancients being by event or advice delivered from their
sickness; hung up votive Tables in the Chapels of their Gods, drawn with the
Liniaments of their Disease and Remedy. Out of these approved, yet scattered
Records, did the Divine Hippocrates gather those Theorems, which all Posterity
adore and embrace as the highest Masterpiece of this skill.

And our Author seems in this his Treatise of the Elder to tread the footsteps
of that more then mortal old man: For here, as in a curious Land-skip, he has
clearly and methodically represented to your view, the Experiments and virtues
of this humble Shrub; whether by chance discovered to the Commons, or by
improvement to the rational. In whose ragged Coat are contained, I dare averr,
rarer and safer Medicines, then the robbed Indies enrich us with; and though
they seem but homely; and the Products of Pesants; yet are more safe and
effectual for out bodies and diseases, then the most renowned Exoticks: For
Nature with a plentiful Horn has provided each Climate proper Medicines.

This being considered by the ingenious, it will not only press upon them a
thankful remembrance of the Author for gathering; but of you also for procuring
the Translation of these Experiments.

This Translation owes you its Life, and lies prostrate at your feet, to be
exposed, or cherished. If it please you, it is all the Translator desires; if
not, it is all he could do in these rough and rugged hills, where even the common
elements are barbarous. But he knows you are ready to entertain any foundling
of his, though full of deformities, thereby to encourage him for better births:
Wherefore he beseeches; you will take this Paper-indeavor, as a fragment of
the great duty he owes you, till he be able in more worthy expressions, to
declare himself,

SIR, Your sincere Clyent, C. de IRYNGIO.
At the Camp in Athol, June 30. 1651,
THE INDEX OF THE ANATOMY of the ELDER.
Sect. I.
OF the names, kinds, form, place, and qualities of the Elder, page 1
Sect. II.
Of the Medicines made of the Elder, 10 Chap. 1. Of the Medicines of the
Berries, 11 1. The Rhob, Tincture, Extract. ib. 2. The Wines 13 3. Spirits and
Waters 14 4. Syrups and Trageas 16 5. The oil pressed from the stones, ib.
Chap. 2. Of the Medicines of the flowers. 1. Conserves p.18 2. Syrups and
Honey ib. 3. Water and Spirits 19 4. Vinegar and Oxymel 21 5. Wines 22 6. Oils
by Infusion, Distillation 23
Chap. 3. Of the Medicine of the buds 26 1. Powders ib. 2. Conserves ib. 3.
Syrups 27
Chap. 4. Of the Leaves, middle-bark, roots, Jews-ears, etc. 28 1. Waters ib.
2. Syrups 29 3. Oils and Liniaments ib.
Chap. 5. Of the Salt and its Spirit 32
Sect. III.
Showing the practice and use of the Elder Medicaments 35 Chap. 1. Of the
Cephalalgia page 36 2. Of ravings and wakings 38 3. Hypocondriack Melancholy 40
4. Of the Epilepsie 45 5. Of the Apoplexy and Palsy 56 6. Of Catharres 61 7.
Of the Toothach 63 8. The diseases of the eyes 66 9. The dregs of ears and
hearing 70 10. Of the nose and smelling ib. 11. Of the face and head 74 12. Of
the mouth and throat 76 13. Of Dispnea and Astmate 79 14. Of the host and
hoarsnesse 82 15. Of the plurisie and pthisis 85 16. Of the diseases of the
dugs 89 17. Of swouning and faintness 91 18 Of Fevers, and 1. Of intermitting
93 2. Of continued and burning 104
19. Of the pest, and pestilential fevers 106 20. Of the smallpox and measles
118 21. Of the diseases of the stomach 120 22. Of the Diseases of the
Intestines of the Colic 125 Worms 128 Leienterie and Coeliack Fluxes 130
Dyssentery 131 Constipation of the belly 135 Hemorrhoides 136
23 Of the obstructions of the Mesentery, Liver, Lien, from whence proceed both
the Jaundies and Scurvie 138 24. Of the Hydropsie 144 1. Ascites ib. 2.
Anasarca 158 3. Tympany 161
25. Of the stone in the Reins; of the Dysury, and Iscury 163 26. Of the
diseases of the Matrix 170 Retention of Flowers ib. Fluxion 173 Suffocation of
the Matrix 174
27. Of Arthritical Diseases 183 28. Of the scab, and its kinds 192 29. Of the
Erysipelas, or Rose 201 30. Of Inflammations, Oedemas, and Schirrous Tumors 208
31. Of Wounds, Ulcers, and Contusions 211 32. Of burning and congelation 219
33. Of poison outwardly and inwardly 224
Medicines set down in the Practice.
1. An Amulet Epileptick. Sect. 3. Cap. 4. For the Rose 29 2. A Balsam
vulnerary 31 3. A Bath for the scab 28 4. A Cataplasm for a spreading Herpes.
ib. 5. A decoction for host and hearsnesse 14 6. A decoction against Philtres,
and other poison 33 7. The Experiment of Countess Emylia 24 8. Extract Granor.
Acts, Quer. 26 Lithontribon 25 Antilemick 19
9. Lac aureum 29 10. A liquor of Snails and Elder-kernels, which is Anodine 27
11. Oil topic in the Plague 19 12. Oil of Elder-sugar 13 13. Misture uterine
26 14. Powder Traumattick 31 15. Polychrestick of the buds 3 16. Rob Antimelick
of the Elder 19 17. A specific in the Rose The Spirits of the Elder. 24 18.
Apoplectick 5 19. Bezoartick 19 29. Epileptick 4 21. Hysteric 26 22.
Lythonthriptick 25 23. Pneumatick 13 24. Stomachick 21 25. The syrup acetous of
the Elder 19 26. Sugar candid of the Elder 14 27. Tragea Granorum Acts 22 28.
Trochiscation of Elder-stones 3 29. A water Anodine, etc. 27 30. A water-purge
of the berries 24 31. The Wine of the berries of Quercetan ib.
Mundus regitur opinionibus.
OF THE ANATOMY OF THE Elder or Boor Tree.
SECT. 1.
Of the Name, Kinds, Form, Place, and Quality of the ELDER TREE.
SEeing the Elder is a Tree most known even to the rudest of the Commons, it
seems a matter not worth the pains to describe it in many words; Nevertheless,
lest in this respect our Treatise should seem lame, some things are to be
prefaced out of the ancient and Modern Botanicks.

I. The Name.
It Is called by Dioscorides, and other Greeks, (...), because it is a lover of
brinks, and shadowy banks, as is thought by Pena and Lobel, in their Advers. of
Plants, p. 434. which name Theophrastus Paracelsus has retained, in whose, and
the modern Chymist-writing, you will find frequent mention of Granorum Acts,
and of Medicines prepared of them.

It Is called of the Latins, Sambucus, or by others, chiefly of Q. Serenus, as
witnesses Hugh Frida, Val. l. 2. de tuend. san. c. 26. Sabucus, from the
likeness the musical Instrument called Sabuc, or Sambuck, has with its hollow
and pith-emptied rods; Pena and Lob, in the place before cited. Whence till
this day it is called by the Spaniards, Sabuco, or Sabugo; by the Germans,
Holunder; or by contraction, Holder, albeit there be some which imagine it is
from the many virtues thereof called Holder, as it were deduced from Hulder, Or
Hulderich; but in this we will not contend with any. The Italian names it
Sambuco; the French, Susier, Suyn, and Susau; the Bohemians, Bez; the English,
the Elder tree; the Scots, Boor tree, or Bore tree; the Low Dutch, Ulier. See
Tabernomontanus Herbal, part. 3. sect. 1. c. 62.

II. The Kinds.
Matthiolus and others speak of four kinds thereof: The Domestic, the
Mountain, the Water Elder, and the Little Elder or Danwort; whereof the first
and last are most commended in Medicine by Physicians, who herein follow
Dioscord. viz. the Elder tree, properly so called, and the Ebulus called the
less, Dwarf, or low Elder. But because both these kinds, as we will hear anon
out of Dioscorides, differ little, or not at all, one from the other in virtue,
I will describe here the Domestik, or Elder tree, properly so called, by which
you may easily judge what is to be thought of the Ebulus.

III. The Form.
The Elder Tree in figure is like the Ash, sends forth long, small, reedlike
branches, covered with an outward bark of an ash color; the next rine to it is
green, and that is yellow and succulent which next clotheth the wood; within
which is contained a white and fungous pith; the leaves are like those of the
Walnut tree, but less, growing by intervals by threes, fours, yea if you look
to both the sides of the branch, by fives and sevens, incompassing it together;
of an heavy smell, lightly cut in edges. In the tops of the branches and twigs
there springs sweet and crisped umbels, swelling with white, sweet smelling
flowers (in June before St. John's Eve) which by their fall give place to a many
branched Grape, first green, then ruddy, lastly of a black, dark, purple
color, succulent and tumid, with its winish liquor. Of all the wild plants
it is first covered with leaves, and last unclothed of them. We omit other
descriptions, this being full.

IV. The Place.
The place of its nativity is every where, and scarce can you find any place
where any other tree or shrub enmantle themselves in their green garments,
which the bountiful enricher of Nature has envyed this treeling. But it most
delights in hedges, orchards, and other shadowy places, or on the moist
brinks of rivulets and ditches, unto which places it is thrust by the Gardeners,
lest by its luxury and importunate increase, whereby yearly it does spread and
enlarge it self, it should possess the place of more honorable, as they
conceive, and of more precious Plants.

V. The Qualities and Virtues.
The Qualities in general are described by Galen, lib. 6. Simpl. Medic. facul.
sect. That it has the force of desiccating, conglutinating, and digesting
moderately; which word for word is repeated by the Galenick Physician Paulus of
Aegian, lib. 7. Medic. ^. 3.

Dioscorides? who, as Galen witnesses, has of all others written most
accurately, most truly, and most learnedly of Plants) did long ago in more
proper colors limn them in his fourth Book, and 175 Chapter, of the Matter of
Medicine. These are his words.

The faculty and use of both (he means the Elder and Ebulus) is the same in
exiccating, and drawing water from the belly: They are indeed troublesome to the
stomach, nevertheless their leaves being boiled as pothearbs, will purge bile
and pituite: Their tender stalks being boiled in pot or pan effect the same.
The root being boiled in wine and given in meat, helps the Hydroped; yea it
helps those that are bitten of a Viper, drunk after the same manner. Being
boiled with water for bathing, it softneth and opens the vulva, and corrects
what enormities are there abouts. The berries thereof drunk with Wine work the
same effect. Anointed on the hair, they make them black. The recent and tender
leaves mitigate inflammations, being with Polent anointed thereon. Their
anointing helps burning and the bitings of mad dogs. They conglutinate profound
and fustulous ulcers, and helps the guttish, being together with the fat of a
Bull or he Goat anointed.

These virtues so nobilitate the Elder, that if after ages had not found out
any, yet they are enough to commend it to us. But as in all other things (as
Seneca witnesses, Quest. Nature. l. 7. c. 31.) Nature does not at once discover
her mysteries, neither are her secrets promiscously laid open to all, being
withdrawn and shut in her inmost Cabinets, out of which, some in this age, some
in another, is received and unfolded. Even so here, one day has taught
another. And the later Physicians with more intent thoughts, falling into the
contemplation both of other herbs, and of the Elder, they have tried it in many
affections to be most wholesome; so that not undeservedly they esteem it a
Panacaea, or Allheal: For what is given to others apart, experience proves
together to be in the Elder. That I may say nothing of its wondrous and hid
operations in expugning Epilepsies, Plague, Erysipelasses, and other malign
affections, which shall be spoken of afterward: It has a wonderful force in
purging out of the body all hurtful, bilous, pituitous, and especially serous
humors, from which bud such troops of sicknesses, as is to be seen in that
famous and learned Treatise of the ingenious Piso De serosa Colluvie. Besides
it is Anodyne, and by rarifying the skin, and digesting the humors and vapors,
it lulleth the pain, it provokes urine, sweat, expels the stone, provokes
the stopped flowers, and does other rarities, according to the parts and
preparation thereof. That not without cause, what the more sober and learned
Chemists have attributed to their manifold Medicinal Mercury, Antimony,
Vitriol, we may admit, admire, and acknowledge in our Elder, though I willingly
confess with some difference; yea, we are more to admire this, seeing what is
got in that Triad of Minerals, is got with such sweat and pains, by those
indefatigasearchers of the many works and windings of Nature; but we attain our
desire in this with light and little labor.

SECT. 2.
Of the Receipts of Medicaments drawn out of the Elder.
BEfore we come to the Diseases cured by the Elder, it is worth our labor first
to explain the Medicaments, which out of each part thereof, ought, and can be
prepared, lest in diverse affections the same with a great deal of loathing and
labor be repeated, we will here set down the more curious and common,
beginning with the Berries, as the best and last product of that Simple.

CAPI.
Of the Medicaments from the Berries.
1. Of the Rob, Tincture, Extarct, or Essence,
TAke the ripe Berries of the Elder picked from their stalks, press the juice
out of them, which being strained is to be thickened on a soft and clear fire.
Some in time of their inspissating add a little sugar, that the pallat may
relish it the better; and this is called the Rob of Elder berries with sugar.
Of the Rob, or inspissat juice of the Berries without sugar, the Tincture and
extract is prepared after this manner.

Take a pound of this Rob, put it in a long and capacious Glass, called by the
Chemists a Cucurbite, put thereon the spirit of Wine, or the proper spirits of
the Elder, described in this Chapter, so that it be a handful high above it.
The Glass being well closed, that the spirit may not exhale; digest it in
Balneo four or five days, shaking the Glass twice a day: After that strain the
whole matter contained in the Cucurbit, through gray paper. Take the strained
liquor (which is obscurely reddish, and is called of some, the Tincture of the
Elder or Granorum acts, and may be kept without further distillation to good
purpose) put it in a Glass Cucurbit, and having put on the Alembick, distill it
on a slow Balnean heat, till the Menstruum, or that spirit, drop by drop
separate, and the extract of the berries remain in the bottom like honey. If the
Menstruum be not totally extracted, that which remains in the Cucurbit is
called by the modern Chemists, the liquid extract of Granorum Acts. You shall
find another extract taken out of Quercetan in the third Section, and 26
Chapter.

II. WINES.
Take the Elder Berries cleaned of their stalks, beat them in a stone mortar,
or earthen vessel, with a wooden pestle, till all the Kernels be well bruised;
with this succulent matter fill the 8, 10, or 12 part of a little barrel, as
you will have it of more or less efficacy, fill up the rest with Must, or new
Wine, that they may work together.

Some boil equal parts of this succulent matter and Must together, till the
consumption of a third part of the whole, on a slow fire; then straining it
through a thin linen cloth, they put it (as is said) in a greater quantity
into a Barrel, put Must thereon, and so suffer them to work.

Quercetans receipt thereof is set down in seat. 3. cap. 24.

This is an excellent way.

R. Of Elder Berries well dried in an Oven, lib. 1. Cinnamon, the strongest and
sharpest, unc. 3. Caryophill. Aromatic. ounc. 1. and an half.
Being all grossly pulverised, sow them loosly in a knot; put them in a vessel
that holds twelve English quarts, or thereabouts, fill up the rest with the
best and most fragrant white Wine, and place it a fortnight or above in a Wine
Cellar; which is to be used in time of repast, for it is an excellent stomachical
drink, most delicious in color, taste, and smell.

III. The Spirit and Water.
Take the ripe berries, express the juice, at least break them together, and
let them stand in a wood vessel till they begin to ferment; and that they may
work the sooner, some add a little of the yiest of beer or wine: some add none,
but keep the same process. D. Finck. keeps in the extracting of the Spirit of
black sweet Cherries, Enchiridii, c. 6. After the fermentation let them be
distilled in a Vesica, and rectified acording to Art.

The rectification is best accomplished first in a Vesica, and then in Balneo;
where in place of a Concurbit use a long-necked Viol, then the most spiritous
part will de abstracted, the phlegm beating again the sides of the Viol will
again fall down.

Others prepare it thus;

Take the ripe berries of the Elder dried in the weak heat of an oven, being
pulverised grossly with a third part of Barley meal with them; being well mixed,
put them in an Oken Barrel, and put boiling water on them, in which some hops
have been before macerated; stop the Vessel close, and suffer them to ferment
some four or five days: To hasten the fermentation and digestion add some
dreggs of Wine or Beer, (as we have said before) distill and rectify it.

But the first way is preferred deservedly by most, as more simple and pure:
The Purging water, as it is extracted by Quercetan and others, out of the
berries, is set down sect. 3. c. 24.

IV. The Syrup and Tragea.
The Syrup is thus prepared: Take of the juice extracted from the new gathered
ripe berries, and clarified, lib. 1. Sugar clarified, lib. 1. boil it a little
on a soft fire in a double Vessel, or in Bal. Mar. to the consistency of a
liquid Syrup.

You shall find the Tragea Granorum Acts, or the Tragea of the
Bore-tree-berries set down in the 22 cap. of the third sect.

V. Oil drawn out of the Stones or Kernels.
Take the grains, or stones of these berries left in the cloth after the juice
is strained from them, wash them well, and dry them in the air, bedew them
with odoriferous White Wind, and then in a press strongly squeeze out the oil
of them, as you do out of the seeds of the flaxes or line, rocked Poppy or
Henbane, and such like; that being purified by residency, keep it for your use
in a glass; for it is an excellent Vomitive, and a good Balsam in externals.

The Dose to take it inwardly, is a drachme, or a drachme and a half in hot
ale, or some other convenient liquor.

This Oil may be more Hematick and Cathartick, if instead of the Wine, the
Kernels be bedewed with Malago, wherein Crocus metallorum has been infused,
and then Oil expressed out of them; which in the same dose will be much more
effectual.

CAP. II.
Of the Medicines made of the Flowers of the Elder.
1. CONSERVES.
TAke the fresh flowers, pull them in little pieces, and to each ounce of them
add two ounces of the whitest Sugar, incorporate them well together in a Marble
Mortar with a wooden pestle: Expose it afterward in a Glass, or earthen Vessel
to the Sun for some days; it being thus prepared, reserve it for your use.

II. The SYRUP and HONEY.
Take of the recent Flowers lib. 1. let them macerate 12 hours in lib. 6. of
warm fountain water; having expressed and strained the liquor, put in again
recent flowers, yea do it the third time. Add four ounces of the whitest Sugar
to each five ounces of the liquor that is last strained, boil them up to a
Syrup according to art.

But if in place of the Sugar you add the same quantity of Honey, and boil it
to a fitting consistence, you have Mel Sambucinum, which is commended by some.

III. The WATER and SPIRITS.
There is sundry ways of distilling Waters from Herbs and Flowers set down by
Wecker, Euonimus, Quercetan, and others; this is the easiest.

Takes as many of the Flowers of the Elder as you list, put a sufficient
quantity of warm water thereon, let them marcerate a night, and then distill
them per Vesicam.

That which distilleth first is excellent, the next is worse, beware then thou
urge them not too much; pour the water on fresh flowers, distill them the
second time; yea reiterate it the third time; so you shall have water fit for
the uses set down afterward in the practice; for that which is extant in the
Apothecaries shops, is nothing but mere phlegm, not worthy the name of
distilled water. No wonder then the sick so seldom find the wished and expected
fruits thereof. If from a part of this water in a long necked Viol, in a soft
Balnean heat, you extract the more spirituous part, in quantity about the
twelfth part thereof, you will have a most fragrant and penetrating Spirit. Or
prepare the Spirit as Quercetan has set down in lib. 1. Pharm. Dogm. restitut.
cap. 7. and D. Sennertus way, Inst. Med. lib. 5. part. 3. sect. 3. cap. 5. is
it not much different.

The Cake which remains in the Vesica after the distillation of the water,
called of the Chemists Caput Mortuum, is not to be thrown away, but to be
reserved for the uses set down in the Practice.

IV. The VINEGAR and OXIMEL.
Pour upon the fresh, or half withered flowers of the Elder, the Vinegar of
white Wine; let them stand in a close stopped glass Vessel in the Sun, or some
other hot place; that the Vinegar more exactly may draw out the virtue of the
flowers, let the flowers remain in the Vinegar, till it have drawn out fully
all the virtue from them, which you may easily know by its fragrant smell, and
golden color. After strain the Vinegar, and reserve it for your use.

An excellent and red Vinegar may be prepared of the flowers and juice of the
branches, which is frequent in France, as Lobell and Pena witness in their
Advers. stirpium nov. p. 434.

Take instead of the juice of the branches, the berries of the Elder dried in
the slow heat of an Oven or Furnace; and upon them put the Vinegar of the
flowers, well purified by straining and subsidency; which being impregnant with
the shining transparent purple, I pour it off, and put on new still, so long as
they are able to give it a purple tincture. The sour Syrup of the Elder is
described sect. 3. c. 19.

The Oximel of the Elder, which Quercetan. in Pharm. Dogm. restit. lib. 1. c.
10. mentions, is thus prepared.

Take of Honey scummed well lib. 1. Of Elder Vinegar lib. 5. Of Simple water,
or water of Elder Flowers lib. 1.
Being mixed, put them in a Cucurbit, and let them be boiled in Balneo to a fit
consistence. You may use here the simple Vinegar, either of the flowers, or
that which is by the infusion of the berries of a purple die, as it shall
please the fancy of the Physician or his Patient.

V. WINF.
Take of the Umbels of the Elder dried in the shadow, as much as you will;
which being pulled in little pieces, put them in a knot of fine thin linen,
with some little clean white stones (to make the knot sink) throw it into a
vessel full of Must; let the wine work. Some bid take a pound of the flowers,
rightly dried and picked off their stalks, to 60 Congions or 70 Gallons of
Wine, and promise after the working of the Wine it shall be of an excellent
Muscadel taste and smell.

Mark, that whatsoever Apples or fruits are covered and wrapped in the flowers
of the Elder Tree, shall acquire a taste and smell much like Muscadel Pears.

VI. The OIL.
1. Take as much as you will of the fresh flowers beaten, put them in a Vessel
of glass, pour on them a sufficient quantity of clear Sallet Oil, macerate
them in the Sun, or some other hot place for 15 days; then decoct it in a
double vessel; strain the flowers, cast them away; put in fresh ones; proceed
as you did before, reiterate your practice the third time, and having strained
it, keep it in a convenient vessel.

Mark, that those gross dregs of the flowers, and of all other things that are
macerate in Oil, and strained from it, is called of the Physicians, Stymma,
which take notice of now, that you may remember it when it is mentioned
hereafter.

2. The following Oil of the flowers is commended of many.

Take a Cucurbite or Glass of middle capacity; fill a third part thereof with
Elder flowers gathered in a clear pure day; put so much Malvatick Wine thereon,
that the third part at least of the glass may remain empty; having stopped the
mouth well, expose it to the Sun a fortnight: then putting the whole matter in
a glaspot on a slow fire of Charcole, heat it a little; then strain it with
great force into another clean vessel, above which within a little while you
shall see a yellowish Oil to swim, which by a funnel or separatory, you are to
separate from the rest of the liquor according to art.

The liquor that remains will serve for the maceration of fresh flowers,
which you are to reiterate sometimes, and in diverse vessels, seeing at one time
you will get but little Oil.

3. The Oil is prepared by distillation, after the manner Sennerte and others
prepare the Oil of Roman Cammomile flowers, and of other sweet smelling
flowers; thus, Take the flowers of the Elder dried betwixt two linen clothes in
the air, being pulled in little pieces, put them in an earthen vessel, or
large Cncurbite; to every pound of flowers add an ounce and half of common
salt, and having a span high covered them with warm water, leave them in
digestion ten dais, or more, after distill them in Vesica; and according to art
separate the Oil from the water.

CAP. III.
Of the Medicines of the Buds or Breakings of the Elder.
I. The POWDER.
TAke as much as you will of the buds, or first breakings forth of the leaf of
the Elder; being dried in the shadow, pulverise them: either keep this Powder
by it self, or mix it with equal parts of Sugar.

The many Medicinal Powder of the Buds is described sect. 3. cap. 3.

II. The CONSERVE.
Take the fresh tender buds smally cut, lib. 5. of the purest Sugar, lib. 1.
upon a slow Charcole fire, mix them well together with a stone pestle, and
expose them in an earthen pan eight days to the Suns rays.

III. The SYRUP.
Take of the Juice pressed out of these first buds and breaking of the Boretree
out of the tree and ground, and by subsidency purified from the dregs lib. 11.
of fine white Sugar lib. 1. s. or q. s. let them be concocted with a slow
balneal fire to the consistency of a Syrup; which being aromatised with half an
ounce of choice Cinnamon, and two drachmes of Cloves, is to be reserved in a
glass vessel.

CAP. IV.
Of the Medicines taken from the Leaves, middle Bark, Roots, Pith, and Sponge.
I. The WATER.
Take the fresh leaves of the Elder, and they being grossly beat or cut, fill
the half of a Vesica with them, and put a sufficient quantity of warm water on
them; macerate them therein for a night, and distill them; put the distilled
water on fresh leaves, distill them again. After the same manner, of the green
and succulent bark water is prepared.

There are some that of the succulent roots, pith, and spunges by themselves,
or mixed together, do distill waters, which they much commend in Hydropsies,
which first are to be well shred and macerated a night inconvenient liquor,
that their virtues may be more easily drawn out of them.

II. The SYRUP.
As of the Juice of the Buds, so from the Juice of the middle bark, or roots, a
Syrup may be prepared for the nicer sort, if a sufficient quantity of Sugar be
put to the juice, well clarified, and on a soft fire boiled to a syrup; and
after the same manner aromatised.

These syrups indeed are esteemed less efficacious then the crude juices,
seeing in their boiling they lose something of their Cathartick faculty, which
Fernele observed. Nevertheless they are more safe, and less noysom to the
stomach, and the rest of the intrals. Therefore their dose is according to
their strength to be augmented.

III. OILS and LINIMENTS.
1. An useful Oil is prepared of the middle bark, macerated in old clear let
Oil, and expressed, as was spoken in the Flowers.

2. Of the Bark and Leaves prepare them thus; Take of the middle Bark and
Leaves, equal parts, fry them in May Butter and Linsed Oil, or in any one of
these, with a soft fire; when they are a while fried, press out the leaves and
bark; put in fresh leaves and bark again, fry them, and express; do so the
third time.

3. The Liniment or unguent which is set down in Matthiol. super Diosc. l. 4.
c. 168. Take of the green bark of the Elder which is next the outward ash
colored rine, being of an herb color, lib. 1. of Oil washed off in the water
of Elder flowers lib. 2. let them warm a while together, then strain and press
them; to this add of new well smelling wax, of the juice of the twigs of the
Elder ounce 4. then suffer them again to boil till the juice be consumed. Take
it then from the fire, stir and mix all together; and at last add of liquid
Varnish ounc. 2. of white Frankincence beat to dust, ounc. 4. likewise add two
whites of eggs, first well beat; mix all diligently, and keep it in a clean
vessel.

4. Another Liniment which the most happy Plater. used to prepare. Take of the
middle bark of the Elder one ounce and half; of the juice of its more tender
leaves one drachme, Linsed Oil washed in the water of Elder flowers two ounces;
of Barrowgrease so washed onu. 1. of good yellow wax one ounce and half, of
Frankincence one ounce, boil them in the water of the flowers of the Elder, in
a closed pot and when they; are cold, gather and keep the Ointment that swims
above. Of all these we will speak in burning, and other external affects.

The rest of the Medicines that are prepared of the parts of the Elder, are
copiously set down in the places that handle the diseases to which they are
appropriate, and there they are to be found.

CAP. V.
Of the Salt and its Spirit.
I. The SALT.
SAlt is prepared not only of the flowers and leaves after the distillation of
waters, and expression of juice; but of the bark and whole tree For all are to
be dried, burned in a clear and open fire, reduced to ashes; of these ashes
make a Lie with pure and clean water, still pouring on firesh water, till all
the saltishnes be extracted; boil the Lie, being filtrate, in an earthen
vessel on a soft fire, till the water exhale, and the salt be left; which by a
reiterate solution, filtration, and coagulaion, is to be purified.

The most gallantway of purifying such like Salts, by the means of the spirit
or Oil of common Salt, is set down in the 19 Chapter of Finckius Enchirid.
Hermet.

Some praise this process, R. of the burned ashes of Elder and Sulphur, equal
parts, being mixed, calcine them with a reverberatory fire, or in a Potters
Furnace; after extract a Lie with the water of the flowers of the Elder; which
being filtrate and boiled to a half on a slow fire, is to be placed in a
Celler, that the salt may run in Christals.

II. The Spirit of the Salt of the Elder.
R. Of the Salt of the Elder, lib. 1. of common Bole lib. 3. being well
powdered and mixed together, put them in well Luted Retort, fit to it an ample
Recipient, and having closed the commissures, add fire by degrees. First there
shall still a waterish liquor, then the spirits shall follow; augment the fire,
and keep it in the same degree, lest the spirits remit, so long till no more
spirits flow, and the recipient become clear; the vessel being cold, and the
clay that luted them together being with a wet cloth for an hour together
softened, that the recipient may be separate without breaking the glasses, you
shall find the spirit of the Elders salt, which is separate from its phlegm by
distilling in Balneo.

The Lute, for arming your glasses, and luting them to their recipients, is set
down by Begwine, l. c. 6. Tyrocin. Chym. By Libavius l. 1. Epist. 24. Epist.
Chymicarum, and others.

Others use other ways of distilling the spirits of vegetable salts, which the
famous Senart. mentions by the by, Instit. Medic. page 1215. but we may use all
things we use in distilling the spirit of common salt: of which see Sennert.
and Begwine, l. 2. c. 6. Tyros. Chymio. and others.

SECT. III.
Showing the practice of the ELDER, and Medicines belonging thereto.
WE have considered already the nature and qualities of the Elder, and in a
most short and clear way set down its Medicines. It remains we briefly show the
practice thereof, and how it is a safe Medicine for most Diseases that follow
our frailty; and of other preparations specific to each part. We begin with
the affections of the head.

CAP. I.
Of Cephalalgia.
IN mitigating the pain of the head, and removing the distempers thereof in
women, we use happily the Cake of the flowers of the Elder, left in the Vesica
after the distillation of the water; it must not be burned; which being dedewed
with the vinegar of the flowers we apply it to the head, and with the
besprinkling of frech vinegar, renew it. It rarifieth the skin, and by
digesting the vapors. dispels them.

Some use rose cakes bedewed with the vinegar of the Elder, which where the
heat is more vehement, the brain more sensible, and more offended with the
piercing smell is far better.

Or, R. Take of recent Elder leaves two handfuls. Of Rose and water Lilly
flowers, of each one handful.
Being shorn and pounded, pour on them a like quantity of Elder vinegar, and
the water distilled out of the flowers, press out strongly the juice; mix with
it expressed two whites of eggs well beat; in which dip a double linen cloth,
and apply it to the head often in the day. The water of the flowers mixed with the
white of an egg and a littile vinegar, is most comfortable in any Cephalalgia;
chiefly in a Feverish, being applied to the brows, temples, and crown of the
head. The vinegar by it self is fitly used in the pain that proceeds or follows
drunkenness.

Or draw out with the vinegar and distilled water of the flowers, from the
kernels of the Peach and bitter Almond, amilky Emulsion, wherein dip a linen
cloth, and apply it often to the brows and crown of the patient.

Pliny says, That the juice of the Elder helps the collections of the brain,
and especailly mitigateth the tunicle wherein it is next inwrapt.

This decoction is excellent to dispel the vapors of the brain, and make one
sleep soundly, if the legs and arms be soundly rubbed therewith when you go to
sleep. Take six umbels of the Elder flowers when they are full, of Anise
umbles, of Roman Camomile flowers one handful, six Poppyheads with their seed;
being put together, beat them in rain water: If the evil has its fuel from
the stomach, matrix, or other parts, they are first to be remedied after that
manner as is declared, particularly in each part. It Is enough here to have
touched this Topic.

CAP. II.
Of Raving and Wakings.
THe same things are profitable here, that are set down in the remedy of the
Cephalalgie; seeing it often these rises to forerun or accompany maladies,
adding ever to these some grainsof Opium, or a little of the seed of white
Poppy, to mitigate and allay the furious and fiery spirits. For example, Take
of the best water of Elder flowers 4 dr. of water Lilly and Rosewater of each
2 drach. of Thebaick Opium half a scrup. of Elder Vinegar to dissolve the Opium
6 scrup. mix them for an Epithenie, wherein a double or treble linen cloth
being wet, is to be applied warm to the brows and crown of the head.

Or in place of the Opium, an ounce of the seeds of white Poppy; and by baking
according to art, make an Emulsion, unto which you may fitly add the white of
an egg well beaten.

If the belly be bound, dissolve of the Syrup or juice of the berries, and also
of the infusion of the flowers of the Elder, ounc. 3, or 4. in the water of the
flowers, and give it when the Patient is dry like a Julip; for it will not only
open the belly, but sweetly quiet the spirits.

When in Anno 1626. the Plague was raging in Haina, and many of the infected
were troubled with head aches, ravings, and wakings; a worthy man told me, he
found no readier help to dissipate those venomous vapors, and bring sleep in
his own and others bodies; then after the giving of several medicines, to bind
their heads about with the flowers of the Elder.

CAP. III.
Of Melancholy, and chiefly Hypocondriack and flatulent.
IN Hypocondriack Melancholy it is profitable first of all, if the diseased be
prone to vomit, to provoke it by the Oil of the infusion of the flowers and
bark of the Elder; lest by preparing and purging Medicines, those crude and
excrementitious humors, which often are gathered in the stomach be carried to the
more principal parts of the body, and augment the obstructions.

Or give of the syrup made of the sap of the buds and berries an ounce, br. 1.
s. with some grains of the extract of Scammonie, and 3 guts of the Oil of Elder
flowers distilled, in the distilled water of the flowers thereof.

Or use the Clyster that is described in the 22 cap. following.

After this, the Wine which is drawn out of the berries and flowers, is not of
meanest worth, for it opens obstructions, cuts gross humors, and by little and
little thrusts them to the door Moreover it refreshes the vital and animal
spirits. Drink a cup full thereof each morning for a month, taking before a
spoonful or two of fresh broth, or a saft egg.

That it may work more safely, you may each week mix with the use of these,
once or twice, the manyfold working powder of the buds of the Elder; which is
thus prepared;

Take of Elder buds dried in the shade, half an ounce. Of Elder Kernels
Trochiscated, Of Sennie leaves, Of Christallised Elder salt, of each three
drachmes, Of the extract of Scammonie, two drachmes, Of Galengale, of Macer, of
each half a drachme,
Being all subtly pulverised, distill upon them.

Of the Oil of Cloves, Of Fennicle, of each six drops, Of Cinnomon, Of Carvi,
of each three drops.
Let them be mixed exactly in a Marble Mortar for a Powder, whose dose is from a
scruple to a drachme.

The Trochiscation, or preparation of the seeds or kernels of Elder is thus;
Take one ounce of the lesser Esula, prepared as is known in infusion in
Vinegar, and grossly pulverised. Infund it in the Spanish Wine of Peter Simons,
lib. 5. let them macerate 8 days in the Sun, or in winter in the chimny corner,
the mouth of the glass being well stopped; after strain them through gray
paper, and purify them. Take the clean Arillas of the Elder berries, dry them,
pulverise them, and with a sufficient quantity of the infusion of Esula, make
them in paste; dry it; being dried, bedew them with the same infusion, and
again work it into paste; of which from your Trochisces; dry them, and keep
them for your use.

And because those excrementitious humors lurking about the stomach, and
vicine places, and much troubling both the Physician and Patient, in all
Hypocondriack Diseases, are more easily evacuate by vomit then purge, you may
use commodiously the oil of the kernels of the Elder, prepared by bedewing them
with the infusion of Antimony, as as has been shown in the second Section; a
little after drinking warm water, vomit is pvovoked; and that obstructions may
be sooner dissolved, and the matter drawn out of the Meseraick veins into the
intestines; besides these internal things, use this fotus.

Take of the bar; of Elder Roots, ounce 1. s. Of well dried Elder flowers, M.
3.
Make a decoction in equal parts of Wine and Water; and that it may penetrate
the more, add as much as you think fit of the Vinegar of the Elder; in which
fomentation dip a sponge, and therewith foment the whole belly, but chiefly the
left Hypochondre.

See the other hereafter in the 23 Chapter of the Misenteries obstruction.

For the altering of the blood and spirrits in the true, and in the
Hypocondriac Melancholy; after generals, the syrup of the juice of the berres,
and infusion of the flowers of Elder, is praised; of each of which, in the
morning fasting, every day, let the Patient take oun. 1. in the water of the
flowers of Burrage.

You are likewise to take a care that the belly be kept open; which is to be
done by the Syrup and the Clyster mentioned in the 2 cap.

In the Paroxisme of your Hypocondriac Melancholy give a spoonful of the spirit
of the flowers of Elder in a draught of Malmsey, for it dissipateth the
ascending vapors, and strengthens the spirits.

CAP. IV.
Of the Epilepsie.
AS this is a grievous, and a disease much to be lamented; so I may say, it
expects its most specific cure, almost from the Elder.

The Cure of Children.
To Infants newborn, before you give them any thing to swallow, you may give
them with great profit. a spoonful of the syrup of the infusion of the flowers,
or juice of the Elderberries, to evacuate that putrid, yellowish, and sometime
blackish water gathered in the stomach, and parts about, while the infant is in
the mothers belly.

For these Syrups do not only change and evacuate, but they also preserve from,
and resist malignity.

Macerate a handful of Elder flowers well dried in the wine, which the best
sort use to wash their newborn babes in; for it consumes the humors gathered
about the joints, and comforts the members. This is also commended, Take of the
powder of the simple buds 1 drach. of the whitest Sugarcandie 1 drach. of the
berries of herb Paris Number 6. pulverise them most subtly, of which give
half a scruple for 9 days together, in the water of Elder flowers, or any other
convenient liquor you please.

In the Paroxisme, the least spoonful of the spirit of the flowers given with
three or five of the seeds of Peony excorticat, is praised.

Or, of Peony excorticat 2 drach. of the best water of Elder-flowers one ounce
and a half, of Linden flowerwater half an ounce.

Make an Emulsion according to art, which being edulcerate Rotalis manus
Christi perlatis, give it by spoonfuls.

Let the Nurse sometimes take the Conserves, Syrup, or water of Elder flowers,
or having taken the spirit, juice, or extract of the berries, let her provoke
smell, that thereby her milk being clear of the sharper and more malignant
serosities, may be the more wholesome.

I knew an infant, which being taken sometime with Epileptick fits, each day,
with a great deal of crying, and pain of belly, did dung a yellowish greenish
matter; whom neither Clysters, nor cleansing Linctussies did any good. I
counseled his mother, seeing I saw her milk more serous and thin, that she
should twice or thrice a week take the rhob, or juice of the Elder-berries,
mixed with burned Hartshorns; and drink a draught of the water of the flowers
above it, and provoke her self to sweat in her bed, or couch: Which being done,
not only the Epileptick fits, but also those painful wringings of the child's
belly did cease; and by little and little, the excrements came to their natural
form.

The cure of those that are come to age.
In those that are come to age it is first necessary above all things, to purge
the body well.

In the Spring time macerate the bark of the roots of Elder in the whey of Cows
milk, which being dulcerat with Sugar, let him each morning take a hearty
draught thereof.

Or, Take the Polichrestick powder of the buds two scruples, or one drachme. Of
recent Rob of the Elder, well thickened with good Sugar, as much as will make a
bole.


Or take the prescribed bole; dissolve it in the whey of Milk, add thereto the
Syrup made of Juice of the buds and berries, ounce I. mix it; prepare a
draught: But if the Patient be prone to vomit, give him the oil expressed out
of the kernels.

The spirit of the flowers and berries of the Elder in, and out of the
Paroxysm, is of great power; but it may be made more efficacious thus:

R. Take of the middle bark of the Elder, Of the roots of Poeonie, of each six
drachms, Of dried Elder leaves and buds, Of Lynden-tree flowers, of each one
handful. Of Rew-seed two drach. Of the Berries of herb Paris, numb. 20. Of
Jews-ears, numb. 6.
This being cut and pounded, put as much of the spirit of the Elder thereon, as
will be a hand broad high above them, and in a hot place, and well stopped
vessel, macerate them eight days; distill them in glass vessels in B. M. till
they be dry; mix with them the distilled spirits, the salt drawn out of its
dregs, and keep it for the Anti-Epileptick Spirit of the Elder.

Whereof give a whole, or half spoonful to the Epileptick in the time of his
Paroxisme; afterward using it every quarter of the Moon, to dissipate the
Epileptick corruption by sweating; or insensible transpiration* and to guard
the brain.

With this same, in the time of the fit, rub the nostrils, gums, and pallat,
adding thereto a Grain or two of Castor.

Herein likewise excels the tincture and extract of Granorum Acts; the
preparation and using of which is set down in the 31 Chapter out of Quercetan.

Or, Take of Granorum acts scrup. 1. Of the berries of Herb Paris, pulverised,
half a scrup.


Mix them, and form pills thereof, numb. 15. or being dissolved in the Anti
epileptick Spirit of the Eldergive them in the Paroxisme.

Mark by the way, That the berries of herb Paris, called by some Bear or Wolf
grapes, is held by some Matrons, as a great secret against the Epilepsie: and
they give them ever in an unequal number, as 3, 5, 7 or 9, in the water of
Linden Tree flowers or of the roots of Squamaria; which I my self have found
effectual in some children. Seeing these berries are mixed with some Antidotes,
especially with the Saxonian, and half a dram of the seeds of these berries,
as Matthiolus relates, being given, avail much against long sickness, and
Witchcraft, it should not seem strange to any man, that they much help in the
Epilepsie, if they consider seriously the malign nature of the Epileptick
vapor, and its enmity with the brain.

Some affirm, that the water of the flowers drawn up into the nose prevails
much against the Epilepsie and Vertigo. In the same affects the eyes and face
are to be washed often with this water.

Anoint gently, in the fit it self, the contracted members, with the oil of the
flowers of the first description, that thereby the Acrimony of the humors and
vapors may be mitigate, that the matter may be dissipate, and the nerves
comforted.

The oil of the second and third description, or the distilled oil, is much
commended; if the palms of the hands, and soles of the feet, if the temples of
the head and nape of the neck be anointed therewith.

Amulets.
There is likewise set down a singular Amulet, made of the Elder growing on a
Sallow. If in the month of October, a little before the full Moon, you pluck a
twig of the Elder, and cut the cane that is betwixt two of its knees, or knots
in nine pieces; and these pieces being bound in a piece of linen, be in a
thread so hung about the neck, that they touch the spoon of the heart, or the
sword-form'd Cartilage; and that they may stay more firmly in that place, they
are to be bound thereon with a linen or silken roller wrapped about the body,
till the thread break of it self. The thread being broken, and the roller
removed, the Amulet is not at all to be touched with bare hands, but it ought
to be taken hold on by some instrument, and buried in a place that no body may
touch it. Petraeus Nosilog. Harmon. l. 1. dissert. 6. Finkius Ench. Harm. c. 5.
The cause of which is not absolutely hid, seeing the Elder and its grains help
this disease. These are the words of Petraeus in the mentioned place.

There are some that ascribe the same effect to the Bore tree, growing on the
Tylia or Linden tree, seeing both by a peculiar property are antiepileptick;
some hang a cross made of the Elder and Sallow, mutually in wrapping one
another about the childrens neck, Petr. Loco Allegat.

Albeit there be some that deny all specific operation to Amulets of the Elder
growing on the Sallow and Linden tree, and to all other Amulets. Nevertheless
their reasons are not of such weight, that they satisfy the mind of a desirous
learner; it is not impossible that so little a piece of the Elder bound to the
skin should break the force of so stubborn a disease: for though it do not draw
out sensibly the vicious humors, yet it may act against the morbifick cause,
and rout it some other way, by alluring, and some other way expugning those
vicious humors, and that malignant Miamse, most noisome to the brain, it having
in little bulk great force; which being or removed, it is likely the Epilepsie
will cease, though the humors remain; if they be not altogther corrupt: which
humors are to be purged, according to the diversities of constitutions, before
you use such Amulets. Read Sennert. l. de Cons. and dissen. Gal and. Chymic.

Whereas they object, That in all these Amulets do not hold: This will not
prove that they are not indewed with an Anti-epileptick faculty; otherwise many
famous Medicaments should be called in question, seeing many times they are
disappointed of their actings in some subjects; because it may be they are not
used in fit quantity, time, or after due prepration, or some other errors are
committed, which may hinder the best, and most approved Medicine to take
effect; neither is it in the power always of the Physician or Medicine, that
the diseased should be releived: some times the evil excels the cunningest art.

CAP. V.
Of the Apoplexy and Palsy.
AS preservative a against the Apoplexy and Palsy, the Salt of the Elder is
much commended, if it be mixed with a third part of the volatile salt of Amber
(which volatile salt uses to stick to the neck of the retort, in the
distillation of the oil of Amber) and given in the time of the new Moon, or
full moon, in a convenient liquor, in the weight of a scruple, or half a
drachme. The salt of the Elder must be first excellently Crystallized in the
water of Sage, as you know.

Amwald desires that three parts of the extract of black Hellebore be mixed
with the Rob of Elder; which he commends as a gallant specific against the
Apoplexy, and all noysom affections of the brain. The receipt is set down in
his Treatise, Panacea Amwaldina, fol. 23.

Pulvis Tureonum Polychrestus, does not only purge the stomach and nearest
vessel, but likewise the brain from its gross, pituite, and serous humors,
whereof give a drachme thereof when it is needful in form of a Pill.

Oxymel Samb. is likewise useful in these cold distempers of the brain; whereof
give often in the water of Sage, a little masted before purging, at least two or
three ounces for the cutting and preparing that gross matter.

The Spirit likewise distilled from the Berries is excellent, if once a week,
or at least each quarter of the Moon, a spoonful thereof mixed with crumbs of
wheat bread, and a little sugar, for it consumes the phlegmatic humors, and
dries and comfort the brain, and it is taken in place of a simple
Anti-epileptick, as we have said in the former Chapter, Or.

You may prepare it new thus, only for this affection, in what quantity you
please, thus; Take of Sage, Marjoram, Ivy Arthritica, of each two drachmes. Of
Couslip flowers, Conval Lilly flowers, of each one drach. and an half. Of
Rochet seed, two drachmes.
Which, all being cut, and grossly pulverised, are to be macerated in a
sufficient quantity of the spirit of Elder, and after eight days to be
distillid in B. M. till they be dry; for the Apoplectick spirit of the Elder;
in a part of which Castoreum may be dissolved, and often times transcolate; of
which mixture a spoonful, chiefly in the time of the Paroxisme, should be
instilled, as the cause is of exigency, and with the same rub the pallat,
nostrills, crown of the head, and nuke of the neck.

Two or three drops of the oil of the second or third description, or
distilled, being instilled in the ear, or anointed on the pallat, after the
manner the spirit is thought to help the rest.

Mark, That those things we have now commended, have chief place in that
Apoplexy that proceeds from pituite or other gross humors, and is familiar to
old men; but that which proceeds from depression of the scul, or inflammation
of the brain, is to be cured by other Medicines, that is not our part here to
handle.

Of the Palsy.
But if the Apoplexy end in a Palsy of the sides, or other members, as it
uses, having observed those universals, for the provision of whole body and
brain, it is necessary often in the week to provoke sweat.

Half an ounce of the Apoplectick Spirit of the Elder is useful here; also two
drachms of the rob of the berries in Sage water.

Or, Of the extract of the Rohob of the Elder, drach. 5. and an half. Antimony
diaphoretick, most white, half a dram.


Of which every morning give to the Paralitick, they being exactly mixed, 1
dram in 2 or 3 ounces of the decoction of the root of the great Burdock, and
command him, that being well lapped in his bed, he swet for half an hour; and
that he may sweat more freely and fully you may mix with the potion half an
ounce of the Apoplectick spirit of the Elder.

Topics.
The enervat, or hanging members are twice a day to be rubbed, first with hard
sharp clothes; afterward with the spirit drawn out of the berries, and
inebriate with the essence of Cephalic herbs. So those gross and viscid humors
that trouble the nerves, and compresse them, and stop the passage of the animal
spirits, will be attenuate, and dissipate, and the stupefied spirits will be
raised and allured.

Nevertheless, lest by these hot, and much drying spirits, the matter it self
and nevres should be hardened, you are to mix with the oil of the infusion of
the flowers of the Elder a third of the oil drawn from the Kernels of its
berries, and this will attemperate the too too much exsiccating heat, and
nevertheless digest and consume the matter. In this case likewise, the
decoction of the root of the Elder and Ebulus in simple water is much praised.

And seeing often times the Palsy of the tongue, and difficulty of speaking
remains, the tongue is often times to be rubbed, and humectated with a sponge,
dipped in the Apoplectick spirit of the Elder.

CAP. VI.
Of Catarrhs.
IN this the Wine prepared of the flowers and berries, is much commended,
because it excellently purges the body of that serous inundation, of which,
after you have taken a little broth, drink a cupfull in the morning.

The simple Powder of the buds of the Elder, taking a scruple thereof in a soft
egg, or in some syrup, or in a spoonful of the Oximel of the Elder in the
Spring, or Harvest, for 14 days each morning, and fasting two hours at least
after it, does mightily consume the Catarrhous matter. Or instead of the Powder
use the Conserve of the buds, mixed with the third part of the Conserve of the
flowers; the Dose ounc. s.

If the body stand in need of greater evacuation, exhibit once or twice the
polichrestick powder of the buds.

The salt of the Elder by it self, or mixed with the third part of the volatile
salt of Ambre, dose scrup. 1. is esteemed likewise the spirit of the Elders
salt, taking weekly six drops thereof, or more in broth made of flesh.

Also, a spoonful or two of the spirit of the berries and flowers, taken with
crumbs of bread and sugar.

Concerning other things, especially sweetning, which is sometimes conducible
to consume the matter in this disease, read the precedent Chapter.

CAP. VII.
Of the Toothach.
Seeing this disease often flows from defluxions, those things are to be first
used that are set down in the former Chapter.

Topics.
We will only prescribe here Topics made of the Elder. Raymund Minder, in his
Military Medicine, cap. 10. commends much the decoction of the roots in Wine
and Vinegar, used to gargarise with, and protests that no one Medicine sooner
eases this great pain.

For Example, Take of the roots of Elder cut in slices, two ounces and an half.
Of Elder, or simple Vinegar, of white Wine, of each six ounces.
Boil them for a water to wash the mouth, which is often to be spit out, and
renewed.

Or, Take of the middle Elder bark, Of Elder flowers, of each an handful, Of
Jews ears one.


Boil them likewise in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar and Wine, and use it.
Where there is a suspicion of worms in the hollow tooth, the hollowness is to
be filled with the spongiola of the Elder; at last it is to be held hard
betwixt the teeth: Likewise the vapor of the former decoction may be received
through a funnel at the mouth.

They make Tooth-pickers, and Spoons of Elder, to which they attribute much in
preserving from this pain. The common people take these tooth-pickers, being
bloody with pricking and picking the tooth, and glue them to the Trunk of an
Elder, which is irradiated with the morning Sun beams; they pull away the bark,
and cover the place with rosin of the Pine: and thus they cure all toothaches.

It Is not apparent by what virtue this is done; when, may be, that is
attributed to the incision, which ought to be attributed to the blooding, or
time of continuance, wherein most diseases are eased. But we leave every man to
his judgment, Scal. Exerc. 183. sect. 11.

If from a defluction, the gums and cheeks do swel, anoint them with the oil of
the infusion of the flowers of the Elder, and put the dregs or crassament of
them to it, for they will digest and resolve it.

CAP. VIII.
Of the Affects of the eyes.
PLaterus Tom. 2. praxeos. has observed, that Surgeons used to apply to
sore eyes a Pill of the Elder, macerated in common, or Rose water, or other
convenient, to mitigate the pain.

The water of the flowers of the Elder, mixed with a like proportion of Rose
water, wounderfully mitigateth ophthalmike pains, and strengthens the sight;
into which sometimes prepared tutty in a knot is to be put, to ease the itch,
and a sponge of the Elder, macerated in Pennyroyal water, to be applied to the
nuke or hollow of the neck.

This following liquor anointed on the eyelids with a feather is profitable.

R. Elder flowers gathered in the month of June, before the rising of the Sun,
and picked from their stalks as much as you will; beat them in a Marble Mortar;
and in a glass well stopped, expose them for a month to the rays of the Sun;
them let then be involved in a leavened Rye loaf, and baked with other bread in
an oven; which being taken out and opened, you shall find an oleaginous liquor,
which you must carefully preserve in another glass for your use.

The tender and recent leaves, with polent or barley meal, applied to
inflammations, does mitigate them, by dissolving and digesting, as was taught
before by Dioscorides; which may be used externally in Ophthalmies, general
Medicines being premised. Or rather use this Cataplasme, which did much help in
a more vehement tumor of the eyelids, whereby the whole eye was hid. Make of
the Mucilage of the seed of Psyllium, and Linseed, extracted by the best water
of Elder flowers, of each six drachmes, add of Elder oil half an ounce, and as
much meal of the flowers as will suffice.

Make thereof a Cataplasm.

The little sponge of the Elder macerate well in the best water of the flowers
til they swell great, do wipe away gallantly the dirt and matter in those
blemishes, and in all other wounds and ulcers of the eyes, immediately laying
thereon a tender and recent Elder leaf.

They say that the ashes thereof blown in the eye, has consumed a beginning
Panincle.

CAP. IX.
Of the Diseases of the Ears and Hearing.
FOments of the decoction of Elder, and Camomile flowers, mitigates the pain of
the ears. The oil of the infusion of the flowers may be with profit anointed;
or adding the meal of the flowers, make thereof a Cataplasm, which is to be
applied hot to the whole region of the ears.

The difficulty of hearing, through gross humors and vapors that possess the
auditory organs, is greatly helped after you have used universals, and the
polychrestick buds of the Elder, by the vapor of the decoction of the roots and
leaves of the Elder, made in a fit Lixive, in the which Lixive, if you add
Origanum, the ears are to be often washed, and still well dried.

The same vapor takes away the tingling, whistling, and other sounds of the
ear, which are also remedied by a drop or two of the oil of the flowers of the
second or third description, being put on a bombaceous tent, thrust in the
ears, for it consumes and dissipates the flatuosities, from which these arise.

Some who suspect the unctuosity of the oil, use after the same manner the
spirit of the flowers and berries; chiefly the apoplectick, which by its
penetrating force does discuss them egregiously.

The juice pressed out of the recent leaves, with a little Wine, and instilled in
the ears, does cleanse the filth of the exulcerate ears, and kill the worms. It
does likewise cleanse and consolidate wounds and ulcers; of which in his proper
Chapter.

CAP. X.
Of the Defects of the Nose, and Smelling.
THe best Water of the Flowers of the Elder, often drawn up in the nose, does
help the smelling, that is diminished by some great sickness.

In the exulceration of the nose by a salt defluxion, the water of the flowers
and bark are profitable, seeing they deterge, dry, and conglut inate.

In a greater exulceration, where the flesh is too proud, the spirit of the
salt is needful, which being mixed with the rest, it consumes the proud flesh,
and hinders further putresaction. See the Chapter of curing ulcers.

Gabel Rover does commend the Spunges that grow on the stock of the Elder,
being dried, pulverised, and given in a fit liquor, for staying the Hemorage of
the nose.

Tragea Granorum acts, which is described in the cure of the Dyscentery, is
good in this case. The dose half a drachme, or two scruples, in a spoonful or
two of Quercetans Corralline Syrup, or in the Styptick red Wine, or in the
distilled water of the Sperm of Frogs, Shepherds purse, or Purslain, etc. or
make a Powder of the equal parts of Tragea, and the little sponges, which is
both to be taken in the mentioned liquors, and lightly and easily to blown into
the nostrils.

CAP. XI.
Of the blemishes of Face and Head.
IF you wash the face often with the distilled water of the leaves and flowers of
the Elder, it cleanses and dries up all pimples and pustles of the face.

Dispensatories affirm, that the oil of the infusion of the flowers mundifieth
and makes clear the skin.

In Lentiginibus, commonly called Freckles, by signature, a decoction of the
flowers in water is commended; for the flowers of the Elder are spotted, Oswald
Croll. de signaturis. Dioscorides teaches, that the juice anointed, makes the
hair black. This will be a profitable experiment to those that endeavor to
make their red hair black; albeit the color be more comely in many, than ill
favored. What we must allow to those old Ruffins that are ashamed of their
white locks, Galen has taught has taught us, l. 1. de Compos. Medicament.
secund. Loc. c. 3. and this transcursorily occasioned by Dioscorides his words.

Take Elder roots cut very small, adding a little of the seed of Staphis agriae
made in a Lixive, wherein wash the head that is full of scales and lice. The
same decoction heals the Tineam or Favum in children, if it be over strong and
painful, dilute it with the decoction of the flowers and leaves. The pain is
likewise mitigated by the anointing of the oil of the infusion of the flowers,
if after washing it be anointed.

The oil expressed out of the berries and kernels, and mixed by stirring, with a
third part of Turpentine, and anointed, does cure by drying and cleansing, all
ulcers of the head, the whole Elder leaf after being applied. Oleum Saccharo
sambucinum is likewise commodious.

CAP. XII.
Of the Diseases of the Mouth and Throat.
THe Common Women, so soon as they suspect any Disease in the Throat of their
young ones, they steep the sponge of the Elder in their drink, and when it is
sweld, they therewith carefully wipe away all the filth of the pallat, gums,
and tongue.

The expressed juice of the leaves mixed with simple or Elder honey, does
absterge and exsiccate egregiously all the ulcers of the gums and throat: If
therewith they be anointed by a pencil, or if it be disolved in the water of
the leaves and bark, and gargarised therewith.

You shall add more virtue thereto in deterging, in purifying, if you mix a
little of the salt of the Elder therewith, or dissolve the said juice in a
weaker Lixive, and use it as a Gargarisme.

If the ulcers be more malignant, and the product of the great Pox, it is
necessary that twice or thrice a day you rub them with a sponge or pencil
dipped in the spirit of Elder berries, wherein a little of the flowers of
Sulphur has been dissolved, and immediately after wash them with the decoction
of the leaves, and besprinkling them with the small flower of the Elder pith.

The Tonsils being tumefied by a thin and saltish defluxion, let them be
gargarised with water, or decoction of Elder flowers, wherein a little
Elderhony has been mixed; for licking the Rhob of the Elder, inspissated with
Sugar, is commodious; which is our women's common and used Medicine* you may use
the syrup of the juice of the berries, or infusion of the flowers, or the honey
of either.

Outwardly anoint them with the oil of Elder flowers infusion, which does
resolve it.

In the Squinancy, having first used universals, to the foresaid Gargarism add
some leaves of Self-heal, with one or two of the sponges of the Elder, called
by many Jews ear, which is a sure experiment. Lob. in Advers. Novis stirp. p.
434.

The Linctus must be the former, only add some pulverised Jews ears; or make
this Eclegme; Take Jewsears two or three, let them sharpen an hour or two in a
sufficient quantity of the water of Elder flowers; then let them boil lightly,
and them in a Marble Mortar, and put them through a Setace; add unto this
Musilage as much as is needful of the Syrup of the juice of the flowers and
sugar, as will make a Linctus, which you may often use; besides, it opens the
belly.

Outwardly apply an Anadyne Cataplasm, which does digest and resolve, made of
Elder leaves, and Reddish stalks, pounded and boiled in the oil of the infusion
of Elder flowers, to the consistency of a Pulticle.

The Acetoses Syrup of the Elder, dissolved in the decoction of Barley, and
given as a Julap when it is necessary, tempereth the heat of the blood and whole
body. See afterward the cure of the continued Fevers.

In spitting of blood Tragea granorum acts is profitable; whereof we have made
mention in the tenth Chapter, which being taken in some convenient Syrup, is to
be used for a Linctus.

CAP. XIII.
Of Dyspnei and Asthma.
THat those things may be removed in these diseases, and expectorat, which are
gathered through the proper imbecility of the Lungs, use the water of the
flowers, in which a third part of Elder Oximel is dissolved, and as Julap twice
a day drink two or three ounces thereof, it cuts the gross matter, and
facilitateth the expectoration thereof.

The same Oximel thickened with Sugar Candy, and taken off a liquorice-stick
like a Linctus, and swallowed leasurely, works well in expectoration.

The Syrup of the flowers of the Juice of the Berries and Buds, etc. are
wholesome taken after the same manner.

The Bark of the Elder enters that famous Oximel, Helleborat of Gesner.

The spirit of the berries in a great Dispnoea is profitable, half a spoonful,
or a spoonful thereof taken with sugar.

Use this following Asmalick, or Pneumatick Spirit, if you please.

Take of the middle Elder bark Liquorish, well shaven, six drachms. Of the
roots of Allacompaine, of Florentine Ireos, Of each two drachms. Of the whole
herb Erysimum, two handful. Of Fennel-seed half an ounce.
Being cut, and shaked together, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of the
spirit of Granorum acts, in which let them stand seven days, every day twice
stirring all together; afterward let them be distilled in Bal. Mar. for the
Pneumatick spirit of the Elder, which in time of necessity is to be taken
either by it self, or dulcerat with a little sugar, or the syrup of Violets.

Or with the same with Canary-sugar, or of Madara, prepare the oil of the
Elder-sugar as follows. Take of this Pneumatick spirit rectified, as much as
you will, mix with it half the quantity of Sugar; fire the spirit with a
wax-candle, or light paper, stir it hither and thither with a knife, till all
turn to a thick and oily liquor, and the flame cease of it self. Use it as an
Eclegme with a stick of Liquorice by it self; or mix with an equal part of
Elder Oximel, it mightily moves expectoration, etc. it is profitable to anoint
the breast in the greatest difficulty of breathing with the oil of
Elder-flowers of the first description; you may mix therewith some drops of the
oil of the flowers of the third description.

In suffocating Catars, besides these abundantly declared, it avails much, if
in the time of the fit, you put a sponge dipped in Elder-vinegar to the nose,
and therewith wet the crown of the head.

CAP. XIV.
Of Hoasting and Hoarsness.
Women with great success, give to their coughing unquiet children, the recent
Rob of the Elder, which is more liquid.

In older, the Linctus of the Oil of Elder-sugar is profitable.

In that wild Cough, where corrupt matter is exercat, and more corruption
feared, this is much praised.

Take of the Elder-leaves recent, or dried in the shadow, M. I. boil them in a
quart of Fountain, or clear River water, to the consumption of a third part;
the strained drink is to be sweetened with Sugar Candy, or scummed honey, of
which every day, morning and evening, drink a warm draught.

The same is commended in hoarsness proceeding from a Catar, that fills the
inequalities of the windpipe, or Arteriae Asperae.

Or where more detersion in necessary for the same effect, there is a fit
Lixive prepared of the ashes of the leaves with the water of the flowers, which
being sweetened with sugar or honey, is to be often taken by spoonfuls in the day.
This, if any thing, will take away hoarsness, and is a great secret amongst
women, as the giving their own proper urine to the diseased to drink, which is
loathsome to many.

To make a clear voice, this is a secret of Alexis.

Take of Elder-flowers dried in the Sun, and pulverised, of which drink a
little every morning in white Wine fasting.

The Cough and hoarsness proceeding from heat in fevers, is excellently
remedied by a Linctus of the Syrup made of the juice of Elder-berries, with
equal parts of the Syrup of Violets.

If you list, and have leisure, you may make Elder-sugar in imitation of
Violet-sugar-candy, Cinnamon, or Rose-sugar; of which in these pectoral
diseases, hold some still to be dissolved in your mouth, that by little and
little it may descend into Asperae Arteriae, or windpipe. It Is thus made.

Take of the best Canary-sugar lib. 6. let it melt and boil in the fragrant
water of the flowers, till it acquire a fit thickness, for making up tablets:
Then infuse the fresh juice pressed from the berries, well purified, or the
frequent infusion of the flowers, as vou please to have the color, lib. 2. on
a soft fire boil them to the consistency of a syrup, then in a glass, or
earthen pot, put sticks in order, two fingers broad asunder, and pour the
liquor hot thereon, and in a warmed shop, the vessel being bound up in a thick
Cotton cloth, leave it there to congeal. See more of this in the famous
Botanicks Pena and Lobel p. 20. advers. Nov. Stirpium and Cas. Bauhine, lib. I.
c. 19. de comp. Medicam.

CAP. XV.
Of the Pleurisy and Phthisis,
IN a bastard Pleurisy it is a very safe and used Medicine, if there be no
fever, to provoke sweat, by taking the Rhobob Granorum acts in the water of
Elder-flowers, or Cardui benedicti, seeing it arises from the serous and
flatulent humors that fall betwixt the Pleura, and intercost all muscles, etc.

In a true Pleurisy, where there is a continual fever adjoined, proceed more
warily: For after the use of universals, the rob, water, and spirit of
Elder-flowers are not to be much feared here, seeing with success we use hotter
sudorificks of the blessed and milky thistles of the simple and composed spirit
of Vitriol, etc. for many expert men acknowledge a malignity in these humors,
which Paracelsus likeneth to Auripigmentel Poison which does corrode the life
like a fire. Diosc. lib. 5. c. 121.

Pectorals.
For the expectoration of the matter in the Lungs, use them that are weak, as
the syrup of the flowers and berries inspissat with sugar, or Elder
candied-sugar, likewise the water of the flowers inspissat, and supped down,
you may mix with these some of the Tragea Gran. Acts for the spitting of blood.

Topics.
Externally anoint with the oil of the infusion of the flowers with the fat of
a Capon, or saltless May-butter, or foment often the side with linen dipped in the
water or decoction of the flowers and leaves of the Elder; for by ratifying the
skin and parts, they digest and resolve those sharp vapors and humors: Or take
Elder-leaves and flowers Camomile, of each an handful; make a decoction in
mild beer, which put in a Cows-bladder, and after the opening of a vein, being
often in the day applied warm, it did wonderfully ease a Smith in my Country,
whose wife I counseled to do so.

Of the Phthisis.
In preserving and curing the Phthisis, besides other things, the decoction for
the wild cough, being taken by spoonfuls, and by little and little swallowed,
is used with success, seeing it proceeds from the ulcer of the Lungs, which
requires detersion, exsiccation, and consolidation; and the leaves and flowers
of the Elder mixed with a little sugar or honey, work these effects; they think
to satisfy all the indications by this decoction. But I had rather in this
case, instead of simple sugar and honey, use tabled sugar-roset, or honyroset
strained, and mix a scruple, or half a dram of this following powder, chiefly
were much arterious blood with the spittle is cast up. Take of Tragea Gran.
acts drach. 1. of Jews ears dried in a Furnace. Oculorum Cancri praep. an.
drach. and half, Saffron Oriental, scrup. 1. sugari rosat. tabled, drach. 2.
being all pulverised well, mix them together exactly; in the mean time you are
to have an eye to the prime cause of this ulcer, whose knowledge is to be found
elsewhere.

George Amwald in his Panacea, p. 29. commends the unction of the oil of
Elder-flowers in a Phthisis.

CAP. XVI.
Of the affections of the Duggs.
SEeing the Duggs of women ofttimes, by reason of the sudden and abundant
affluxion of blood, for the generating of milk, chiefly after their delivery,
use to be inflamed; or as the blood is of thinner consistence, and hotter, use
to have an Erysipelas, or Rose; the following receipts may safely and securely
be applied.

In Inflammations, the Caput mortuum, or the cake of the flowers of the Elder
with the red Vinegar thereof, in one Erysipelas, let it be bedewed with the
distilled water of the leaves and flowers of the Elder, and so applied warm:
For it digests and resolves that which has flowed in, and is compacted, and
does moderately by reason of the Vinegar repel the inflammation, and extinguish
the heat of the blood. Anoint he hardened kernels of the dugs with the oil of
the infusion of Elder-flowers, and put the leaves of the Elder thereupon.

For the exulcerat, the lac aureum, or Golden-milk is most fitting, being made
of the common or elder Lixive, and the oil of the infused flowers and bark,
mixed by hard shaking and stirring together; in which linen being dipped, and
wrung afterward, is to be applied warm to the ulcers: It Is also profitable, for
the more hasty and happy perfecting of the cure, to blow on it the powder of
Elder-leaves. So the ulcer, whatever it be, shall be cleansed, dried and
dighted; view these in their proper places.

I knew a woman, whereof I made mention in the fourth chapter; which often being
taken with the Rose in her paps, who having taken the Rob of the Elder, and
provoked sweat moderately in her bed, uses to apply no other Medicine to the
diseased part, but a knot of red fine linen, wherein Elder-flowers are sewed
so ingeniously to avoid all the exulceration which would have ensued.

CAP. XVII.
Of Swouning and Faintness.
THe Vinegar of Elder-flowers, imbibed in a sponge, recovers those, as it were,
from death, that are subject to swounings and faintings upon every the lightest
cause or occasion; for it excellently refreshes the spirits; for which
Physicians highly prize it, being mixed with other cordial Epithemes.

In this alone dip linen cloths, and apply them to the pulses of the temples
of the wrists, and near the ankles.

Or make this Epitheme, wherewith the face and the palms of the hands are to
be washed.

Take of the water of the flowers of the Elder, 3 ounces. Of Incarnation Roses,
2 ounces. Of the Vinegar of Elder-flowers, half an ounce. The Vinegar of red
Berries, two dra. mix them.
Tragea Granorrum acts made after this manner, is much commended.

Take of the Tragea of the grains of the Elder. Of choice Cinnamon, of each one
drach. Of Cloves, Galangale, of the flowers of the Elder without the stalks, of
of each one scruple. Of Sugar Rosat, of Anthosat tablets, of each two drachms
and an half.
Make all into a fine powder, of which give to the diseased half a dram in
Wine, or some other convenient Liquor.

How Women that faint by reason of the matrical diseases, are to be helped by
the Medicines of Elder, I have set down in the 26 chap.

CAP. XVIII.
Of Fevers in general.
And 1. Of intermitting Fevers.
THe common people, as soon as they find the first touch of a Fever, they take
the Rob of the Elder in the Vinegar, spirit, or water of the flowers thereof;
and so in their beds, being well covered with cloths, dispose themselves for
sweating, which the Physicians do not disapprove, seeing experience proves,
that Fevers by these are many times prevented and dissipated.

This seems to be the most probable reason thereof, That that putrid filthiness
is by this means discussed without delay, and the body rarefied; which, if it
had been left longer in the body, without doubt would have daily increased the
corruption, and given vigor to the Fever; as is learnedly discoursed by the
famous Sennert. in his Treatise of fevers. But have a care that this be only
done in the beginnings of fevers, and in such bodies as are not full of the
rubbish of corrupt humors, otherwise it is more safe and sound to open the parts
and passages of the whole body by Emetick and Cathartick Medicines.

Emeticks and Catharticks.
The purified Oil expressed out of the kernels of the berries, is commended in
strong and lusty bodies, 1 dra. or a drac. and half thereof, being taken in the
broth of flesh; for it gently moves vomit, and loosneth the belly, not without
a singular good temper of the body.

For the same use, the juice expressed out of the bark of the roots, are
commended, being taken in the same, or a greater quantity. Bernhard Gordon in
his Treatise of preserving man's life, bids us take so much, as the half of
an egg shell will contain.

Concerning the Wine made of the infusion of the bark of Elder roots, which
provokes vomit, and emptieth the belly of corrupt humors, read the 28 Chapter.

The Oil made of the infused flowers and bark of the Elder, being drank from
one ounce to three, provokes vomit, and purges the belly; the same alone, or
in a decoction, may be given in a Clyster.

The Polych^est powder of Elder buds, does not only purge both the biles, but
also phlegm and serous humors; whereof drink in hot and tertian fevers, in
whey; but in cold and quartanes; in Wine a scruple, or a dram or 4 scrules,
as the strength of the diseased will admit.

Or let pills of Tragachanth be fomented with this, or some syrup or musilage,
so that above them the mentioned liquor be drank.

In young ones, the syrup of the juice of the berries, of the buds or bark,
etc. suffice.

The commons praise this, Take a cup full of Goats milk whey, which holds about
four ounces, macerate therein half an ounce of the middle bark of the Elder
dried in the shadow; being strongly pressed out, drink it warm in the morning,

In which a few things are to be observed: That the commons are fully
persuaded, and call experience to witness, that if those middle barks be pulled
downward from the Tree, it emptieth the body of evil humors by purge; if they
be pulled upward, it works by vomit.

The truth of which, as I dare not call in question seeing I know the same
thing is asserted of Assarum by some Physicians; if notwithstanding it be free
for me to give my opinion without prejudice to others, and the truth, I believe
we ought rather to ascribe the effect to the constitution and peculiar property
of the receivers, or to the nature of present humor. I will say nothing now of
the imagination, whereby the receivers persuade themselves, the Medicine will
work downward or upward, which they endeavor to help by sundry ways, by
motion, compression of the belly, suppositors, thrusting their fingers in their
throats, and so forth.

Nevertheless I will not deny that the bark, and whole Elder also, has diverse
virtues in purging the noxious matter, by diverse places; nevertheless I doubt
that these are rather to be ascribed to the diverse pulling it off the Tree,
then to these causes mentioned, and other more weighty, which I leave to the
serious consideration of the learned, and proceed.

That the stalks and leaves of the herbs, being boiled, does purge phlegm, is
manifest out of Dioscorides; to which nevertheless the sprigs or sprouts are
preferred, if in the Spring time, in which they are to be found, they be
macerated a little in hot water, and prepared with oil and vinegar, and be
eaten sparingly before supper, in place of a sallet; for they gently loose the
belly, unlock the obstructions of the Mesentery, and being frequently eaten,
deliver and preserve from contumacious fevers.

Instead of these the Conserve of buds, mixed with the Conserve of the flowers,
is profitable; of which take daily an ounce, half an hour before supper, in the
water of the bark.

Cutting Medicines.
In such fevers, which are lengthened from the cramming of the Meseraick
veins, and from the grosness and toughness of the humor, Oxymel Sambucinum,
dissolved in the distilled water of the flowers, or barley water; and daily on
the intermitting days drank an hour or two before supper is commended.

The Crystallized salt of the Elder, taken from half a scruple to a whole is
profitable; also six drops of the, spirit of the same, taken in the broth or
flesh; for all these do powerfully open obstructions and cut asunder the
grosness and toughness of the humor, they cleanse the bowels and vessels, and
both by urine and sweat dissipate the feverish matter. See more in the 23
Chapter.

Before the Fit.
Internal Medicaments.
Those which are used before the Fit are of two sorts; for some of them move
vomit and the belly, others provoke sweat.

When in time of the fit the matter tends upward, which is known by the
sudden straitness of the breast, by the stretching of the Hypocondriac, by
nauciousness and propensity to vomit, give him a spoonful or dram and a half
of the oil pressed out of the berries kernels in warm Ale, and by putting your
finger in his throat hasten the vomit.

Joseph Quercetan in his 1 Book, and 8 chapter of Dogmatick Pharmacy, asserteth
that this following decoction is excellent in intermitting fevers, quotidan and
quartan.

Take Elder-roots and bark, of each ounce 1. of Asarium drachms 3. of good
Cinnamon dram 1 and an half, boil them in milk. This decoction at one and the
same time moves vomit and sedge. Let it be taken at the beginning of the fit,
and reiterate if it be needful. If the body be evacuate, and nature incline to
sweating, before the fit use these following.

The Rob of Elder in greatness of a Walnut, being mixed with half a dram of
the powder of the blessed Thistle, and swallowed and drinking vinegar above it,
and afterward, two hours before the fit, provoking sweat in bed, is an usual
Medicine.

Or make this mixture; Take half a dram of the extract of the rob of the
Elder, and half a scruple of the salt of the Elder; mix them, and form of them
with the powder of Hearts-horn, Pills; which are to be taken in a spoonful of
the syrup of the berries: two hours before the fit give the half thereof to the
younger and weaker complexions.

In Fevers less hot, especially quartans, two or three spoonfuls of the spirit
of the Elder-berries, given before the fit, is commended.

There are some which dissolve this following powder in it before, and they
cannot praise enough this Medicine in more obstinate quartans, especially if
the day before the fit the stomach, and other vessels nutritive, be well purged
by the oil pressed out of the stones of the Elder-berries.

Take of Hearts-horn prepared, without burning of the finest Antimony
diaphoretick, of each half a scruple; let them be exactly powdered.

Neither is the heat of this spirit here to be feared, seeing in the same
fevers, Galen, and other famous Physicians, prescribe Theriack, Methridate,
Myrrh, the spirit of Wine, the water of Zedoary; for a hard knot must have a
hard wedg: And experience proves, that these Medicines, being administered
before the fit, do not only stop the fierceness of the fit, but likewise quite
overthrow the fever; which before would neither yield to preparing nor purging
Medicines; the reason is, because the feverish matter at that time is more
moveable, and being prepared by nature it self, more easily follows the
course of the Medicine.

Externals or Topics.
This Topic is commended to be applied to the pulses. Of Elder and Lavender
leaves, of each half an handful, of salt half as much. They being pounded well,
incorporate them with the oil of Elder, that they may become a paste; whereof
apply one half to the wrist of the right hand, and the other to the wrist of
the left, and bind them with a rowler wet in Elder-vinegar.

Foelix Plater, in the second part of his Practice, has this, Take of Elder,
Rue, Marigolds, and Nettle-leaves ana m. 1. let them be pounded with salt and
vinegar, and let them be applied.

A double linen cloth dipped in the spirit of Granorum acts is applied with a
great deal of comfort to the belly, chiefly to the stomach before the fit, in a
quartan; for seeing the fuel of the evil is settled in these places, if it be
not altogether routed by the application of this Epitheme, yet it will be much
weakened.

To take away the shaking, and mitigate the chilness, the backbone is to be
rubbed with the same spirit being hot.

2. Of continual and burning Fevers.
In continual and hot Tertian and burning Fevers, where the heat is more
intense, and great drought tormenteth the Patient, make this Julap.

R. Of Fountain or River-water, lib. 3. of Elder-vinegar ounces 3. of the
finest Sugar ounces 2. let them boil together a little in a fit vessel; unto
which, being warm, add one dram of Cinnamon in powder; let them cool of
themselves in a close vessel, and strain them through Hyppocrates sleeve for a
Julap.

Of which give the patient often in the day, it extinguisheth the feverish heat,
cuts the gross and tough matter, cleanses the thin and bilous, unlocks
obstructions, it purges humors that offend through their convenient places,
and by its acceptable acidity it sharpneth the appetite, and refreshes the
strength.

This same is performed by the acetory syrup of the Elder, described in the
next Chapter, which is to be dissolved in Barley-water, till it come to the
consistency of a Julap.

For example, Take the sharp Eldersyrup ounc. 3. simple Barley-water lib. 1.
mixed, or Oximel of the Elder ounc. 2. clear Fountain Water lib. mix them, give
four ounces or more of this, and such like, at each time; otherwise if you give
less, and only once or twice a day, they rather increase than diminish heat. P.
Egineta lib. 2. cap. 36. for as Charcole in a Smiths Forge, being besprinkled
with water, burns more ardently; so the feverish heat is rather kindled than
quenched by drinking sparingly.

That you may extinguish the intemperate heat, and refresh the vanquished
strength, instead of an Epithem apply to the pulses the Vinegar of
Elder-flowers mixed with Rose Water, and imbibed by double or treble linen
cloths.

To loose without danger in these fevers the bound belly, the syrup of the
juice of the berries is convenient, of which dissolve two or three ounces in
the water of Elder-flowers; use it instead of a Julap, and drink it, for it
gently loses the belly, and evacuateth the feverish matter.

CAP. XIX.
Of the Pest and Pestilential Fevers.
IN curing and preserving from the Plague, great is the use of the Elder. A
little sponge being wet in Vinegar of the Elder, and carried in a hollow globe
made of Juniper-wood, and smell it, it mightily strengthens the spirits
against the impression of the infectious contagion.

Red hot bricks, being besprinkled with this Vinegar, and a vapor raised, it
does dissipate the contagious virulency, so that it cannot insinuate it self in
men's houses and cloths. By what means it may be endued with an Antilemick force
more efficacious, shall appear by what I will now say.

Rob of the Elder and the extract prepared of it, here are excellent: The first
whereof is named by many. The Country-mans Theriack, of which each week to
swallow the bigness of a Walnut, and drink above it its proper Vinegar, and so
to sweat in bed, is a commonly received preservative. This may be fitly used by
those who are infected with the Plague, especially if you mix with it some of
the anti-pestilential powders; or at least drink above it three or four
spoonfuls of Antilemick Vinegar of the Elder.

The same Rob chiefly it that is most recent, being spread more thickly on a
shive of bread, and eaten an hour or two before your meat, loosneth the belly;
in whose place you may give a spoonful or two of the syrup of the juice of the
berries.

It is enough to swallow sometimes in a morning before you go out the greatness
of a pease of the extract.

Rohob, and the Extract Antilemick of the Elder.
R. Roots of Tormentillae, Buterdock, Of Pimpanels, Of Angelica, Leaves of
Scordium, Berries of Juniper, of each half an ounce.
Macerate the roots 24 hours in Elder vinegar, afterward dry them at leisure,
and being powdered by themselves, add the leaves of Scordium, and berries of
Juniper, likewise in powder; mix them all together, and with the Vinegar that
remained besprinkle them, and work them most exactly with a pound of Rob
Sambuci, in form of an opiat: Of which give to the infected person two drachms
in a convenient liquor, to provoke sweat, and thrust out the poison from his
heart. Of which also besprinkled with the spirit of Elder, you may prepare the
extract that is set down in the second Section and first Chapter of this Book.
The dose given to the infected is one scruple or dram in convenient liquor.

The spirit of the Elder by it self is here very powerful, both in preserving,
a few drops thereof being taken with a little white bread in a morning, and
likewise in the beginning of the disease, a spoonful or two being taken thereof
before the feverish heat be powerful.

But that spirit is far more noble, which is drawn off by an Alimbeck in the
preparation of the Antilemick extract; seeing from the volatile essence of
those Bezoartick simples it has carried much with it. Or at least infufe those
simples in the spirit of the Elder; and being macerated therein for a few days,
let it be strained, for the Antilimbeck spirit of the Elder, whose virtues in
curing and preserving cannot be praised enough.

By the same Alexitaries, and chiefly by the roots of Angelica and
Juniper Berries, if the red Elder-vinegar of my description be impregnat with
them, it becomes Antilemick Elder-vinegar; which is not only a vehicle to other
Alexipharmacal Medicaments, but moreover it may be taken by it self, when the
intense heat and fever will not admit of the spirit, or other more hot
medicines.

Some drops of the spirit of Eldersalt given in the broth of flesh is a
preservative.

Neither is it unwholsom, if once or twice a week in the morning, an hour or
two before dinner, a cup full of the wine prepared of the berries be taken but
remember to take before it a little broth; for it loosneth the belly, hinders
putrefaction, and by reason of the Bezoartick virtue of the berries, it
preserves the body from contagion.

At supper drink a cup full of the wine prepared of the dried berries, which
strengthens the stomach.

A special Topic Oil.
Some greatly commend in the Pleague this oil.

Take the flowers of the Elder, fill therewith a Cucurbit, or a more ample
Glass, to the middle; strew upon them Marsh Mallows, and tops of Hypericon, of
each so much as only the fourth part of the Glass shall remain empty; power
thereon so much sweet clear Oyl-Olive as will cover the flowers; close exactly
the mouth of the Glass sigillo hermetico, or lute it; and through all Summer or
for three months set it in the Sun, that the heat of the Sun may draw the
virtues out of the flowers into the oil; then having strongly pressed the
flowers, strain the oil, and being purified by settling, reserve it in a well
closed vessel; unto each ounce of which, before you use it, add a scruple of
Sal Nitre.

Some prepare it suddenly thus, They take the oil of infused Elder-flowers, as
much as is necessary, in it they immerge the flowers of the Marsh Mallows and
Hypericon, and boil them together in Bal. Mar. for some hours; afterward they
express strongly the flowers, and strain it; in the strained oil they immerge
recent flowers, boil them, press them, and strain them; and afterward add Nitre.

The way of using it is this; The whole body of the infected person within 24
hours is to be anointed with this oil warm, and being wrapped in warm sheets, he
is to be laid in a warmed bed to sweat; for they affirm that it is proved, that
by this only remedy many have safely escaped the fierceness of this poison:
which unction, as it is not disapproved, seeing it opens the pores of the
skin, and by them draws out and dissipates the pestilential infection and
malignity, and by consequence is used commodiously, not only in the plague and
pestilential fevers, but also in other malignant and chiefly spotted fevers: So
we are to be very wary, lest in this sharp and dangerous disease, we neglect to
use the internal Bezoarticks and Alexiterix already mentioned; but rather ought
to join them with these, that with united forces both ways, internally and
externally, they may vanquish the malignity.

It seems this has come from the Egyptians, of whom Alpinus in his 4 Book and
15 Chapter relates, that they use this medicine in pestilential fevers, in
which the spots are either begun to appear, with great profit, at least once a
day using this hot linament, after which, without delay, they cover the
feverish with many cloths, endeavoring to draw the poisonous humor from the
bowels to the skin.

Comforting and Altering Medicines.
Lest the diseased in sweating altogether faints, we ought to hold often to his
nose a sponge dipped in the Antilemick Vinegar of the Elder; for this Vinegar
does powerfully dissipate these narcotick vapors, and recreate the strength.
It is likewise to be applied to the temples with linen cloths.

To ease the heat and thirst you are often times to give to the diseased, in and
after his sweat, some spoonfuls of the Julap which is set down in the Cure of
burning fevers; or prepare this acetous syrup of the Elder, which in provoking
sweat, in resisting putrefaction and contagion, in strengthening the heart and
other intrails, is far more excellent than the common acetous syrup, by reason
of the Alexiterous virtue of the Elder.

Take clear Fountain Water lib. 3. White Sugar lib. 2. and an half.
Boil them on a clear fire of Charcole, till the half be consumed, scumming
them well in time of boiling: After add sharp Elder-vinegar lib. 1. and an
half, boil them again on the consistence of a syrup: You may, to procure a more
sweet smell, in a knot of fine linen infuse in it an ounce of Cinnamon grossly
powdered, and sometimes wring it.

The syrup being cold, let it be kept in a galli-pot; of which give often some
spoonfuls by it self, or dissolve it in the distilled water of Burrage, sweet
Roses, Elder, Scabious, or such like.

The Cure of the Buboes and Carbuncles.
Apply to Buboes pestilential, and Carbuncles, a Plaster made of the meal of
Elder-flowers and Honey, which is excellent in ripening these tumors.

Or take of the oil more special, which just now was set down, Of crude Honey,
of each half an ounce; of Salt Ammoniac drach. 1. of the Meal of the flowers
and leaves of the Elder, of each as much as suffices, let them all be exactly
wrought, till they become like a plaster.

Some apply the feces of the flowers macerated in oil, and press it out, which
they call Stymma.

Some roast Onions under the ashes, and pound them, and mix them with the Rob of
the Elder, and apply them as a Cataplasm to the risings of the skin.

Amongst other vesiccatories, which is applied happily to these contumacious
lumps, the famous Sennert. recites these following.

Take of Mustard Seed, of middle Elder-bark, equal parts, pound them with
Vinegar in form of a Cataplasm which is to be spread on a white linen cloth.

Or, Take of the leaves of the Elder, of Burrage, Of Mustard Seed, Of Rancide
Nut-kernels, equal parts.


Let them be pounded and applied, having first anointed the place round about
with Theriack.

The Apostume being open, and become an ulcer, a linament made of honey and the
juice of Elder-leaves is to be applied; which every day, twice a day, being put
in with lint tents, it dighteth away the quittous, and mundifies the ulcer: the
oil pressed out of the berries kernels, and mixed with the third and fourth part
of Turpentine oil, is much praised. See the rest in the Cure of Ulcers.

CAP. XX.
Of the Small Pox and Measles.
SEeing these spots and pushes depend upon that putred and malign humor, which
nature, troubled with it, does expel to the skin and external parts; it is
commodious to commit the whole business to nature, if she work righly and
effectually.

But seeing, before they break out, a fever does possess those tender bodies,
which is unknown whether it be a token of the Pox and Meazles, or of pituite
putrefying in the stomach, or neighboring parts: It is commodious to give to
Infants a spoonful or two of the infused flowers: For if it be the Pox, it
causes them to strike out; if it be putred pituit in the stomach, it gently
purges it.

If it be to one of riper age, give him one or more ounces, adding according to
his strength, yea on the first day, and before nature go about to expel the
Pox, of the Polichrestick powder of the Elder-buds, a scruple or half a dram,
whereby nature being disburdened of the sinck of the first region, more happily
and easily may expel the rest, which is mixed with the mass of blood.

After this, the water of the Elderflowers given in spoonfuls is good: for it
strengeheneth the heart, and thrusts forth that putred and malign humor, both
in children and in those that are older; it may be sweetened with syrup of the
berries. Which, if they come forth more slowly or sparingly, besides internals,
we must use unctions; of whose matter and manner we have spoken in the former
Chapter.

Alpinus testifies, that the Egyptians have none more excellent and familiar in
all their Pox and malignant spots than these. And our women would do well to
follow their footsteps, forsaking old wives fables, which often times bring not
so much help as hazard. Nevertheless we are to have a care, that a little after
we wipe the whole body with soft and warm linen cloths, in a warm place, free
of all cold.

To quench thirst where the feverish heat is more vehement, and the strength
more vanquished, use those Julaps we have mentioned in the cure of Fevers.

But if you perceive by the continued host, that the Pox has seized on the
lungs, abstain from these sharp things, and instead of them, use the syrup of
the flowers or of the juice of Elder-berries, being thickened with Sugar, for a
Linctus: The distilled water of the flowers of the Elder, sweetened with the
same syrups, is to be used for a Julap to strengthen the intestines, and
prevent a flux; mix with it Tragea granorum acts.

CAP. XXI.
Of the Diseases of the Stomach.
A Weak, cold stomach, and of hard digestion, is helped by the Spirit of
Granorum acts, which does greatly strengthen the same, consumes corrupt
phlegm, and helps concoction: being taken with a little fine white Bread and
Sugar, in quantity a spoonful or two.

The Stomatical spirit of the Elder.
Is more efficacious, and is this:

Take of our Acorous roots and Ginger, of each half an ounce. Of Mynt Crisped,
one handful. Of Fennel-seeds and Anise-seeds, of each two drachms.
Being cut and pounded, pour upon them the spirit of the grains of the berries
of the Elder, that it may be four fingers deep above them. Let them infuse
twelve or fourteen days, every day stirring them about. Afterward strain or
distill from them the stomatical spirit, whose uses are many: For it is not only
to be taken inwardly, as we have said; but likewise externally to be applied to
the cold and weak stomach with linen; for it helps difficulty of concoction,
stops vomit, and mitigateth all pains and sobbings, which proceed from a cold
temper or windy humor. If there be nauceousness or vomit, with oppressing of
the heart, and difficulty of breathing; it is suspicious that these effects
proceed from tough phlegm, or some other putred humor gathered there; then give
two ounces of the oil of infused flowers, or bark of the Elder, with black
water; and by thrusting the finger in the throat provoke vomit; or give a
dram of the oil drawn out of the berries and kernels in a draught of warm
Ale, and hasten vomit.

By which means any thing that is trouble to the stomach will be cast up, which
being done, give a spoonful of the stomatical Elder-spirit or simple, well
sweetened with Sugar, and imbibed in the heart of the Rie-bread for
strengthening the stomach.

That Wine which is prepared of the dried berries, as we appointed, is
altogether stomatical, and greatly helps the weak and windy stomach; whereof
you must drink often, chiefly in time of supper a cup full or two.

Neither is it to be objected that Dioscorides says, That Elder is hurtful to
the stomach, seeing he speaks there of the crude and unprepared, which we
acknowledge is hurtful to the stomach, as some preparations thereof likewise
are; but experience it self does attest, that this wine, and other medicines
thereof, have great virtue in corroborating and comforting the stomach.

The spirit of Elder-salt, taken in six grains or more, weekly in fleshbroth,
does cleanse the stomach, and stir up appetite.

In the burning of the stomach and Cardialgia, proceeding from hot bilous
humors, which has flowed into it from other parts, or has been engendered and
corrupted there, if it be needful, you may give a vomit of the oil pressed out
of the kernels. The acetous syrup of the Elder described in the 19 Chapter, is
profitable; whereof give an ounce for a dose, dissolved in two or three ounces
of Barley-water. Or make this powder:

Take of Tragea Granorum Acts, ounces 2. Oculi Cancrorum prepared dr. 1. Sugar
rosat. intablets. Sugar perlat. half an ounce, mix them.


Of which give a dram in two spoonfuls of the syrup, which we now commended.

CAP. XXII.
Of the diseases of the Intestines.
1. Of the Colic.
BEcause, besides a bare distemper, a pituitous humor, a vitrious or flatulent
uses often to be the cause of the Colic; therefore their increase are to be cut
off.

Wine prepared of the berries or flowers work this effect leasurely: Likewise
the water of the bark and roots, mixed with a third part of the syrup of the
juice of the buds and infusion of the flowers; which wonderfully mitigate pain;
whereof take often an hour before meat, for preserving you four ounces.

Or where nature is more strong, give a half or whole dram of the
Polychrestick powder of the buds in the syrup of the flowers made thin with
Wine.

To dissipate wind, mitigate pain, and loosen the bound belly, use this Clyster.

Take of Elder-leaves two handfuls. Of Elder-flowers and
Cammomile-Roman-flowers, of each an handful. Of the stones of Elder-berries
dried drach. 2.
Being cut and pounded boil them in pure wine, or wine of the Elder, till the
Colature come into eight ounces; add,

The oil of the infused flowers three ounces. Of Elder-hony two ounces. The
Yeolk of one Egg; mix them, and make a Clyster, apply it hot.
The spirit of the berries is of great virtue here, because it dissipateth not
only in the stomach, but in the intestines also, all mescusness of pituite and
other viscid humors. By its great diaphoretick virtue, it dissipateth all thin
and serous humors in the intestines; it warmeth by its penetrating heat the
intrails, made cold by drink, air, etc. and so taken, both inwardly, and
anointed, it stilleth the huge pains that arise thence.

I know a Churchman, who by this spirit in a short time dissipateth the
Colic, which is familiar to him, and upon the least occasion bred.

In place of this use the spirit of the flowers well purified from its phlegm,
etc.

The distilled oil of Elder-flowers imbibed in silk, and applied to the navel
with a ventose, is a most gentle paregorick.

Whereof also give four drops in a spoonful of the spirit of flowers or
berries. The spirit of Elder-salt, given in the water of the flowers, or in
broth in the quantity of six, or seven, or eight drops, by his cleansing and
dissipating virtue, preserving from the Colic: But if you perceive by the
thirst intense heat, and constitution of the patient, that these pains arise
from the abundance of hot and sharp boylous humors, or some other hot cause;
you are to use these things which I have set down in the former Chapter, in the
heat of the stomach; unto which add the syrup of Elder-flowers, which is either
to be taken alone, or made thin with the best stilled water of Elder-flowers.

II. Of Worms.
THe Chrystaline Salt of the Elder preserves and freeth from worms: It robs
them of their nourishment, kills them, and purges them out. The dose is, from
half a scruple to half a drach or two scrup.

For those of riper years, which are troubled with worms, you are to prepare in
the Springtime a dish made of Elder-buds, delivered from their bitter naucious
taste, by the effusion of boiling water, with oil, salt, and vinegar, which is
to be used as a sallet before supper: For the oil closes the breathing places
of the worms, and makes the belly slippery: Salt and vinegar cleanse, cut, and
kill the worms. The Elder-buds do loosen the belly, purge the worms and thrust
forth their fuel. That this sallet may be more pleasant, you may add some
tender leaves of sorrel, which likewise resist worms. At other times the powder
of the buds taken in the morning for a few days, a scruple at once in broth, is
commendable.

Give to more delicate persons frequently a spoonful of the syrup of the juice
of the buds; with which mix half a scruple of prepared Hearts-horn. Some press
out the juice of the recent leaves, and mix it with honey, or honey-roset, and
give it sometimes before other meat, and by this means kill and purge out worms.

Where the stomach and intestines are furred and filled with a greater quantity
of tenacious putrid pituit mucilage; give twice or thrice the Polichrestick
powder of the buds in their syrup.

3. Of Lienterick and Celiaick Fluxes.
ALbeit at the first sight the Elder seem not fit for fluxes; notwithstanding
in Lienteries and Celiaick fluxes, where the meat and drink are either in that
form in which they were received, or else half concocted, and not much altered,
voided out of the body sooner than was fitting, by reason of the weakness of
the retentive faculty of the stomach and intestines, proceeding for the most
part from a cold and humid distemper, the spirit of Granorum Acts, both simple
and stomatical, is used with a great deal of profit. Therefore a spoonful or
two of it is often to be given with Rye or Wheat-bread; or being imbibed in a
double linen cloth applied to the stomach or abdomen.

Moreover, Tragea granorum acts, and the cordial powder prepared of it, is
profitable; whereof give twice a day, viz. morning and evening before meat, a
dram in three or four spoonfuls of generous wine.

For drink in time of meat you may use wine prepared of Elder-berries dried,
Cinnamon and Cloves.

4. Of the Dissentery.
IN the Dissentery, which is a bloody and painful emptying of the belly. Oswald
Crollius, from their signiture, commends the Elder-berries; of which the
Chemists, but chiefly Quercetan, in lib. 1. cap. 2. of his Dogmatick Pharmacy,
describes this Tageam, communicated to him by D. VVolfius, Professor in the
University of Marpurg, so often mentioned and commended by me in this Treatise.

Press the juice out of the Elder-berries when they are ripe, which is in
Autumn; of which Juice and Rye-flower make paste, work it well, and thereof
make little Cakes, which in a Oven are to be baked to the hardness of Biscuit,
that they may be reduced to a subtle powder; which powder is again to be
imbibed in the juice and made in paste, baked and pulverised as before. And
this is to be done the third time.

At last, all being done, reduce it again to a subtle powder, it will keep
long, and is a hid specific against a Dissentery. Take a dram of this, and
as much of the powder of a Nutmeg, incorporate them well with a soft roasted
egg, and sup it up.

This is called Tragea granorum Acts, that is, a powder of the grains of
Elder. And thus far Quercetan.

Others prepare it thus: Take Riebread hot out of the Oven, moisten it with the
juice of Elder-berries, and bake it again in the Oven; being dry again, moysten
it with the juice of Elder-berries, and do so four or five times; then reduce
this bread into powder, whereof take a dram alone or a half, with as much
nutmeg-powder. Of which see the famous Sennert. in the 10 Chapter of the
Treatise of the Dissentery. But a care must be taken that the belly be not over
soon stopped, but place must be left for the evacuating of sharp humors, lest
that befall which happened to the Maid mentioned by the learned Fernel. in lib. 6.
cap. 9. Pathol.

Therefore to purge the sharp humors, and mitigate the cruel pain, give two or
three days before you use the Astrictive, in the morning, one ounce or one
ounce and half of the syrup of Elder-flowers, prepared by three infusions in
three ounces of Barley-water, or in the water of Elder-flowers. You may with
profit add to this one scruple or half a dram of white Mechoacan subtly
pulverised; for it gently purges and binds the belly.

After three days are past, and we have used all necessary evacuations, and
clangings, and pain for the most part is ceased, then we may more safely use
our Tragea; for it does not only restrain the belly; but together with this
gives a contrary motion to these sharp and salt humors, by little and little
disposing them for sweat, if it be taken twice a day, morning and evening, mixed
after this manner, yet with a fasting stomach.

R. Tragea Gran. Acts, drach. 1. The Spirit of the flowers of the Elder Gutt.
35.
They being well wrought together in a Marble Mortar, pour on it by little and
little; The water of Tormentil-roots an ounce and half. The Syrup of the juice
of Plantain half an ounce.
Mix them and use them hot, they will dissipate the malignity by sweating and
evaporation, and will bind the belly by stopping the flux of the humor.

The same things may be used in a Diarrhoea or white Flux.

5. Of Constipation or Boundness.
THe leaves of the Elder are commended to those that are in health to open
their womb, by Egineta, and Hippocrates in his second Book of Diet.

This same is performed by the distilled water of the leaves and bark, with
which a third part of the syrup made of the infused flowers, or of the juice of
the berries or buds, is to be mixed with it, to make them of a more pleasant
taste.

The same syrups being taken alone loosneth the belly; or drink a draught of
wine at your breakfast, or in the morning, having taken a little broth; or take
a dram of the powder of the buds in Plum-broth or a soft roasted Egg: Or use
in the place of this the conserve of the buds. The recent Rob of the Elder
spread thick upon a slice of bread, and eaten before other dishes, is our Wives
domestic Medicine, which they use likewise in their Infants and Children whose
bellies are stopped longer than ordinary; for this Juice is most pleasant and
familiar to children, chiefly if in time of thickning of it you do add a little
Sugar, as has been told.

VI. Of Hemmorhoides.
THere is nothing more excellent to ease the pain of the Hemmorhoides than a
stove or fomentation made of the flowers of Elder and Verbasie or Hony-suckle
in water or milk: for in a short time it eases the greatest pain. I
experimented this first in a Country Miller, then in a City Baker: which both
did wonder at the sudden ease, and have great quantity of the flowers in
readiness beside them, to use when necessity shall require.

The anointing with the oil of the infused flowers, mixed with a third part of
Unguent Populeon, is Anodine.

Or take of the infusion of Elder-flowers, half an ounce. Of Elder-kernels and
Yeolks of Eggs, of each two drachms. Of white Wax enough making, according to
art an Unguent.
To stay the Hemmorhoides in a night a singular Cataplasm is made of
Elder-leaves boiled in water, to the consistency of a Poultice, and mixed with
Oyl-olive spread on a scarlet cloth, and apply it warm to the Hemmorhoides:
being often renewed through the whole night, the Patient lying on his face, is
commended by Alexis in his Secrets.

By what means their flux is to be stopped is set down in the stopping of the
Hemmorhoides in the nose, and monthly terms, and in stopping the blood in
wounds.

Mark, that for the falling of the Anus, amongst other things, the outmost bark
of the Elder is commended by Mindererus, cap. 7. M.M.

CAP. XXIII.
Of the Obstructions of the Mesentery, Liver, Milt; from whence proceed both
the Jaundies and Scurvy.
TO hinder and cure the obstructions, drink in the morning and the beginning of
the repast, a cup full of the wine of Elder-berries, for some days and weeks;
for it cutteth the thick, tartarous, serous and bilous matter, it cleanses,
evacuateth, and by opening obstructions and purifying the blood, gives the body
a more fresh color; especially if once at least of the week you mix with it a
half or whole dram, according to the parties strength, of the Polychrestick
powder of the buds.

In these diseases this following powder is commended.

Take of the Elder-buds dried in the shade drach. 2. Of Crystalline Elder-salt
scrup. 8. Of Wormwood scrup. 4.
Make of all a subtle powder, and give a scruple, or half a dram thereof in
broth in the morning for many days, commanding him to fast four hours, and use
moderate exercise. Those that are not pleased with the powder may form it into
pills, with the rob or juice of the berries, and drink broth above it.

A Lixive made of Elder-ashes, prepared with wine or the water of the flowers,
powerfully unlocks obstructions, and attenuateth and changes bilous and
tartarous humors. Whence it is a profitable Medicine in the Jaundies, some
spoonfuls thereof being taken morning and evening, dulcerat with sugar, honey,
or Elder-hony.

Oximel Sambucinum taken in an ounce and half weight dissolved in the water or
flowers of the bark is more meek and pleasant.

Or where the heat is greater, and a Fever joined, an ounce and a half of the
acetous syrup of the Elder, dissolved and given at one dose.

Some commend four or six drops of the oil of the flowers of the second
description in a spoonful of the spirit or best water of the flowers; give it
twice a week, and command moderate exercise.

In this case the spirit alone, the rob and its extract are safe medicines. For
whilst the sink of the belly is emptied by the Polychrestick powder of the
buds, they provoke sweat by their penetrating virtues, they unlock the
obstructions and crammings of the Mesentery, Liver, Milt, and Gall; and cut and
prepare the thickness of humors.

The yellow middle bark is commended by his signature for the yellow Jaundies;
by Crollius de Signaturis rerum. It Is therefore to be macerated in wine with
two or three Jews ears; of which strained, drink a sound draught morning and
evening. Or you must use the distilled water thereof; or the syrup made of its
juice: For besides that they open the belly and evacuate hurtful humors, the
Medicines prepared of this bark, have great virtue to open all obstructions.

Six drops of the spirit of Elder-salt taken in broth, is commended.

In the Scurvy, having premised these purging and cutting Medicines, the
greatest hope of health and helps is placed in evacuating the serosities by
sweating: whence Plater affirms the rob of Elder-berries or Walwort to be very
convenient, adding to three ounces of these one ounce of the syrup of Popie.
The dose drachms 2. The extracts of these are more convenient and penetrating,
of which give one scruple, or one dram, in a spoonful of the spirit of
Elder-flowers, or of Carduus Benedictus, or of Scurvigrass; and then let him
provoke sweat in his bed, or in a dry Bath.

Topics.
EXternally anoint frequently the Hypocondriacks, where those bowels are
placed, with the oil of the infused flowers; which the ordinary and used
Dispensatories affirm to cure the Jaundies, and help the stopped Liver.

In a hard and Scyrous Milt boil the leaves of Elder in Wine and Oil, to the
consistence of a Poultice, which are to be put through a Searse or Setace, then
mix therewith as much of the meal made of the flowers of Elder and Cammomile as
will suffice; then apply it hot like a Cataplasm.

This Cere-cloth, or Serat, is commended for mollifying and digesting scyrous
tumors.

First, boil twice or thrice recent Elder-leaves in the oil of the infusion of
Elder-flowers, still pressing the leaves well, before you put in new ones. Then,

Take of the oil so prepared ounc. 3. Of the powder of tender Elder-leaves one
ounce and half. Of Turpentine and yellow Wax, enough.
Of which apply every day to the place affected some of this spread on a piece
of Leather, cut like a Cowes tongue, and covered with a fine linen cloth.

The Scorbutic persons, amongst other symptoms which I have neither time nor
place to mention, are troubled with a pain in the soals of their feet and tops
of their fingers, which the famous Sennert. affirms to be cured by this:

Take of Elder-flowers two handfuls, boil them in Wine, adding two drachms of
soap spread on a cloth, and applied to the diseased part.

CAP. XXIV.
Of the Hydropsie, and its kinds.
1. Of Ascites.
SEeing this depends of serous humors, fallen into the Abdomen; and seeing the
virtue of the Elder is to exsiccate and draw water from the belly by the
consent of Dioscorides and all Physicians; there is no man that does not
perceive that the Elder is of great virtue in this disease.

Purging Medicines.
First then boil in Wine, in a close vessel, those middle barks of the Elder,
with one or two Jews-ears; sweeten the decoction; and for some days give it to
the diseased party morning and evening to drink.

Some praise this; Take of the middle bark subtly grated, as much as you
will, boiled in a sufficient quantity of Goats-milk, that being put through a
Searse, it may acquire the consistence of a syrup or honey; of which give an
ounce, or an ounce and a half, for certain days in white wine. The water of the
succulent middle-bark, distilled in the Springtime, and given with a third
part of the syrup made of the juice of the buds, or roots, is used in two or
three ounces weight.

Quercetan in the first book and seventh chapter of his Dogmatick Pharmacy
commends this purging water of the berries; Take the seeds or berries of the
Elder and Ebulus, perfectly ripe, which is in Autumn; out of these with a press
draw out the wine or juice, shaking out the inmost kernels, and mixing them
with the rest, distill them.

This water, which is Cohobat thus upon the dregs, has a notable efficacy in
purging, and chiefly of serous humors; let it be aromatized with Cinnamon,
Coriander prepared with the juice of Lemmons, and such like; it may be given to
Hydropick persons from one ounce to two. Thus far Quercetan.

For example, R. Of the water preserved ounces two, Syrup or juice of the
berries and buds, of each one ounce and half mixed. Of this composed water you
may see more in the cited place of Quercetan.

Of the Wines we have often made mention before, chiefly in the second Section;
nevertheless we will set down this of Quercetans, in his first Book and ninth
Chapter, because it differs little from others; The seeds are to be pressed, and
the juice drawn out, which being mixed with a double quantity of the Must of
the best white wine, is to be put in a Hogshead of convenient bigness, till it
be fully digested and fermented.

Note, That it is better if it be done in a close Hogshead, that is, if the
Hogshead be not altogether full; but at least the third part be left empty, and
be well closed that nothing do exhale. Which being done, and the fermentation
being in a months time finished, the hogshead is to be opened, and to be
filled up to the brim with wine, wrought after that manner with the juice of
berries in another hogshead.

This wine does purge all serous humors, and much helps Hydropick persons;
the dose is a cup, less or smaller as the strength of the person is.

Dioscorides writes, that the root being boiled in wine, and given to
Hydropick persons in their meat, does help them.

Whose juice being pressed out, does purge upward and downward like Antimony,
as Mindererus witnesses in his Military Medicine, cap. 6. So that we are to
use it warily, and only so much in quantity as the half of a Walnut-shell will
hold, as he honestly informs.

He commends there likewise a Sallet made of the buds, oil, salt, and vinegar,
which we have set down in the cure of the intestine diseases. Forestus lib. 19.
Observat. 44. affirms, That by long experience he had learned, that the leaves
of Elder being put in Hydrogogick decoctions, do excellently purge water,
chiefly in the Hydropsie.

The same Forestus in the same book and 87 Observe. has this, The bark of the
root of the Elder reduced in a Succus, the dose is two ounces, in fragrant
Wine. Benedic. Veronensis writes, that some give four drachms of the juice of
the bark of Elder-roots. Others give for 9 days together the juice of
Elder-bark-roots in a pretty quantity, or an ounce in the waning of the Moon,
and so cure Hydropick persons: for it bravely purges water, as the middle bark
of the Elder does likewise. Nicholas at one time gives six ounces of the
decoction of middle Elder-bark: The same man gives two or three drachms of the
juice of the Elder, and of the juice of Ebulus four drachms to an ounce. Some
give the juice of the middle-bark of the Elder with Oximel. Thus far Forestus.

And this I have set down, that all may know there was great difference of the
dose amongst the Ancients. Nevertheless let him observe faithfully Mindererus
his dose, till he know the virtues exactly of each.

Muller in his Medicinal Mysteries says, This is the perfect cure of the
Hydropsie; R. Of the juice of the recent roots of the white Lilly, and of the
juice of the green middle-bark of the Elder, of each one spoonful. Take it in
common water or thin Oximel ever after three or four days: This purges the
belly strongly. For the tumors that are left about the knees, feet, etc. lay to
them the leaves of the great Bur-docks, for they draw out the water.

The Polychrestick powder of the buds in a dram, given in white wine sweetened
with Oximel of the Elder, or syrup of the juice of the berries is commended in
this disease.

Or, Take of the Polychrestick powder of the buds four scruples. Of Gum of Peru
of Galingale, of each half a scruple.
Make an exact mixed powder, it is to be given in what liquor you please, at two
times to a patient that is not yet weak; for it powerfully evacuateth serous
humors.

If the form of powder displease you, work it with the syrup of honey of Elder
in form of Pills, or with the Rob of Elder in form of a Bole.

Hydroticks or Sudorificks.
If by these Catharticks the body be emptied well enough, then you may safely
proceed to Sudorificks and Diuretics: For if we proceed otherwise, the whole
stream will be devolved on the reins and ureters, whereby the gathering
together thereof grievous symptoms will arise.

The Rob of the Elder and its extract are Sudorificks. The first whereof given
in two drachms weight is commended by the Augustans for this purpose. The
second is to be in as many scruples, dissolved in the water and vinegar of
Elder-flowers for one dose.

Or where the Liver is more cold, and the urine less red, give a spoonful or
two of the spirit of the berries or tincture of the Elder, made thin with the
water of the flowers, and sweetened with the syrup of the juice of the berries.
Then in bed or in a dry Bath provoke sweat.

The spirit of the flowers is more gentle, nevertheless it excellently
provokes sweat, and dries strongly the water of the Hydropick person,
especially if it be well rectified.

Diuretics, and which move Urine.
Besides those rehearsed, these that follow are Diuretics. The salt of the
Elder with a third or equal part of the salt of Wormwood. The dose from a
scruple to half a dram.

The spirit distilled from the salt powerfully moves urine, and dries
moisture; six drops thereof are to be given in broth some days.

Where the bowels are more hot, and the urine more red, which is ofttimes a
deadly token in Hydropick persons, instead of these give three or four ounces
of the acetous syrup of the Elder dissolved in the water of the flowers and
leaves, of each half a pound; whereof four or five ounces are to be drank
before meat twice a day morning and evening. The poor man's Euporist, viz. A
Lixive prepared of Elder and Juniper-ashes, with one part of white wine, and
three parts of simple water, or the distilled water of Elder-flowers; whereof
give a cup full twice a day to the Patient fasting, and command moderate
exercise for half an hour or longer, if it be possible; add to it a sufficient
quantity of Sugar and Cinnamon, to make it smell and taste more sweetly.

The Experiment of Emylia, Countess of Isinburg.
And seeing we have made mention here of Diuretics, I will not pass by this
Receipt of the Countess, by which alone she cured many poor people of the
Hydropsie; in which, albeit much is to be attributed to the potion it self,
nevertheless I ascribe the chief effects of this happy Medicine to the wine
prepared of the Elder-flowers and sponges, which the Hydropick use in time of
their cure; therefore I have set down the whole course of the cure, as it is
faithfully communicated to all the true Sons of this noble Art, by the famous
Finck, in the 26 Chapter of his Enchirid.

Take of the old Acorns unshelled, Of the old roots of Parsley, Of white Oculi
Cancrorum, of each two scruples and an half. Of Sugar, Of Cinnamon, of each one
dram.
All are to be subtily pulverised and searced.

Before the diseased person altogether lie down, first let him moisten three
shives of wheat-bread in strong wine; may be it would not be beside the
purpose, if before in that wine he had macerated some Elder-flowers; then
presently let him sprinkle upon these shives 4 scruples down weight of that
powder, and at night before he go to bed, let him eat it, and go to bed and
sleep above them.

Secondly, on the day next following, early in the morning, let him eat as many
shives of bread so prepared, and fast one or two hours after.

Thirdly, on the same day at night let him eat the same preparation, eating and
drinking nothing above it, and so go to sleep.

In the mean time this diet is to be observed; Let the diseased person abstain
from fish, swines-flesh, herbs, cheese, cold water, thin and superfluous drink:
Let him use wine prepared after this manner, which I esteem to be the chief
part of the cure.

Take of the whole dried umbels of Elder-flowers, three, Of Jews-ears exsiccate
in a dry air, two, Of white wine two quarts; or for the use of a middle-child,
one quart.
Let them stand all night in infusion, and the patient may drink thereof at his
pleasure; but let him abstain from all other drink till the tumor be evanished.

Mark, if the patient by this cure find not an evident alteration, and abating
of the tumor, he may after a fortnight renew the cure; and without doubt, by
divine assistance, he shall recover his former health.

Topics.
Apply outwardly to the tumified parts a Cataplasm of the juice of the Elder
incorporate with Goates-dung, which has an eminent virtue in digesting those
salt and waterish humors.

Or anoint the tumified parts with the oil of the bark and leaves, prescribed
before in the second place; unto which add this same dung to give it
consistence.

The tincture drawn out of the rob and juice of the berries does excellently
discuss and dry, if it be rubbed on the belly and legs.

Or, take a sufficient quantity of the leaves and bark, boil them in a common
Lixive, wherewith foment the belly and tumified parts twice a day.

The vapor of which decoction, held under the Hydropick legs, draws the
serosity from thence, and discusseth it by sweat; it must be poured on hot
bricks in a close vessel, that the vapor may come to the heat.

Others bid the feet and legs only to be bathed in a decoction of the leaves,
wherein a handful or two of common salt has been dissolved.

Note, that the pith of the Elder being pressed with the finger, does pit, as
Hydropick feet do; therefore the juice of the Elder, and the distilled water of
Jews-ears, are profitable. Crollius de signaturis rerum, hither you may
transfer the example of the Hydropick and gravelly clown, as it is set down in
the Chapter concerning the Stone, who was cured by the use of the pith of the
Elder.

2. Of Anasarca or Leucophlegmatia.
IN Anasarca or Leucophlegmatia, having prescribed lighter purges, you are
immediately to proceed to Sudorificks and cutting Medicines, which we have set
down, made of the juice, extract, and spirit of the berries, and so forth.

For by these the serosity that resides in the musculous flesh, and swells the
members, are discussed; and the desired heat is restored to the cold and weak
members, and the intrals appointed for nutrition are opened and strengthened.

The wine of the flowers of the Elder is excellent for ordinary drink. By which
alone'tis manifest, that some after long fevers, and other chronical diseases,
becoming Leucophlegmatick did in an instant untumifie: wherefore may be that
experiment of Emylio the Countess were more fit to be used in this than in the
Ascites.

Note, there was a certain Citizen of Haina, who for two years being vexed with
a continual falling again into fevers, and after that became Leucophlegmatick
through his whole body, by my advice he was cured by these following; First, I
desired him to use wine wherein the Elder-bark and flowers, and the tops of
wormwood in equal parts were infused, thereby to open the obstructions of the
Meseraick vessels, and to purge the serous and pituitous inundations of the
first region. Of which every morning, after he had taken a little broth, he was
to take a good draught. From which time, after the belly had for a few days
answered the Medicine, I desired him to swallow a pretty spoonful of Elder-rob,
mixed with Hearts-horn; and having drank Vinegar of the Elder, mixed with Wine,
go to sweat in bed; which being done twice or thrice, his whole body did
detumifie; a more lively color, and laudable appetite did return; neither to
this day has appeared any residity of Fevers.

While I was writing these things, a grave Matron told me this history; she was
almost threescore years old, being troubled for some weeks with a white Flux of
the belly, she fell into an Hydropsy, so that her belly and flesh wonderfully
swelling, her strength marvellously decayed; her daughters being amazed and
doubtful of their mothers health, they went to a Physician their kinsman, then
famous in this Country, they earnestly desired his counsel and help; who,
albeit he was terrified by her weakness proceeding from her age and sickness, to
use any cure; yet nevertheless through their entreaty he appointed some
comfortablethings amongst which he chiefly commended the conserve of
Elder-flowers, and commanded each morning half an ounce should be given her
thereof, by which alone, through divine assistance, she was in a short time
recovered, and lived till she was fourscore years old, to the great wonder of
all those that saw and heard it.

3. Of a Timpany.
SEeing of this disease the belly is so swelled of flatuosities, that it sounds
like a drum, if it be beat on; and that these flatuosities do proceed from no
other cause than from a weak stomach; the stomach is to be strengthened, and
the flatuosities discussed.

These indications, a Purge being premised, if needful, are well satisfied by
the spirit of Granorum Acts simple and stomatical, commended much before for a
weak stomach, seeing it not only strengthens, but likewise by his subtle
faculty penetrateth the most subtle passages of the body, and discusseth all
flatuosities; chiefly if the dose of the Carminant-seeds, of Anise and
Fennel-seeds, be augmented: Give every day a spoonful, and anoint the belly
with the same.

Or, Take of the Spirit of the Stomatical Granorum Acts, two ounces, Of the
Elder-flowers, one ounce and an half, Of white Sugar Candy pulverised, one
ounce: mix them.


The dose, one or two spoonfuls.

Benedict Victor Favorin. in 25 cap. of his Empyricks has these: I saw a
wonderful effect in curing the flatulent Hydropsie; every morning in the
dawning this drink was given to the patient, Take of the water of the roots of
Danewort, two ounces. Of the Elder, four ounces, mix them.
Continue without interruption this drink for thirty days, and a wonderful
effect will follow. But I would ever add some of the syrup of the berries or
flowers, seeing the distilled water given alone much troubles the fasting
stomach.

CAP. XXV.
Of the Stone.
IN the Stone of the Bladder a Laxative of the Elder Locusts, which is most
useful in this and other diseases, because it only helps nature naturally to go
to stool, Petraeus Nosolog. harm. diss. 40. These. 53.

The wine made of the flowers and berries help greatly here; for first they
disburden the stomach and intestines of that serous and mucid humor, whereby
pure Chyle, and less impregnant with those tartarous tinctures is brought to
the liver. Whence it is that the serous comes not so impure and muddy to the
urinal passages. And besides, if any slip be committed here, and the tartarous
humor be gathered together in these vessels, this wine changes them, and with
the urine thrusts them out of the body: Drink it fasting in the morning, the
dose a cup full, having supt a little broth before it.

An Anodyne and Emollient Clyster may be made of the decoction of the flowers
and leaves of the Elder; unto every eight ounces of the strained decoction, add
three or four ounces of the oil of infused Elder-flowers; if we will change
more, pour this decoction through the ashes of Elder-leaves a little, and mix
with it, besides the oil, two ounces of Elder-hony.

The pith being cut and swallowed, is commonly much praised for moving urine,
and purging those dregs. And I know a man, who being troubled with the Ascites
and Stone, by the persuasion of a Country-woman, used only this pith; having
avoided these dregs, and much serousness daily by his urine, was cured of his
Nephritick pains and Hydropsie.

There are some that cutting it in thin shaves, infused it in the spirit of the
berries; and after a fortnight, press the pith strongly and strain the spirits,
and give a spoonful of the Colature, which they commend much.

The Lithonthryptick Elder-spirit.
Take two ounces of the Elder-pith cut as is said: put thereon as much of the
spirit of the berries well rectified as will cover it. Let them stand seven
days in a hot place, in vessels well closed, that nothing evaporate. After
pressing the pith, strain hard the spirit a few times: Put into the Colature
some bruised Juniper Berries, viz. two ounces. Leave it likewise for two days
in infusion, in a hot place, in a close vessel: Afterward press it again, and
strain it. Again infuse as much Juniper Berries into the colature, and leave it
for three days in the infusion, and again press it, and strain it, and purify
it from all the feculent grounds, as much as you are able. And so you have the
stone-break spirit of the Elder endued with the essence of Elder-pith, and
Juniper Berries; which you are to keep in a stopped close glass, whose use is
excellent in breaking and expelling the stone, especially if it be used as
follows.

First, the nefritick person is to purge his belly with Polychrestick powder of
the buds, or with the Clyster prescribed a little before; and having anointed
his loins with Elder-oyle, he must go into a (...) made of Pease-straw and
Mallows* the flowers of Elder and Cammomile; afterward let him drink a
spoonful of this spirit in White Wind, and stay in the Bath till he avoid the
Stone. And to avoid swouning, let him hold to his nose a sponge dipped in
Elder-vinegar, and let him moisten his pulses with this same vinegar, or some
cordial Epithem.

This Medicine has its original from the experiments set down in the Dutch
Matthiolus, and is called a wonderful Medicine by Muller in his Mysteries
Medicinal. Nevertheless this is to be preferred to that in respect of the
virtues it has from the pith, or spirit of the Elder, to break the stone.

A Stonebreak Essence, or Extract.
He that pleases may prepare an excellent Essence, or Extract, against stony
and tartarous diseases, as follows:

Take of the Pith of the Elder one ounce, Of the dried Berries of the Elder, Of
recent Juniper Berries, of each an ounce and half; Of Liquorice mundified, six
drachmes.
The Pith and Liquorice are to be cut in small pieces, and the berries grossly
powdered; being mixed, let them be infused in a sufficient quantity of Elder
spirit; and let them stand in a hot place for a fortnight together, stirring
each day the glass, and stopping the mouth thereof well; that time being ended,
put them in a linen bag, and in a press press them strongly; put the strained
liquor in a Cucurbit, and putting to the Alimbeck thereof, distill that spirit
in Balneo, till that which remains in the bottom become as thick as honey,
having mixed before with it two drachms of the Magisterie or salt Ocular.
Cancror. being mixed, keep them in a glass vessel: whereof give from a scruple
to a dram dissolved in a spoonful of that spirit that was distilled from
them, and in the water of Linaria distilled with Rhenish wine; observing those
things which were prescribed before in the administration of the stonebreak
spirit of the Elder.

The salt of the Elder is commendable in salt and tartarous diseases, given
alone or mixed with the former extract in a convenient liquor, 8 or 6 grains of
the spirit of salt does cleanse these tartarous muddinesses.

Dysuria and Ischuria.
In the difficulty of making water, and in the not making water at all, these
Medicines are excellent; seeing these symptoms arise from a muddy and mucid
humor, or from a glewish toughness that obstructeth the urinal passages.

But chiefly the stonebreak extract of the Elder is good in this case; whereof
give a scruple in the water of the flowers of Vinaria, and the diseased is to
be fomented about the secrets with the decoction of the Radish and Vinaria.
Pliny says, that the stones being drank in two ounces weight move urine.

CAP. XXVI.
Of the Affections of the Womb.
TO mollify and open the secrets of a woman, and cure the diseases about them,
it is affirmed by Dioscorides to be done by incession, made of the Roots of
Elder boiled in water.

1. Of the stopping of the Monthly Terms.
MAny Medicines made of the Elder are to be used in the defect of the monthly
Terms; which for the most part proceeds from a gross blood, or tough humor,
closing or obstructing the orifices of the Histerick veins.

First then you are to use things which open the belly, and disburthen it of
that putrid filth; give them therefore to drink the wine of the berries, which
looseneth the belly, and makes thin the blood and gross humors.

The distilled water of the middlebark, mixed with the purging water of the
berries, prepared as Quercetan directs, serves for both ends: The dose is three
ounces, with one ounce of the syrup of the berries, bark, or buds.

Which if you desire to be more Cathartick, add to it half a dram, or as much
as suffices, of the Polychrestick powder of the buds.

The Elder-rob, with the powder of the white Dittany, or of Pimpinel, is the
women's Medicine. Gabel Shover has this:

Take of ripe Elder-berries, Of Rosemary, of each one handful, Of
Pimpinel-roots, half an ounce,
Boiled in a quart of strong old Wine; whereof drink a good draught warm each
morning for three days, before the time of their courses, and let them fast two
hours after.

The spirit of the berries is likewise useful, which by its subtility passes
through the whole body, and through the least vessels thereof, cutting and
attenuating the grosness of the humors; it may be taken the same time before
the courses use to flow: The dose is a pretty spoonful in Wine, or some
distilled water; in place of the simple spirit, you may take the Hysteric
described hereafter in the same quantity and manner; for his virtue is great,
in moving the courses.

The oil of the second description is commendable, if two or four drops
thereof be added to these spirits.

In the Scyrrous disposition of the matrix, where the crammed humor is hardened
into a Scyrrous, closing the orifice of the veins, and stopping the courses,
besides these Medicines you must make incessions of the leaves and root of the
Elder boiled in water, as Dioscorides commands.

Let there likewise be an ointment made of the oil of the infused flowers and
leaves, mixed with the fat of a hen. This same fat dissolved in the decoction
of the roots and leaves is to be injected into the womb.

2. Of the flowing of the Courses.
TRagea granorum acts excels in stopping these; whereof give half a dram,
and as much Nutmeg in a soft egg, or red Wind, singed by the quenching of red
hot gold in it.

Take of Tragea Granorum Acts half an ounce. Of Nutmegs, a little roasted, Of
the roots of Tormentil, Of red Coral prepared with Rosewater, of each two
scruples. Of Sugar-rosat in Tablets, six drachmes.
Let them be mixed for a Tragea; whereof take morning and evening two drachmes
for a dose in the former liquors.

If the blood be too serous and fluid; that serousness is either to be purged
gently by the belly, or by weak Hydroticks by sweating; whereof we have spoken
largely in another place.

Gabel Shover has this; Give to the woman in the morning three spoonfuls of
the best water of Elderflowers, and command her to fast three hours after.

3. Of the Suffocation of the Matrix.
SEeing this most perilous Disease depends from a malignant and cold air,
exhaled from the womb and uterine vessels to the Midriff, Heart, and Brains,
the womb is to be purged of all malignant and putrid humors, and the strength
is to be corroborated.

Apply here those things which were set down in the stopping of the Courses;
both because these used not to be the least and seldomest cause of these
malignant vapors; and likewise because the Medicaments purge and dissipate
these uterine filths gathered upon whatsoever occasion.

A half or whole spoonful of the spirit of the flowers or berries of the Elder,
greatly avails here, both out, and in time of the fit, for both powerfully
discuss these cold and poisonous vapors, evacuate out of the utrenal sink, and
vindicate the more nobler intrals from their infection, and restore freer
breathing. Gabel Shover takes a handful of Jews-ears, and infuseth them in a
quart of the spirit of Wine; of the which he gives the diseased a full draught
in time of her fit.

The Antiepileptick Elder-spirit, if it be used instead of the Juniper, is
good; and with it anoint the belly below the navel toward the secrets.

Or prepare for this, and such diseases, this that follows.

The Histerick Spirit of the Elder.
Take of the middle bark of the Elder, one ounce, Of the roots of white
Dittany, Of round Birthwort, of each three drachmes. Of the dried leaves of the
Elder, one handful. Of red Artimesia. or Mugwort, Of Prrsley, of each half an
handful. Of the flowers of white Lillies, two drachmes. Of clean Jews-ears,
three in number.
Being cut, infuse them in a competent quantity of Elder-sprit, that it may be
a hand-breadth above them. Let them stand in infusion for ten days; and every
day stir them twice; afterwaad distill them in Balneo, foa the Histerick
spirit; of which give a half, or whole spoonful in time of the fit, and with
the same anoint the lower belly, by rubbing it in, as has been prescribed.

Not only in the suffocation of the Matrix, which by excellency is called the
Histerick passion; but also it is excellent for the stopped flowers, and other
cold and moist diseases of the womb.

It helps likewise to expel the dead child and secondines, if after
universals, and topics, a spoonful thereof be given in white Wine, or some
distilled water, three or four drops of the oil of the flowers of the second
description, being mixed therewith.

Extractum Granorum Acts Hystericum.
Of the ripe grains of the Elder dried in the shadow, Quercetan forms an
Extract, which is a specific Histerick, and is called of the Chemists,
Extractum Granorum Acts. It is thus prepared:

Gather a great quantity of the grains of the Elder well dried in the shadow;
and having thrown all the rest of the berry away, reserve the grains only; with
which fill a long-necked great Cucurbit to the middle; put upon it the strong
spirit of wine, made acid with the acid liquor either of Vitriol or Sulphur,
that it may be three or four fingers broad above the matter; the vessel being
closed, that nothing may breath out: Digest it for five or six days in B.M.
till the spirit of the wine receive the tincture of a Ruby, which you shall
separate by inclination, having a care that none of the dregs or troubled
matter go with it.

Of which tincture not having separated its menstruum, that is, the aqua vitae,
which without any corruption or alteration will be kept long; unto which you
may add a little Sugar, if you will make it have a more pleasant taste; you may
give a half or whole silver spoonful to women troubled with the suffocation of
the Matrix, shall be unexpectedly, and as it were miraculously weakened, and
restored to their perfect health.

Again, if you will separate from it the aqua vitae by an Alimbeck in Balneo
vaporoso, till the extract remain in the bottom of a most excellent red color,
whereof give a scruple for a dose in its own proper distilled water, or in
other convenient waters, or in white wine, and it will become red. Thus far
Quercetan.

The Uterine mixture which I used to prepare is this;

First I take the berries of the Elder dried in a flow heat of the Bakehouse;
of Mugwort and of Castoreum as much as I please; I put upon each of them by
themselves in a Viol some of the rectified spirits of the Elder, and draw out
the essence according to art; and I purify each one of them by themselves, and
keep them in Glasses.

Afterward,

Take of the essence of Elder-berries six ounces. Of Balm-mint three ounces. Of
Castor, Of the spirit of Vitriol well rectified, of each one ounce.
Being mixed, I put them in a Glass of a narrow throat, and I digest them for
ten days in a warm Balneo, that they may be well united; and if any dregs be in
them, they may go to the bottom; from which I separate that which is clear, I
strain it, and keep it in a well-stopped Glass. The dose is a little spoonful
alone, and dissolved in some appropriate water; but if the body be full of ill
humors, I first purge it with the Polychrestick powder of Elder-buds.

In place of Appendix I thought fit to join hereto the Medicines made of the
Elder long ago, commended and commanded by our great Chieftain and Master
Hippocrates, in Uterine Affections.

In the Hydropsie of the Matrix, he commends the fruit of the Elder, given
fasting in wine, lib. 1. de morb. mulier.

He says, this purges things to be purged in Childbed; boil the leaves of
the Elder, and give the water thereof to drink, ibidem.

If the womb be inflamed in childbirth, let her sup hot the tender leaves of
the Elder lightly boiled with the grossest part of recent wheat-meal, ibid.

In the same place he commands us to put into the secrets a long piece of
Elder-pith, the tenderer part being shaven.

In Ulcers of the womb pound Linseed and Elder-berries together, mix honey with
them, and make a Plaster, and use it, ibid.

Or the leaves of the Elder, and of the Lentisk, being boiled in water and
strained, are to be injected warm, Lib. de nature. mulier.

The same things being likewise pounded with Muss, may be outwardly applied,
ibid.

In a filthy ulceration of the Matrix, boil the berries of the Elder and
Laurel, in equal potions in wine, afterward inject that wine, lib. 1. d. m. m.

Or take the berries of the Elder, Anice, Franckincense, Myrrh, Wines, and
inject their juices, ibid. Whereby the courses are likewise provoked, ibid.

To expel the Secondine, first apply a Foment made of the decoction of
Elder-leaves, and then that which is made of Cantharides, ibid.

In very great fluxes of the courses apply a Cataplasm made of Elder and
Mirtle-leaves, lib. 2. m. m.

Or boil in water the leaves of Elder and Lentisk, and with the Colature warm
wash the Matrix, ibid.

In the strangulation of the Matrix, R. Three half quarts of Oil, and a handful
of Elder-leaves; boil this, and make a fomentation therewith, or with hot shells
put in it, make a Stove, placing the woman in a chair, and covering her with
cloths.

Or boil the leaves of Elder and Myrtle, and in the strained water boil
Barley-chaff, and make a Stove; if she can endure the heat thereof, ibid.

If the pain be vehement after her purging boil in black wine the Laurel and
Elder-berries, and wash it therewith, ibid.

Or boil the Elder in water, and having strained the water, put to it sweet
wine, and wash therewith.

Of which, and many others, you may view Hippocrates in those Books and places
mentioned.

CAP. XXVII.
Of the Arthritick Disease.
HOw stiff this Disease is, and how miserably it tormenteth the patient, is
known even to children; notwithstanding it expects ease, if not full cure;
which sometimes is done by the Medicines of our Elder.

And seeing nothing is more able to preserve than that great increase of serous
humors being hindered, and those that are sprung be evacuated: Seeing from
these, if not only, yet most commonly, Arthritick pains have their beginning;
as experience can testify. These Medicines therefore that follow are
convenient.

Viz. The wine of the berries, of which he is to drink a cup full often in the
week, in the morning or in the beginning of dinner: But that is of most force,
which we have set down in the 24 Chapter out of Quercetan.

The water distilled out of the succulent bark in the Autumn, or Spring, is often
to be drank. Let it be sweetened with the third part of the syrup of the berries
or buds; the dose is four ounces. That it may purge more forcibly, mix
therewith a half or whole dram, according to the Patients strength, of the
Polychrestick powder of the Buds.

Vomits are good to preserve from this disease, if it be provoked once a month
by those that are used to it. In cure of the Arthritick, chiefly of the
Sciatick or Gout, seeing vomit does revel, and derive by the upper parts, it
performs more than any downward purge. Therefore you are to reiterate it two
days and more, if the evil persevere.

The oil pressed out of the kernels of the berries, and half a dram thereof
taken in the broth of Ale, does excel in this disease. The oil of the infused
flowers or bark is good; the dose is one or two ounces in warm water.

You shall repress the Arthritick assaults, if you once or twice in the month
sweat, having first purged the body: For the serous matter gathered in the body
is easily discussed by sweat; and as soon as natural or artificial sweat
appears, there is great hopes of safety. See Hildanus, Centor 5. observe. 3.

Give then of the Rob of the Elder two drachms with a scruple of Hartshorn
prepared; or half a dram or two scruples of the extract Granorum acts; or
one spoonful or two of the spirit of the berries or flowers.

This is uporist of some, The Roots of the Elder or Walnut, half an ounce. Of
the pulverised Kernels, dram 1.
Let them macerate for a night in white wine, whose Colature being a little
sweetened with Sugar, is to be given in the morning in bed, to provoke sweat.
If it be given a little before the fit, it disappoints it.

In the Springtime the buds prepared with oil, vinegar and salt; and
frequently being eaten before supper, being mixed with other Sallets, is
commendable; for they gently purge the belly and purify the blood from
serosity.

The powder of the buds dried in the shadow, is good for preventing of Gouts
and all Arthritick Diseases; whereof take in the Springtime or Harvest, for a
whole month together in the morning, half a scruple in a soft egg with a little
salt. Or take the Conserve of the buds alone, or mixed with the Conserve of the
flowers in equal parts. The dose is the bigness of a Walnut or Chestnut, morning
and evening before meat. Drink above it some of the water of the flowers,
sweetened with a little of the juice of the berries.

Topics.
A linen cloth dipped in the distilled water of the leaves and flowers of the
Elder, and applied warm, wonderfully asswages the pain, unlocks the pores,
digests the matter, and strengthens the nervous parts.

That it may more penetrate, and where the color and heat is greater you may
add in equal quantity Elder-vinegar. Where the matter is colder, and the pain
longer, you may dip the same clothes in such a liquor as this, and apply them
hot.

Take of the spirit of Elder-berries, three ounces. The spirit of the flowers,
drach. 2. Of Opium of Thebes, scruples two, mix them.
By its Narcotick virtue it mitigateth the pains, and discusseth the more
stubborn matter, and refreshes the members.

The Goutish Anodine Water.
Quercetan in the first book and seventh chapter sets down this Podagrick water;

Take of the green leaves and flowers of Elder, of each lib. 1. more or less,
as you please, to make it greater or less quantity; pound them, and macerate
them well in B. M. then distill them in a Glass, or Copper vessel, till they be
dry; with this water forment the pained place twice a day; yea you may use it
constantly in that Gout, which proceeds from hot humors. So far he.

The Oil, wherein the roots of the Elder or Ebulus, and the leaves or fine
extract from them, has been boiled, chiefly the oil of the Dwarf-Elder-seed,
from which the seeds of the greater differ little, is much praised here. It is
prepared thus; beat the ripe and clean seeds in a paste, boil it in water, and
gather the scum thereof, put it in a long Glass, in a warm place for three or
four days, till the oil, which is greenish, go to the bottom; the same oil
pressed out of the seeds is most powerful.

These are the words of Plater, in the second part of his practice.

Or, take oil of infused Elder-flowers, ounces two; and of it pressed out of
the kernels, half an ounce.

Being mixed, apply them warm to the grieved place. Dioscorides affirms, that
the recent leaves applied, with the fat of a Goat or Bull, does help the
Goutish.

I know a man, that whenever he is troubled with the Gout uses only this
unction; He takes new Cream of Milk, and he mixeth with it the Powder made
into fine meal, of the and leaves of the Elder, till it acquire the consistence
of a Poultice, or Cataplasme, which being spread on a linen cloth, he applies
it hot to the diseased part; and from this easy and simple Medicine he
exspects, and experiences with happy success, great ease.

Gabel Shover, amongst others, has this; Take the water of the Elder, and the
spirit of Wine, of each ounces 2; mix them, and apply clothes moystened
therein: Some take two ounces of Elder-water, and one of aqua vite, and mix
them.

The same man much commends in pains of the joints, and other cold
defluctions, from which the resolution and Palsy of the joints do proceed,
this:

Take a good quantity of Elder-pith, a quarter of a pint of Rhenish-Wine, and
as much of your own urine, being mixed, boil them in a new pot, till half be
consumed. Then anoint the grieved place with the spirit of Wine, and rub it
well in. Afterward apply a woollen-cloth hot, dipped in the former decoction. And
when it is dry, dipped it and apply it again. And this is to be done before you
go to bed.

Some praise this that follows, in Arthritick Diseases, chiefly which are hot.

A Mucilaginous Andonyne Liquor.
R. Of quick Snails, newly taken whole out of their shelly cottages; Of
Elder-berries dried in the Oven, and pulverized; and of common salt, of each as
much as you will; put it in the straining bag called Hippocrates sleeve, making
one row upon another so often as you please; so that the first be of the Snails,
the next of the Salt, and the last of the berries, continning so till the bag
be full; hang it up in a Cellar, and gather diligently the glutinous liquor
that distills out of it by little and little, even to the Mucilage; and being
put in a stopped Glass, expose it four days to the Sun; and therewith anoint
gently the grieved part.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of the Scab, Psora, Itch, Herpes, and other Cutaneous Diseases.
It Is a Golden saying of our Divine Master, Aphorism 21. Sect. 1. That we
carefully observe the motion of Nature and its course, and with our Medicines
assist it as much as we are able.

Seeing in most of these out-breakings in the skin Nature does thrust the
hurtful matter from the principal parts to the more ignoble and less principal,
viz. the Cutaneous, it seems best here to use Sudorificks, and those that
expel to the circumference of the body.

Because many times a great heap of putrid humors are seated about the stomach,
Mesentery, Liver, and Melt; that sink, as far as is possible, is to be emptied
by Emetick and Cathartick Medicines, lest omitting and neglecting this
evacuation, the putrid and salt humors, by the unseasonable use of Sudorificks,
being drawn out of the Jacks of the first region, be thrust into the greater
and nobler veins, and so raise more dangerous damages.

Purges and Vomits.
In delicate bodies and children, the water distilled from the succulent bark,
by two cohobies, and sweetened with a little syrup of the juice of the berries,
does work this effect, being given in a few spoonfuls. Also the syrup of the
berries juice, being given alone, from an ounce to an ounce and half.

In those of riper age, give the purging water made according to Quercetans
descripton, from two ounces to three, with an ounce of the syrup of the buds or
bark.

Or use twice or thrice the Polychrestick Powder of the Buds in Whey.

Or incorporate it with the Conserve of the flowers for a bole; or reduce it
into the form of a pill, with the syrup of them, or such like; for it is a good
Medicine to purge the body from salt and feculent humors.

Or take a cupful of Whey, macerate in that, half or a whole ounce of the
middle bark of the Elder; the Colature being strained in the morning, let it be
drank warm. The wine of the infusion of the bark and root of the Elder,
subtly grated, is good to provoke vomit, and empty the belly of evil humors;
it does this when they have infused together for a night. These are the words
of Vigo in his Chirurg. part. 1. lib. 7.

Or take a dram of the oil pressed out of the berries kernels, more or less,
according to the strength of the patient; give it in a cup of lukewarm Ale.

It were likewise profitable for the Scabby, if they made a Sallet of those
young buds, who in the beginning of the Spring, together with those
outbreakings and pustles of the skin, by the singular favor of Nature, as
contemperanious, do bud forth; being first macerated a little in hot water,
with oil, salt, and vinegar; and sometimes eaten, it purges the belly, and
freeth the blood from salt and serous humors.

Sudorificks.
These things being premised, that which remains yet in the skin, or mass of
blood, is to be emptied by Sudorificks.

The water of Elder-flowers and the clearer spirit of them may be given even to
children. For to make it of a more pleasant taste sweeten them with a little
syrup of the infusion of the flowers.

These Medicines following agree to those that come to years.

Take of the Rob of the Elder two drachms. Of Hartshorn burned and prepared
one scruple. Of the Water of Elder-flowers three ounces. Of Oximel of the Elder
half an ounce.
Mix them, and make a draught of them.

Or, take of the extract of Elder-berries two scruples, Of Elder-salt half a
scruple, Of the water distilled from its flowers two ounces, Of the Vinegar of
the flowers half an ounce.
Mix them for a draught.

After taking of these sweat is to be provoked in Bath or Bed.

The Conserve of Elder-flowers with the Conserve of Cicory-flowers is
commodious to change, alter, and strengthen the intrals or inward parts.

Or make this Julap, which you must use every day an hour or two before supper;
or after you come from Bath or sweating, drink four ounces thereof.

Take of the Conserve of Elder-flowers, Of Burrage, Of Cicory, of each half an
ounce.
Dissolve them on a soft fire in a quart of Elder-flowers water; to the
strained Colature add of the sharp Elder-syrup two ounces, mix them.

Topics.
In a more universal, filthy, and continuing Scab, Tetter or Psora, etc.
prepare this sort of Bath.

Take of recent Elder-leaves, ten handfuls, Six whole Umbels of the flowers, Of
quick-sulphure, two ounces, Of crude-Allum, one ounce.
Boil it in a sufficient quantity of rainwater, unto which afterward add a
sixth part of the Lixive. Let the diseased every day sit once in a Bath, to
provoke sweat, not neglecting in the mean time the former internals. Or where
only the hands or feet are scabby, the same decoction; but in less quantity is
to be prepared; wherein daily the feet and hands are to be washed; yet
nevertheless you may add other things, as the roots of Sorrel, and Alacampain.

After the Bath, the exulcerate and clift places are to be anointed, to
mitigate their pain, with the oil of the infufed flowers; to which you may
give a more drying and healing virtue to the leaves of the Elder, subtly
pulverised till it come to the consistence of a Liniament.

Or, use the Liniament of Matthiolus, or Plater. Or this:

Take of the oil of the infused flowers and bark of the Elder, of each 3
drachms, Of washed Ceruse, one dram, or four scruples, Of Wax, enough.
Make thereof a Liniament.

Those black, round, and about very red pustles, which break forth frequently
in the feet, chiefly of women, are often to be washed with the water of the
leaves, and mitigated with the foresaid unctions.

Mark, There was a Bakers wife in Heyna, which could not go out of doors by
reason of the abundance of those Pustles, and was greatly disquieted by their
heat, having premised what was fitting, she used for a Topic milk, wherein the
flowers were macerated, in which, clothes being dipped, were applied warm with
great ease. Where the heat and redness is more intense, instead of simple milk,
take sour or Butter-milk.

Only sweating by taking the rob of the Elder sometimes does cure the simple
Herpes by the abstersive and siccative quality.

In this the oil pressed out of the kernels of the berries reduced in form of a
Liniament with Sugar of Saturn, is much praised by some: If it be anointed on
the pustles, after they are opened with a needle, and cleansed from the matter,
putting thereon a green leaf of the Elder, or one dried in the shadow. In an
eating Herpes, having purged, sweat, and breathed a vein, this Cataplasm is
commended, wherewith she-Montebanks have gained largely.

Pound in an Earthen Vessel, with a wooden Pestle, the green leaves of the
Elder, adding to them in the time of pounding a little Elder-vinegar, after
that manner that women make sawces of the Watercress, Sorril, and such like:
Mix with this pounded and succulent matter one part of the ashes of
Elder-leaves, and two parts of the powder of the leaves, that it may become
like a paste or thick Cataplasm. Add to it, that it may stick the better, a
little Turpentine dissolved with the yeolk of an Egg; apply it twice a day to
the ulcerous places, being first wiped with clean linen.

Neither is this a mere new invention, for John de Vigo in the first part an
7th. book of his Chirurg. says, That Elder-leaves pounded with Hellebore and
Oximel Scillitick, does cure Ringworms, Itches, and Scabs.

CAP. XIX.
Of the Erysipelas or Rose.
IT is usual as soon as the Rose invadeth, to take those Medicines whereby
nature is helped to thrust the matter from the inward to the outward parts: For
which end the rob with the water-vinegar of the Elder-flowers are applied; for
learned Physicians do acknowledge that this matter wants not its own
malignity. Wierus uses this potion:

Of the Water of Elder-flowers, three ounces, Of Parsley-seed, half a dram,
Of T. Sigillata, half a scruple. Mix them.
There are some, that in all Erisipelas, even in that which follows ofttimes
the Scurvie, do swallow this bole, and drink the water of Elder-flowers above
it, to discuss the malignity by sweating.

Take of the Rob of the Elder, two drachmes, Of Mineral Bezoartick six grains,
mix them. Or, take of the extract of Elder-Rob, two scruples, Of Sulphurat
nitrate Antimony, half a scruple, mix them.
But if the belly be bound, give the syrup made of the berries juice, which
looseneth the belly, and resists malignancy.

In more strong bodies, and where evil humors stick in the first passages, you
may give a half, or whole dram, according to the patients strength, of the
Polychrestick Powder of the buds.

To temper the heat of the blood in the intrails, these things are set down in
the cure of the hot fevers.

Topics.
The Topics here should not be cooling, repelling, or fat, which obstruct the
pores of the skin, lest that sharp and malignant matter be thrust to more noble
parts, or closed up in the diseased; whence often times the part has been
gangrenat: For which cause the common people by all means avoid moystening of
the part, and when any evil here arises, ascribed it to it, though not
rightly; for all moystening is not to be avoided, but only that which is made
of restringent, repellent, and things that obstruct the pores; but those which
unlock the pores and digest the humors and consume them. Though they be liquid,
they are so far from hurting that they greatly help.

John de Vigo testifies, that the Elder has the virtue of resolving, drying
and opening, by reason of the subtilty of its parts: wherefore these following
made of it may be safely used.

Shave the bark from the trunk, and apply it every day three times round about
the part diseased of the Rose.

Or, R. of white Soap ounce 1. dissolve it in lib. 3. of the water of the
flowers of the Elder, apply it warm to the diseased part, and when it dries
renew it.

Some dry them before, and apply them dry, that they may satisfy the peoples
desire, that much fear moisture in this disease. This is commended: Take of the
water of Elder-flowers five ounces. Of Theriack of Andromache one dram. Mix
them.
Dip linen cloths in it, and wring them in your hand, and apply them warm to
the place, and when they are dry dip them in the liquor and apply them.

Or, R. The dried berries of the Elder ounce 1. the flowers of the same M. 1.
Having pounded, cut them, boil them in lib. 2. of the simple-water, to the
consumption of the third part. Add to the Colature ounces 3. of a thin Lixive;
mix them: Dip a linen cloth in them, being warm, wring it a little and apply
it to the part, as has been shown.

Taberna Montanus says, he has tried, that the Rose being anointed with the
Rob of the Elder does ease and discuss it.

Lac Aureum, which is prepared of the Lixive and oil of the Elder well stirred
together, till it acquire a milky color, is commended much; chiefly here when
the Rose enclines to ulceration and gangrenates: For by its drying and
cleansing virtue, it hinders further putrefaction and corruption; and by
mixing the oil, it mitigateth the pain, and cures the ulcer; apply it hot.

Those that avoid all moisture, let them use clothes dipped often in these liquors,
and dried; or which is common, sprinkle upon the diseased part, small bran,
mixed with the like quantity of the powder of Elder-flowers.

Specificks.
To prevent this disease, many wonderfully praise this following;

R. Of new Elder-flowers, or in defect thereof, of those well dried, M. 1. of
Milk of a red Cow, or at least with red spots; boil them in a close vessel,
and upon a slow fire. Let him drink once, twice, or thrice, when the Moon
waineth; or if they will, through every month in the year, of this colature in
the morning; and they shall be afterward free of this disease. See Dr: Sennert.
de febrib. lib. 2. cap. 16.

Neither is this Medicine destitute of reason; for it is probable that the
fluxibility and accrimony of the blood, being taken away by this Medicine,
Nature is less afterward pricked by it; yea those malignant impressions stamped
on the liver and reins, defiling the blood by their contagion, are altogether
wiped off, by the frequent use of this specific Medicine.

An Amulet made of the Elder, on which the Sun never shined, if the piece
betwixt the two knots be hung about the patients neck, is much commended; some
cut it in little pieces, and sew it in a knot in piece of a man's shirt, which
seems superstitious.

I learned the certainty of this experiment first from a friend in Lipsick; who
no sooner erred in diet, but he was seized on by this disease; yet after he
used this Amulet, he protested he was free; yea that a woman to whom he lent
it, was likewise delivered from this disease. Notwithstanding I leave the whole
matter to other men's judgments, who may easily try it, seeing there is so many
secret works in Nature, whose operation is evident; yet their causes are hid in
such deeps of obscurity, that they cannot be searched out by the sharpest sight
of men's reason.

CAP. XXX.
Of Inflammations, Oedema's, and Schirrouses.
1. Of Inflammation.
DIoscorides writes, that the green and tender leaves, being applied with
polent, mitigate Inflammations.

The cakes of the flowers and leaves left after distillation, if it be wet with
the oil of infused flowers, is applied fitly to an inflammation.

Or, R. Of Elder-leaves M. 3. of Barley polent M. 1. boiled in simple water, to
the consistency of a Poultice: Being put through a Serce, add of the oil of
infused Elder-flowers ounces two; of the meal of the leaves and flowers of the
Elder, of each enough. Make a Cataplasm, for it digesteth, resolves, and if
the Inflammation Apostemat ripeneth, the Aposteme being opened, cure it as an
Ulcer. Of which afterward.

2. Of an Oedema.
Its known by the cure of the Ascites how the Elder helps Oedematous tumors,
chiefly in the feet. See there the fomentation for the feet made of the
decoction of the leaves in a Lixive.

But seeing these fomentations are tedious, it is enough to carry the green and
dry leaves of the Elder in the stockings. A great Lawyer was delivered by the
use of this simple Medicine, which he often applied, at the desire of a
worshipful Knight of Misnea.

3. Of a Schirrus.
The cure of a Schirrus is known by cure of the obstruction of a Schirrus Melt.

There are some that say the leaves only of the Elder does mollify and discuss
Schirrus tumors by Signature; because it grows in dark and shadowy places:
For which reason in the 23 Chapter, we set down a Splenetick Searcloth of them:
Which may be fitly applied here, the tumors being anointed with this following.

Take of the oil of Elder-flowers, ounce 1. of Amonick dissolved in
Elder-Vinegar, drachms 2. boil it on a soft fire, to the consumption of the
watrishness. Add white-Wax; and according to art, make an ointment.

CAP. XXXI.
Of Wounds, Ulcers, and Contusions.
NO man that ponders well the rehearsed words of Dioscorides and Galen, will
deny the Elders virtue to be great in these Diseases; especially in Wounds and
Ulcers.

The Cure of Wounds.
The common people keep as a great secret in curing wounds, the leaves of the
Elder, which they have gathered the last day of April; which, to disappoint the
Charms of Witches, they had affixed to their doors and windows; but seeing the
Elder-leaves of themselves are found efficacious enough to heal wounds, this
superstitious opinion of the people is to be laughed at.

A Vulnerary Balsam.
To cure wounds safely and suddenly, take the green and tender Elder leaves;
stamp them; and having put a little Wine on them, wring out the juice strongly.
Take of this juice, being purified, as much as you will, add thereto in equal
quantity, the oil of the infused flowers; boil it on a clear fire, still
stirring it with a Spatula, till the wateriness be consumed; afterward

Take of oil so prepared, four or five ounces, Of it pressed out of the
berries kernels, two ounces, Of clear Venice-Turpentine, three ounces, Of
Verdigrease, three drachms.
Being well mixed together on a slow fire with a Spattle, let them stand eight
days in the Sun, or some other hot place, that the dregs may go to the bottom;
from which separate the pure Balsam; which is to be applied hot to the wound
with lintcotton, and the wound to be bound up with linen clothes; it does
imitate the virtue of the most precious Balsams; half an ounce of the Sugar of
the Elder may be added.

A Plaster of the Balsam.
If you mollify wax with a sufficient quantity of this Balsam, and apply it
according to art, it cures wounds suddenly.

To stop a great Hemmorage.
Tragea Granorum Acts being mixed with an equal part of Jews-ears, is
commended in stopping of blood.

Or make this Powder;

Take of Tragea Granorum Acts, Of dried Jews-ears, of each three drachmes, Of
the white of an Egg dried in the Sun, two drachmes, Of the pith of the Elder,
Of the purest Gum-tragant, of each one dram.
Pulverise subtly every one by it self, and afterward mix them exactly.

The Use. The blood being drank up of a sponge, and the wound being dried as
much as is possible, put therein a sufficient quantity of the Powder; if it
succeed not at first, dry the wound again with the sponge, and put in the
Powder, and keep it in with torn pieces of cloth put thereafter.

The Puncture of Nerves.
In the Puncture and wounds of Nerves, the Learned Surgeon de Vigo in his
seventh book, together with daily experience does attest, that the oil of the
infused flowers is much praised.

The Oil of the Flowers of the second description; and the Balsam, or Plaster
made of the Balsam, being put thereon, works effectually.

The Cure of Ulcers.
Dioscorides has taught us, that the leaves of Elder do cure deep, perverse,
and Fistulous Ulcers.

An Uporist.
Apply then here either the juice alone, put in, being nevertheless wrung out
with a little Wine or Urine; and afterward lay upon it the pounded leaves like
a Plaster; which is a Country-remedy.

Or make this Liniament;

Take of Elder vulnerary Balsam, one dram, Of the Leaves of the Elder
subtly pulverised, one dram. Of Verdegrease, two scruples, Of Elder-salt,
one scruple.
Mix all together exactly for a Liniament; of which daily you are to put some
in with Tents in impure and Fistulous ulcers, and a convenient Plaster above
it. Injections and washings of deep and putrid ulcers, when need requires, are
to be made of the leave sand bark; which do excellently cleanse and hinder
corruption. Apply them before you make a new binding, that the filth cleansed,
and washed by the former Medicine, may be together with them washed out.

In those Ulcers which cast out that icor, which Paracelsus calls Synovia; the
Vulnerary Balsam chiefly avails, being hot put in; seeing it dries
moderately, and keeps the substance of the wounded part temperate. You may
sprinkle afterward above it the Powder of the dried Pith and Jews-ears, which
are much praised by many.

Gabel Shover has this R. of Elder-Pith drachms two, of Orenge-Pills scruple
half; mix them for a Powder, which are either to be sprinkled in, or to be
taken with a fasting stomach in a morning.

The same man takes as many Elder-flowers as is needful; he fryeth them in
butter and applies them twice or thrice.

Or, instead of a Vulnerary potion in these and other Ulcers over-flowed; he
gives daily a dram, or a dram and half of following powder in warm
buttered Ale.

Take of Elder pith three ounces, Of dried Jews-ears, Of prepared Oculi
Cancrorum; of each two ounces, Of Orenge-pills, Of Citron Pills, Of Nutmegs, of
each one scruple.
Make a subtle Powder of all.

In dilating of Wounds and Ulcers, and in keeping Issues open, the Pith of the
Elder is convenient: For while that sponge-like substance drinks in the humors,
it is dilated, and so distendeth the lips of the Wounds and Ulcers.

The Cure of Contusions and Bruises.
In Contused parts, the juice of Elder-leaves, pressed out with wine, and
anoint on the place, or linen dipped therein and applied, does discuss the black
blood, and strengthens the part.

Or take of the Meal of Elder-flowers, ounces two; of Camomile and
Wormwood-flowers, of each half an ounce; mix them with Elder-oyle, and work
them together, that they may become like a Cataplasm; which is to be
applyeddaily to the contused part.

To take away the marks and impressions, anoint them with oil of infused
flowers.

In intertrigoes, when the flesh, and not the skin, is infected, the unction of
Plater or Matthiolus his Liniament, besprinkling it with the subtle Powder of
Elder-leaves, is profitable.

Or make this Magisterial Powder, which with great commodity is sprinkled on
the emunctories of newborn babes, viz. behind their ears, in their armpits and
groines:

Take of Elder-leaves half an ounce, Of the flowers of the same, Of Red-Roses,
of each two drach.
Mix them for a Powder, which being sprinkled, consumes the moisture, and
dries the place.

CAP. XXXII.
Of Burning and Congelation.
Topics.
DIoscorides, says, That the green and tender leaves, being applied with
Pollent, helps burning.

These following are commended by Authors: first, the oil of infused flowers
and bark: secondly, the oil of the leaves and bark fried in butter and oil;
thirdly, the two liniaments of Matthiolus and Plater; the receipts of which are
set down in the second Section in the second and fourth Chapters.

The Uses. A member being burned with fire, gun Powder, boiling water, etc. is
to be easily anointed with these warm, and afterward to be wrapped in soft and
warm linen: For each one of them has the virtue of rarifying the skin, of
drawing out hot vapors, mitigating pain, digesting and drying of serosity, and
of curing the raised blabs in ulcers, and in restoring the diseased place, as
much as is possible, to its wonted beauty.

If the burning pierce more deep, so that the blabs being broken, and the skar
taken a way, it degenerateth into an ulcer; besides these oils and ointments,
you must sprinkle easily and lightly every day, the powder of the leaves and
pith; which does excellently dry, and, by cleansing moderately, does fill
ulcers with flesh.

In this case oils are more profitable then liniaments, as will be easily
found by any that use them.

This following unguent, as a singular experiment, is commended in all kinds of
burning by the famous Don^relius, for easing pain, or quenching the force of
the heat, and soon and safely curing the ulcers; also it is happily applied to
Herpes Miliaris, and other out-breakings, which come from yellow bile, or salt
humors.

Take of the middle-bark of the Lynden-tree, Of the Elder, of each one handful,
Of Linseed half an ounce.
The barks are to be cut in small pieces, and infused together with the seed in
a sufficient quantity of the water of Elder-flowers, for the space of three
hours warm; then add half an ounce of sheeps dung; mix them, and boil them in
a double vessel in May-butter unsalted, washed often in fountain water, and at
last in the water of Elder-flowers, till the humidity be perfectly consumed.
Strain them: and add of yellow wax, as much as suffices; mix them: and
according to art make an ointment. They are Donerelius his words.

If the ulcer become more sordid, use the things in the precedent Chapter. Lac
aureum drank up in Linen clothes, and applied, is profitable, of which we have
spoken in the cure of Erysipelas.

Internals.
When many parts, or those situated next the nobler parts, are burned, and then
the unnaturel heat spreads it self over the whole body, you are to use those
things set down in the cure of the hot fever. Or make this Julap:

Take of the water of Elder-flowers, half a pound* Of the acetous syrup of the
Elder, two ounces, Of Hearts-Horn burned and preparred, two scruples.
Mix them for two doses: for it cools the heatned spirits, it extinguisheth
the thirst, dissipateth the Empereum, and roborateth the strength.

The Cure of Congelation or Brosting.
Apply to the frosted parts, the middle bark of the Elder, or linen moystned
in their decoction. When they clif; the powder of Elder-bark, pith, and
flowers, reduced to a liniamenth with the oil of infused flowers, in
commended, the parts therewith being anointed daily. Apply upon it linen
moystned in the Golden Milk of the Elder, for it dries and hinders a
Gangreene. See more in the cure of Ulcers.

CAP. XXXIII.
Of Poisons.
Inflicted outwardly, or taken into the body.
IN the stinging of venomous beasts, the green leaves of the Elder being
applied, are praised, because they draw out the poison, and dry the wound.

Dioscorides especially commends the same pounded leaves applied to the bite of
a mad dog.

George Amwald in his Panacea bids us dissolve Rob of the Elder in Vinegar and
Wine, and rub therewith the stung or bitten place, and wash it therewith.

In the stinging of Wasps and Bees anoint the place with the oil of the
infused flowers* or with that which is pressed out of the kernels of the berries,
and put a leaf thereon; it mitigateth the pain, and in a short time causes the
tumor to fall and evanish.

To stop the poison of the Vipers bitings, besides these Topics, Dioscorides
bids us boil the roots of Elder in Wine, and drink the Colature. He
attributes the same virtue to the berry drank in Wine.

It Is better to use the Wine of the berries, to take two drachmes of the Rob;
or as many scruples of the extract in the water of Elder-flowers, and provoke
sweat.

In Philtrums, or those Potions wicked Whores use to give for love, or in other
poisons taken inwardly nothing is better, then upon the suspicion immediately
to cast all up by vomit, that is in the stomach.

Give two ounces or three of the oil of the infused flowers or bark of the
Elder in warm Ale, and accelerate vomit.

Or, take an indifferent spoonful of the oil pressed out of the kernels; give
it in warm Ale: For by this means all venom that is in the stomach, is happily
excluded, and the corrosive acrimony of the poison is qualified; use it again,
if it be needful.

Which being done, provoke sweat, that that which sticks in the veins (for
the more malign the humor is, the more it penetrateth, and like ferment,
infecteth the whole blood) must be evacuated by sweat.

Those things which were brought for the Plague, are profitable here: Rob
simple, and Antilemick, their extracts, etc. of which give as much as is
convenient to the age and strength of the patient, dissolved in the distilled
water of Elder-flowers, of other convenient liquor. And seeing seldom the force
of the poison is daunted by once or twice; but rather under the subtle show of
a servant, as being overcome, and obeying Natures command, by secret mines
lurketh and works to overthrow the strength of Nature, and overcome it by
little and little. Therefore the use of these Alexitericks is not to be
intermitted but to be continued, till all the poison and malign impressions
that remain be extirpate out of the body. This mixture is profitable.

Take of the Conserve of Elderflowers, of the flowers of Burrage, as much as
you will; mix them. Give half an ounce thereof daily, an hour or two before
dinner. Drink a spoonful of the juice of the berries above it.

Give two drachmes every week of the Rob of the Elder, in the water of
Elder-flowers, and provoke sweat in bed, or bath. After the sweat, the heat to
be tempered with a spoonful or two of the sour syrup of the Elder.

This experiment is praised by many; Take of the middle Elder-bark, subtly
shaven, and dry it lightly in the shadow, a little more then a handful; put on
it three quarters of a pound of Goats milk, boil it on a soft fire till the
half be consumed; of whose Colature drink morning and evening.

They say that this does absolutely out-rout all poison given by whores and
knaves, though it were given three years before. If it do not succeed at first,
the patient is to use it often; and by divine assistance he shall obtain the
wished event.

The Conclusion.
THese things, Courteous and kind Reader, I thought fit to set down of the
Elder, and the use thereof, and Medicines. Those Dishes which may be prepared
of the flowers and berries, at that time, when they are to be had in great
abundance green: for the preventing of many diseases; seeing they are well
known to Cooks by daily experience. To what diseases they agree, is known by
what is said. If there occur any thing here which does not please you, it is
your part favorably to construct it, and to withhold the censure, till you try
all things more exactly in the infallible balance of reason and experience.

I leave, for praise* nor crave;
For praise enough I have;
If not contemned by thee,
Courteous Reader, I be.
If those things that are omitted, obscure, or not rightly delivered, be by thy
more pollisht judgment added, illustrated and corrected, thou shall deserve
infinite favors from me, and all those honorers of Medicine and Nature: For
nothing can be more happy then to know much; and we are to learn, that we way
know. Neither at any time was there any of such qualified reason, but things,
age, and use will afford-him some new objects, some new observations: So that
what thou thoughtst thou knewst, thou unknowst; and despisest that upon thy
trial, which thou did most trust. For there was never any thing more
unrighteous then an unjust man, which holds and believes nothing right, but
what he fathers.

Farewell, and what ere thou art, favor these endeavors; and together with me
in this wonderful and unexhaustible variety of things, devoutly admire, and
piously worship, the unsearchable depths of Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

FINIS.

