BLACK (...) SUPPLEMENT OR ENLARGEMENT, To Mr. Nich. Culpeppers English
Physician.

Containing a Description of the Form, Names, Place, Time, Celestial
Government, and Virtues, of all such Medicinal Plants as grow in England, and
are omitted in his Book, called The English-Physitian. And supplying the
Additional Virtues of such Plants wherein he is defective.

ALSO The Description, Kinds, Names, Place, Time, Nature, Planetary Regiment,
Temperature, and Physical-Virtues of all such Trees, Herbs, Roots, Flowers,
Fruits, Excrescencies of Plants, Gums, Ceres, and condensate juices as are
found in any part of the World, and brought to be sold in our Druggist and
Apothecaries Shops, with their Dangers and Corrections.

By Joseph Blagrave of Reading, Student in Physic and Astrology.

To which is annexed, a new Tract for the Cure of Wounds made by Gunshot or
otherways, and Remedies for the help of Seamen troubled with the Scurvy and
other distempers usually accompanying them; exceeding useful in times of War
and Peace, fitted for the meanest capacity.

London, Printed for Obadiah Blagrave, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in
Little-Brittain, 1674.

To the Reader.
REader, I here present thee with a Supplement by way of enlargement to Mr.
Nich. Culpeppers Book, called, The English Physician; having taken pains and
care to add such English Plants with their Virtues and use in Physic, which
were wholly omitted by him in the aforesaid Book called The English Physician.
And likewise for further use and benefit of my Countrymen, I have inserted in
this Supplement, the virtues and uses of such eminent and useful Trees, Herbs,
Roots, Flowers, Fruits, Excrescencies of Plants, Drugs, etc. as are brought
from any part of the world, and sold in our Druggists and Apothecaries Shops. I
have likewise showed their us in Physic, and where there is any danger I have
given sufficient caution. The same Method that Mr. Culpepper used, I have also
followed; and have all along in this following Supplement not only showed their
Physical uses, but Astrological also. I have also caused the Stationer to Print
this Book within the circumference of the Volume, called Octavo; so that this
Supplement may be Bound with Mr. Nich. Culpeppers English Physician in one
complete Book; and by which means you will have a complete Pocket-Herbal ready
upon any emergent occasion, to look out the Virtues of any Plants whatever
which are generally used in Physic; And further Reader, for thy use and
benefit, I have caused to be annexed a Tract for the Cure of Wounds made by
Gunshot, or otherwise; expressed in as plain Terms as could possibly be
rendered, principally intended at this exigence of time, for a light to young
Practisers in Surgery, and for such as should be at a distance from any help
upon any sudden accidents. I doubt not but you will find it useful in times of
peace as well as times of War. Reader, for thy further Information in this most
noble Practice of Physic, View my Book called Astrological Practice of
Physic, more at large. Thus Reader commending thee to Gods protection, I
subscribe my self,

Yours to serve you to my power, Jos. Blagrave.
From my House called Copt-hall, upon the seven Bridges in Reading, June 1673.
A SUPPLEMENT TO Mr. CVLPEPPER'S English Physician.
Acatia.
OF this, there are two kinds, one growing in Egypt, the other about Pontus.

Descript.] The first kind is a thorny tree, set full of sharp prickles amongst
which do arise the leaves set full of other small leaves, the flowers are
white, the seed is broad like Lupines, enclosed in long Cods, out of which they
draw a juice or black liquor; which is called Acatia.

The second kind is also a thorny plant, set with long shary prickles, and the
leaves be almost like the leaves of Common Rue; the fruit is likewise enclosed
in Cods like that of the first kind, there is a gum issues out of this tree
which is called Gum-Arabick, very well known here, but the liquor or Juice, is
hardly known; for instead of this true Acatia, they use in shops the Juice of
Sloes.

Place.] The place I have told you already.

Nature and Virtues.] Acatia, especially the Juice, is dry in the third degree
and cold in the first, and under the planet Saturn.

The Juice stops the Lask, Lask
and the superfluous course of women's flowers, and reduces the Matrix to its
proper place, Mother
being fallen down, and stays and keeps it in is natural place, the Juice
being drunk with red wine, It is good outwardly to be applied to hot Tumors or
inflammations, Tumors
Serpigo or wildfire; wildfire
and also good to be laid to wheals or hot blisters of the mouth; it is
excellent to heal inflammations of the eyes, Eyes
being applied thereunto.

Aconitum.
OF this are two sorts: the one bearing blew flowers the other yellow, it is
also called Wolfs-bane, and the blew, is generally known by the name of
Monks-hood.

Descript.] The Wolfs-bane which bears the blew flower is small but grows
up a cubit high, the leaves be split and jagged, the flowers in long rows
toward the tops of the stalks, gaping like hoods, on the hoary root grows as
it were a little knop, wherewith it spreads it self abroad, and multiplyeth.

Place.] The Monks-hood or blew Wolfs-bane is very common in many Gardens, the
other rarely found but in the Gardens of some curious herbarists; but grows
in Forests and dark low woods and Valleys in some parts of Germany and France.

Time.] They flower in April, May, and June.

Government and danger.] These plants are hot and dry in the fourth degree of a
Martial venomous quality, if it be inwardly taken, it inflameth the heart
burns the inward parts and kills the body;

Dodonaeus reports of some men at Antwerp, who unawares did eat some of the
Monks-hood in a sallad, instead of some herb, and dyed forthwith; this I write
that people who have it in their Gurdens might beware of it.

Agnus Castus, the chast-tree.
Names.] IT is called of some Piper Agreste, or wild pepper, in shops and of
Herbarists, Agnus Castus; it is also called hemp-tree, or Chast-tree.

Descript.] Agnus Castus is a shrubby bush or tree, with many pleasant
branches, the leaves are much like the leaves of hemp; the flowers grow at the
tops of the branches, in clustering spikes of a purple color; and sometimes
light purple mixed with white; the seed much like pepper corns (I mean the
common black pepper;) but softer and of a very strong (and to me unsavory) sent.

Place.] This chastity-procuring plant, grows not of its own nature in our
Horizon, our cold climate not so much standing in need thereof as the hotter
countries of Italy, Spain, and the Southern parts of France, where it grows
plentifully, in rough untilled grounds, and by the banks of lakes, Rivers and
water courses; It is not to be found growing in our Country, unless by chance
procured and nourished, with care, as a great rarity, in the Gardens of curious
Herbarists.

Time.] It naturally flowers about July and August.

Government and Virtues.] There is a great antipathy between this plant and the
benevolent and sociable Venus; Mars, rules him; and makes use of him to check
the too much salacious entertainments of Venus.

Of temperature it is hot and dry, in the third degree; and of a very
astringent quality.

Agnus Castus, is a singular remedy, for those whose nature prompts their
desires to Venereal sports; a procurer of chastity, and singular for such who
desire to live and preserve themselves in that condition; it takes away and
abates so much lecherous desires, Lust abates
as it extinguisheth the thoughts thereof; the reason is, it dries and
consumes the seed of generation in what sort soever it be taken, whether in
powder or in decoction, or (as some write) the leaves alone laid upon the bed
to sleep upon, puts away all unchaste thoughts and desires.

A decoction of the seed being drunk, drives away and dissolveth all windiness
in the bowels, Wind
stomach, Stomach
mother, or any part of the body.

A dram of the seed in powder drunk in wine, cures hardness and stoppings in
the Liver and spleen, Liver Spleen.
and is good in the beginnings of Dropsies.

It provokes the Terms, Terms
being taken by it self or with Pennyroyal, or used in manner of a Pessary.

It is profitable to be mixed amongst Oils or ointments, to heat and mollify
stiff and benumbed members; Dead members
and cures clift or rifts of the great Gut, being applied with water.

Agnus Castus is good against Venomous creatures, Venomous bittings
it drives away Serpents, and all other Venomous beasts from the place where
it is strewed or burned, and heals bitings and stingings of the same, if it
be laid upon the greived place, and the seed thereof being drunk with wine.

A decoction thereof is good for women to sit in to help hardness, stoppings,
apostumations, and Ulcers of the matrix. Ulcers Matrix


A Cataplasm made with the leaves thereof and fresh butter and applied, does
dissolve and assuage swellings of the Cods and Stones. Cods Stones


The Almond-tree.
Names.] THere are two kinds, the bitter and the sweet; the fruit of both is
called Almonds, distinguished by the Epithets sweet or bitter.

Descript.] The Almond-tree is in growth and leaves much like unto the peach
tree; but it grows to be much bigger and stronger, and is of a longer
lasting or continuance.

Time.] The Almond-tree floureth betimes in the Spring and the fruit is ripe in
June and July.

Government and Virtues.] The sweet Almonds are under the dominion of Venus;
and are temperatly hot, the bitter are claimed by Mars: and are not only hot,
but also dry, and of a clensing and cutting faculty.

Almonds eaten before meat, stop fluxes of the belly, Flux
and nourish, especially being blanched; the sweet oil new pressed out of
them, is of a gentle healing quality for any inward soreness, fretting of the
Guts, Guts
or soreness of the Reins, Kidneys
or sharpness of Urine; Bladder
and is good for them that spit blood, Spitting blood.
so is the fruit.

Bitter Almonds do open obstructions of the Liver, Liver
Lungs, Lungs
Spleen, Spleen
Kidneys, Kidneys
and other inward parts, and are good against the Cough, Cough
and shortnes^e of Breath; Breath
inflammation, and exulceration of the Lungs, being made into a lohoch with
Turpentine and licked in; as writes Dioscorides.

The bitter Almonds taken with sweet wine, provoke Urine, Urine
and cure difficulty and pain in making water; and are good for them that are
troubled with Gravel and Stone. Stone,


Five or six bitter Almonds eaten in the morning fasting preserve from
Drunkenness all that day, Drunkenness,
and being applied to the forehead with oil of Roses and Vinegar, they take
away Headache, Headache
they are with great profit applied with honey upon corrupt and foul spreading
sores, and the bitings of mad dogs; they cleanse the skin and face from spots
and pimples.

Ammoniacum.
Name.] AMmoniacum is the only name it has in shops and is generally known by.

Descript.] This is a Gum or liquor of a tree called by Dioscorides, Agasyllis,
and of some Ferula growing in Cyrene, and nigh unto the place where was the
oracle Ammon in Lybia; whereof it is supposed to be called Ammoniacum; the best
sort is that which is close firm and pure, free from Gravel or dross, of a
bitter taste, smelling somewhat near unto the sent of C^storeum, and is almost
like the true Frankincense.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the planetary influence of Mars hot and
dry in the second degree, the quantity of a dram thereof taken inwardly loses
the Belly, Belly
and purges away cold Slimy phlegm, ^legm
drawing the same unto it self from remote parts of the body: it is also good
against Asthma, Asthma
shortness of breath, and Stoppings of the breast, Breast
falling sickness, Gout, pain of the haunch or huckle-bone, called the
Sciatica, Sciatica
against the old headache, Head ach
and diseases of the brain, Brain
sinews and extreme parts: Sinews
it may be taken in a lohoch with honey or in the decoction of French barley to
mundifie and cleanse the breast, Breast
and ripen phlegm, Phlegm
causing the same easily to be spit out.

It is also good against hardness and stoppings of the Spleen, Spleen
it provokes Urine, expells the dead child, Dead Child
but then must be but little of it taken at once, for if it be taken in too
great a quantity or too often, it will cause one to pis^e blood, it cures
swellings, Swelling
and hardness, and abates pain of the Liver and Spleen, Liver Spleen
if it be steeped in Vinegar and laid upon the place, being mingled with honey
and pitch and applied, it dis^olveth hard swellings and Tumors, Tumors
in the joints and extreme parts; and consumes all cold Tumors, and Scirrhus
matter, being laid thereon; and is good to he put into all ointments and
plasters that are made to warm, mollify, and to assuage pain.

Being mixed with the oil of Cyprus and Nitre, it is good to be applied to the
hip for the Sciatica or hip-gout, Sciatica Hip-gout
and to be laid upon any part to assuage pain, and weariness.

It is excellent to be put into Collyries and all medecins that are made to
clear the sight, and to take away dimness and the web of the eyes. Eyes


Amber.
Names.] IT is called Yellow Amber, Ambra Citrina; but in Latin more generally
Succinum.

Descript.] It is of sundry colors, some pieces whitish, some yellow, paler,
or deeper, and some of a very deep red color and dark, all the other being
clear, and transparent, but much more, being polished. It is by some taken to
be a vegetable, as Coral is; but more generally to be a kind of liquid
Bitumen, issuing from springs and fountains, in the German Seas; and running
into pieces, greater or lesser is taken up by Iron hooks, being soft under
water, but by the Air is hardened as Coral is: the white which is the lighter
and sweeter is best for Medicine, the yellow serves more to Mechanic uses;
and being rubbed it will draw strawes and other small things unto it, as the
Loadstone does I^on; and it will burn like Rozen or Bitumen, with a strong
heady sent: the powder thereof cast into the flame of a Candle, or other light,
will make a sudden flash like Nitre: by being distilled in a retort it will
yield an oil which at the first is very red, and smells very strong and
almost odious, but being several times Rectified, both color and sent will be
amended, and the oil fit for medicinal use.

Government and Virtues.] Amber is of a moderate hot and day temperature, and
under the particular influence of Mars; if it be burned on Coals, and the fumes
thereof received into the head, Head,
it does much help the moist distillations thereof on the Eyes, Eyes
Teeth, Teeth
Nose, Nose
or Stomach, Stomach
and is good for those that have the falling sickness; Falling Sickness
It provokes women's courses and is very good for to help the fits of the
Mother, Courses Mother
it prevents miscarriage, and procures Easy delivery; to take half a dram of
the powder, in a tear Egg, or in Wine, three or four mornings together, which
also helps the whites, and men that have the running of the Reins, it stays
fluxes, and strengthens the parts, it provokes Urine plentifully being taken
in saxifrage-water; It is very good for those that are troubled with old
Coughs, or are fallen into Consumptions, to take the powder thereof mixed with
conserve of red Roses, and taken in the mornings fasting; and is also
profitable for Joynt-Aches, and the Running Gout: the chemical oil of Amber
being taken inwardly three or four drops, in a little Muscadine does
wonderfully help the Stone, and the stopping of Urine, Strangury, or pissing by
drops; Two or three drops used outwardly to the Temples, and the nape of the
Neck, or behind the Ears, does warm and dry a cold moist brain, discusseth
wind in the Ears, and head, strengthens the memory, and is good in all
diseases of the head or brain.

Ambergrease.
Names.] Descript. IT is called Ambra Grisea in Latin, and Ambergrise in
English; But what it is or from what it comes, there are various opinions, yet
none certain; some suppose it be the spawn of a Whale; others affirm it to be
the excrement which has long continued in the belly of the whale; which being
cast forth is by the motion of the Seas cast on shore; some others think it to
be the excrement of certain great fishes, and some take it to be the Foam of
the Sea, but all these opinions are vulgar Errors, and Erroneous; The most
certain received opinion of the most Judicious is; That it is a kind of Bitumen
whose springs are in the Rocks of the Sea, or as some (and with good reason)
affirm that it grows on the Rocks as Mushrooms do on Trees, condensate into
that f^rm and substance we observe it in; oily and unctuous originally, and
being light is carried by the waves of the Sea, unto the shores of sundry
Countries and climates; There is much variety in the color thereof and some in
the substance; as white more or less, or gray, lighter or darker, or inclining
to redness or darkness: that which is not very white, as being usually very
dry* and inclining to a grayish color more or less, and either with spots,
and veins or without, so as it be fat, that is upon a knives point heated will
show oily, is accounted the best, and the black sort is the worst.

Government and Virtues.] It is governed by the Sun, and is hot and dry of
temperature in the second degree; it warmeth resolves, and strengthens; what
way soever it be taken, it eases the pains in the head, being dissolved in a
warm mortar, and mixed with a little ointment of Orange flowers; the Temples
and forehead being anointed therewith. It likewise comfort the brain warmeth
and resolves the cold defluxions of humors thereon, and on the Nerves and
Sinews, it does also comfort and strengthen the memory, and vital spirits: it
is good for women troubled with the mother to be applied to the place, it
helps barrenness proceeding from a cold cause, and is good for those to smell
unto who are subject to the falling sickness: it does well agree with aged
persons, to warm comfort and strengthen their cold decayed spirits; adding
vigor unto them; and is likewise accounted to have a property to stir and
excite Venereous exercises.

Amomum.
Description.] IT is a bunch or cluster of whitish round berries, somewhat like
unto grapes for the outward form and bigness but else very like unto Cardamomes
within, yet bigger and rounder, having within the outer whitish thin shell or
skin many blackish brown seeds, close thrust together; very like to the inner
seeds of Cardamoms, but larger and of somewhat a hot peircing sent, smelling
like unto oil of spike, and of a sharp, hot, and quick taste, as most Indian
spices are.

Government and Virtues.] Sol has the peculiar Government hereof, it is of an
heating, binding and drying quality, procuring rest, and sleep, Sleep, Rest
and easing pains in the head; Headache, Imposthumes, Scorpions.
being applied to the forehead; it digesteth and discusseth inflammations and
Imposthumes, and helps those that are stung by Scorpions being used with
Basil, it is good against the Gout, and Griping in the Guts, Gout, Gripings.
to swallow three are four of the seeds, and for the fits of the mother, taken
in the same manner; or made into a pessary and so used, or else in a Bath; It
is convenient for the Liver and Reins, and is an ingredient of chief account,
in great Antidotes that are preservatives.

Annise.
Name.] IT has no other name, but Annise, and Anniseeds.

Descript. [This plant has leaves much like young parsley newly sprung up; his
stalks be round and hollow; the leaves at first coming up, somewhat round but
afterward spring forth other leaves cut, and jagged, like those of Parsley; but
a great deal smaller and whiter; at the top of the stalks, grow diverse fair
tufts, or spikey Rundells, with white flowers, which being past comes the
seed, whitish, and sweet in smell and taste.

Place.] Annise grows naturally in Syria and Candy, but may now be found in
some gardens in England.

Time.] It flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is under the dominion of Jupiter, of temperature hot
and dry in the third degree; the seeds are only used in Physic which do much
dissolve Wind, Wind, Stomach, Bow. Belly, lask Urine, stone Hiccop, Flux
Whites, dropsy, Liver Thirst, Lust, milk, Mouth breath phlegm Cough, poison
Venomous Beasts, Fa ling-sickness Squinance Throat
help belchings and blastings in the Stomach and bowels, Gripings and pains in
the belly; it stops the Lask, and provoks Urine, and is good against the
Stone, taken with wine and water. It removes the hiccop, not only when it is
taken inwardly but being smelled unto.

It cures the bloody flux, and stops the whites in Women, and is very
profitable to be given to such as have the dropsy, it opens the Liver, and
stancheth thirst.

Anniseeds plentifully eaten stir up lust, and causes women to have plenty
of milk, the seed chewed in the mouth amendeth the stench thereof and makes
the breath sweat.

The same beaten to powder, and taken with honey, cleanses the breast from
phlegm, and cures the old cough, having bitter Almonds mixed therewith, the
same drunk with Wine is good against poison, and bitings of Venomous beasts.

Dreams Sleep Headache, hearing
It is singular to be given to Children to eat that be in danger of the
falling-sicknes, being mixed with honey vinegar, and hysop, and the throat
gargled therewith, it cures the Squinancy and swellings of the Throat.

Anniseeds bound in a little bag, and kept at the nose to smell unto, keeps
men from dreaming and starting in their sleep, Dreams Sleep
and causes them to rest quietly, the perfume of it taken up into the nose
cures the headache, Headache,
and being pounded with oil of roses and laid to the Ears it cures inward
hurts and wounds of the same which impedite the hearing. hearing


Anagyris or Arbor Inda.
Name.] IT has no other names in our shops.

Descript.] There are three kinds hereof, the first Anagyris is a little low
shrub, or bush, upon which grow small leaves always three together, the
flowers be yellow almost like broom flowers which being past, there succeed
long husks or Cods, which contain in it a flat seed hard and firm almost like
a kidney leaf, but somewhat smaller: the whole plant is of a strong ilfavored
stinking savor, as it were the smell of Gladwyn, or Spurge-wort.

2. Another shrub, somewhat resembling the former in leaves, and growing, but
has flowers very thick together, hanging by a fine slender stem, like to a
spiky Ear, but yellow, almost like broom flowers: the Cods are rounder and
smaller then those of the former, with a smaller fruit.

3. There is another kind producing long Cods also, which, well ordered in the
growing up, waxes to be a tall tree; the branches are set with broad round
leaves, the flowers be purple and red, like the flowers of garden pease, which
grow about the lowest part of the great branches, producing afterward long
flat Cods; of a wan blew color, having therein a flat seed, hard like to a
Lentil.

Place.] These plants grow wild in several places of Italy, and Province, in
woods, and upon the Mountains,

Time.] Anagyris flowreth in April, and May; the second in May and June: the
Arbor Inda in March, the fruit is ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] Both leaves and seed are hot and dry, yet partake of
a Saturnine influence, a dram of the leaves boiled in wine, Terms
drive down women's flowers and the afterbirth: the young leaves bruised and
laid to, pultis wise, do allay, and dissolve swellings, Swellings
the seeds eaten provoke violent vomiting. Vomiting


Aloe, or Aloes.
Names.] BY the same name of Aloe or Aloes is the condensed juice of this plant
called in all parts of Europe; the plant is also called Sea-houseleek and
Sea-Ay-green.

Descript.] This plant has very long leaves, thick and set round about with
short points or crests, standing wide one from another, the root is thick and
long, all the herb is of a strong savor, and bitter taste, out of this herb is
drawn a Juice, which is dried, and called Aloes in parts of the world.

Place.] Aloe, grows very plentiously in India, and from thence comes the
best juice; It grows also in many places of Asia and Arabia near the sea
side, but the juice thereof is not so good as that of India.

Government and Virtues.] It is a martial plant, hot in the second degree, and
dry in the third, of a very bitter taste, the juice being refined and clarified
from its dross, is of a clear and blackish clean brown color, it opens the
belly, and purges cold phlegmatic and choleric humors, Phlegm Choler
which over-burden and hurt the stomach, it is the basis in almost all pills,
it comfort cleanses and dries up superfluous humors.

It may be taken with Cinnamon, Ginger, Mace, Galingal, or Anniseed, to assuage
and drive away pain of the stomach; Stomach
and to comfort and warm the stomach and expel phlegm; the same is also good
against the Jaundies and spitting of blood. Jaundies spitting Blood.


Aloe made into powder and strewn upon new bloody wounds, stops the blood,
and heals the wound; wounds
likewise being applied upon old ulcers it closes them up, and it is a
sovereign medicine for Ulcers about the secret parts and fundament. Ulcers


The same boiled with w^ne and honey, heals rifts and out-growings of the
fundament, and stops the flux of the Hemerrhoides, Hemrods
and being applied with honey it takes away black spots, Spots
that come by stripes or bruises, bruises
it is also good against inflammations hurts and scabs of the Eyes, Eyes
and against running and dimness of the same.

Aloes mixed with oil of roses and vinegar and laid to the forehead and temples
asswageth headache, headache
the head being often rubbed with Aloes mixed with wine keeps the hair from
falling off. Hair
The same applied with wine cures sores of the mouth and gums, the throat and
kernels under the tongue; and outwardly applied it is a good consolidative
medicine; stops bleeding, and does mundifie and cleanse all corruption.

Assa foetida.
Names.] THis is a juice or liquor, got out of the stalks and roots of a
certain plant called Laser and Laserpitium, growing in Media and Persia and is
of a very loathsome and stinking savor, so that it is called the Devil's T --

There is another sort which grows in Cyrene, which is of a pleasant savor
and not very bad in taste.

Descript.] Laser is a plant that dies yearly; it has great thick stalks,
having leaves like Parsley; of a pleasant sent, the seed is broad as it were a
little leaf; It has a great many roots growing out of one head, which is thick
and covered with a black skin: from out of these roots, and stalk, being cut,
flows a strong liquor or Juice, which is dried and useful in Physic.

Place.] The best grows on the mountains of Cyrene, and yields a liquor of
a pleasant smell; the other kind grows in Syria, Media, Armenia and Lybia,
the Juice whereof is of a very loathsome smell; which is our Assa foetida or
devil's dirt.

Government and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree; under the
dominion of Saturn is the Juice, but the roots under the influence of Mars: the
roots as say Dioscorides and Gallen are good against poison; Poison, Breath
Sweet.
and a little of the same eaten with meat or taken with salt causes a sweet
breath.

The Roots stamped with oil and applied, takes away black and blew marks that
come of bruses or stripes, Bruises
cures and dissolveth the Kings Evil and all hard swellings and botches,
Kings-Evill Botches
the parts being anointed or plastered therewith.

The same root made into powder, and made into a plaster with the oil of
Ireos and wax, does assuage and cure the Sciatica or hip-Gout, Sciatica
the same boiled with pomgranat-pills and vinegar, does cure the hemorroids,
and takes away warts and superfluities about the fundamentor elsewhere. Warts


They also mundifie and cleanse the breast, dissolve and ripen tough phlegm,
Phlegm
and are profitable against an old cough coming of cold, Cough
being taken with honey in manner of an Electuary or Lohoch.

They provoke Urine, Urine
cleanse the Kidneys and bladder, break and drive forth the stone, Stone
provoke women's flowers, Flowers
and expulse the secondine and dead child. Secondine


Being chewed in the mouth they abate the toothache, Toothach
and draw superfluous humors from the brain.

The liquor or Gum of Laserpitium, especially of Cyrene, which is called in our
shops Gummi Benzni or Benzoin dissolved in water, and drunk, drives away
hoarsness, Hoarsness
that comes suddenly and being supt up with a rear egg, it cures the Cough,
Cough
and taken in some broth is good against the Pleurisy. Pleurisy


It is good against Cramps and shrinking of the sinews, Cramp Sinews
to be taken the quantity of a scruple; and taken with Pepper and mirrhe, it
provokes the Terms, Terms
and drives forth the afterbirth and dead fruit, afterbirth
to be taken with honey and vinegar or surrup of vinegar, it is good against the
falling sickness, Falling Sickness
it is good against the flux of the belly, Flux
coming from weakness of the stomach being taken with raisins.

It drives away the shaking fits of Agues being drunken with wine pepper and
Frankincense: there is an electuary made thereof, with pepper, Ginger, and the
leaves of Rue, pounded together with honey, which is called Antidotum ex succo
Cyreniaco, which is a singular medecin against Quartain Agues. Agues


It is good against the bitings of Venomous beasts, Venomous bittings
poisonous shots of darts or Arrows, Shots
bitings of mad dogs, being taken inwardly and applied outwardly upon the
wounds. It quickneth the sight, and takes away the haw or web in the Eyes, web
in the Eyes
at the first coming, if it be applied upon them with honey, being wrapped with
Frankincense in a fine linen Cloth, and holden upon the T^eth; it cures the
Ach of the same, Toothach
the decoction thereof with figs and hysop boiled together in water, and holden
or kept in the mouth works the same effect.

Being applied with honey it stays the Uvula falling down, Uvula
and with hydromel or mede it cures the Squinance, being gargled with it. It
breaks pestilential Impostums, and Carbuncles, Carbuncle
being laid thereto, with Rue, Nitre, and honey; after the same manner it takes
away Corns; Corns
being applied with Coperass and Verdigrease, it cures the disease in the
Nostrills called Polypus, Polypus
and all scurvy manginess. Manginess
Against kybed heels, Kibed heels
first bath the heels with wine, and then anoint the kibes with this gum
boiled in oil.

The stinking gum call Assa foetida, is good for all the purposes aforesaid,
but it is not so good as the Laser of Cyrene, but it is very good to smell
unto, or to be laid upon the Navel against the choking or rising up of the
Mother. Benzoin is used for all the purposes aforesaid, instead of the sweet
Laser; but it is supposed not to be the true Laser Cyreniacum, but the gum of a
certain tree to us unknown.

B.
Balsom-tree, or the true Balsome.
Names.] THe Arabians call it Balessau; The Greeks (...), and the Latins
Balsamum; the liquor they call Opobalsamum, the berries or fruit of the tree
Carpobalsamum, and the sprigs or young branches thereof Xylobalsamum;

Descript.] The balsome or balm tree, in the most natural places where it
grows, is never very great, seldom about eight or nine foot high, and in
some places much lower, with diverse small and straight slender branches issuing
from thence, of a brownish red color, especially the younger twigs, covered
with a double bark, the red outermost, and a green one under it, which are of a
very fragrant smell, and of an Aromatical quick taste, somewhat Astringent, and
gummy, cleaving to the fingers; the wood under the bark is white, and as
insipid as any other wood: on these branches come forth sparsedly, and without
order, many stalks of winged leaves, somewhat like unto those of the
Mastick-tree; the lowest and those that first come forth consisting but of
three leaves, others of five or seven leaves, and seldom above; which are set
by couples, the lowest smallest, and the next bigger, and the end-one largest
of all; of a pale green color, smelling and tasting somewhat like the bark of
the branches; somewhat clammy also, and abide on the bushes all the year, the
flowers are many and small standing by three together on small stalks, at the
ends of the branches, made of six small white leaves a piece; after which
follow small brownish hard berries, little bigger than Juniper Berries, small
at both ends, crested on the sides, and very like unto the berries of the
Turpentine tree, of a very sharp sent, having a yellow hony-like substance in
them somewhat bitter but Aromatical in taste, and biting on the tongue like the
Opobalsamum; from the body hereof being cut there issues forth a liquor (which
sometimes flows without scarifying) of a thick whitish color at the first,
which afterward grows clear, and is somewhat thicker than oil in Summer, of
so sharp a peircing sent, that it will pierce the Nostrills of those that smell
thereunto; almost like unto oil of spike; but as it grows older, so it
grows thicker, and not so quick in the smell; and in the color becoming
yellow like honey or brown thick Turpentine as it grows old.

Place and Time.] The most reputed natural places, where this tree has been
known to grow, both in these and former days are Arabia, Foelix, about Mecha,
and Medina, and a small village near them called Bedrumia, and the hills,
valleys, and sandy grounds about them; and the Country of the Sabeans adjoining
next thereunto; and from thence transplanted into India and Egypt; It likewise
grew on the hills of Gilead. And it is reported that the Queen of Sheba,
brought of the Balsome-trees to Solomon (as the richest of her Presents) who
caused them to be planted in Orchards in the Valley of Jericho; where they
flourished, and were tended and yearly pruned, until they together with the
Vineyards in that Country were destroyed by that monster of mankind, the savage
Bestial Turk. It flowereth in the spring, and the fruit is ripe in Autumn.

Government and Virtues.] This Balsome-tree is a Solar plant, of temperature
hot and dry in the second degree, and is sweet in smell, being of thin parts;
but the liquor, or Opobalsamum, is of more thin parts than the plant it self;
the fruit or berries is very like it in quality, but far inferior thereunto in
the subtilty. The Liquor or Opobalsamum is of great good use against all
poisons or infections, Poys ns, Vipers, Scorpions, Pestilence, Spotted Fever,
Liver, Spleen, Head, Stomach, brain Memory, Falling Sickness Eyes, Ears,
Coughs, Consumption, Cold, Wind, Bowels Mother, Barrenness, Dead-birth, Whites
Urine, Stone, Gravel, Palsy, Cramp, Sinews Green, Worms,
both Vipers, Serpents and Scorpions, the Pestilence and spotted Fever; and
other putride, and intermissive Agues that arise from obstructions, and crude
cold humors, to take a scruple or two in some drink, for some days together,
and to sweat thereon: for this opens the obstructions of the Liver, and
Spleen, and digesteth those raw humors in them, cherishing the vital spirits,
radical moisture, and natural heat in them and is very effectual in all cold
griefs, and diseases of the head or stomach, helping the swimmings and turnings
of the brain, weak memories and falling sickness, it clears the eyes of films
or skins, and eases pains in the Ears: It helps the cough, shortness of
breath, and consumption of the Lungs, warming and drying up, the distillations
of Rheums upon them, and all other diseases of the stomach proceeding of cold
or wind, the cold or windy distempers of the bowels womb or mother, which cause
torments or pains, or the cold moystures procuring barrenness. It provokes the
courses, expels the dead birth and afterbirth, the flux of the Whites and
stopping of Urine; it cleanses the Reins, and kidneys and expels the stone
and gravel: it is singular good against the Palsy, Cramp, tremblings,
convuls^ons, shrinking of sinews, and for green wounds.

The women in Egypt preserve their beauty and youth herewith for a long time.

The berries are especially good against poisons and infections, the falling
sickness, swimmings and pains in the head, the cough and diseases of the Lungs,
windy pains, and Stitches in the sides, stopping of Urine rising of the mother,
and other diseases thereof to sit in a bath made of them. The wood is also
(though in a far weaker manner) effectual for the same purposes.

Bdellium.
Name.] BOth the tree and Gum are called by one name that is Bdellium, and gum-
Bdellium.

Descript.] Dioscorides gives no description of this tree, but Pliny Lib. 12.
cap. 9. sets it down to be of a sad form, and of the bigness of the white
olive tree, having leaves like an oak, and fruit like the wild figtree, the
best Gum, is clear like glue, fat on the inside, easily melting or dissolving;
pure, or clean from dross, sweet in the burning like unto Unguis Odoratus, and
bitter in taste, but there is hardly any such brought unto us, for we find
little bitterness in any, and less sweetness, in the burning of it, but
strong and unpleasant rather; neither is it soft, or easy to be dissolved, but
hard and not to be dissolved Equally, but into grains or knots without warmth,
yet it is of a sad brown color somewhat like glue, and much like unto Myrrh;
so that they are often mistaken one for another, but that Bdellium is harder
dry and browner; but there are sundry sorts thereof as says Mathiolus, and
Bauhine in his Comment upon him, for the Indians and Arabians, who were the
chief merchants for drugs, had learned the art of Adulterating them, of whom
the Jews learned that art, and have since exceeded them therein, as the
Vintners, and Coopers study who shall out-doe others in the mysterious Mystery
and mischief of sophisticating and adulterating wines.

Place.] Arabia is said to be the chief place where they naturally, grow; yet
in Genesis 2. it is said, it grows in the land of Havilah, which is compassed
by the River Pishon, one of the heads of the River which went out of the Garden
of Eden; which land of Havilah, joyneth to Persia Eastward, and does incline
toward the West, where it is said is Gold Bdellium and Onyx stone.

Government and Virtues.] Both tree and Gum- Bdellium are peculiars to the
Jurisdiction of Mars; the tree is very sharply armed with cruel Thorns, the
Properties of the Gum are to heat, and mollify hard Tumors, Tumors, Nodes,
knots, Terms, Stone, cough, serpents, Spleen, Sides, Burstness, Cods,
Dead-birth, Mother,
and the Nodes or knots in the throat, neck, or Sinews, or of any other parts,
any way applied, it provokes Urine and women's courses, and breaks the Stone,
it is good for the Cough; and for those, that are bitten or stung by any
Venomous creatures: It helps to discuss the windiness of the Spleen, and the
pains of the sides, it is good for those that are bursten, or have the falling
of the guts into their Cods; as also for the swellings of the Cods through
wind. It expels the dead birth, softneth the hardness of the mother, and
dries up the moisture thereof.

Buckwheat.
Names.] IN most Countries of England this grain goes by the general name of
French Wheat especially in Hampshire, Surry, Berkshire, Wiltshire and
Buckinghamshire* especially in those barren parts of those countries where it
is most usually sown and delights to grow, it is also in many parts of
England called Buckwheat, some take it to be the Erysinum of Theophrastus, and
the Ireo of Pliny, and it is called by Mathiolus, Frumentum Sarasenicum, the
Dutch names are B^ckweydt, and Buckenweydt.

Descript.] It rises up with diverse round hollow reddish stalks, set with
diverse leaves each by it self on a stalk, which is broad and round, and lie
forked at the bottom, small and painted at the end, somewhat it does resemble an
Ivy leaf, but is softer in handling, at the top of the stalks come forth
diverse clusters of small white flowers, which turn into small three-cornered
blackish seed, with a white pulpe within; the root is small and threddy.

Place and Time.] It is said to have its original birthplace in Arabia,
whereby it had the Latin name of Frumentum Sarasenicum; and was transplanted
from thence into Italy, but now it is very commonly sown in most of our
Northern countries, where for the use and profit made of it many fields are
sown therewith, it is not usually sown before April, and sometimes in May, for
at its first springing up, a frosty night kills it all, and so it will do the
flowers when it blossoms, it is ripe at the latter end of August, or beginning
of September, and will grow in a dry hungry ground, for which it is held as
good as a dunging.

Government and Virtues.] This grain is attributed to Venus, it does nourish
less then wheat, Rye, or barley, but more then millet, or Pa^ick, and the bread
or cakes made of the meal thereof, does easily digest and soon pass out of the
stomach (yet some hold the contrary): it gives small nourishment though not
bad, and is withal a little statu^ent or windy, yet Country People in diverse
places of Germany, and Italy, do feed hereon as almost their only bread-corn,
and are strong and lusty Persons, following hard Labor, for the bread or cakes
made ^herof are pleasant, but do somewhat press or lie heavy on the stomach. I
never knew any bread or cakes made of it for people to eat ^n this Country; but
it is generally used to fatten Hogs, and Poultry of ^ll sorts, which it does
very exceedingly, and quickly; The physical uses of it are these, It provokes
Urine, Urine, Milk, Belly, Melancholy, Sight.
increases milk, loosneth the belly, and being taken in wine is good for
melancholy persons; the juice of the leaves dropped into the eyes, clears the
sight.

Bane-wort.
Names.] IT is also called in some places of England, Sperewort.

Descript.] This plant has reddish stalks full of knees or joints, upon which
grow long narrow leaves, almost like the leaves of Withy but longer, and a
little snipt or toothed round about, especially those that grow lowest: the
flowers are yellow as Gold, somewhat rough in the middle, in Fashion and Color
like those of Golden Crowfoot. After the flowers be past, there succeed knops
or heads like those of Crowfoot, the reed is threddy.

Place.] It grows in moist medows, watery places, and standing puddles.

Time.] It flowreth in May, and yields his seed soon after.

Government and Virtues.] This is an herb of fiery Mars, hot and dry in the
fourth degree, it blistereth the body as Ranunculus does, and is like it in
complexion, and operation.

This herb is no way to be given inwardly; for it is hurtful both to man and
beast: the sheep which happen to eat thereof are troubled with a grievous
inflammation, which burns up and consumes their Livers whereof they dye; the
Dutchmen call it Egelcoolen, because sheep that have eaten of it, have a
disease which they call Egel, that is, the blistering and inflammation of the
Liver.

Spanish-Broom.
Names.] IT is also called, Italian-Broom.

Descript.] The Spanish-Broom has woodish stems from which grow up long
slender and pliant twiggs, which be bare and naked without leaves, or at least
having very few small leaves set here and there, far apart from one another,
the flowers are yellow not much unlike the flowers of our English Broom, after
which it has Cods wherein are contained brown and flat seed.

Place.] This Broom grows in dry places in Spain and Languedoc, and is not
found in this Country but in the Gardens of Herbarists: It is plentiful in
the Physic Garden at Westminster.

Time.] It flowers in this Country in June, and somewhat after; the seed is
ripe in August.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the planetary influence of Mars hot and
dry of temperature, the flowers and seed of Spanish Broom, the quantity of a
dram, being drunk in mede, or honyed-water cause strong Vomiting, Vomiting
but without danger, the seed taken alone loses the belly, Belly loosned.
and brings forth great plenty of watery and tough humors, out of the twigs,
or little branches being steeped in water, is pressed forth a juice, which
taken in quantity of a little glass full fasting, is good against the
Squinancy, and also is good against the Sciatica.

Base-broom.
Name.] IT is called also in English Woodwoseen.

Descript.] This is not much unlike the common broom, saving that it is not so
high nor so straight, but lies along almost upon the ground, with many small
branches, proceeding from a woody stem, and set with little long small leaves,
and at the top with small fair yellow flowers not much unlike those of the
Common Broom, but smaller, after them come narrow husks or Cods, wherein is a
flat seed; the root is hard and of a woodish substance.

Place.] It grows in untilled places that lie low, and is very frequent in
moist clay pasture grounds.

Time.] It flowers in July and August and sometimes after, and shortly after
the seed is ripe.

Government and Virtues.] It is hot and dry of temperature, and under the same
planetary influence as the other Brooms; and is in nature and operation like
unto the common Broom but not so powerful; It is seldom suffered to grow while
the seed is ripe in the Country, they gather it while it is in flower for the
dyers, who dye clothes yellow with it.

Behen.
Names.] IT is also called Been-album, and Polemonium.

Descript.] Behen has tender stalks, with joints; the leaves are meetly broad,
set two at every Joint one against another, at the highest of the stalks grow
white flowers, hanging down, and joining one to another like a little nose-gay,
after the flowers there comes black seed enclosed in round husks, the root is
white plain and long.

Place.] Behen grows upon mountains, and rough stony places, but is planted
here in Gardens.

Time.] It flowers in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] It is dry in the second degree, a Saturnine plant,
the root being drunk in wine, is good against the bloody Flux, flux, Venomous,
bitings, Urine, Strangury.
and the bitings and stingings of Venomous beasts, the same drunk in water
Provokes Urine, and helps the strangury, and pains in the huckle bone. It is
good to be taken with Vinegar, against the hardness and stoppings of the
Spleen, Spleen
and all pains thereof, being chewed in the mouth, it helps the Toothache;
Toothache
the same being pounded and applied, cures the stingings of Scorpions; and is
reported to have so great Antepitheticall power against Scorpions, that
whosoever does but hold the same in his hand, cannot be stung by any Scorpion.

Black-bind-weed.
Name.] IT is also called With-wind.

Descript.] Black-bind-weed, has smooth red branches very small, like great
threads, wherewithal it wrappeth and windeth it self about trees, hedges, staks,
and all things it can lay hold upon; the leaves are like to Ivy, but smaller
and tenderer, the flowers be white and very small, the seed is black tryangled
or three square, small and black, growing thick together, every seed is
encl^sed and covered with a little skin, the root is also small and tender as a
thread.

Place.] It grows in borders of Fields and Gardens; and about hedges and
ditches, and amongst herbs.

Time.] It delivers 'its seed in August and September, and afterward
perishes.

Government and Virtues.] Bind-weed is a plant of Mercury of a hot nature, and
of subtle parts, having power to dissolve, the juice of the leaves being drunk
do loosen and open the belly, and being pounded, and laid to the grieved place,
dissolveth, wastes and consumes hard swellings.

Rough bind-weed.
Names.] IT is also called prickly Bind-weed, and commonly known in shops by
the name of Sarsa-parilla;

Descript.] Rough or prickly Bind-weed grows with tender stalks, and
branches, garnished or set round about, with many sharp prickles or thorns,
winding it self about trees, hedges and bushes, like our English Bind-weed;
taking hold with its clasping branches upon every thing stands near it; the
leaves be something like those of our Ivy but longer, and sharper at the point,
the flowers are white; and the fruit are red berries, when they be ripe
clustering like Grapes, the root is of a thick hard substance.

Place.] It grows in the West Indies, as in Peru and Virginia, delighting in
places that incline to moisture, and in low and shadowy Valleys, and is
sometimes found in the Gardens of curious herbarists.

Time.] In its natural Country, it flowers in Spring and Autumn.

Government and Virtues.] It is hot and dry of temperature but of subtle and
thin parts; under the influence of Mars; to which plant he flies for cure;
after he has been too much inflamed in his fiery assaults with Venus, the
decoction of this plant is excellent for the French Pox; Pox, Rhumes, Gouts,
Stomach Catharrs Kings-Evill Spleen.
and is good in Rhumes, Gouts, and cold diseases of the head, and stomach, and
expels Wind, from the Stomach and Mother: it helps also Catharrs, and salt
distillations from the Head, it is good in Tumors and the Kings-Evill. A dram
of the powder, with the like quantity of Tamarisk, being taken in Ale, or Wine,
mollifies Tumors, and hardness of the Spleen.

It is so great an Antidote against Poison, that it does not serve only for
Venom, received before hand, but also against all poison, after that one has
taken hereof; so that whosoever takes thereof daily, no Venom can hurt him;
it is also reported of this plant, that if the juice thereof be given to a
child newly born, no Poison shall ever after hurt him.

Bombace-tree.
Name.] IT is also called the Cotton-Tree.

Descript.] This plant is but a shrub, or low-tree, which grows not very
high; the leaves be broad with deep cuts, or slits somewhat like Vine leaves,
but smaller; the flowers be yellow, and somewhat purple in the middle, jagged
about the edges, the fruit is almost like unto Filberds, broad and flat, and
full of fair white Cotton or Bombace; in which the seed lies hidden.

Place.] The Bombace, or Cotton-tree grows in Egypt, Candy, Maltha, and the
Indies, it is now very plentifully planted in the Island of Barbados.

Government and Virtues.] This plant is under the dominion of Venus; the seed
whereof is of temperature moderatly hot and moist; and is very good against a
Cough, and all cold diseases of the breast. It augmenteth natural strength,
increasing the seed of Generation; and exciteth and stirs up the desire to
Venus sports.

Box-tree
Names.] IT has been also called Palm Tree, because on Palm Sunday people use
to dress up Churches, and their houses therewith.

Descript.] It is so well known a description is needless.

Place.] It delights in hilly Grounds, as Boxwood in Surry can testify, they
usually plant it to make knots in Gardens.

Time.] It is planted in the beginning of November, it floureth in February and
March, and the seed is ripe in September or thereabouts.

Government and Virtues.] It is a Saturnine plant; the leaves are hot and dry*
and astringent; It is not useful in any medicine, but rather hurtful, for box
taken into the body does not only hurt the head and brain; but the very smell
thereof is hurtful unto the brain, and causes Headache.

Some writers do affirm, that the lie wherein boxen leaves have been steeped,
make the hair yellow if the head be often washed therewith.

Prickly-Box.
Names.] IT is called also Box-thorn, Asses-box, and Thorn-box.

Descript.] It is a tree not much unlike the other Box; the leaves be thick and
somewhat round like boxen leaves, and amongst them grow sharp prickles, the
flowers grow amongst the leaves, and after them, there comes a black round
seed, as big as a pepper corn, the roots are woodish and spread much abroad.

Of the small branches and roots of this tree steeped in water and boiled, or
of the pressing forth of the juice of the seed they make Licium, which formerly
was in much use with Physicians.

Place.] The prickly Box-tree, grows in Capadocia, Lybia, and in some parts
of Italy, and Slavonia.

Government and Virtues.] Mercury governs it, the dried Licium, is of subtle
parts and astringent, it helps those who have the Lask and Bloudy-flux; Lask,
Bloudy-flux Spitting-bloud Cough Ulcers* Gums, Lips, Eyes
as also those that spit Blood or have a Cough.

It stops the inordinat course of the flowers either taken inwardly, or
applied outwardly, it is good against corrupt Ulcers, and running Scabs,
running of the Ears, inflammation of the Gums, and against chops of the lips
and fundament, being applied thereto.

It cleereth the sight and cures scurvy festred sores of the eye lids, and
corners of the Eyes.

Comin.
Name.] IT has no other names, there are two kinds hereof Garden Comin and
wild Comin.

Descript.] The Garden Comin, has a straight stem, with diverse branches, the
leaves be jagged not much unlike Fennel, the flowers grow in rundells or spiky
tops, like Annise, Fennel or Dill, the seed is brown and long.

The wild Comin has a brittle stalk of a span long, upon which grow four, or
five leaves all jagged or snipt, or dented round about.

Place.] The Garden Comin grows in Ethiopia, Egypt, Galatia, lesser Asia,
and Cicily: from whence the seed is brought to us.

Government and Virtues.] The seed is hot and dry in the third degree, and
solar.

Comin scatters and breaks windiness of the Stomach, Bowels and Matrix; it
is singular against Gripings, Griping of the Guts
and frettings of the Bowels, either to be received at the Mouth; administered
in Clisters, or outwardly applied pultis-wise with barly-meal.

The same eaten or drunken is very good for the Cough, Cough
Colds, Cold,
stoppings in the Breast; and if it be drunk in Wine, it is good for those that
are hurt with any Venomous beast, it asswageth swellings of the Cods and
Stones, Cods swelled
being applied pultis wise.

The same mingled with Yuray meal and pulpe of raisins, and applied to the
Belly, stops the inordinate flux of Women's courses. Flowers,


Comin-seed pounded and given to smell to, with Vinegar stops bleeding at Nose.
Bleeding at Nose


Capers.
Names.] NAmes, it has none but Capers, or Cappers.

Descript.] It is a prickly plant or bush almost like the bramble, with many
branches spread abroad and stretched along the ground, upon which do grow hard,
sharp, and crooked prickles, with blackish round leaves standing one against
another, not much unlike the leaves of Assarabacca, or the leaves of a
Quince-tree but much rounder, amongst the leaves spring up small knops or buds,
which do open into fair starlike flowers of a pleasant smell, after which,
comes the fruit, which is long and round, and has in it small corns or
kernells, the root is long and woodish covered with a thick bark or rind, very
useful in Physic.

Place.] Capers grow in rough untilled places in stony sandy ground, and by
hedges sides in Spain and Italy, and other hot Countries, the fruit and
flowers, are brought unto us from Spain, preserved in pickle.

Government and Virtues.] Capers are plants of Mars, hot and dry in the second
degree, and somewhat astringent, the bark of the root, is most used in Physic;
the flowers and leaves are not so strong in operation, and are an excellent
sauce.

The bark of the Caper roots is good against the hardness and stopping of the
Spleen to be taken with Oxymel, or mingled with oils or ointments for that
purpose, and outwardly applied upon the region of the Spleen, Spleen.
the root hereof is good in decoction, to be given in drink to such as are
troubled with the Sciatica and Palsy, Sciatica Palsy
and to such as are hurt or bruised by falls or otherwise; Bruises
it mightily provokes Urine and stirrs up women's courses, Terms
the fruit and leaves have the like virtue as the roots, but not so strong, the
seed of Capers boiled in Vinegar and kept warm in the Mouth asswageth the
Toothache, Toothache
the juice of the leaves, flowers and young fruit of Capers kills Worms in
the Ears, Worms in the Ears
being dropped therein; the Capers which are brought into this Country
preserved in pickle, being eaten are meat and medicine, for it stirs up
appetite, fortifies the Stomach, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
and consumes and wastes cold phlegm that is gathered about the Stomach.

Soldonella.
Names.] IT is called also in some places Sea-cawle, and in Dutch Zee-wind; but
in shops, it is known by the name of Soldonella or Brassica-marina.

Descript.] Soldonella has many small branches somewhat red, by which it
spreads and creeps along the ground, covered here and there with little
round green leaves, rounder and smaller then leaves of Assarabana, the flowers
are red, or carnation color, the seed is black and grows in husks or round
Cods, the root is small and long; the leaves have a saltish taste.

Place.] This herb grows abundantly in Zealand, upon the Sea-banks, and in
most salt grounds and Marshes, which the Sea flows over.

Time.] It floureth in June, after which time it is fit to be gathered, and
kept to serve in medicine.

Government and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree a martial
plant; it purges very forceably down all watery humors; Watery humors, Liver,
Dropsy.
and opens obstructions of the Liver, and is given with good success to
hydropicall people; the best way to give it, is boiled with the broth of fat
flesh, or else it may be dried and taken in powder, but if it be taken in
powder alone, it hurts and troubles the Stomach, the correcters of it are
Anniseeds, Ginger and Cynnamon, and a good quantity of Sugar, and so taken
altogether.

The Carob-tree.
Names.] IT is called in shops Xylocaracta, Carob and Carobs.

Descript.] This fruit grows upon a great tree whose branches are small and
covered with a red bark, the leaves be long and spread abroad after the manner
of Ashen leaves, consisting of six or seven small leaves growing by a rib, one
against another, of a sad dark green color above, and of a light green
underneath, the fruit is certain crooked cods or husks, sometimes of a foot and
an half long, and as broad as ones thumb; sweet, in the husk is contained seed,
which is great, plain, and of a Chestnut color.

Place.] This plant grows in Spain, Italy, and other hot Countries.

Government and Virtues.] The fruit of the Carob-tree, is some what hot and
dry, and astringent, especially when it is fresh and green, somewhat subject to
the influence of Saturn, the fresh and green Carobs do gently loose the belly,
but are somewhat hard of digestion; and if eaten in great quantity hurtful to
the Stomach; but being dried they stop fluxes of the belly, Fluxes
provoke Urine, Urine
and are not prejudicial to the Stomach, being much fitter to be eaten, then
the Carobs which are fresh gathered or green.

Cassia-fistula.
Names.] IT it called Cassia in the cane, but is usual known by the general
name of Cassia-fistula in most Countries.

Descript.] The tree which bears the canes has leaves not much unlike those
of the Ash-tree, they be great, long, and spread abroad, made of many leaves,
growing one against another, along by one stem, the fruit is round, long,
black, and with woodish husks or Cods; most commonly two foot long, and as
thick as ones thumb; severed or parted in the inside, into diverse small cells
or Chambers, wherein lies flat, and brownish seed laid together with the
pulpe, which is black, soft, and sweet, and is called the flower, marrow, or
cream of Cassia, and is very useful and profitable in medicine.

Place.] It grows in Syria, Arabia, and the East Indies, and in the West, as
Jaimaca.

Government, Nature, and Virtues.] The black pulpe or moist substance of
Cassia, is of a gentle temperature, moderatly hot and moist in the first
degree, under the Government of Venus; the inner pulpe of Cassia is a sweet and
pleasant medicine, and may safely be given to all weak people as women with
Child, and young Children.

It loses the belly gently, and moderatly purges choleric humors, Choler
and slimy phlegm, Phlegm
gathered about the Guts; to be taken the quantity of an ounce, at a time.

Cassia is excellent good for those who are troubled with hot Agues, Agues
the Pleurisy, Pleurisy
Jaundies, Jaundise
or any inflammation of the Liver especially being mixed with waters, Liver
drinks or he^bs that be of a cooling nature. It is good to cleanse the Reins
and Kidneys, Reins and Kidneys
it drives forth Gravel and the Stone, and is a preservative against the
Stone, to be drunk in the decoction of Liquorish, and Parsley roots, or Ciches.
It is good to gargle with Cassia to assuage and mitigate swellings of the
Throat, and to dissolve, ripen and break imposthumes and Tumors.

Avicen writes that Cassia being applied to the part greived with the Gout,
asswageth the pain.

Wild-Carrot.
Names.] THere is one kind that grows not in England, which is called Daucus
Cretensis, because it grows in Crete or Candy, or Daucus of Candy, the wild
Carrot which grows here, is also Daucus, and often passes in shops for the
true Daucus of Crete, it is also called birds-nest, from the great tufts of the
flowers resembling a birds-nest.

Descript.] The Daucus Cretensis is a tender herb having a stalk of a span long
set with leaves a great deal smaller, and more tender then the leaves of
Fennel; at the top of the stalk grow little spikey tufts, with white flowers
like unto the tops of Coriander, yielding a little long, rough white seed of a
good savor and sharp taste, the root is of the thickness of ones finger, and
about a span long.

The Wild-Carrot or birds-nest, has leaves like Coriander but greater, and not
much unlike the leaves of the yellow garden Carrot, the flowers be white,
growing upon tufts or rundells, like to the tuffets of the yellow Carrots, in
the middle whereof there is found a little small flower or twain, of a brown
red color turning toward black, the seed is long, and hairy; the root is
small and hard.

Place.] The true Daucus grows in Candy, in stony places that stand in the
Sun, the other grows in this Country, about the borders of Fields, in stony
places and by the way sides.

Time.] This last kind floureth in July and August.

Government and Virtues.] The seeds of Daucus are hot and dry almost unto the
third degree under the influence of Mercury, the seed beaten and drunk in Wine,
is good against the Strangury, Strangury
and painful making of Water, Gravel and Stone, it provokes Urine, Urine
and Women's Courses and expells the dead child and Secondine. Courses Secondine


It asswageth the tormenting pains of Gripings in the Guts, Gripings-Cuts
dissolveth Wind, Wind
cures the Cholick and is good to ripen an old Cough. Cholick Cough


The same drunk in Wine is good against bitings of Venomous beasts; and being
pounded and applied, it scatters cold swellings and dissolveth Tumors.

The root of Daucus of Candy, drunk in Wine stops the Lask, Lask
and is a sovereign remedy against Venom and Poison. Poison


Cedar-tree.
Names.] THere be two kinds hereof, the great Cedar-tree, and the small Cedar;
out of the great tree issues a white Rozen, called in Latin Cedria, and
Liquor Cedrinus, or Liquor of Cedar.

Descript.] The great Cedar, grows very tall, high, great and thick, the bark
from the foot of the stem, unto the first branches is rough, and from thence up
to the top, it is smooth and plain, of a dark blew color, out of which there
droppeth white Rozen of his own kind, which is moist, odoriferous, or of a
sweet smell, and by the heat of the Sun it becomes dry and hard; the Limbs and
branches of this tree be long, and parted into many other small branches,
standing directly or right, one against another, like those of the Firre-tree,
the said branches be garnished with many small little leaves, thick, short, and
having a sweet savor the fruit is like that of the Firre-tree, but that it is
greater, thicker and harder, the whole tree grows strait up like the
Firre-tree.

Of their smaller Cedar there be two kinds, the first kind of small Cedar is
much like to Juniper, but somewhat smaller, the stem is crooked or writhed, and
covered with a rough bark, the fruit is round berries like Juniper berries, but
somewhat greater of color; at the first green, then yellow, and at last
reddish, of an indifferent good taste.

The second kind of small Cedar grows not high; but remains small and low,
like the other, the leaves of this are not prickly but somewhat round and
mossey at the ends, almost like the leaves of Tamarisk, and Savin, the fruit of
this kind, bears also round berries, which at first are green afterward
yellow, and when they are ripe, they become reddish, and are bitter in taste.

Place.] The great Cedar grows in Africa and Syria, and upon the Mountains of
Libanus, Amanus and Taurus.

The second kind grows in Phoenicia, and in certain places of Italy, in
Calabria, and also in Languedoc.

The third kind grows in Lycia, and is found in certain parts of France, as
in Provence and Languedoc.

Time.] The great Cedar perfecteth his fruit in two years, and it is ever
without fruit, which is ripe at the beginning of Winter, the small Cedar-trees
be always green and Laden with fruit, having at all times upon them fruit
both ripe and unripe, as has Juniper.

Government and Virtues.] The great Cedar is under the dominion of the Sun, the
smaller of Mars; the Cedar is hot and dry in the third degree, the Rozen or
Liquor Cedria which runs forth of the great Cedar tree, is hot and dry
almost in the fourth degree, and of subtle parts.

The fruit of the small Cedar is also hot and dry, but more moderatly;

Cedria that is, the liquor or Gum of Cedar, swageth the Toothache, Toothach
being put into the hollowness of the same, also it clears the sight, and
takes away spots and scars of the Eyes, Eyes Spots Scars
being laid thereon, the same dropped into the Ears, with Vinegar kills the
Worms of the same; Worms
and with the Wine of the decoction of hysop, it cures the noise and ringing
in the Ears, Ears
and makes the Hearing good. Hearing


The old Egyptians did use in times past, to preserve their dead bodies with
this Cedria, for it keeps the same whole, and preserves them from
corruption, but it consumes and corrupts living flesh, it kills Lice, Lice
Mothes, Moths
Worms and all such Vermin, so that they will not come near it.

The Fruit of the Cedar, is good to be eaten against the Strangury, strangury
it provokes Urine, and brings down Women's Courses. Courses


Cistus.
Kinds and Names.] OF this there be two sorts, the first called Cistus non
Ladanisera, because it bears no Ladanum, the other is a plant of a woody
substance, upon which is found that fat liquor or gum called Ladanum.

The first kind which yields no Ladanum, is also of two sorts, viz. the Male
and Female.

The Male bears red flowers, the Female white in all things else, the one is
like the other; out of the root of the Female Cistus is drawn forth a sap or
liquor called Hippocistis.

The second kind of Cistus is called also Ledum and Ladum, the fat Liquor which
is gathered from it, is called Ladanum, and in shops Lapdanum.

Descript.] The first kind of Cistus, which bears no Ladanum, has round
hairy stalks, and stems with knobbed joints, and full of branches, the leaves
be roundish, and covered with a cotton or soft hair, not much unlike the leaves
of Sage, but shorter and rounder, the flowers grow at the tops of the stalks,
of the fashion of a single Rose, whereof the Male kind is of color red, and
the Female white, at the last they change into knops, or husks wherein the
seed is contained.

There is found a certain excrescence or out-growing, about the root of this
plant, which is of color, sometimes yellow, sometimes white, and sometimes
green, out of which is artificially drawn a certain juice, which in shops is
called Hypocistis, and is used in medicine.

The second kind of Cistus, which is also called Ledon, is a plant of a woody
substance* growing like a little tree or shrub, with soft leaves, in figure not
much unlike the others, but longer and browner, upon the leaves of this plant
is found that fat substance called Ladanum, which is found growing upon the
leaves about Midsommer, and the hotest days.

Place.] The first kind of Cistus grows in Italy, Cicily, Candy, Cyprus,
Languedoc, and other hot Countries in rough and untilled places.

The second kind grows also in Crete, Cyprus, and Languedoc.

Time.] The first kind of Cistus floureth in June and sometimes sooner.

The second kind of Cistus, floureth and brings forth seed in the spring
time, and immediately after the leaves fall off, and about Midsommer there
comes new leaves again, upon which leaves in the hotest days, is found a
certain fatness which is, diligently gathered and dried, and makes that Gum
which is called Lapdanum.

Government and Virtues.] These plants are governed by Jupiter, the flowers and
leaves of Cistus are dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent; that
which grows about the roots is of like temperature but more astringent;
Lapdanum is hot in the second degree almost, and is somewhat dry and astringent.

The flowers of Cistus, boiled in Wine and drunk, stops the Lask, Lask
and all issues of blood and dryes up superfluous moisture, Bloody issues
as well of the Stomach, as other parts of the belly, the leaves do cure and
heal green wounds being laid thereupon. Green-Wounds


Hypocistis stops all Fluxes of the belly, Fluxes
and is of a stronger operation then the flowers and leaves of Cistus,
wherefore it cures the bloody Flux and the immoderate overflowing of Women's
Courses. Women's Courses


Ladanum drunk with old Wine, stops the Lask, Lask
and provokes Urine; It is very good against the hardness of the Matrix or
Mother, Matrix
laid to in manner of a pessary, it draws down the secondine or afterbirth,
afterbirth
when it is laid upon quick-coales, and the fumigation, or smoke thereof be
received up into the Matrix: the same applied to the head with Myrrh or oil of
Myrrh, Head
cures the scurff thereof, Scurffe
and keeps the hair from falling off, if it be droped into the Ears with
honied Water or Oil of Roses, it heals pains in the Ears. Ears
It takes away the Scars of wounds being applied thereunto with Wine, Scars
it is also very profitably mixed withal unguents and plasters that serve to
heat, moisten and assuage pains; and for such as be laid to the breast against
the Cough.

Cockle.
Names.] IT is called also Nigell-weed, Field-Nigella and Cockle:

Descript.] It has straight slender hairy stems, the leaves be also long,
narrow, hairy and grayish, the flowers are of a brown purple color, changing
toward red, divided into five small leaves, not much differing from the
proportion of Wild Campions; after which, there grows round cups, wherein is
contained plenty of seed of a black, brown color.

Place.] It is two frequent amongst Corn, Wheat, Rye and Barley.

Time.] It flowers in May, June and July.

Government and Virtues.] This unprofitable guest amongst Corn, is of a
Saturnine quality, causes giddiness of the Head, and stupifies, if it get
amongst the Corn to be made with it into bread, and howsoever taken it is
dangerous and hurtful, although some ignorant persons have mistaken it for the
right Nigella, or used it instead Yuray or Darnell, to the great danger of the
patient.

Corn-flour.
Names.] IT is also called Blew-bottle, Hurt-Sicle and Blew-blow, great
Corn-flour, and Wild-corn-flour.

Descript.] Corn-flour has a crested stalk, upon the which grow narrow,
sharp-pointed and grayish leaves notched or cut, about the edges, and sharp
corners like teeth, about the top of the stalks, it bears small round buttons
which be rough and scaly, out of which grow pleasant flowers of five or six
jagged leaves, most commonly blew, especially the wild kind, which being
vanished, there grows in the scaly husks or heads certain long seeds, which
are incl^sed in a hairy down or Cotton.

Place.] It grows in the fields amongst Corn, but especially amongst Rye,
there are other kinds which have while and purple flowers which are planted in
Gardens of Herbarists, and of them called Cyanus.

Time.] These flowers do flourish from May, until August.

Government and Virtues.] Corn-flour is cold and dry, a plant of the Lunar
influence, and is appropriate to the Eyes, Corn-flour bruised or pou^ded and
laid to the Eyes, cures any redness, running or inflammation thereof, Eyes
inflamed
or any kind of Tumor or hot inflammation or Tumor about the Eyes.

Distilled water of Corn-flour or Cyanus, cures redness and pain of the Eyes,
either being dropped into the Eyes, or the Eyes washed therewith.

Coryander.
Names.] IT is called in shops Coryandrum, in English Coryander, and of some
Colyander.

Description.] This is a stinking plant, it bears a round stalk, full of
branches of a foot and an half long, the leaves are whitish, all jagged and
cut, the under leaves that spring up first are almost like the leaves of
Chervil or Parsley, and the upper leaves are not much unlike the same, or rather
like to Fumitory leaves, but a great deal tenderer and more jagged, the flowers
be white, and grow in round tuffets, the seed is all round, and hollow within
and of a very pleasant sent when it is dry, the root is hard and of a woody
substance.

Place.] It is sown in Gardens and loves a good Soil.

Time.] It flowereth in July and August, and the seed is ripe shortly after.

Government and Virtues.] The green plant is cold and dry of a Saturnine
quality, hurtful to the body; but the sweet-savoring seed, is of a warm
temperature, and useful for many purposes, the seed of Coryander, being
prepared, and taken alone or covered with Sugar, after meals, closes up the
mouth of the Stomach, Stomach
stays Vomiting and helps digestion, Vomiting
Digestion
the same roasted or parched, and drunk in Wine kills and brings forth Worms
out of the body, Worms
and stops the Lask and bloody Flux and all other extraordinary issues of
blood. Lask

Bloody Flux




Coryander, ought not to be covered with Sugar or to be put into any meat or
medecin nor used any way unprepared, the way of preparing it, is after this
manner, viz. Take of the seed of Coryander well dried, and pour thereupon good
strong Wine and Vinegar mixed together, and so leave them to steep by the space
of four and twenty hours; then take the seeds out of the Liquor and dry them,
and so keep them to be used in medicine, the green herb Coryander being boiled
with crumbs of whitebread, or barley meal, consumes and drives away hot Tumors;
Tumors, King's Evil, Lumps St. Anthonies-fire
swellings and inflammations; and with bean-meal, it dissolveth the King's Evil,
hard knobs, and Worms, the juice applied with Ceruse, Litharge of Silver,
Vinegar and oil of Roses, cures St. Anthonies-fire, and asswageth, and eases
the pains of all inflammations.

Coloquintida.
Names.] I It is also called, Wild-bitter-gourd, and the fruit Coloquint-Apple.

Descript.] Coloquintida creeps with his branches along by the ground, with
rough hairy leaves of a grayish color, much cloven or cut, the flowers are
bleak or pale, the fruit round of a green color at the beginning, and after
yellow, the bark thereof is neither thick nor hard, the inner part or pulpe is
open and spongy, full of gray seed in taste very bitter; the which is dried and
kept for medicinal use.

Place.] Coloquintida, grows in Italy and Spain, from which places the dried
fruit is brought unto us.

Time.] Coloquintida brings forth his fruit in September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is under the planetary influence of Mars, of
temperature hot and dry in the third degree; the white or inward pith or pulpe
of the Apple, taken about the weight of a scruple, opens the belly mightily,
and purges gross Phlegm and Choleric humors, Phlegm, Choler Slime, Guts Pains,
gripings Apoplexy, Falling Sickness Meagrim Breath, Cholick Sinews, pain and
noise in the Ears.
and cleanses the Guts of slimy filthiness, and stinking corruption, which
oftentimes sticks amongst them, and causes those grievous pains, Gripings,
and wamblings of the belly, and if taken in too great quantity, it causes
blood to come forth; like virtue it has if it be boiled, or laid to soke in
honied water; or any other liquor and after given to be drunken; it profits
much against all cold dangerous sicknesses, Giddiness of the head, pain to
fetch breath, the Cholick, looseness of the Sinews, and places out of joint;
for all the same purposes, it may be put into clisters, and suppositories; that
are put into the fundament, the oil wherein Coloquintida, has been boiled
being dropped into the Ears eases the pain and singing thereof.

Coloquintida, if administered by an unskilful hand, is very dangerous, and
hurtful to the Stomach and Liver, and troubles the Bowels and entrails; for
remedy, ye must put to the pulpe or pith of Coloquintida, Gum-tragant and
Mastick, and after make it into trochis or balls with honey.

The Cornel-tree.
Names.] IT is called of some long Cherry, or long Cherry-tree.

Descript.] The Cornel-tree, sometimes grows up to a reasonable bigness like
other trees, and sometimes it is but low, and grows like to a shrub, or
hedge-bush, as diverse other small trees do, the wood or timber of this tree is
very hard, the flowers are of a faint yellowish color, the fruit is very red
and somewhat long, almost like an Olive but smaller with a long little stone or
kernel enclosed therein, like the stone of an Olive-berry.

Place.] The Cornel-tree, is in this Country to be found no where but in
Gardens and Orchards where it is planted.

Time.] The Cornel-tree floureth betimes in March; and afterward brings forth
his leaves, the fruit is ripe in August.

Government and Virtues.] The fruit of the Cornel-tree are cold, dry, and
astringent, under the dominion of Saturn; the fruit eaten is good against the
Lask and and bloody Flux, Lask, Bloody Flux, Stomach
and do strengthen weak and hot Stomac^s.

Wild-Cucumber.
Names.] IT is called also spirting Cucumber, and the dried juice of the root
Elaterium.

Descript.] Wild Cucumber has leaves somewhat round and rough, but lesser and
rougher then those of the Garden Cucumber, the stalks be round and rough,
creeping along the ground without any claspers or holders, upon which, out of
the hollowness of the branches or wings, among the leaves; grow short stems,
bearing a flower of a faint yellow color, after the flowers there come little
rough Cucumbers, of the bigness and length of ones thumb, full of sap, with a
brown kernel, which being ripe skippeth forth as soon, as one touch the
Cucumbers, the root is white, thick, and great, with many other small roots,
hanging to it, the whole plant is of a very bitter taste, but especially the
fruit, whereof the juice is dried, to be used in medicine, and is called
Elaterium.

Place.] It is in this Country found in Gardens only, where it is planted, but
where it is once sown it comes easily again every year.

Time.] These Cucumbers do flower in August, and their fruit is ripe in
September.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the dominion of Mars, the juice thereof
is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a resolving and cleansing nature,
the root is of the same nature, but not so strong as the juice. Elaterium taken
in quantity of half a scruple, drives forth gross Phlegm, Phlegm, Choler,
Waterish humors, Dropsy, Breath, Eyes Brain, Headache, Courses Squinancy
Choleric and especially all waterish humors; so that it is singular good
against the Dropsy, and for them that are troubled with shortness of Breath,
the same allayed with sweet milk, and snuffed up into the nose cleanses the
Eyes, from the evil color which remains after the Jaundise, asswage^h
headache, and cleanses the brain, the same boiled in honied Wine, and applied
to the Matrix, drives down the Courses and Dead-birth. Elaterium being
outwardly applied, with oil or honey; or the Gaul of an Ox, helps the
Squinancy, and the swellings of the Throat, the juice of the bark, and root of
wild Cucumber, does also purge Phlegm and choleric and waterish humors, and is
good for such as have or are inclinable to the Dropsy, Dropsy
but is not so strong in operation as the Elaterium, the root of Wild Cucumber
made soft or soked in Vinegar, and laid to the place greived, asswageth the
pain, and takes away the swelling of the Gout, Gout, Toothache Cold, Tumors
Imposthumes Scurffe, Tetters Wheals, Scars
the Vinegar, wherein it has been boiled holden in the mouth eases the pain
in the Teeth, the same laid to, with parched Barly-meal, dissolveth cold
Tumors, and applied with Turpentine it does ripen, break and open imposthumes,
the same made into powder and laid to with honey, cleanses, scoureth, and
takes away, foul Scurviness, spreading Tetters, Manginess, Pushes or Wheals,
red spots, and all blemishes and Scars of the body, the juice of the leaves
dropped into the Ears, takes away the pain of the same.

Danger.] If Elaterium be taken into the body, in too great quantity,
unadvisedly, or crude, and uncorrected, it much hurts the inward parts, and
Gripes much the Belly in the time of its operation.

Remedy.] To correct it and take away it is griping quality that it may do no
hurt, let it be given with Mede, or sweet milk, a little Salt and Anniseed, or
give it in powder with a little Anniseed, Gum-tragacanth and Salt.

Cypress-tree.
Names.] IT has no other name in English, but this tree is called Cupressus in
Latin; and the Nuts or fruit thereof, Nuces Cupressi, in English Cypres-nuts.

Descript.] The Cypresse-tree, has a thick, straight, long stem; upon which
grow many slender branches; the which do not spread abroad, but grow up in
length toward the top, so that the Cypress tree is not broad but narrow,
growing to a great height, the bark of the Cypress-tree is brown, the timber
yellowish, hard, thick, and close, and when it is dry of a pleasant smell,
especially if it be set near the fire, the Cypress-tree has no particular
leaves but the branches instead of leaves, bring forth short twigs, green and
small divided again into other small twigs, the which be cut and snipt in many
places, as if they were set about with many small leaves; the fruit is round
almost as big as a prune, or plum, which being ripe does open in diverse places,
and has in it a flat grayish seed.

Place.] The Cypress-tree delights in dry Hilly and mountanous places in hot
Countries.

Time.] The Cypress-tree is always green, the fruit is ripe in September, at
the beginning of winter.

Government and Virtues.] Saturn rules this plant, the leaves and fruit are dry
in the third degree, without any manifest heat and very astringent, the fruit
of Cypress taken into the body, stops looseness and the Bloody flux, Bloody
Flux
and is good against spitting of blood, and all other issues of blood; Issues
of blood
the decoction of the same, made with water, has the same virtue.

The oil in which the fruit or leaves of Cypress have been boiled, does
strengthen the Stomach, Stomach, Vomiting
stays Vomiting, stops the belly, Broken Belly
and all fluxes of the same, and cures the excoriation or going off, of the
skin, from the secret members.

Cypress-nuts cure them that are bursten, and that have their Guts fallen into
their Cods, being outwardly applied in Cataplasms thereunto; the leaves have
the same virtue, but not so strong; the fruit of Cypress is also good to cure
Polypus, Pollypus
which is corrupt flesh growing in the nose.

The same bruised with dry fat figs, does cure the blasting and swellings of
the Yard and Stones; Yard Stones
and if leaven be added thereunto, it dissolveth and wastes botches, and
boyls, being laid upon the grieved place.

The leaves of Cypress, boiled in sweet Wine or Mede, does help the Strangury,
strangury
and issue of the Bladder; the same beaten very small and applied, does close
up green Wounds, Green-Wounds
and stop the bleeding thereof; and being applied with parched Barly-meal, they
are profitable against St. Anthonies-fire, St. Anthonies-fire
Carbuncles, carbuncle
and other hot Ulcers, Ulcers
and fretting sores: Sores
the leaves and fruit of Cypress, being infused in Vinegar, and the hair washed
therewith makes it black. Hair


Coral.
Kind and Names.] THere be several kinds of Coral, but the red and the white,
especially the red, is most in use: there be also several sorts of black Coral
called Antipathes, and there is a kind of Coral, which is black, rough, and
bristly, and is called Sambeggia.

Descript.] These plants, although their hard substance, make them seem rather
to be Stones, yet they are vegetables. The greater red Coral, which is the
best, grows upon rocks in the Sea, like unto a shrub, with arms and branches,
which shoot forth into sprigs, some greater and some lesser, of a pale red
color, for the most part when it is taken out of the water but when it is
pollished it is very fair, and of a lovely red color: whilst it is in the
water it is soft and pliable, but being taken out and kept dry a while, it
becomes of an hard stony substance.

Place.] The Corals are found in the Isles of Sardinia, and diverse other places
of the Mediterranean Sea.

Time.] Coral is found growing at all times in the year.

Government and Virtues.] Coral is under the dominion of the Sun, yet reputed
to be of a cooling and astringent quality: the red is the hottest, the white
the coldest, it is good to stop the Running of the Reins in Men, Running of the
Reins, Whites Bleeding, sp^^en Strangury Spleen, Stone Heart, stomach Liver,
Fevers
and the Whites in Women; the red Coral stops bleeding, and is good for them
that spit blood; or any flux of blood; being taken in Wine, or other drink: It
abates the Slpeen, helps the stoppage of Urine, and such as piss by drops, the
powder of it being burnt, and taken in drink eases the pain of the Stone: It
strengthens the Heart, Stomach and Liver, and is good in all pestilential
Fevers, and malignant diseases: it is good against Venom, chears the Heart
and is good against Melancholy; there is an excellent Cordial made of it called
Tictura Corallii, singular good for all the purposes aforesaid, the powder
taken in Wine or distilled Water, gives rest to such as have Agues, helps the
Cramp, Cramp
it is good against the Falling Sickness: some write that if two grains of the
powder of red Coral be given to a Child newly born, in some black cherry water,
or the Mothers milk; that Child shall never be troubled with the
Falling Sickness; Falling Sickness
it is likewise good to cause easy Delivery, Easy Delivery
to rub Childrens Gums, Gums
to help their teeth to break forth more easily, Teeth
it helps sore Gums and Ulcers in the Mouth; and heals up foul hollow Ulcers
in other parts: Ulcers
it is also profitable to be used in medecines for the Eyes, to stay the Flux
of Rhume: It cools and dryes up the moisture, and takes away the heat and
redness of the Eyes: the aforementioned Tincture and likewise the Chemical oil,
may be used for any of the aforesaid purposes.

Cardamoms.
Names.] THey are called Cardamom, and Grana Paradisi by some, Grains of
Paradise.

Descript.] Cardamoms grow upon a small tree, in the East Indies and Arabia,
which bears the seeds in husks, in which they are brought hither and sold in
our shops, for medicinal use.

Government and Virtues.] These seeds called Cardamoms are hot and dry in the
third degree, under the dominion of Jupiter; It breaks the Stone, Stone,
Urine Poison, Scorpions
and provokes Urine, and gives ease to such as make water with pain; it
resists Poison, and helps stingings or bitings of Scorpions or other
Venomous creatures. It is good against the Falling Sickness, Falling Sickness
Guts, Wind Bruises, Sinews Sciatica
Gripings in the Guts or Bowels; expels Wind from the Stomach, and
intrails; helps such as are bruised or broken by falls or bruises, those that
have loose or weak Sinews, and pains of the Sciatica or Hip-gout; and used with
Vinegar it is good against Scabs, and is an ingredient in many of our
compositions and cordial Antidotes.

Cloves.
Names.] THey are called in Latin Caryophylli.

Descript.] The tree wherein the Cloves do grow is great and tall, covered with
an Ash-colored bark, the younger branches being more white, the leaves grow by
couples one against another, somewhat long and narrow, like to bay leaves, with
a middle rib, and sundry veins running through them, each of them standing on a
long footstalk, the ends of the branches are divided into many small brown
sprigs, whereon grow the flowers, on the tops of the Cloves themselves, which
are white at the first with their sprigs, green afterward, and at last reddish
before they be beaten off from the tree; and as they dry before they be put up,
grow blackish as they are brought to us, having four small tops at the heads of
them, and a small round head in the middle of them; the flower it self,
standing between those, consists of four small leaves like unto a Cherry
blossom, but of an excellent blew color with three white Veins in every leaf,
and diverse purple-threds in the middle; of a more fine scent then the dried
Clove.

Place.] The Clove-trees grow in the Molucca-Islands, where they ga^her them
twice every year, viz. in June and December: they grow plentifully also in
Amboyna, and in diverse other places of the Indies, ^he Indians generally call
them Calefar, and in some place Chanque.

Government and Virtues.] The Cloves are under the solar influence, of
temperature hot and dry in the third degree, they comfort the Head and Heart,
Head* Heart, Liver* stomach Wind, Urine
strengthen the Liver, and Stomach, and all ^nward parts that want heat, they
help digestion, ^reak Wind, and provoke Urine, the Portugal Women use to
distill the Cloves while they are fresh, which make a sweet and delicate water,
profitable for ^ll passions of the Heart, and weakness of the Stomach.

China-root.
Descript.] THe root called China-root is like to the root of a great Reed,
some flattish, others round, not smooth, but bunched and knotty, reddish for
the most part, on the outside, and whitish and sometimes a little reddish in
the inside: the best is solid and firm and somewhat weighty, fresh, and not
worm-eaten, and without any taste but as it were drying; the plant of the root
grows up with many prickly branches, like unto Sarsaparilla or the prickly
Bind-weed, winding it self about trees, and has many leaves growing on them
like broad Plantain leaves, the roots grow sometimes many together, and while
they are fresh, the Indians eat them as we do Turnips, or Carrots.

Place.] This plant grows not only in China, but also in Mallabar, Cochin,
and diverse other places there.

Government and Virtues.] It is a plant of Jupiter, and the properties thereof
are many, and of great use with us in diverse cases; in diet drinks for the
French Pox; French Pox
it is profitable in all Agues, Agues, Heckticks,
Quotidian, Intermittent, or pestilential, Heckticks and Consumptions,
Consumptions,
it helps the evil disposition of the Liver, pains of Head Head
and Stomach, Stomach
and strengthens it: It dryes up the defluxions of Rheums, helps the Jaundies,
Jaundies
and burstings Burstings
in Children or others by drying up the humor which is the cause thereof. It
also helps the Palsy, Palsy, Gout
and all other diseases of the joints and bladder, the Gout, Sciatica,
Sciatica, Nods
Pocky-nods and Ulcers of the Yard, Yard, Lust
and is good in all cold and Melancholy diseases; It stirs up Venery; it may
be taken several ways, as being boiled, first sliced thin and steeped a good
while in water only, or with Wine and water; some boil it in the broth of a
chicken, tied up in Linen cloth; and to take from a quarter to half an ounce
or more at a time; as the quantity of drink o^ broth is, or as the party can
bear.

Cinnamon and Cassia Lignea.
Descript.] THe Cinnamon-tree is described to be a great Tree, about the
bigness of the Olive Tree, with many straight branches without knots, covered
with a double bark, like the Cork whose inner rind is to Cinnamon, and is so
barked every third year, and being cut in long pieces o^ if it were the bark of
the whole tree, is cast on the ground, wherein dry it, it is rouled together as
we see it; and is better or worse, blacker or bette^ colored, by the greater
or lesser heat of the Sun: the leaves are of a fres^ green color like those of
the Cittron-tree, the flowers are white and the fruit black and round like
hasel-nuts or small Olives; the best grows in Zeland, having leaves like
Willowes, and fruit like unto bay berries, whereof there is made an oil.

As concerning the Cassia, several Authors do write that Cinnamon and Cassia,
is one and the same tree, and that the variety and difference of the Soil where
they grow, makes the difference only; but we daily see that the Cassia which
comes to us, is the bark of a tree, and either roul'd together like Cinnamon
or not roul'd, but in small or great smooth pieces, and therefore may be
conceived to be a sort of Cinnamon, yet the taste being Glutinous, less sharp
and quick, and more stiptick then Cinnamon, argues it to be the bark of
another sort of tree, although of the same kind and nature. Pliny lib. 12 cap.
29. says, that Cassia which grows where Cinnamon does is a shrub of three
cubits high, but on the hills; whose thick branches have their bark unto
leather, which must be emptied or hollowed in a contrary manner, unto that of
Cinnamon: for being cut into sticks of two cubits long, they are sewed into
fresh beasts skins, that the worms may eat out the wood, and leave the bark
whole by reason of the sharpness and bitterness; the three sorts of color
therein shows their goodness. That which is white for a foot high next the
ground is the worst; the next thereunto for half a foot is reddish, which is
next in goodness from thence upward, which is blackish, and the best, and is to
be chosen fresh, of a mild scent and of a very sharp taste, rather than biting;
of a purplish color, light in weight, and with a short pipe, not easily
broken, so that we may see plainly, that Cassia differs not much from
Cinnamon; and yet that it is differing from it.

Government and Virtues.] Cinnamon is under the dominion of Jupiter; it is of
temperature hot and dry in the second degree, of very subtle parts and very
Aromatical; it is very Cordial, it comfort the Heart, and strengthens a
weak Stomach, Heart, stomach
it eases the pains of the Cholick, Cholick, Urine,
especially the distilled water of it, the stopping of Urine, and it stays the
superabounding flux of Women's Courses; Terms, Face
it causes a good color in the Face, makes a sweet breath, Breath, Poison
and good against the poison of venomous beasts, it is much used to stay
looseness Looseness
and bind the body: the distilled water thereof is most effectual; but the
Chemical oil thereof is much more hot and piercing.

Cocculus Indus.
Names, Description, and Virtues.] THe Italians call these berries or round
seed Cocco di levante, and the French call them so likewise; they are of a
blackish Ash Color on the outside, having a thick white kernel within them, of
a hot taste, drawing water into the mouth, and grow many together like
Ivy-berries, yet each by it self on a stalk, some thinking them to grow upon a
kind of night shade, others on a kind of Tithymal or Spurge, they are used
either to make bates to catch fish, with things for that purpose, or the powder
thereof used to kill Lice, and Vermin in in Childrens Heads.

Costus.
THere are to be had in our Druggists and Apothecaries Shops, two sorts of
Costus, far differing the one from the other both in form and substance: the
virtues of the true Costus are these. It provokes Urine Urine, Courses
and Women's Courses, and helps diseases of the Mother, Mother, Convulsions
as well by bathing, as suming; two ounces thereof being drunk, helps the
biting of Vipers, and is good against pains of the Breast, Convulsions, or the
windy Stirches, Stitches, Stomach,
swellings in the Stomach, Sides, or Body, being taken in Wormwood-Wine,
sciatica, sinews
and being taken with sweet Wine, it provokes the desire to Venery: Venery
It kills Worms Worms Agues
in the Belly; it is used with oil to anoint the Body before the cold fits of
Agues to warm it, and expel it, as also against weakness of the Sinews, and
the Hip-gout; it helps discoloring of the skin, using it with honey and water.

Cubebs.
CVbebs are small berries, somewhat sweet; about the bigness of Pepper-Corns,
but not so black nor solid, but more rugged or crested, being either hellow or
with a kernel within it, of a hot taste, but not so fiery as Pepper, and having
each a short stalk on them like a tail: these grow on trees less than
Apple Trees, with leaves narrower than those of Pepper; the flower is sweet,
and the fruit grows clustring together: The Arabians call them Quabebe, and
Quabebe Chini; they grow plentifully in Java; they are used to stir up Venery
Venery, stomach
and to warm and strengthen the Stomach, being overcome with phlegm Phlegm, Spleen
or Wind, Wind, Womb
they cleanse the breast of thick tough humors, help the Spleen, and are very
profitable for the cold griess of the Womb: being chewed in the mouth with
Mastick, they draw Rhume from the Head, Head, Brain
and strengthen the brain and memory. Memory


Red, White, and Black-Currans.
Names.] THe Latin names for Currants is Ribes and Ribes fructu rubro, the red
Curran, albo white, and nigro black.

Descript.] The red curran bush has a stalk covered with a thin brownish bark
outward, and greenish underneath, the leaves are of a blackish green, cut in
the edges into five parts, much like a Vine-leaf, but smaller, the flowers come
forth at the joints of the leaves, many together on a long stalk, hanging down
about a fingers length; of an herby color, after which come round berries,
green at the first but red when they are ripe, of a pleasant tart taste; wherein
is small seed, the root is woody and spreading.

There is another sort hereof, whose berries are twice as big as the former and
of a better relish.

The white Curran-tree has a taller and more straight stem than the red, a
whiter bark, smaller leaves, but has such like berries upon long stalks, of
the same bigness as the first, but of a shining transparent whiteness; of a
more pleasant taste then the former.

The black Curran, rises higher than the last, and is more set with branches
round about and more pliant, the younger covered with a paler, and the elder
with a browner bark; the leaves are smaller then those of the former, and often
with fewer cuts therein: the flowers are alike, but of a greenish purple
color; which produce small black berries; the leaves and fruit have an
unpleasant smell, but yet are wholesome, though not pleasant.

Place.] All these sorts of Currants grow plentifully in England, in Gardens
where they are planted; they have been found growing naturally wild in Savoy
and Switzerland, as Gesner says; and some in Austria says Clusius: they grow
in great abundance in Candia; and other places in the Streights, from whence in
great quantities they are brought dried unto us.

Time.] They flower and bear fruit, in June, July and August.

Government and Virtues.] Currants are under the influence of the benevolent
planet Venus: they are of a moist temperate refeshing nature; the red and white
Currants are good to cool and refresh faintings of the Stomach, Stomach, thirst
to quench Thirst, and stir up an appetite, Appetite, agues
and therefore are profitable in hot and sharp Agues, it tempereth the heat of
the Liver Liver, Blood
and Blood, and the sharpness of Choler Choler, Stomach,
and resists putrefaction; it also takes away the loathing of meat, and
weakness of the Stomach by much Vomiting, and is good for those that have any
Looseness looseness
of the belly: Gesner says; that the Switzers use them for the Cough, and so
well they may; For,

Take dry Currants a quarter of a pound; Brandy Wine half a pint: set the Brandy
on fire; and bruise the Currants and put them into the Brandy as it is burning
stirring them until the Brandy is almost consumed, that it becomes like unto
an Electuary, it is an excellent remedy to be taken hot for any violent Cough,
cold or Rhume; the black Currants and the leaves are used in sawces by those who
like the taste and scent of them; which I believe very few do of either.

Caranha.
CAranha, or Carogna, is a gum, which is brought from the West Indies, but of
the tree that it issues from, we have no Description: it is a soft kind of Gum,
wrapped up in leaves, to keep one piece from sticking unto another for it is
very cleaving, and of a dark or muddy greenish color; it is an especial and
speedy help for all cold Aches, Aches
and pains Pains
in the Joints, and Nerves, and swellings therein, the defluxions of cold
humors on them, or on the Eyes, or on any other part, to be laid on the temples
or behind the Ears, and it is also used for the Toothache to be laid on the
temples like Mastick.

Ceterach.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Asplenum and Splenium, and in English
Spleenwort and Milt-wast, and Scalefern.

Descript.] Spleenwort or Ceterach, springs up from a small black threddy,
bushy root, with many long single leaves, cut on both sides into round dents,
even almost to the middle-rib, which is not so hard as that of Polypody, each
division being not always set opposite unto the other but between each, smooth
and of a light green on the upper part, and with a dark yellowish roughness
underneath, folding or rouling it self inward at the first springing up.

Place.] Ceterach grows in moist shadowy places, and very frequently upon old
stone-walls, of Churches, decayed Castles, and the ruinous Walls of ancient
Religious houses. It grows on Beconsfield Church in Buckinghamshire and upon
Wooburn Church in the same County, and Horn-church in Essex, and many other
places.

Time.] Ceterach is to be found green all the year.

Government and Virtues.] Mars rules this plant; It is generally used against
all the infirmities of the Spleen; spleen,
it also helps the Strangury, strangury
pissing by drops, and wastes the Stone Stone Jaundies
in the Bladder, and is good against the yellow- Jaundies, and the Hicket:
Hicket-
a dram of the dust that is on the back of the leaves, being mixed with half a
dram of Amber in powder, and taken with the juice of purslain or plantain, is a
speedy remedy for the running of the Reins, Reins
as Mathiolus says, and that the herb and root being boiled and taken helps
all Melancholy diseases and especially those which rise from the French Pox.
French Pox
The distilled water thereof being drunk is profitable against the Stone Stone
in the Reins and Bladder; a lie made of the Ashes thereof or the decoction
drunk for some time together, helps such as are troubled with the Spleen,
Spleen
and it may outwardly be applied for the same purpose, it hinders conception
in Women if they make much use of it.

The Cokar Nut-tree.
Description and Names.] THis grows to be a great large Timber-tree, the body
covered with a smooth bark; bare or naked without any branch, to a great
height, (for which cause the Indians, do either bore holes therein, at certain
distances, and knock strong pegs into them, which stick out so much as may
serve for sooting to get up into the tree to gather the juice or liquor and the
fruit, or fasten ropes with nails round about the tree, with spaces which
serve as steps to go up into it) and toward the top, it spreads out into
sundry great Arms, which bow themselves almost round, with large leaves on them
like the Date tree but greater, whose middle-rib is very great, and abiding
always green, and with fruit also, continually one succeeding another; from
between the lower boughs come forth smaller stalks, hanging down bearing sundry
flowers on them, like those of the chestnut-tree, after which come large great
three-square fruit or Nuts, ten or twelve and sometimes twenty thereon
together, as big as ones head, or as a smaller Pompion almost round, but a
little smaller at the end, covered with a hard tough Ash-colored thick bark,
an inch thick in some places, and within it a hard woody brownish shell, but
black being polished having at the Head or top thereof three holes somewhat
resembling the nose and eyes of a Monkey, between which outer bark and this
shell, grow many gross thredds or hairs: within the woody shell there is a
white kernel cleaving close to the side thereof as sweet as an Almond, with a
fine sweet water in the middle thereof, as pleasant as Milk, which will grow
less pleasant or consume, either by over ripeness or long keeping: this tree
is called by the Indians, Maro; in Malaca, Trican; and in other places by
several other apppellations: the timber of this tree is solid and firm, black
and shining, like the walnut-tree, and fit for any building; and Garcias says,
it is of two sorts (I suppose he means, for two uses), the one to bear fruit,
the other to extract the liquor which issues therefrom, when the branches are
cut, or when it is bored and received into some things tied thereunto for that
purpose, which liquor they call in their Language Sura; and it shows like
unto troubled Wine, but in taste like new sweet Wine, which being boiled they
call Orraque, and being destilled, it yeildeth a spirit like unto our
Aquavitae, and it is used for the same purposes as we do ours, and will burn
like it; they call it Fula; And being set in the Sun it will become good
Vinegar, and that which runs last being set in the Sun to grow hard, or
boiled to hardness, will become Sugar, which they call Jagra; of the inner
kernel while it is fresh they make bread; the fresher the Nuts are, the sweeter
is the meat thereof.

Government and Virtues.] This is a Solar plant; the fruit or kernel of the
Coker-nut does nourish very much, and is good for lean bodies; they increase
the natural seed, and stir up the appetite to Venery, Venery, Throat
and are good to mollify the hoarsenesse of the Throat, and hoarseness
Hoarseness
of the voice.

Chocholate.
HAving before set down the particular Virtues of the Cacoa or Coker-Nut; I
shall add somewhat of a Confection or Composition made thereof, called
Chocolate. It is brought over unto us made into Rowls, and is used for a
Cordial being macerated in milk, and made potable, adding what other
ingredients pleases the preparer thereof; which may be done diverse ways,
according to the constitution of the party, and medicinal use, it is prepared
for.

There is very much variety of the ingredients, whereof this confection is
compounded; some do put into it black Pepper, and Tanasco, which is a red
Indian root like Madder: which is proper only for those who are of cold and
moist constitutions, and are troubled with a very cold Stomach, and Liver.

Another Receipt of the Indian Spaniards is this. Take of Cacoa's 700. of white
Sugar one pound and an half, Cinnamon two ounces, of long red Pepper 14 in
Number, of Cloves half an ounce, three cods of the Logwood or Campeche tree, or
instead of that, the weight of two Rialls, or a shilling of Anniseeds; some put
in Almonds, kernels of Nuts, and Orenge-flower-water.

This Receipt is fit for those that have chronick diseases, macilent bodies, or
are inclinable to be infirm; you may either add or take away, according to the
necessity, or temperature of every one; and it is very proper and convenient
that Sugar be put into it, when it is drunk: sometimes they make Tabulats of
the Sugar, and the Chocholate together; which they do, only to please the
pal^ts as the Dames of Mexico do use it, and they are there sold in shops, and
are confected, and eaten like other sweetmeats.

Another Receipt, or way of compounding it, shall follow, but take this for a
Rule that one Receipt cannot be proper for all Persons; therefore such as drink
it as common drink in public houses, may receive more hurt than good by it:
therefore every one may make choice of the ingredients, that they may be
useful for the complexion of the Body.

The Receipt is this.
To every 100 of Cacao's, put two cods of long red Pepper, one handful of
Anniseeds; one cod of Campeche or Logwood, two drams of Cinnamon; Almonds and
Hasel-nuts of each a dozen, white Sugar half a pound; and if you cannot have
those things which come from the Indies, you may make it with the rest.

The way of compounding the Chocholate.
The Cacao, and other ingredients must be beaten in a stone mortar, or grownd
upon abroad stone, which the Indians call Metate, and is made only for that
use; such stones as our Painters grind their colors upon will serve for that
use, the first thing that is to be done is to dry the ingredients, with care
that, in stirring, they be not burnt nor become black; and if they be over
dried, then they will be bitter and lose their virtue: the Cinnamon and the
long red Pepper, are to be first beaten, with the Anniseed; and then beat the
Cacao, by little and little till it be all powdered, and sometimes turn it
round in the beating that it may mix the better; and every one of these
ingredients must be beaten by it self; and then put them all into the vessel
where the Cacao is; which you must stir together, and then take out that paste,
and put it into the mortar, under which you must lay a little fire, after the
confection it made: But you must be very careful, not to put more fire than
will warm it, that the unctuous parts do not fly away, you must searse all the
ingredients, but only the Cacoa, and when you find it to be well beaten and
incorporated (which you shall know by the shortness of it) then with a spoon
take up some of the paste which will be almost liquid, and so either make it
into tablets, or rowles, or put it into boxes, and when it is cold it will be
hard. To make the Tablets you must put a spoonful of the paste, upon a sheet of
Paper; the Indians put it upon a leaf, where being put in the shade it grows
hard, and then howing the Paper the Tablets fall off, by reason of the fatness
of the paste: but if it be put into any thing of earth or wood, it will stick
fast, and will not come off, without scraping or breaking.

In the Indies they take it two several ways: the one being the common way is,
to take it hot, with Atolle, which was the drink of ancient Indians, (they call
Atolle pap, made of the flower of Maiz, and so they mingle it with the
Chocholate,): the other modern way which the Spaniards use, is of two sorts;
the one is, that the Chocholate being dissolved with cold water, and the scum
taken off, and put into another Vessel, they put the remainder upon the Fire
with Sugar; and when it is warm, then they pour it upon the scum they took off
before, and so drink it: the other way is to warm the water; and then when you
have put into a pot or dish, as much Chocholate as you think fit, put in a
little of the warm water, and then grind it well with the Molinet, and when it
is well ground put the rest of the warm water to it, and so drink it with
Sugar, to your taste.

Besides these former ways there are others: one is, put the Chocholate into a
pipkin, with a little water and let it boil well until it be dissolved, and
then put in sufficient water and Sugar, according to the quality of the
Chocholate, and then boil it again until there comes an oily scum upon it; and
then drink it.

There is another way to drink Chocholate, which is cold; and takes its name
from the principal ingredient and is called Cacao, which they use at Feasts to
refresh themselves, and it is made after this manner.

The Chocholate being dissolved in water with the Molinet, take off the scum or
crassy part which rises in great quantity, when the Cacao is older and more
putrified, the scum is laid aside by it self in a little dish, and then put
Sugar into that pan from whence you took the scum, and pour it from on high
upon the scum, and so drink it cold, but this drink does not agree with all
Stomachs, by reason of its coldness.

There is another way to drink it cold, which is called Cacao penali; and it is
done by adding to the same Chocholate (having made the confection, as is before
set down) so much Maiz, dried and well grownd, and taken from the husk, and
then well-mingled in the mortar, with the Chocholat, it falls all into flower
or dust, and so these things being mingled as is said before there rises the
scum; and so take it, and drink it, as before.

There is another way, which is a short and quicker way to make it, which is
more wholesome; that is, first to set some water to warm, and while it warms,
throw a Tablet, or some Chocholate scraped and mingled with Sugar, into a
little cup, and when the water is hot pour the water to the Chocholate, and
then dissolve it with the Molinet, and then without taking off the scum drink
it.

But in our colder Country most usually it is thus made with milk, instead of
water, and some add yolks of Eggs, and a sop of white Bread.

Such as desire to take it in milk, three ounces of Chocolate will be
sufficient to a quart of milk; scrape the Chocolate very fine, and put it into
the milk when it boyles; work it very well with the Spanish instrument called
Molenillo, between your hands; which instrument must be of wood, with a round
knob, made very round, and cut ragged, that as you turn it in your hands, the
milk may froth, and dissolve the Chocolate the better; then set the milk on the
fire again, until it be ready to boil, having the yolk of two eggs, well
beaten with some of the hot milk, then put your eggs into the milk, and
Chocolate and Sugar, as much as you like for your taste, and work it altogether
with the Molinet, and thus drink it: or, if you please, you may slice a little
manchet into a dish, and so eat it for a breakfast: you may if you please make
it also with water instead of milk, after this manner:

Set a pot of conduit-water over the fire until it boyles; then to every
person that is to drink, put an ounce of Chocolate, with as much Sugar into
every pot, whereunto pour a pint of the said water so boiling and therein work
together the Chocolate and the Sugar, with the Instrument called El-Molenillo,
until it be thoroughly incorporated; which done pour in as many half pints of
the said water, as there be ounces of the Chocolate; and if you please you may
put in the yolks of one or two new-laid eggs, which must be beaten until they
froth very much: the hotter it is drunk, the better it is; you may likewise put
in a slice of white-bread or biscuit, and eat that with the Chocolate, which
will be a very substantial and Cordial breakfast.

Coffee.
THis is reported to be the berries of certain shrubs or bushes growing in
Arabia, and from them into Turkey, and other parts: it is said of it self to be
insipid, having neither scent nor taste; but being pounded and baked, as they do
prepare it to make the Coffee-liquor with, it then stinks most loathsomly,
which is an argument of some Saturnine quality in it: the propugners for this
filthy drink affirm, it causes watchfulness: (so do both the stinking Hemlock
and Henbane in their first operation if unhappily taken into the body, but
their worse effects soon follow): They also say it makes them sober when they
are drunk, yet they would be always accounted sober persons, or at least think
themselves so, when they can but once sit down in a Coffee-house; certainly if
there had been any with in it, some of the ancient Arabian Physicians or others
near those parts, would have recorded it: But there is no mention made of any
medicinal use thereof, by any Author either Ancient or Modern, neither can it
be endued with any such properties as the indulgers of it, feed their fancies
with; but this I may truly say of it: Quod Anglorum Corpora, quae huic liquori
tantopere indulgent, in Barbarorum naturam degenerasse videntur.

But if any one desire to make Coffee, after the manner as it is prepared and
sold here in Engl. in the public Coffee-houses, it is thus: Take a gallon of
water and set it in a pot of Tyn, or any other Vessel close covered; set it
upon the fire and let it boil: when it thoroughly boyles, put into it a quarter
of a pound of the powder of the Coffee-berry, stirring it well together, so let
it boil a quarter of an hour, and your Coffee is ready to drink, then pour some
of it into a smaller pot covered, and keep it always ready before the fire.

Those that delight to have it in their houses for their private use, may add
or diminish the quantity of the Coffee-powder making it stronger or smaller as
they please.

Camphire.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Camphora, and Camphura, from the Arabians Cafar.

Descript.] Camphire is a gum, or liquor of a great vast-tree, like unto a
Walnut-tree, and of an ash color like unto a Beech: the leaves are whitish
like unto willow leaves; this liquor or gum, partly distilleth forth of its own
accord, but chiefly by incision: it is clear and white, and transparent, and
although when it is dry it be somewhat brittle, and will breaks into many small
pieces, yet it will not be made into powder by it self alone, but must have the
help of a blanched Almond, or some other such like unctuous thing, which will
reduce it into fine powder: neither will it be easily dissolved in cold water,
but by warmth will be resolved like unto fat, being easily set on fire, and
will burn in the water: It is of a very strong scent and subtle parts.

Govern. Nature and Vert.] Diverse have been the opinions of Authors about the
temperature of Camphire: some take it to be hot, because it is of such tenuity
of parts. Rhasis says, it is cold and moist, and Avicenna says, that it is
cold and dry, and that it causes watchings and wakefulness, and quieteth the
senses of those that are hot. It is governed by Mercury; and by experience is
found to cool the heat of the Liver and Back, Back, Reins
and all hot inflammations Inflammations
and distempers of heat Heat, Liver
in any part of the body; it eases pains of the Head, Headache, Operate
and restrainth fluxes, Fluxes,
either of blood out of the Head or nostrills, being applied to the nostrills
and to the forehead with juice of housleek and plantain-water, or with either
of them, and some Nettle-seed. It stays the flux of the natural seed either
in Man or Woman, using it to the Reins and privy parts; and extinguisheth the
heat of Lust, and desire to venereal actions.

It does preserve from putrefaction, and for that purpose is put into diverse
compositions and antidotes, to resist Venom, Venery, Poisons
poisons, and infection of the Plague Plague Ulcers
or other diseases: it is good in wounds and Ulcers, to restrain the heat of
them, and is of much use with Women, to preserve their beauty.

Cambugio.
Names.] IT has obtained a great many names partly from the sunddry nations,
and languages; and partly, from the mistakes of people, as Gutta Gamba, Gutta
Gamandra, Gutta Gemon, and many others; in english, it may be called the Golden
yellow Indian purger.

Descript.] Cambugio is yet scarce well known unto us whereof it is made, but
only what we see of it, being a solid piece of substance, made up into wreathes
or rouls, yellow both within and without, and giving a yellow color upon the
moistning of it: we cannot learn certainly whether it be a gum, or hardened
juice, but it is most likely to be a juice, because it will easily dissolve in
water, and it is most likely to be the juice of some peculiar herb of that
Country from whence it is brought, that gives a yellow juice it is brought unto
us out of the East Indies, and some say from China.

Government and Virtues.] It is particularly under the influence of Mars, and
has a property to purge both by stool and vomit: and may be given from three
or four grains, unto ten or twelve, or to a scruple or half a dram, accorrding
to the age and strength of the patients Body; it works gently with some,
purging forth crude phlegmatic Phlegm
humors from the Stomach, and wheyish from the Bowels, Bowels
without any trouble, but contrarily with others it works very churlishly;
and much troubles the Stomach, some use to make small pills of it and give it
in that form, especially if the humors be stubborn, and not easy to be
avoided; and for that cause some add a little Scammony unto it to help the slow
working in some bodies; also some correct it, by giving it in the pulp of
Currants, extracted in white Wine; and some in the infusion of Roses.

White Daffodyl.
Names and Kinds.] CAlled also Narcissus, and primrose-Pearls.

There are several kinds hereof, one with a crimson, or red purple circle in the
middle of the flower, and another having a yellow Circle as it were a Crownet
or cup, in the middle of the flower: there is another kind that is yellow in
the middle; and another sort which bears double flowers.

The cause of the name Narcissus given to these flowers.
These flowers took their name, in commemoration of a Noble and Beau^iful
youth, whose name was Narcissus, who was so exceeding Beautiful that ^e was
desired of many great Ladies, who were vehemently enamoured of ^im; but he
regarded them not because of his surpassing beauty: wherefore ^e being desirous
to free himself from their most importunate suits and re^uests; he went a
hunting, and being thirsty, he came to a Fountain, where^f when be would have
drunken, he saw in the water his own feature and ^urpassing beauty, the which
before that time, he had never seen; (for there were no looking-glasses in
those days): and thus as he stood amazed, gazing this own shadow, he supposed
it had been one of the Amorous Ladies that ^ved him; and was so ravished with
the love of his shadow, that he de^^red and endeavored to kiss and embrace
himself, and when he could not take hold of his own shadow or figure, he still
endeavored the same, until at last he died by extreme force of love. In whose
honor, and perpetual Memory, the poets say, that the earth brought forth this
delectable flower.

Descript.] The first kind of Daffodill or Narcissus has small narrow leaves
like Leek blades, with a crested bare naked stalk without leaves of a foot, or
nine inches long, with a flower at the top growing out of a certain film, as it
were a skin, most commonly growing singly or alone, and sometimes two together,
consisting of six little white leaves growing together; in the middle whereof
is a little round wrinckled hoop or cup, edged about the brinks with a certain
round edg, wherein are contained certain small threads or stems with yellowish
tips hanging upon them; after the flowers, appear angled husks, wherein grow
black seeds: the root is round and Bulbus, like an Onion.

The other Narcissus with the yellow cup or Circle in the middle, his blades
are longer and broader, and not so green as those of the first; the stalks are
longer and thicker, and upon every one of them stands three or four flowers
like unto the first but that they are all yellow in the middle.

There is another kind that is yellow in the middle, and bears many more
flowers, which are smaller than those before described.

Place.] The first two kinds grow plentifully in diverse places of France, as
Burgundy, and Languedoc, in Meadows and pastures; but in this Country, they
grow only in Gardens where they are planted.

Time.] They flower most of them in March and April, and some kinds flower not
until the beginning of May.

Temperature and Virtues.] Venus challenges the dominion over these plants for
her own, and gave them their name from her darling Narcissus: the root hereof
is hot and dry in the third degree, the which root being boiled or roasted, or
taken in meat and drink, provokes the stomach to Vomiting, Vomiting, burnings,
the same pounded with a little honey is good to be applied to burnings and
scaldings, Scaldings
and cures Sinews Sinews-strains
that are hurt or sprain'd, and is good to help dislocations, or Members out of
joint Joinst, Pains
being applied thereunto, it also gives ease in all old griefs and pains of
the joints; the roots of Narcissus, takes away all spots Spots, Face
of the Face, being mingled with Nettle-seed and Vinegar, and applied, it
mundifieth and cleanses corrupt and rotten Ulcers, Ulcers.
and ripeneth and breaks hard Impostumes, if it be mixed with the meal of
Vetches, and honey and applied pultis-wise to the part greived; and being mixed
with the meal of Yuray and honey, it draws forth thorns and splinters, being
applied thereunto.

Yellow Daffodil.
Names.] THis kind of Daffodill is also called Lide-lilly, because it flowereth
in March, which Month in some Countries is called Lide, and they are also
called Daffa-down-dillies.

Descript.] It has long narrow green leaves, the stalks be round upon which
grow pleasant yellow-flowers, to see to; but somewhat unpleasant to the smell:
after which come round knops, or husks, like little heads, wherein the seed is
contained, it has abundance of roots, which grow thick together, and increase
by new sprigs and blades, whereby it spreads and increases it self under
ground, so that of one plant you may soon have a great increase.

Place.] It grows not naturally in this Country, but in Gardens where it is
planted.

Time.] Daffodills, flower in March and April.

Government and Virtues.] Yellow-Daffodil is under the dominion of Mars, the
roots hereof are hot and dry almost in the third degree.

The root boiled in posset drink, and drunk, causes Vomiting, Vomiting
and is used with good success in the beginnings of Agues, Agues, Imposthumes,
especially Tertians which frequently rage in the springtime: a plaster made
of the roots with parched Barley-meal, and applied to swellings and Imposthumes
do dissolve them; the juice mingled with honey, Frankincense, Wine and Myrrh,
and dropped into the Ears, Ears
is good against the corrupt filth and running matter of the Ears; the roots
made hollow and boiled in oil does help raw Kib'd heels: Kibed-heels.
the juice of the root is good for the Morphew, Morphew.
and discolorings of the skin.

Date-tree.
Names.] THis is also called Palm Tree: and the fruit, Dates, or fruit of the
Palm-sree.

Descript.] This plant grows to be a great tree, with a straight thick trunk,
covered with a scaly bark: at the top thereof grow many long branches with
great plenty and store of long, straight, narrow leaves, or twigs like reeds,
so that the branches seem to be no other thing, but a bundle or sort of reed
leaves, growing thick together upon one branch: amongst those branches grows
the fruit, clustering together at the first, and wrapped in a certain long and
broad covering, like to a pillow, which afterward opens and shows the
fruit, standing along by certain small sprigs growing out of a flat yellow
branch, the fruit is round and long, containing within it a long and hard
stone; there is the Male Palm Tree and the Female; the Male tree brings forth
flowers only, which vanish away, and the Female bears the fruit, and
brings it unto perfection and ripeness.

Place.] The Date-tree grows in Africa, Arabia, India, Syria Judaea, and
other of those Eastern-countries.

Time.] The Date or Palm Tree, continues always green, and floureth in the
springtime. and the fruit in hot Countries is ripe in Autumn.

Government and Virtues.] The branches and leaves, are cold and astringent, the
fruit is hot and dry, almost in the second degree, but somewhat astringent,
especially before it is thoroughly ripe. Mars governs them. Dates are hard of
digestion, and cause oppilations in the Liver and Spleen, they engender
Windiness, Headache and gross blood; being eaten green and fresh; but being
through-ripe, they are not so hurtful, but nourish indifferently, being well
digested in a good Stomach.

Dry Dates stop Looseness, Looseness, Vomiting,
and stay Vomiting, and Wambling Wambling
in the Stomach: (especially of Women with Child) if they be eaten; or mingled
with other proper medicines and applied plaister-wise to the Stomach; and being
administered inwardly or applied outwardly with medicines convenient, they
strengthen the weakness of the Liver Liver, Spleenn
and Spleen:

The leaves and branches of the Date-tree do heal Green-Wounds, Green-Wounds
and soder and close them up; and refresh and cool hot inflammations: There is a
direction in the plaster Diacalcitheos, that it be stirred with a stick of the
Palm Tree, that it might be of the more virtue and efficacy, from whence also
the same plaster is called Diapalma: you may see the composition of the
plaster, in Galens first book de medicamentis secundum genera.

Dictamnum of Candy.
Kinds and Names.] DIoscorides makes mention of three kinds hereof; the first
whereof is the right Dictamnum only, the second is the bastard Dictamnum, the
third is another kind bearing both flowers and seed: it is called also Dittany
of Crete, and in shops Diptamum.

Descript.] The first kind which is the right Dictamnum, (as says Dioscorides)
is a hot and sharp plant, much like unto Pennyroyal, but having greater
leaves, somewhat hoary or mossey, with a certain fine down or woolly, white
Cotton: at the top of the stalks or branches grow certain small spikey tufts,
hanging by little small stems, greater and thicker than the ears or spikey
tufts of wild Marjoram, and are somewhat of a red color, in which there grow
little flowers.

2. The second kind, called Bastard Dictamnum, is much like unto the first,
saving, that it does not hurt nor bite the tongue, neither is it hot: It has
round soft woolly stalks, with knots and joints; at every of which joints there
stand two leaves, somewhat round, soft, and woolly, not much unlike the leaves
of Pennyroyal; but that they are greater, all hoary, and white, soft and
woolly, like to the first leaves of white Mullein or Tapsus Barbatus, without
any scent but bitter in taste: the flowers be of a light blew, compassing the
stalk, by certain spaces like to garlands, and like the flowers of Pennyroyal
and Hore-hound: the root is of a woody substance.

3. The third kind is like to the second in figure saving that his leaves are
greener and more hoary; covered with a fine, white, soft hair, almost like the
leaves of Watermint, the whole plant has a good and pleasant smell, as it were
a mean betwixt the scent of Watermint and Sage, as says Dioscorides.

Place.] The first kind, or the right Dictamnum, comes from Crete, now called
Candia, which is an Irland in the Mediterranean Sea, formerly belonging to the
Venetians, but two or three years sinee, taken by the Turks.

The other two kinds grow, not only in Candia, but in diverse other hot
Countries.

Government and Virtues.] The right Dictamnum is hot and dry and of subtle
parts, the other two kinds are also hot and dry, but not so hot as the first,
they are all under Venus. The right Dictamnum is of the same virtue as is
Pennyroyal, but it is better and stronger, it brings down the Flowers,
Flowers
Afterbirth Afterbirth
and dead Child, deadchild
whether it be drunk or eat, or used as a pessary or mother suppository: the
like virtue has the root which is hot and sharp upon the tongue; the juice is
very good to be drunk against all Venom, Venom
and bitings of Venomous beasts, and Serpents. Dictamnum is of such force
against Poison Poison
that the only favor and smell thereof drives away all Venomous Beasts and
Serpents, Serpents
the juice of the same is of singular force against all kinds of Wounds, Wounds
to be dropped or poured in; it both mundifieth, cleanses, and heals the
same, it qualifieth and asswageth the pain of the Milt or Spleen, Milt
and wastes and diminishes the same, being either taken inwardly or applied
outwardly to the place: it draws forth Splinters Splinters
and thorns Thorns
if it be bruised, and laid upon the place.

It is written by the Ancients that the Goats of Candy, and likewise Deer; if
they be shot with any Shaft, Javelin, or Arrow, that hangs or sticks fast
in their flesh; they forthwith seek out the plant Dictamnum, and eat thereof;
by virtue whereof, the Arrows fall out and their Wounds are cured.

The bastard Dictamnum has the same virtues as the first, but not so strong.

The third kind is very profitable to be put into medecines, drinks, and
Emplaisters that are made against the bitings or stingings of Venomous beasts.

False-Dictamnum.
Names.] THis herb is called in Latin Tragium, and by some Fraxinella; some
Apothecaries do use the root hereof instead of the right Dictamnum, from whence
it has gotten the name of Bastard and false Dittany.

Descript.] This plant is like unto Lentisms or Licoras, in leaves and
branches; it has round blackish rough stalks, and leaves displayed and spread
like those of Licoris: at the top of the stalks grow fair flowers; of a bluish
color, which on the upper part, has four or five leaves, and in the lower
part of the same flower it has small long threads crooking or hanging down
almost like a Beard; after the flowers are gone, in the place of each flower
there come four or five Cods, somewhat rough without, slimy to be handled, and
of a strong smell almost like a Goat; in the which is contained a black plain
shining Seed: the roots be long, and white, sometimes as thick as a finger and
do grow one against another.

Place.] It grows in the Isle of Candy as well as the true Dictamnum; and is
found in the Gardens of some curious Herbarists.

Time.] It floureth in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] This plant is also under the dominion of Venus. It is
hot almost in the third degree, and of subtle parts; the seed taken to the
quantity of a dram, is good against the Strangury; Strangury
provokes Urine, Urine, Stone
is good against the Stone in the Bladder, breaks and brings it forth, and
likewise drives down the Terms, Terms, Thorns
or flowers of Women; the like virtue has the leaves and juice to be taken
after the same manner, and being laid to outwardly, it draws out Thorns and
Splinters; Splinters
the root taken with a little Rhubarb, kills and drives forth Worms, Worms
and is of singular virtue against the same.

Dioscorides also reports of this plant, that the wild Goats, when they be
struck with Darts or Arrows, by the eating of this herb do cause the same to
fall out of their bodies, as well as if they had eaten of the right Dictamnum:
For which cause it is possible that this herb became first to be used in shops
instead of the true Dictamnum.

Dittander.
Names.] IT is also called Dittany, and Pepperwort.

Descript.] Dittander or Dittany, has long broad leaves, not much unlike the
Bay Tree leaf, but larger and longer, and notched about like a Saw: the stalks
and branches be round, uneasy or hard to be broken, and about two foot high;
at the top whereof grow very many small white flowers, and after them a small
seed, the root is long and single creeping under the earth, and puts forth
yearly, in diverse places, new sprigs and leaves.

Place.] It grows plentifully in diverse low grounds, and salt Marshes, as in
the Marshes by Rochester in Kent.

Time.] Dittander floureth and is in seed in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] This herb is hot and dry in the third degree, a
Martial plant; some people use this herb with meat instead of Pepper, because
it has the nature and taste of Pepper, whereof it took the name of Piperitis:
the root of this plant is very good against the Sciatica, Sciatica
being applied outwardly to the huckle bone, or haunch, made into a pultis,
with some Goose or Capons-grease, and an ointment made of the leaves with
Hog's Grease, or the leaves bruised, and applied to the place, helps the
Hip-gout, Hip-gout
and pain in the Joints, Joints
the part being afterward bathed with Wine, and Oil, and wrapped in wool or
Lambskin, a spoonful or two of the juice of Dittander in Ale, given to Women in
travail, causes Easy and speedy Delivery, Easie-Delivery
it is likewise good to take away Scars, Sun-burning, and Scabs, and clean-seth
discolorings of the skin.

Double-tongue.
Kind and Names.] THere is found two kinds hereof: it is called likewise
Horse-tongue, and Laurus of Alexandria.

Descript.] Double-tongue has round stalks like Solomons-Seal, of a foot and
half long, upon each side whereof grow thick, brownish leaves, not much unlike
to Bay-leavs upon the which there grows in the middle of every leaf, another
small leaf fashioned like a Tongue; and bet wixt those small and great leaves,
there grow round red berries, as big as a pease: the root is tender, white,
long, and of a good scent.

2. There is also another kind of double tongue which also brings forth his
fruit upon the leaves, and is like the first in stalks, leaves, fruits, and
roots, saving that there grow no other small leaves, by the fruit upon the great
leaves.

Place.] Double-tongue grows in Hungaria and Austria, and in some dark Woods
in Italy: some curious Herbarists plant it in their Gardens.

Time.] The seed hereof is ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] Double-tongue or tongue blade, is good to assuage
pain, as Galen says; the Laurel of Alexandria, is hot and dry of temperature:
Double-tongue is an herb of Venus; the leaves-and roots thereof are much
commended against Swellings Swellings
of the Throat, Throat, Uvula
the Uvula, and kernels under the tongue; and against Ulcers, and Sores of the
same, being taken in a Gargarism. Marcellus says, that in Italy they use to
hang this herb about childrens necks, that are sick in the Uvula: Urine, Terms
and Dioscorides writes, that if it be worn upon the bare Head, it is good for
the Headache: Headache, Mother,
this herb is good for diseases of the Mother, and a spoonful of the leaves of
Double-tongue given, causes the strangled Matrix to descend down to its
natural place.

The root of Laurel of Alexandria, boiled in Wine and drunken, helps the
Strangury, Strangury
provokes Urine Urine
and Women's natural sickness, procures Easie-delivery, Easy-delivery
expels the Secondine, and all corruption of the Matrix.

Garden Dragons, Dragon-wort and Water Dragons.
Kinds and Names.] THere be three kinds: the first is called, the great Dragon,
Dracunculus Major; of some, Serpentaria, and Colubrina; in shops, Serpentaria
Major.

The second kind is called Dracunculus Minor in Latin, the lesser Dragon; and
of some, Aron maculatum; in English, small Dragon-wort, and speckled Aron.

The third kind is called in Latin Dracunculus palustris, sine aquatilis; in
English, Water-Dragon, or Marsh-Dragon, in low dutch Water-Draken-wortel.

Descript.] The first kind called the great Dragon, or Serpentary, bears an
upright stalk of a cubit long or more; thick, round-smooth, and speckled; with
diverse colors and spots; like to an Adder, or Snakes skin: the leaves be great
and large, compact or made of six, seven, or more leaves, whereof each single
leaf, is long, and like to a sorrel or Dock-leaf, and are very smooth and
plain: at the top of the stalk grows, a long hose or husk, like to the hose
or Cod of Cuckow-pintle, or Wake-robin, of a greenish color without, and of a
dark red or purple color within, and so is the clapper, or pestle that grows
up within the said husk, which is long, and thick, and shart-pointed, peeked
like to a horn; whose fruit by increase waxes so as it stretches, and at
length breaks out of a certain skin, or Film; and appears like to a bunch
or cluster of Grapes; which at the first are green, but afterward become very
red: these berries or Grapes are full of juice or liquor; in which is a certain
small hard seed; the root of this Dragon is lasting, thick and white, and
grows like to a Bulbous Onion, covered with a thin skin, and of the quantity
of a middle-siz'd apple, and bearded with diverse little white hairs or strings;
and oftentimes there is joining to it other small roots which spring out of it,
whereby it is multiplied.

2. The smaller Dragon in his leaves, husk, or Cod, pestil, or clapper, berry,
and Grape, is like unto Aron, or Cuckow-pintle; saving that his leaves are not
marked with black, but with white spots; neither do they perish so soon as
Cuckow-pintle, but they grow together with their berries until Winter.

Their berries also are not fully so red, but of a certain yellowish red: the
root is not much unlike the root of Aron, white and round like an Onion, and
has certain hairy threads hanging by it, with some small roots or buds of new
plants.

3. Water-Dragon has not a round Bulbous root like the other Dragons, but it
is a long creeping root, full of joints, and of a good thickness, out of which
joints springs up the stalks of the leaves, which are smooth without, and
spongy within; but downwards toward the ground, the said roots send out of
their said joints, certain small hairy, or threddy roots; the fruit grows
alone upon a short stem; and comes forth with one of the leaves, compassed
about with white small thrommes or threads; at the first, (which is the blowing)
and afterward it grows forth into a cluster, which is green at first and
waxes red when it is ripe; smaller then Grapes or cluster of Cuckow-pintle
berries, but as sharp or biting: the leaves be large, green, fine, smooth,
fashioned like Ivy leaves, yet smaller than the leaves of Cuckow-pintle, but
that leaf wherein the cluster of berries grows, is smallest of all; and on
the upper part or side next the fruit, it is white.

Place.] The first or great Dragon-wort, grows in shadowy places, in this
Country; it is planted in Gardens.

2. The second kind, or lesser Dragon-wort delights also in shadowy places;
it grows not in England; but it is found plentifully in the Islands called
Majorca and Minorca.

3. The third kind grows in moist watery places, in the brinks of ditches, and
also in floating waters, and also along the running streams and Rivers.

Time.] They flower in July, and the fruit is ripe in August.

Government and Virtues.] All these herbs are under the dominion of Mars, and
are all, especially their roots and fruits, hot and dry in the third degree:
The roots of these plants, either boiled or roasted, and mingled with honey,
Short-Breath
and taken as a Lohoc, is good for them that cannot fetch their breath, and for
those who are troubled with dangerous Coughs, Coughs, Catharrs.
and Catharrs, that is, the distillation and falling down of humors from the
Brain to the Breast; and against Convulsions Convulsions
or Cramps; Cramps
they divide, ripen and consume all gross and tough humors, and scour off,
and cleanse the inward parts.

They have the like power, when they are three or four times boiled, until
they have lost their Acrimony, or sharpness, to be afterward eaten with meats
as Galen says.

The roots dried and mingled with honey, scoureth malignant and fretting Ulcers
Ulcers, Spots
that are hard to cure; especially if it he mingled with the root of Briony;
and it takes away all white Spots and Scurviness, from any part of the body
that is rubbed therewith: the juice of the root, puts away all Webbs
Manginess, Web
and Spots from the Eyes; and it is good to be put into Collyries, and
medicines made for the Eyes: the same dropped into the Ears with Oil takes
away the pain Eyes, Pained-Eares
and grief of the same.

The fruit or berries of Dragons cures virulent, and malignant Malignant
Ulcers, Ulcers, Polypus
and consumes and eats away, the superfluous flesh called Polypus which
grows in the nose, and it is good to be laid unto Cankers, Cankers
and such fretting and consuming Ulcers.

Some write (as Pliny amongst the rest of his Romantic fancies) that those who
carry about them the leaves, or roots of great Dragon-worts, cannot be bitten
or hurt of Vipers or Serpents.

Dunch-down.
Names.] IT is called Dunch-down, because if the Down thereof happen to fall
into the Ears, it will cause one to be deaf as Mathiolus says. It is called
in Latin Typha palustris, Reed-mace, and Water-torch, the leaves are called
Matweed because they make Mats therewith.

Descript.] This herb has long, rough, thick, and almost three square leaves,
filled within with a soft pith or marrow, amongst the leaves sometimes grows
up, a long, smooth, naked stalk, without knots, or joints, not hollow within,
having at the top a gray or russet long knap or Ear which is round, soft, thick
and smooth, and seems to be nothing else but a throm of russet wool or
flocks, set thick and throng d together; the which at length when as the said
knap, or Ear, waxes ripe, it is turned into down, and carried away with the
Wind; this down or Cotton is so fine, that in some Countries they fill cushions
and beds with it, as Fuchsius writes: the roots be hard thick and white with
many threads hanging overthwart one another; and when these roots are dry they
are good to burn, and for nothing else as I ever heard of.

Place.] This plant is frequently found in standing-ponds and waters, and
shadowy pools; and commonly amongst Reeds and flags, by the brinks or edges of
Rivers and running Streams.

Time.] It is at full growth in July and August, and the Down ripe soon after.

Government and Virtues.] It is an herb of the Moon, of temperature cold and
dry; the Down of this plant mingled with Swines-grease well washed, heals
burnings Burnings
or Scaldings, Scaldings
with fire or water. It has also been experimented and prooved, that the Down
or Cotton of this plant, is very profitable for Kibed-heels; Kibed-heels
which are broken out and hollow, if it be laid thereupon.

Dwarff-plane-tree.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Sambucus Palustris, and Sambucus Aquatica,
Marsh-Elder, and Water-Elder, because of the flowers and fruit, and the Timber
is full of pith like Elder.

Descript.] This plant is somewhat like Elder. The Wood thereof, but especially
of the young branches, is full of pith, as are those of Elder: the leaves be
large and fine cornered, almost of the fashion of Vine leaves, but smaller, the
flowers be white and grow in round shadowy tuffets, whereof those in the middle
are small; and they that stand all about the border of the round spokey tuffts
are great; the fruit is round berries like the berries of Elder, but greater,
and of a shining red color.

Place.] This plant grows plentifully in Meadows, by the sides of fresh fair
running Rivers, and by watercourse, and in low waterish places.

Time.] The Dwarff-plane-tree, flowe^s in May, and the fruit is ripe in
September following.

Government and Virtues.] It is a Saturnine plant; some say that the berries
thereof being taken into the body, do cause Vomiting and open the belly,
purging Vomit, Purge
downwards: but it is not now experienced, being little made use of, if at all.

Elder, and the Kinds.
OUr Prodromus Culpepp. falling short both in the description, kinds, nature
and Celestial government of Elder, and also of their several medicinal uses, I
must not omit to enlarge somewhat thereupon supplying his defects, and adding
the several kinds and their virtues.

Descript.] 1. The common Elder-tree, called in Latin Sambucus vulgaris,
grows up in some ground if it stand alone to a good height, but standing
thick it is but a shrub with spreading branches, the outer bark is grayish, but
underneath it has a green skin, it has a pith in the middle: the leaves are
winged and stand at the joints of the branches, a little dented about the
edges, of a fair sad green color, of a strong smell: the flowers are white and
stand in tufts at the tops of the twigs, smelling stronger than the leaves,
after which succeed small round berries, green at first, and blackish when they
are ripe, full of purplish juice within them, and some small flat seeds or
grains: the root is great and thick far spreading; there is a kind of Fungus,
or Excrescence, growing at the bottom of the tree, and on the branches of this
tree, called Jews-Ears, and is somewhat in resemblance like unto an Ear, but is
accounted a kind of the Mushrooms.

Descript.] 2. White berried Elder, Sambucus fructu albo: this Elder is both in
form, bark, pith, branches, leaves and flower, so like the other that it cannot
be discerned but by the fruit; but the chiefest diffe- is that the berries are
of a pale, whitish, yellow color in most places; yet in some they abide
greenish, and is hereby only distinguished from the former:

Descript.] 3. Jagged-Elder; Sambucus, Laciniatis foliis: the difference in
this from the first is the form of the leaves, which are so much divided or
jagged even to the middle rib, that it would not be deemed an Elder but only by
the smell thereof; in all other parts, as well flowers as berries, it differs
not from the first.

Descript.] 4. Red-berried Elder, Sambucus racemosa Rubra; this is a mountain
Elder, and differs but a little from the common Elder, but that it seldom
grows so great, and the flowers are somewhat yellowish, and grow not in large
spread tufts; but in small long branched clusters, like Privet, and the berries
are of a scarlet color, and pleasant to be eaten; it is like it in the
growing, rugged white bark in the body and Elder boughs and somewhat reddish
in the young leaves as also in the roots; the Wood is not so soft nor so pithy.

Descript.] 5. Sambucus Palustris sive Aquatica the Marsh Elder: This has his
body and branches, covered with a whitish bark, but they are smaller and more
brittle then any of the former; the leaves also differ much from them, being
broad and smooth, divided at the edges, into three and sometimes five parts,
and dented round about, like unto a vine leaf, and somewhat resembling the
great Maple, or vulgarly called Sycamore leaf; the flowers stand in tufts, or
umbells, like the first sorts, but they are smaller and whitish, the outermost
are much larger than any of the innermost, or of the former Elders, consisting
of five leaves a piece, round pointed, which compass the middle flowers round
about, but have no threads in the middle, of a reasonable sweet scent; after
which follow very red berries, somewhat flat, and full, of a red juice,
bitterish in taste, ready to cause Vomiting.

Descript.] 6. The Elder or Gelder-rose, Sambucus Rosea is the Latin
appellation; this is of the same kind growing after the same manner, with such
like leaves, but the Flower is composed as it were of many whitish or pale blush
flowers set together in a round tuft or ball.

Descript.] 7. Dwarff-Elder, called also Walwort and Danewort, in Latin Ebulus
sive Sambucus humilis; this is but an herb dying every year with the stalks
down to the ground, and rising fresh again every Spring, and inform and quality
resembles the common Elder, it rises up with a four square, rough, hairy stalk
four foot high, sometimes more and sometimes less, the winged leaves are
somewhat narrower than those of the Elder, but else very like it; the flowers
are white with a dash of purple, standing in Vmbells like those of the Elder,
but more sweet in smell, after which come small blackish berries, full of juice
while they are fresh, wherein there lie small hard kernels or seed, the root
does creep under the upper crust of the ground, springing a fresh in diverse
places about the bigness of ones finger.

Jagged Dwarff-Elder.
Descript.] 8. THis is called in Latin Ebulus foliis laciniatis: there can be
known no difference between this and the other, save, only in the leaves,
which do so deform the whole face of the plant, that none almost would think it
should belong to the former; the flowers, fruit, and smell only leading us to
Judge of the Species: the leaves are almost Jagged, as much as the jagged
Elder, wherein consists the only difference in this, from the former.

The Place and Time.] Common Elder grows very frequently in hedges, and in
many places it is planted to serve for hedges, and partitions, for grounds, and
Gardens, especially about London, where the Gardeners plant it, not only to
serve in their grounds, but for the annual profit it yields both for the
green buds, flowers and fruit, and it is planted likewise in many places where
Coneys breed, for shadow; every stick or branch being thrust into the ground,
will easily take root and grow. The second, it is said was first found by
Tragus in the Woods of Germany. The third, is found wild, on Hills in watery
Woods. The fourth, is only found planted in the Gardens of the Curious. The
fifth is found by watersides and Moorish places in Germany, France, England,
Italy, and Peidmont in Savoy, as Pena says. The sixth is nursed up only in
Gardens, but best delights in moist Grounds. The seventh grows Wild in many
places of England, where if it be once gotten into a Ground, it will so creep
and spread it self under the upper crust of the earth, that is will hardly be
gotten out again. The last is as yet a stranger in England.

The Time.] The common Elder shoots forth his buds early in the year-in the
beginning of January if the weather be mild: all or most of the Elders, flower
in June, but the Danewort somewhat late, as his fruit likewise is later ripe;
even not until September: but the others are ripe for the most part at the
middle or latter end of August.

Government and Virtues.] In the judgment of Culpepper, about the planetary
dominion of these plants, he much mistakes himself, saying that both Elder and
Walwort were under Venus, but they are numbered amongst the violent purgers, and
of a heating and drying quality, quite contrary to the nature of Venus, as also
their rank smell demonstrates; I do therefore attribute them to the dominion of
Mars in Scorpio; both Galen and also Dioscorides do attribute to the Walwort,
as well as to the common Elder (for they account their properties both one) a
hot and dry temperature, purging watery humors abundantly, but not without
trouble to the Stomach: the first shoots of the common Elder boiled like unto
Sparagus, and the young leaves and stalks boiled in fat broth, draws forth
mightily Choler and tough Phlegm; Choler, Phlegm
the tender leaves also eaten with oil and salt does the same, the middle or
inner bark boiled in Water, and given to drink works much more violently, and
the berries also either green or dry, expel the same humors and is often given
with good success to help the Dropsy, by evacuating great plenty of watrish
humors; Watery humors
the bark of the root also boiled, or the juice thereof drunk, works the same
effects, but more powerfully, than do either the leaves or fruit: the juice of
the root taken provokes Vomiting Vomit, Dropsy
mightily, and purges the watery humors of the Dropsy: the same decoction of
the root, cures the biting of the Viper Viper, Adder
or Adder, as also of a Mad-dog, Mad-dog, Mother,
and mollifieth the hardness of the Mother if Women sit therein: and opens
the Veins, and brings down their Courses; Courses Hair made black, Eyes
inflamed, Burning
the berries boiled in Wine perform the same effects, the hair of the Head or
other parts washed therewith is made black: the juice of the green leaves
applied to hot inflammations of the Eyes, asswageth them: the leaves boiled
until they be tender and then beaten and mixed with Barly-meal, and applied to
hot inflammations asswageth them, and helps Burning Burning
and Scalding; Sealding, Fistula's, Ulcers
and cures Fistula's and Ulcers, being laid thereupon and eases the pains of
the Gout, Gout, Brain
being beaten and boiled with tallow of a Bull or a Goat and laid thereon; the
juice of the leave snuffed up into the nostrills, purges the Tunicles of the
Brain; the juice of the berries boiled with a little honey and dropped into the
Ears, Ears pained
eases the pains of them; the decoction of the berries in Wine being drunk
provokes Urine, Provoke Urine to make lean
the powder of the seeds, first prepared in Vinegar and then taken in Wine,
Wind, Chollick
half a dram at a time, for certain days together, is a means to abate fat,
and keep the body lean, the berries so prepared and as much white Tartar and a
few Anniseeds, put unto them, a dram of this powder given in Wine cures the
Dropsy humor; Dropsy humors
very gently purging: the dry flowers are very often used in the decoctions of
Glisters to expel Wind, and eases the Chollick; for they lose their purgeing
quality which they have being green, and retain an attenuating and digesting
property being dried.

The distilled water of the flowers is of much use to clear the skin from
Sunburning, Sunburning
Freckles, Freckles
Morphew Morphew
or the like, and (says Mathiolus) the Head being bathed therewith it takes
away all manner of Headache Headache
that comes of a cold cause.

The Vinegar made of the flowers of Elder by maceration and insolation, is
grateful to the Stomach, Stomach
and of great power and effect to quicken the Appetite, and helps to cut
gross or tough Phlegm Phlegm, hot
in the chest; a sirrup of Vinegar made thereof, will work more effectually for
these purposes: the leaves boiled and laid hot upon any hot and painful
Aposthumes, Aposthumes
especially in the more remote and sinewy parts, does both cool the heat, and
inflammation of them, and ease the pains: the distilled water of the inner bark
of the tree or of the root, is very powerful to purge the watery humors of the
Dropsy, Dropsy, Tympany, Burning
or Tympany, taking it fasting and two hours before Supper.

Mathiolus prescribes a Receipt hereof to help any Burning or Scalding,
Scalding
which is made in this manner, viz.

Take (says he) one pound of the inner bark of the Elder, bruise it or cut it
small, and put it into two pound of fine sallad oil, or oil of Olives, that
has been first washed oftentimes in the distilled water of Elder-flowers; let
them boil gently a good while together, and afterward strain forth the oil,
pressing it very hard; Set this oil on the fire again and put thereto, four
ounces of the young branches and leaves of the Elder-tree, and as much new Wax,
let them boil to the consumption of the juice, after which being taken from the
fire, put presently thereunto two ounces of liquid vernish (such as Joiners use
etc.) and afterward, of Olibanum in fine powder four ounces, and the whites of
two eggs being first well beaten by themselves; all these being well stirred and
mixed together, put it up into a clean pot, and keep it to use when occasion
serves.

The young buds, and leaves of the Elder and as much of the roots of plantain
beaten together, and boiled in old Hog's Grease, and laid warm upon the place
pained with the Gout, Gout
gives present ease: if you put some of the flowers of Elder into a bag,
letting it hang in a Vessel of Wine, when it is new made and begins to work:
the bag being a little pressed every evening for a sennight together gives to
the Wine a very good relish and a smell like Muscadine; the like may be tried
with a Vessel of Ale or Beer new Tunned up, and set to work together, the
leaves of Elder boiled tender and applied warm to the fundament eases the the
pains of Piles, Piles, Ulcers
if they be once or twice renewed as they grow cold: The foul inflamed or old
Ulcers, inflamed, blood
and sores of the Legs Sore Legs, hot
being often washed with the water of the leaves or of the flowers distilled,
in the middle of the Month of May, does heal them in a short space.

Fistulous Ulcers
The distilled water of the flowers takes away the heat and inflammation of the
Eyes, and helps them when they are bloud-shotten. shotten Eyes


The hands being washed Morning and Evening with the same water of the flowers,
does much help and ease them that have the Palsy Palsy, hands
in them, and cannot keep them from shaking: shaking
the pith in the middle of the Elder stalks, being dried and put into the
Cavernous holes of Fistulous Ulcers, Fistulous Ulcers
that are ready to close, opens and dilateth the Orifice, whereby injections
may be used, and other remedies applied for the cure of them.

It is reported, that if you gently strike a Horse that cannot piss, with a
stick of this Elder, and bind some of the leaves to his Belly, Mizaldus
it will make him piss presently: it is also said, and some persons of good
credit, have told me (but I did never make any experiment of it) that if one
ride with two little sticks of this Elder in his pockets, he shall not fret nor
gaul, let the Horse go never so hard.

The Mushrooms, or Excrescences of the Elder-tree, called in English Jews
Ears, usually Auriculae Judae, and Fungus Sambucinus, are of much use being
dried to be boiled in Ale or Milk, or some other proper decoction with
Columbine leaves for sore Throats, Sore Throats pallat of the Mouth Headache
and with a little Pepper and pellitory of Spain in powder, to put up the
Uvula, or pallat of the mouth being down: the dried Jews Ears steeped in
Rose Water, and applied to the Temples and forehead, eases the pains of the
Head, or Headache, as says Mathiolus.

The Mountain or red berried Elder has the same properties, that the common
Elder has, but much weaker in all things; and the berries hereof are accounted
to be cold, and to procure sleep, Sleep
but the frequent use hereof is hurtful; it has been said that if a stick, or
branch of this Elder be put into the passage or Cavern that a Mole Moles
has made, it will either drive them forth, or kill them in their holes.

The marsh Elder is of the same purging quality, with the former or common
Elder, especially the berries or the juice of them. Hens and Birds do feed upon
them willingly in the Winter.

The Danewort, Walwort, or Dwarff-Elder, is in operation more forceable or
powerful than the Elder, in all the diseases, and for all the purposes
whereunto it is applied, but more especially wherein the Elder is little or
nothing available, the Dwarff-Elder serves to these uses;

The young and tender branches and leaves thereof taken with Wine, helps
those that are troubled with the Stone Stone,
and Gravel; Stone, Gravel
and is a speedy and quick help for hardness and swelling of a Man's Stones,
Stones swelled or hard
being laid warm thereupon; the juice of the root of Walwort, applied to the
Throat, helps the Quinsie Quinzy, King's Evil,
and Kings-Evill: the juice thereof, put into the fundament helps the falling
down thereof, Falling of the Fundament Courses, Dropsy
the same also put up with a little wool into the Matrix brings down Women's
courses the same juice of the root, strongly purges watery humors, and is held
most effectual for the Dropsy of all other herbs whatsoever; the dried berries
or the seeds beaten to powder, and taken in-Wine fasting works the like
effect: the powder of the seed taken in the decoction of Chamaepetis, or
grownd-Pine, and a little Cinnamon to the quantity of a dram at a time, is an
approved remedy both for the Gout, Gout, Joint-aches
Joint-aches, and Sciatica, Sciatica
as also for the French Pox, French Pox
for it draws the humors from the place affected, whereby it eases the
pains, and draws forth those humors, that are fluent, peccant and offensive;
the powder of the root works in the like manner, and to the same effect; the
root hereof steeped in Wine all night, and a draught thereof, given before the
access, or coming, will either break off the fit or abate the violence
thereof, Agues
and at the second taking seldom fails to drive it quite away: an ointment
made of the green leaves and May butter, made in the Month of May, is accounted
a sovereign remedy for all outward pains, Outward pains
Aches or Cramps in the Nerves, Aches in Nerves
Joints or Sinews, Joints, Sinews
for Lameness Lamenesse
or stiffness by cold or other casualties, and in general to comfort, warm, and
strengthen all the outward parts ill affected; as also to mollify the
hardness, and open the obstructions Obstructions
of the Spleen, hardness Spleen
the greived parts being anointed therewith.

The leaves laid to steep in water and sprinkled in any chamber of the house,
kills Fleas, Flies Fleas, Flies
and Waspes Wasps, Cold,
as is said: Tragus says, that the tender branches boiled in Wine, whereunto
some honey is put, and drunk for some days together is profitable for a Cold
and dry Cough, Cough, Breast
cures the diseases of the Breast, by cutting and extenuating and digesting
the gross, and tough Phlegm therein, all the properties before-said of the
Elder, the Walwort does perform more strongly, and is more effectual in opening
and purging Choler, Phlegm Choler, Phlegm
and Water, in helping the Gout, Water, Gout
the Piles, Piles
and Women's diseases, colors the Hair black, helps the Inflammations of the
Eyes, and pains in the Ears, Women's courses hair, Eyes, ears
the stinging or biting of Serpents, Serpents, Mad-dog, Burning
or a Mad-dog, the Burnings or Scaldings, Scaldings
by Fire or Water, Wind Cholick, Wind Cholick and Stone
and Stone, the cure of all old sores and fistulous Ulcers, Ulcers
and all other the griefs and maladies before of the Elder specified.

Thus in general Terms, I have given the species, nature and virtues of the
Elder and Dwarff-Elder, with their excellent operations, deducted from the
Testimony of the best Authors, and late admired experience: I shall now lay
down some more particular, and late experienced medicaments, composed of some
parts of the Elder, and appropriated to several diseases in several parts of
Man's body.

For pain in the Head.
Take the Cake of the flowers of Elder left in the Still after the
distillation, and sprinkle upon it the Vinegar of the flowers, and apply it to
the Temples, renewing it with sprinkling on fresh Vinegar, or you may use Rose
cakes be sprinkled with the Vinegar of Elder; which is far better for the brain
where the heat is more vehement, and the brain more sensible.

Or, Take of fresh Elder leaves two handfuls, of Roses and waterlilly-flowers,
of each one handful, being cut and pounded, pour upon them of Elder Vinegar,
and the water, distilled out of the flowers, of each a like quantity, press
the juice out strongly, and mix with it two whites of Eggs well beaten, in
which dip a double Linen cloth, and apply it to the Head, repeating it often.

This decoction is excellent to dispell the Vapors of the brain, and make one
sleep soundly, if the Legs and Arms be soundly rubbed therewith when you go to
bed.

Take six Umbells of the Elder flowers when they are full; of Annise, Umbells
four; of Roman Camomil flowers one handful, six poppy Heads with their seeds:
being cut together beat them in rain water, and so apply them.

The Elder's remedies again Hypochondriack and flatulent Melancholy.
In these diseases, if the Patient be subject to Vomit, it is expedient first
of all to provoke it by the oil of the infusion of the flowers and bark of the
Elder; lest by preparing and purging medecines, those crude, and
Excrementitious humors which often are gathered in the Stomach be carried to
the more principal parts of the body and augment the obstructions.

Or give of the syrrup made of the juice of the buds and berries an ounce, with
some grains of the extract of Scammony, and three drops of the oil of
Elder-flowers distilled, in the distilled water of the flowers thereof.

Or use this clyster following which will mitigate pain, expel wind, and
loosen the belly.

Take of Elder leaves two handfulls, of Elder flowers and Roman
Cammomil-flowers, of each an handful; of the stones of Elder-berries dried two
drams: which being cut and pounded, boil them in good Wine, or Wine of the
Elder, till the colature come to eight ounces; add the oil of the infused
flowers three ounces, of Elder-honey two ounces, the yolk of one egg; mix them
and make a clyster and inject it hot.

After this the Wine which is drawn out of the berries and flowers, is very
profitable, for it opens obstructions, cuts gross humors, and by degrees
carries them off. It does likewise refresh the vital and animal Spirits; drink
a cupful thereof each morning for a Month, taking before a spoonful or two of
flesh broth, or a soft Egg; with these you may also mix once or twice a week
the powder of the buds of Elder; which is thus prepared,

Take of Elder-buds dried in the shade half an ounce, of Elder-kernels
trochiscated, of Seen leaves, of Crystalized Elder Salt, of each three dams, of
the extract of Scammony two drams, of Galingale, and Mace, each half a dram;
being all subtly powdered distill upon them, of the oil of Cloves and Fennel
of each six drops, of Cinnamon and Caraway of each three drops; let them be
mixed exactly in a marble, Mortar for a powder; whose dose is from a scruple to
a dram.

The Trochiscation, or preparation of the seeds of Elder is thus: Take one
ounce of the lesser Esula prepared in infusion in Vinegar and pulverized
grossly, put it into Spanish Wine, and let them macerate eight days in the
Sun, or in the Winter in the Chimney-corner, the mouth of the glass being well
stopped; after, strain them through gray Paper, and purify them, take the clean
Arilla's of the Elder-berries, dry them, pulverize them, and with a sufficient
quantity of the powder of Esula make them in paste, dry it, and then sprinkle
them with the same infusion, and again work it into paste, of which form your
Troches: dry them, and keep them for your use.

The specific cure of the Epilepsie or Falling sickness from the Elder. The
Cure of Children.
To Infants new born, before you give them any thing to swallow, you may give
them with great profit, a spoonful of the syrrup of the flowers, or juice of
the Elder-berries, to carry off that putrid, yellowish, and sometimes blackish
water gathered in the Stomach and parts about while the Infant is in the
Mothers womb; for these syrrups do not only change and evacuate, but they also
preserve from and resist malignities.

Macerate a handful of Elder-flowers, well dried in Wine, with which wash the
new born babe; it consumes the humors gathered about the joints, and comforts
the members: this also is profitable; Take of the powder of the buds one dram,
of the berries of herb Paris, Numb. 6. powder them very finely, of which give
half a scruple for 9 days together, in the water of Elder-flowers, or in any
other convenient Liquor.

In the Fit the least spoonful of the spirit of the flowers, given with three
or five of the seeds of Peony excorticated, is much commended or of Peony-seeds
excorticated of the best Water of Elder-flowers, one ounce and an half; of the
flowers of Linden, half an ounce.

The cure of those that are of age, and grieved with the Falling Sickness.
In the cure of such persons, first, purge the body very well. In the Spring
time, macerate the bark of the roots of Elder in the Whey of Cows milk, which
being sweetened with Sugar, let him each morning drink an hearty draught
thereof; or take of the compound powder of the buds two scruples or a dram, or
take of the new rob of the Elder, well thickened with Sugar as much, as will make
a Bolus.

The Spirit of the flowers and berries of the Elder, in and out of the fit, is
very effectual, but it may be made more efficacious in this manner: Take of the
middle bark of the Elder; of Peony-roots, each 6 drams; of dried Elder-leaves
and buds, of Linden tree-flowers of each one handful; of the seeds of Rue two
drams, of the berries of herb Paris Number 20. of Jews-Ears numb. 6.

This being cut and pounded put as much of the Spirit of Elder-flowers thereon,
as will be a hand broad high, above them; let them stand eight days in a hot
place, and in a vessel close stopped, distill them in glass Vessels in Balneo
Mariae, till they be dry; with them mix the distilled Spirits, the salt drawn
out of its dregs, and keep it for the Anti-Epileptick Spirit of the Elder,
whereof you may give a spoonful to the patient in the time of his fit,
afterward using it every quarter of the Moon, to dissipate the Epileptick
corruption by sweating, or insensible transpiration; and to strengthen the
brain; with this same in the time of the fit, rub the nostrills, Gums, and
Palate, adding thereto a grain or two of Castor.

The Water of the flowers drawn up into the Nose, prevails much against the
Epilepsie, and Vertigo; in the same affects, the Eyes and Face, are to be
washed often with this water; in the time of the Fit anoint gently the
contracted members, with the oil of the flowers of the first description; the
oil of the second sort is much commended to anoint the palms of the Hands and
Soles of Feet, the Temples and nape of the Neck.

Of the Apoplexy, and Palsy.
The salt of the Spirit of Elder is much commended as a preservative against
these grievous diseases, if it be mixed with a third part of the volatile
Spirit of Amber, and given in the time of the new Moon, or full Moon in a
convenient liquor, in the weight of a scruple or half a dram; the salt of the
Elder must be first excellently crystaliz'd in the water of Sage.

Oximel Sambuci, is likewise useful in these cold distempers of the Brain,
whereof give often in Sage water, a little before purging, for the cutting and
preparing that gross matter.

The Spirit likewise distilled from the Berries is excellent, if once a week or
at least each Quarter of the Moon, a spoonful thereof be taken mixed with crumbs
of Wheat-bread and a little, Sugar: or you may prepare it new in what quantity
you please, Thus.

Take Sage, Marjoram, Ivy, of each two drams; Cowslip-flowers, Lilly of the
Valley-flowers, of each one dram and an half; of Rocket-seeds two drams: which
being cut and grossly powdered, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of the
Spirit of Elder, and after eight days distill them in Balneo: dissolve a little
Castoreum in it and strain it, of this give the Patient a spoonful in the time
of the Fit, and with the same rub the Crown of the Head, Temples, Nape of the
Neck, and Nostrills.

But if the Apoplexy end in a Palsy of the sides or other Members, as usually
it does, (or in death;) it is necessary to provoke sweat, which may be done with
two drams of the spirit before mentioned, or two drams of the Rob of the
berries in Sage water, or of the extract of the rob of the Elder; five drams
and an half of which every morning give to the patient, being exactly mixed one
dram in two or three ounces of the decoction of the great Burdock, and keep him
warm to sweat in his bed for half an hour.

Of Catharrs.
In this the Wine prepared of the flowers and berries is much commended, drink
a cupful in the morning after you have taken a little broth.

For diseases of the Ears and Hearing.
For to ease and mitigate pains of the Ears use Fomentations, of Elder and
Camomile-flowers; and anoint the place with the oil of the infusion of the
flowers of Elder: To take away the tingling, sounding and other noises of the
Ears, drop in a drop or two of the oil of the flowers, and stop the Ears with
Bombace dipped therein, and with the decoction of the roots and leaves of the
Elder, with some Originanum; let the Ears be often washed therein, and receive
the hot sum thereof.

Of the defects of the Nose and Smelling.
Water of Elder-flowers often snuffed up into the Nose helps the Smelling,
when it is lost or diminished, by any great Cold or sickness; and if you wash
the Face often with the distilled water of the leaves and flower: of the Elder,
it cleanses and dries up all pimples and pustules of the Face.

For diseases of the Throat and Mouth.
The expressed juice of the leaves, mixed with Simple or Elder honey does
cleanse and dry very much, all the Ulcers of the Gums and Throat, they being
gargled therewith; and outwardly anoint them, with the oil of Elder-flowers by
infusion.

For Hoarseness.
The new Rob of the Elder-berries, which is liquid, is with good success given
to Coughing and unquiet Children; for older people a Lohoch of the oil of
Elder-Sugar is profitable; but where there is much matter, and corruption
feared, this medicament following is profitable:

Take of fresh Elder-leaves, a little dried in the shadow one handful, boil
them in a quart of Fountain water, to the Consumption of a third part, strain
it, and sweeten it with Sugar Candy or clarified honey; of which, every day
morning and evening drink a draught warm.

To make the Voice clear.
Take of Elder-flowers dried in the Sun, and pulverized; of which drink a
little every morning, in white Wine fasting: if the Cough and Hoarseness
proceed from heat in Fevers, the syrrup made of the juice of Elder-berries
with equal parts of the syrrup of violets, is an excellent remedy. Or you may
make Elder-Sugar in imitation of violet Sugar Candy, Cinnamon or Rose Sugar; of
which in these pectorall diseases hold some still to be dissolved in your
mouth, that it may gradatim, descend into the Windpipe: it is thus made;

Take of the best Sugar 6 pound, let it dissolve and boil, in the fragrant
water of the flowers, till it come to a fit thickness, to be made into tablets,
then infuse the fresh juice made from the berries well clarified, or the
frequent infusion of the flowers, as you please to have the color: on a soft
fire boil to the consistency of a syrrup, then in a glass or earthen pot, put
sticks in order two fingers breadth as^under and pour the Liquor hot thereon,
and in a warmed shop, the vessel being bound up in a thick Cotton-cloth, let it
stand to congeal.

For Swooning and Faintness.
The Vinegar of Elder-berries imbibed in a Sponge recovers those as it were
from death, that are subject to Swoonings and Faintings, it excellently
refreshes the vital Spirits, in this also dip Linen clothes, and apply them
to the pulses of the Temples, Wrists, and near the Ankles.

Of Agues and Fevers.
As soon as any one finds a Fever at first begin to approach, let them take of
the Rob of the Elder in the Vinegar, Spirit or water of the flowers thereof,
and so in their beds being well covered with clothes, dispose themselves for
sweating.

But this is only to be done in the beginnings of Fevers, and in such bodies
as are not full of gross and corrupt humors; otherwise, it is more safe, to
open the passages of the whole body by Emeticks and Catharticks.

The purified oil expressed out of the kernels of the berries, is commended in
strong and lusty bodies, one dram or a dram and an half thereof, being taken in
the broth of flesh; for it gently moves Vomiting and loosneth the Belly.

The oil made of the infused flowers and bark of the Elder, from one ounce to
three, provokes Vomit, and purges the Belly; the same alone or in a decoction
may be given in a Glister.

In young ones, the syrrup of the juice of the berries, of the buds or bark,
suffices. There are some which testify, and call experience to witness, that
if the middle bark of Elder be pulled downward from the tree, it purges the
body downwards, but if they be pulled upward it works by Vomit.

In such Fevers which are lengthened from the stopping or fullness of the
Meseraick Veins, and from the grosseness and toughness of the humor, Oxymel
Sambucinum, dissolved in the distilled water of the flowers or Barly-water, and
daily on the intermitting days drank an hour or two before supper is
commended: the Crystallized salt of the Elder, taken from half a scruple to a
whole one, is profitable, also six drops, of the Spirit of the fame, taken in
the broth of flesh; all these do powerfully open obstructions, and cut asunder
the grossness and roughness of the humor; they cleanse the Bowels and
Vessels, and both by Urine and Sweat dissipate the Feverish matter. In the
time of the Fit, give the patient a spoonful or a dram and a half of the oil
pressed out of the berries-kernells, in warm Ale: the rob of Elder in greatness
of a Walnut, being mixed with half a dram of the powder of Carduus benedictus,
and swallowed; and drinking Vinegar above it, and afterward provoking sweat in
bed, is a very good medicine.

In continual and hot burning Fevers, where the heat is more intense, and
great drought tormenteth the Patient, make this Julap.

Take of Fountain or River-water three pounds, of Elder Vinegar three ounces,
of the finest Sugar two ounces, let them boil together a little in a fit
Vessel; unto which being warm, add an ounce of Cinnamon in powder; let them
cool of themselves in a close Vessel; and strain them for a Julap, of which
give the Patient often in a day: it extinguisheth the Feverish heat, cuts the
gross and tough matter, cleanses the thin and Bilous, opens obstructions; it
purges the peccant humors; and by its acidity sharpneth the appetite and
refreshes the strength.

Of Worms.
The Crystalline salt of the Elder, preserves and freeth from Worms; it robs
them of their nourishment, kills them and purges them out: the dose is from
half a scruple to half a dram, or two scruples; for those of riper years, you
may prepare in the Spring time, a dish made of Elder-buds freed from their
bitter nauseous taste, by the infusion of boiling water with Oil, Salt, and
Vinegar, which is to be used as a sallad before supper: That this sallad may be
the more pleasant, you may add some tender leaves of Sorrel.

Briefly, whatsoever I have here said in relating the properties of the Elder;
the Dwarff-Elder does more strongly effect in opening and purging Choler, Phlegm
and Water, in helping the Gout, the Piles and Women's diseases, it colors the
hair black, helps inflammations in the Eyes, and pains in the Ears, the
biting or stinging of Venomous creatures or a mad Dog, the Burnings or
Scaldings by fire or water, the Wind Chollick, the Chollick and Stone,
difficulty of Urine, the cure of old sores and Fistulous Ulcers, the Dropsy
and Gout, and all the other griefs before specified.

Eglantine.
Name.] IT is also called Sweet-bryar.

Descript.] Eglantine or Sweet-bryar, is much like the Wild Rose plant, having
very sharp prickles, shutes, springes and rough branches; the leaves also be
not much unlike but larger, and of a pleasant smell the flowers be single,
smaller than the flowers of the Wild Rose, most commonly white and sometimes
red, after which there come also little knaps, or long red berries, like as in
the other Roses, wherein the seed is contained.

Place.] The Eglantine as well as the manured Roses, is planted in Gardens; if
it be set against a wall, under a Window it will cast a most pleasant smell
into the room, and so will the branches thereof being set in flower-pots, in
Windows and Chimneys in the Summer Months.

Time.] Eglantine, flowers in May and June about the time the Garden-Roses do.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the dominion of Venus; the fruit is of an
astringent quality; It stops the Lask, Lask
and all other issues of blood, Bloody-Issues
being eaten.

There is a rough Spongeous ball or Excrescence, that grows on the Wild Rose
bush, and also on the Eglantine, which is of great efficacy, and virtue against
the Stone, Stone
and Strangury. strangury
It brings forth the Gravel and Stone, and provokes Urine. Urine


White Ellebore.
Names.] IT is also called Hellebore, and Neese-wort, Veratrum album in Latin,
and Helleborus albus.

Descript.] The White Ellebore, has great broad leaves, with ribs or Sinews
like the leaves of the great Plantain or Gentian: the stalk is round two or
three foot high; at the uppermost part whereof, grow along and round about the
top, the flowers one above another pale of color, divided into six little
leaves, the which have a green line, overthwart; the flowers being passed away,
there comes in their places small husks, wherein the seed is contained: the
root is round, as thick as a man's finger or thumb, white both within and
without, having many threddy strings appending unto it.

Place.] White Ellebore, or Hellebore, grows in Anticyra, near about the
Mountain Octa, and in Cappodocia, and Syria, but the best grows in Cyrene; in
this Country, the Herbarists plant it in their Gardens.

Time.] White Ellebore flowereth in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] The root of White Ellebore is hot and dry in the
third degree, a plant of Mars. The root causes one to Vomit up mightily, and
with great force, all superfluous slimy Venomous and naughty humors:
Slimy-humors
likewise, it is good against the Falling Sickness, Falling Sickness
Frenzies, Frenzy, Headache, Melancholy
old pains in the Head, Melancholy, the Gout, Gout, Sciatica
and Sciatica, all sorts of Dropsies, Poison, and against all cold diseases,
that he hard to cure, and will not yield to any medicine. But it ought not to
be given to any body to be taken inwardly but from a skilful hand, and with
good advice and due preparation and correcting. Galen advises, not to give of
this root in any medicine to be taken into the body, but to be used only in
outward applications.

Therefore. Outwardly it is good to be used against all roughness of the skin,
Wild Scurff, Scurff, Knobs
Knobs, foul spots, and the Leprosy, Leprosy, Fistulas, Terms, dead birth,
Sneesing
being mixed with Oils and Ointments and applied thereunto; the same sliced
and put into Fistula's, takes away the hardness of them: the same used as a
pes^aty brings down the flowers, and expels the Dead-birth; the powder
thereof put into the Nose, or snuffed up into the same, causes Sneesing,
warmeth and purges the Brain from gros^e Slimy-humors; the same boiled in
Vinegar and holden in the mouth, eases the Toothach, Toothache, Eyes
and mingled with Collyries for the Eyes it does clear and sharpen the sight.

The root of Hellebore pounded with Meal and Honey, and laid where Mice and Rats
frequent, will kill them that eat thereof; and if it be boiled in Milk and set
for Waspes and Flies to sick thereof, it kills them.

White Ellebore unprepared, and unduly taken, or too much in quantity, is very
hurtful to the body, for it choketh and troubles all the inward parts, draws
together, and shrinketh all the Sinews; and at length kills the Party:
therefore it ought not to be taken without good advice, and care, and due
preparation; neither is it to be given to such people as be either too old or
too young, nor to weak or Feeble persons, nor to such as spit blood or be
troubled in their Stomachs, or such as are straight and narrow-Chested; such
people may by no means take of it without danger.

Wild White-Ellebore, or Neesewort.
Names.] IN Latin it is called Helleborine, and Epipactis; in high Dutch
Wild't Wit, Niescruyt, that is, Wild White-Helle-bore.

Descript.] This Herb is like unto the beforementioned White Ellebore; but
that in all parts it is smaller: it has a straight stalk, with sinewy leaves,
like the l aves of Plaintain or White Ellebore but smaller; the flowers hang
down from the stalk, of a white color, hollow in the middle, with small yellow
and incarnate spots, of a very strange fashion; and when the flowers are gone,
there comes, after them, small seed like Sand, enclosed in thick husks; the
roots are spread, here and there full of sap, covered with a thick bark and of
a bitter taste.

Place] This plant delights in moist Meadows and shadowy places, it grows
in low dark shadowy places in Brabant, as Dodoneus writes.

Time.] This herb sloureth in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] It is likewise a Martial plant, hot and dry of
temperature; The decoction of this Herb drunk, opens the stoppings of the
Liver; Stopping Liver
and is good for such as are any ways diseased in their Livers, or have
received any Poison, Poison
or are bitten by any manner of Venomous beast.

Erisimon.
Names.] IT is called in Latin I^io; which some English by the name of
Winter-Cresses: this is the Erisimum of Dioscorides.

Descript.] Erisimon grows up with long leaves deeply rent and jagged upon
both sides, not much unlike the leaves of the Rocket gentle, or Roman rocket,
or Wild Mustard; the stalks be small, slender, and pliant, and will twist and
wind like Ozier branches; upon the same stalks or branches grow many
yellow-flowers; and after them come little slender husks; wherein also is a
seed of a sharp biting taste, the root is long and thick, having many strings or
hairy threads, hanging thereunto.

Place.] This herb delights to grow in untilled and stony places; and by
Highways sides.

Time.] Erysimon floureth in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] Erisimon is hot and dry, of the same nature as are
Cresses, under the dominion of Mercury: the seed thereof taken with honey in
manner of a Lohoc, and often licked in, ripeneth tough and clammy Phlegm, Phlegm,
Lungs
gathered together, about the Lungs, and within the Breast, and canseth the
same to be spit easily forth: it is likewise good against shortness of Breath
and an old Cough; Breath short Old Cough
it will be the more proper for the same purpose, if the seed be first steeped
in fair water, and then dried by the fire; or else lap it up in paste and bake
it, which will mitigate the heat thereof.

The same seed so prepared and put into medicines is good against the Jaundies,
and Gripings of the Belly, against the Sciatica, and all Venom and Poison.
Jaundies, Belly ache, Sciatica Poison, cankers Swelling, Imposthumes breast,
Cods Stones


The seed of Erisimum mingled with honey and water, and applied pultis-wise is
very available against Cankers, hard Swellings, Imposthumes behind the Ears,
the old and hard Imposthumes, and hard Swellings of the Breast, Cods, and
Stones; it wastes and consumes all cold Swellings.

Euphorbium.
Names.] IT is called in shops Euphorbium, and Euforbium; of some, Carduus
Indicus, and Ficus Indicus, the Thistle or Fig of India.

Descript.] Euphorbium, is the Gum or Tear of a certain strange plant, growing
in Lybia, en the mount Athlante or Athlas, next the Country of Mauritania, now
called Morisco or the Country of the Moors. It was first found out in the time
of Juba King of Lybia; the leaf of this plant is long and round, almost like
the fruit of the Cucumer, but the ends or corners be sharper, and set about
with many prickles, which are sometimes found in the Gum it self; one of those
leaves set in the ground does increase and multiply diverse; the sap or liquor
that comes forth of the said leaves, burns or scaldeth, and straightwayes it
congealeth, or becomes thick, and that is the Euphorbium: the Euphorbium, at
the first, is yellowish, clear, brittle, very sharp and burning in the mouth
and throat; fresh and new, not much above a year old: For, this Gum does soon
lose much of his heat and virtue by Age.

Place.] The Euphorbium described of the Ancients, grows upon the borders of
Mauritania, and in Africa and Judaea; from whence it has been brought into
certain places of Spain, France and Italy, where it brings forth neither
flower^ nor fruit.

Time.] Euphorbium puts forth his leaves in the Springtime, whereof the
first, second, and the third is the stalk or stem, and the rest grow forth as
branches; and when the plant is seven or eight years old, it brings forth
yellow flowers; the fruit is ripe in Autumn, of color red, and prickly.

Government and Virtues.] Euphorbium is under the dominion of Mars, it is of
temperature very hot and dry almost in the fourth degree; Euphorbium is too
churlish a medicine to be taken of it self alone, but being duly corrected and
prepared it becomes very medicinal. The way and manner of correction, and
preparation thereof is as follows.

1. It may be corrected several ways; one manner is, first, to anoint it with
oil of sweet Almonds, afterward put it in the middle of a Citron or Lemmon;
and wrap it or close it up in leavened paste, and so bake it; and when the
paste is baked, you may take the Euphorbium out of it, to use in medicine.

2. Another way is; Take of Mastick, Gum Tragacanth, and Euphorbium of each
equal parts, mix them well together, and put it into the middle of a loaf and
bake it well; then take of the inner crum of that loaf, and make small pills
thereof, which be singular good against Weakness and debility caused by the
French Pox; French Pox
and all pains of the Limbs.

3. Another way is; Take Euphorbium and Mastick, of each equal part^, and make
pills thereof with the juice of Citrons or Orenges; which pills are much
commended against the Pestilence. Pestilence


Euphorbium, being well corrected and prepared, purges downward, tough, cold,
and slimy, Phlegm, Phlegm, Choler
drawing the same unto it self from the remote parts of the body; and also
purges Choler: it is very good against the old and continual Headache,
Headache, Palsy
the Palsy, Cramp, weakness that follows after the French Pox, Pain of the
Sinews, Cramp, French Pox, Sinews.
and extreme parts, and is good against the Pestilence; and such like
contagious diseases.

A plaster made of Euphorbium, with oil and wax is singular good against all
Aches, and pains of the Joints, Lameness, Aches, Lameness
Palsies, Cramps and shrinking of Sinews; Palsy, Sinews
the same being mingled with oil of Bays and Bears-grease, cures Scurff and
Scabbs of the Head, Baldness, Scurff, Scald-Head, Baldness
and causes the Hair to grow again; and it will also cause the Beard to grow
if the Chin be anointed therewith.

The same mingled with Oil, and stroked or laid upon the Temples, is good
against Drowsiness, and does awaken and quicken the Spirits of such as are
subject to the Lethargy; Lethargy, Apoplexies Speech-lost Leprosy
and if it be applied to the Nape of the Neck, it restores the speech again,
to such as have lost it by reason of the Apoplexy, or other sickness; and being
mingled with Vinegar, and applied, it takes away foul and ill favored spots of
the body, the Leprosy, Leprosy
scurff, and skoles of the skin.

Fenugreek.
Names.] IT is called in shops in Latin Foenum Graecum, which is as much as to
say Greek-hay.

Descript.] Fenugreek grows up with tender stalks, round, blackish hollow and
full of branches; the leaves are divided into three parts, like the leaves of
Trefoil, or the three-leaved grass; the flowers be pale, whitish, and like the
flowers of Lupines but smaller: after the flowers are faded or fallen away,
there follow after them long Cods, or husks, crooked, and sharp pointed,
wherein is a yellow seed; the root is full of small hanging hairs.

Place.] It grows not in this Country, but in the Gardens of some Herbarists.

Time.] It flowereth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Government and Virtues.] Fenugreek-seed is hot in the second degree, and dry
in the first; under the influence of the planet Mercury; the seed which is to
be had at our Druggists and Apothecaries shops is only used in medicines.

The decoction or broth of the seed, drunk with a little Vinegar, Ill-humors
expels and purges forth all evil and superfluous humors, which cleave or
stick fast to the Bowels.

The same decoction first made with Dates and afterward made into the
substance of a syrrup, with honey, does mundifie and cleanse the Breast, Breast
Chest Chest
and Lungs, Lungs
and is good for all griefs and diseases of the Breast; so that the Patient be
not troubled with a Fever, or the Headache; for such a syrrup is hurtful to
the Head, and to them that have Agues.

Fenugreek is of a softning and dissolving nature, and therefore the Meal
thereof, being boiled in Mede or honied water, does consume soften and
dissolve, hard Swellings, Swellings
and Imposthumes, Imposthumes
and a paste made thereof with Salt-Peeter, and Vinegar does soften and wast
the hardness and Swelling of the Spleen. It is good for Women that have either
Imposthume, Ulcer, or stopping in the Matrix Spleen, Matrix
to bathe and sit in the decoction thereof, and a suppository made of the juice
thereof and put up into the neck of the Matrix does mollify and soften all
hardness thereof, or in the natural place of Conception: the decoction of
Fenugreek is good to wash the head withal, to take away the scurffe thereof,
Scales, Nits, and dandriffe. Dandriffe, Scurffe Scales, Nits


The same applied with Brimstone and Honey drives away Pushes, pimples, wheales
and spots in the Face, heales all Manginess, and Itch, Pushes, Pimples, Itch.
and helps the rank and stinking smell of the Armpits: The seed of Fenugreek
being prepared as the Lupines, may be eaten, and then they loose the belly
gently.

The Fig Tree.
Kinds and Names.] OF these there is the wild Fig Tree, and the Garden
Fig Tree: The Garden Fig Tree is called in Latin Ficus Sativa; and the fruit
Ficus, or a Fig: The wild Fig Tree is called Ficus Silvestris, and Caprificus:
the dry Fig is called in Latin Carica, the fruit of the Fig Tree which never
comes to ripeness, is called in Latin grossus, and of some Erineus.

Descript.] The Garden Fig Tree grows with many branches, full of pith
within, like the stalks of Elder, covered over with a smooth plain bark or
rind: the leaves be great and large, of a blackish green, and for the most part
divided into five parts; at the top of the branches grow the fruit, the which
is round and long, fashioned like Pears, sweet and full of small kernells or
grains. Before the fruit be ripe, if it be hurt or scarified there comes a
sap or juice like milk, but being through-ripe the juice is like to Honey.

Place.] The Fig Trees are plentiful in Spain and Italy. In this Country they
are planted in Gardens, but they must be set in warm places that stand well in
the Sun, and defended from the North and North-East Winds.

Time.] The Fig Trees in this Country are late before they put forth their
leaves, it being in May; the fruit is ripe about the end of Summer.

Government and Virtues.] Figs are under the Government of Jupiter; the green
Figs new gathered are a little warm and somewhat moist; the dry Figs, are hot
almost in the second degree, and of subtle parts; the milky juice of Figs is
hot and dry almost in the third degree and also sharp and biting: the leaves
have also some sharpness, with an opening power, but not so strong as the juice.

The new gathered Figs nourish more than the other fruits: and they loose the
belly gently, but they engender Windiness, Belly Windiness, heat Thirst
they abate heat and quench thirst, but eaten in too great a quantity hurt and
weaken the Stomach: the dry Figs do nourish better then the green or new Figs,
yet they engender no very good blood: those that feed much upon Figs become
Lousie thereby, as some say. Figs eaten before meat, do loose the Belly and are
good for the Kidneys, Kidneys
for they drive forth Gravel and Urine, Gravel, Urine
they provoke sweat, Sweat
and by the same means they send forth Corrupt Corrupt
and stinking humors; humors
wherefore they may very well be given to young Children that are sick of the
Smallpox, Smallpox
and Wheals or Measels, Measells
for they bring them quickly forth, without any danger; they be good also for
the Throat, Throat
Lungs, Lungs
and Cough, Cough
and those that are short Winded; they ripen Phlegm Phlegm
and cause the same to be easily spit out, whether they be eaten raw or roasted,
or sodden with Hysop and Licoris and the decoction drunk.

The decoction of Figs in water is good to be drunk of those, that have taken
hurt by squats or bruises Bruises
of, or by falls, Falls
from high; they disperse and scatter clotted Clotted
and congealed blood, blood
and assuage or slake the pain.

An Electuary made with Figs, Salt, Rue and Walnuts, is an Antidote against all
Poison and corruption of the Air. This was the preservative which Mithridates
King of Pontus used against the Plague, Plague
Pestilence, and against all Poison Poison
and Venom. Venom


The decoction of Figs gargariz'd or holden in the mouth is good against the
sharpness and hoarseness Hoarseness
of the Throat, and also against Swellings, swellings
and Impostumations Imposthumes
of the Mouth, Throat, Almonds of the Throat, and Jaws, and Swelling of the
Tongue: Figs are also good to be kept in the Mouth against Swellings, and Ach
and pain of the Teeth Teeth
Gums, Gums
and Jaws; Jaws
being outwardly applied with Wheaten-Meal, they do soften and ripen boiles,
Boiles
Imposthumes, and Phlegmons (that is, hot and angry Swellings, Swellings
) and Tumors Tumors
behind the Ears, especially if there be put to it Lins^ed and Fenugreek: and
if Lilly roots be mixed with it, and applied pultis-wise, it will ripen and
break Plague-Sores, Plague Sores
Imposthumes, Buboes, Buboes
and Botches. Botches
Figs sodden in Wormwood Wine, with Barly-meal, is good to be applied as a
Pultis or Plaster upon the Bellies of those that have the Dropsy. Dropsy
Figs and Mustard Seed being pounded very well together and outwardly applied,
amend the Hearing, Hearing
help Deafness, and take away the ringing noise, Noise
or sound in the Ears: Ears
the dry Figs have power to dissolve, consume, and make subtle; and may very
well be used both inwardly and outwardly: the leaves of the Fig Tree do wast,
and consume way the Kings-Evill, King's Evil
or Swelling kernels in the Throat, and mollisie and wast all other Tumors,
being beaten small and applied thereunto. The milky juice of Figs is good
against all roughness of the skin, Skin
Leprosies, Leprosy
spreading Sores, Sores
Tetters, Tetters
Smallpox, Measells, Pushes, Freckles, Lentiles, and other such like spots,
Spots
and Scurviness, both of the body and Face; being laid thereto with parched
Barly-meal, and being mixed with sat, or grease, it takes away Warts Warts
if they be anointed therewith: It cures the Toothache, Toothache
if you dip a little Cotton in the said Milk, and lay it to the Tooth, or make
a pellet thereof and put it into the Tooth if it be hollow; It opens the
Veins of the Hemerrhoids, Hemerrhoids
and loses the Belly, being laid to the fundament; the leaves have the same
virtue being used for a suppository, being mixed with the Meal of Fenugreek,
and Vinegar, it gives ease in the hot Gout; the same juice is good to pour
into Wounds made by the biting of Mad-dogs; Mad-dog
the Ashes of the Fig Tree mixed with oil of Roses and Wax, cures burnings;
Burnings
and the Lie that is made of the ashes of the fig, heals festred and foul
fretting Sores, Sores
if they be washed therewith.

Fistick-Nuts.
Names.] THese Nuts are called in shops Pistacia, Pistacies; Fistici, and
Fistick-nuts.

Descript.] The Tree that hears the Fistick-nuts, has long great leaves
spread abroad, consisting of five, seven or more leaves, growing one against
another, all along a reddish rib, or sinew, whereof the last, which is alone at
the top of the leaf is the greatest and largest; the fruit of this tree is much
like to small Hazel-nuts; and like the kernells of the Pineapple, in which
lies the kernel or nut.

Place.] This tree is a stranger in this Country: it grows in Syria, and
other hot Eastern Countries.

Government and Virtues.] Fistick-nuts are under the influence of Jupiter; they
are of a mean, or temperate heat and somewhat astringent; Fisticks are good to
open stoppings and obstructions of the Liver, and also they strengthen the
same: they he also good for the Stomach; they also open the pipes of the Lungs
Liver, Lungs
and Breast; Breast, stomach
and are good against shortness of Breath, Lungs, Breath
the Tissick, Tissick
and painful fetching of Breath, to be eaten either alone or with Sugar.
Dioscorides says, that Fistick nuts given in Wine, are a good medecin against
the bitings or stingings of Venomous beasts.

Flax.
Names.] IT is called Linum in Latin, by which name it is well known in shops:
it is called also Lin, whence the Cloth that is made thereof is called
Linen Cloth, and the seed is called Linseed; the oil which is pressed out of
the same seed is called Linseed-oyle.

Descript.] Flax has a tender stalk, covered with sharp narrow leaves, parted
at the top into small short branches, the which brings forth fair blew
flowers; when the flowers are fallen away, there comes in their stead round
knaps or buttons, in which is contained a blackish seed, large, fat, and
shining.

Place.] Flax is sown in this Couuntry, in fat and fine Ground, and in low
moist fields it delights to grow in.

Time.] Flax floureth in May and June, and is ripe soon after.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the dominion of Venus; the seed of Flax
which is only used in medecin, is of temperature hot in the first degree and
temperate in moisture, and dryness. The seed called Linseed, being boiled in
water and applied in manner of a pultis or plaster, asswageth all pains,
softneth cold Tumors or Swellings, the Imposthumes of the Ears and Neck and of
other parts of the body. Linseed pounded with Figs does ripen and break
Imposthumes and boyles, Pains, Imposthumes, swelling Ears, Boyles
being laid thereon, and draws forth thorns, and all other things that stick
fast in the body, i^ it be mingled with the root of Wild Cucumer: The same seed
mingled with honey and Cresses, and laid unto rough, rugged and il-favored
Nails, as well of the hands as the Feet, cleanses them that be corrupt, and
cures the party: Nails, Spots in the Face Old Sores Ulcers, Sight, Belly,
Gripings Bowels, Matrix* Cough Heckick, Fevers
the same seed being pounded and laid to the Face, cleanses and takes away
all Spots and Freckles thereof. The Wine wherein Linseed has been boiled,
preserves old Sores and Ulcers from corruption, if they be washed therewith,
and from festering, and inward rankling: the water wherein Linseed has been
boiled does quicken and clear the sight if it be often dropped into the Eyes:
the seed used in glisters, asswageth the griping pains of the Belly, and of the
Matrix or Mother, and cures the Wounds of the Bowels and Matrix: Linseed
mingled with honey, and taken as an electuary o^ lohoch cleanses the Breast,
and appeaseth the Cough, and taken with Raisins is good for such as are fallen
into Consumption, or Hecktick-feavers.

The seed of Lin, taken into the body alone, or in too great quantity, is bad
for the Stomach, ingenders much Wind, and hinders digestion of meats.

Flea-bane
Names.] IT is called in Latin Psyllium, by which name it is known in shops:
it is also Herba pulicaris, and in English Fleabane, and Flea-wort.

Descript.] Fleabane* has long narrow hairy leaves, amongst which spring up
round and tender branches, set full of like leaves, but smaller and garnished
at the top, with little long round spiked knops like Ears; with greenish
flowers or blossoms, which do afterward change into brown or shining seeds, in
proportion, color, and quantity like unto Flea's.

Place.] Dioscorides says: It grows in fields and desert places: In this
Country it grows not but in some Gardens, where it is sown; and where it is
once sown it grows continually afterward, of its own sowing or shedding of
seed:

Time.] It floureth and seedeth, in July and August.

Government and Virtues.] Flea-wort is a Saturnine plant, the seed thereof
(which is chiefly used in medicine) is cold in the second degree and temperate
in moisture and dryness, as Galen and Serapio write: The seed of Fleabane
steeped in water, and boiled, and the decoction thereof being drunken, purges
downwards addust and Choleric humors: It asswageth pain, and stacketh the
inflammation and heat of the entrails or Bowels, and is good against hot Fevers
or burning Agues, Choler, inflamed Bowels, Fevers, Agues,
and in all inward heats, and against Drought and Thirst.

The same seed grossly bruised, but not broken, being parched at the fire, is
good against the Bloudy-Flux, Bloody Flux.
vehement Lask, especially when they proceed of taking strong, and violent
medicines the Fleabane-seed mingled with oil of Roses and Vinegar, or water,
is good to be applied, unto hot griefs of the joints, Aposthumes or swelling
behind the Ears, and other hot Swellings; Hot pains Ears Swellings
Also it is good against the Headache: Headache
the same applied pultis-wise with Vinegar, is good against the going out of
the Navel, and the bursting Navel, bursting
of young Children; The water wherein the seed has been steeped is good to be
laid on the burning heat called St. Anthonies-fire, St. Anthonies fire
and to all hot Swellings: Some are of opinion that if this plant when in it is
green be strowed in any House, it drives away Fleas, so that they will not
come near it.

Too much of Fleabane-seed taken inwardly is very hurtful to the body, and
ingendereth coldness and stiffness, dullness of the Spirits and heaviness of the
heart: If any one find himself distempered by taking of it, a speedy remedy is,
to provoke Vomiting, and afterward drink of the best old Wine that can be
gotten either by it self or boiled in Wormwood, or Wine mingled with a little
honey.

Firre-tree.
Names.] THis Tree is called in Latin Abies; and the Dutch call it Mastboom,
because of the usefulness of the Timber in serving to make Masts for Ships; the
liquid or clear Rozen that runs out of the bark of the young trees, is
called Terebinthina Veneta, and in English Venice Turpentine.

Descript.] The Firre-tree is great, high and long, and continues always
green; it grows much higher than the Pine, and Pitch-trees: The stem is very
even and straight, plain beneath and without joints, but upwards it grows
with joints and knops; upon which joints, grow the branches bearing leaves
almost like Ewe, but smaller, longer, and sharper at the points or ends, of a
bluish green color, the fruit is like to the Pineapple but smaller, and
narrower, not hanging down as the Pine-apples do but growing straight upward:
from out of the bark of the young Firre-tree, is gathered a fair liquid Rozen;
clear and shining, which in taste is bitter and Aromatical, in taste, almost like
to Citron pills, or Lemon pills condited.

There is also found upon this tree a Rozen or white Gum; like as there is
found upon the Pine and Pitch-trees, which is sold for the right, Frankincense,
and so is vulgarly esteemed.

Place.] The Firre-tree grows upon high Mountains in Greece, Italy, Spain and
France; But in diverse places of Germany, and most in Norway, from whence the
Timber thereof is plentifully brought hither, and is very serviceable in
building.

Government and Virtues.] The Firre-tree is under the rule of Mars. The bark
and dry Gum or Rozen of this Tree, are in temperature and virtues like the bark
and Rozen of the Pine Tree, but these of the Firre-tree are of a more
Acrimonious and cleansing quality.

The liquid or clear Rozen is hot and dry in the second degree, having a sharp
quality, and is of a digestive or cleansing nature: the liquid Rozen of the
Firre-tree, taken about the weight of half an ounce, loses the Belly and
drives forth hot and Choleric humors: it does cleanse, and mundifie the
Kidneys Choler, Kidneys
and Bladder, provokes Urine, Bladder, Urine
drives forth the Stone and Gravel, Stone, Gravel
and is good to be taken oftentimes of such as are troubled with the Gout: the
same taken with Nutmeg, and Sugar to the quantity of a Nut helps the
Strangury, Gout, strangury
and is very good against excoriations or going off of the skin or Flux of the
Secret parts Secret parts
It is also very excellent for all fresh and green Wounds, especially Wounds of
the Head, Wounds, Head
for it cleanses and heals very much.

Galangall.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Cyperus.

Descript.] This plant has long, hard and narrow leaves, the stalk is
triangled about a foot and an half long, at the top whereof grow little leaves,
among which are spiky tops, and white seed, the root is long interlaced one
within another, having many threads of a brown color and sweet savor.

Place.] Galangall, as Dioscorides writes, grows in low and moist grounds,
but is not common in this Country, but as it is planted in some Gardens.

Time.] This herb brings forth his spikey top and seed with leaves in June
and July.

Government and Virtues.] It is a plant of Mars, the root is hot and dry in the
third degree. The roots of Galangal, boiled and the decoction drunk provokes
Urine, Urine
brings down Women's Flowers, drives forth the Stone, Stone
and is good for those who are troubled with the Dropsy: Terms
the same is also good against the Cough, Cough
the stingings of Scorpions, Scorpions
and bitings of Venomous beasts, being taken after the same manner: It is also
good against the hardness of the Mother Mother
and remedieth Stoppings, and coldness thereof, if the Belly be bathed
therewith; the same root made into powder closes up, and heals old running
Sores Sores
of the Mouth and secret parts, Secret parts
(although they eat and wast the flesh,) if it be strowed thereon, or laid
thereupon with Wine. It is also a very good ingredient to be put into hot
ointments, and maturative plasters. Pliny says, that the seeds of Galangal
drunk with water stops the Flux of the Belly, Belly
the overflowings or immoderat Flux of Women's Flowers, Flowers
but if it be taken in too great ^ quantity it causes Headache.

Galbanum.
Names.] THe plant out of which the Gum Galbanum, comes, is called by Pliny,
Stagonitis.

Descript.] Galbanum is a gum, or liquor, drawn forth of a plant in Syria
called Metopium: the best is gristly between hard and soft, very pure fat,
close, and firm without any stalks and splinters of wood amongst it; saving a
few seeds, of a strong savor, not too moist nor too dry.

Place.] The plant out of which Galbanum comes does grow upon the Mountain
called Amanus in Syria.

Government and Virtues.] Gum-Galbanum, is hot almost in the third degree and
dry almost in the second, a plant of Jupiter. Galbanum is good against an old
Cough, Cough
and for such as are Tissical Tyssick
or short-Winded, and cannot easily draw their Breath, Breath
but are subject to panting: it is very good for those that are bruised Bruises
inwardly, and against Cramps Cramps
and shrinking of Sinews: Sinews-shrunk
the same drunken with Wine and Myrrh, is a very good counter-Poison against
any Venom taken into the body, or shot received by poisoned Poison
Darts or Arrows, to be taken in the same manner: it provokes the Terms, Terms
and drives forth the Dead-birth, Dead-birth
it has the same virtue if it be conveyed as a Pe^ary into the secret Parts;
Secret parts
or the fume thereof received up into the Matrix; and the quantity of a Nut
thereof given in a glass of Wine helps the painful travail of Women and
causes easy Delivery: E^sie Delivery
The perfume of Galbanum, does help Women that are troubled with rising,
suffocation or Strangling of the Mother, and them that have the
Falling Sickness; and being laid to the Navel it causes the Matrix that is
removed to settle in its proper place. Galbanum does mollify and soften, and
draws forth thor^es, Thorns
Splinters, Splinters
or slivers, and discusseth and disperseth cold humors; and is very good to be
laid upon cold Tumors Cold Tumors
and Swellings, Swellings
and is a proper substitute in all ointments, oils and plasters, that have
power or virtue, to warm, digest; and dissolve, to ripen and break Boyls and
Imposthums, Boyls, Imposthumes
and to draw out Thorns and Splinters: It is good to be laid upon the side Sides
against pains thereof, and against hardness and Stoppings of the Spleen; Spleen
the same mixed with Nitre and Vinegar and applied, is very good to take away
Spots Spots
and Freckles Freckles
of the Face, or any scurff, or Morphew, or other discolorings of the skin: It
is good to stop an hollow Tooth Toothache
to take away Ache and pain of the same. It is also good to cleanse the Ears
Ears
of corrupt filth, and running Running
matter, being mixed with oil of Roses and dropped therein.

There is likewise by the Ancients a more than ordinary, yea, a miraculous
virtue ascribed to this Galbanum; as may be found amongst the stupendous
wonders of Pliny, and the imaginary miracles of Mizaldus, Albertus Magnus, and
many more; that is to say, that wheresoever this Gum is burned all manner of
Serpents, noisome and Venemons Creatures, will presently fly away and dare not
come with in the seent thereof; and that no Venomous Creature, whether it be a
flying Insect, creeping Serpent, or Poisonous Beast whatsoever, that is any
ways inimical to mankind, have any power to hurt such as be anointed with this
Galbanum. And that those Venomous beasts or Serpents, as be but touched with
Galbanum, mingled with oil, and the seed or root of Spondilium or Angelica, it
will cause them presently to dye: The same is truly reported of the New England
and Virginia Snake-weed; that it will kill those Rattle-Snakes if touched
therewith, or come within the scent of it: and it is probable that the
Galbanum, in the Country where is grows naturally, those parts being much
subject to be infested with those Venomous Creatures, it may there work the
same effects upon them.

Stock-Gillow-flowers.
Kinds and Names] THere are found two kinds of these Gillow-flowers; the one is
great and called the Castle or Stock-Gillow-flower, which may be kept both
Winter and Summer, the other is not so big, and is called the small
Stock-Gillow-flower; which must be sown newly every Spring and brings forth
his flower and seed the same year, they are called Leucoion and Violae albae or
white violets, because the leaves be white: but the leaves of the flowers (for
they be of diverse colors) late writers do call them violae matron^les, or
Dames Violets.

Descript.] These two kinds of Gillow-flowers are not much unlike Wall-flowers,
but that their leaves are whiter and softer.

The great Castle or Stock-Gillow-flower his leaves be hard and straight, at
the height of two or three foot, with long, narrow, and soft leaves like
Molleyn; far greater, longer and larger then the leaves of Wall-flowers or
Yellow-Gillow-flowers, the flowers be of a fragrant or pleasant smell, much
like to those of Harts-ease or Wall-flowers, but much larger, of color
sometimes white, and sometimes Ash-c^lour, Carnation, and sometimes inclining
to Scarlet and sometimes purple or violet color, after which flowers, there
come long husks or Cods, wherein the seed is contained being flat and large.

The small Stock-Gillow-flower, is like to the great in his stalks, and
whitish, woolly, soft leaves, also in the sweet smell and fragrant savor of his
flowers, in the diversity of colors in his Cods, and seed, saving that it is
smaller in all respects, not exceeding the length of a man's foot in height; and
perishes every year, after his seed is ripe.

Place.] These kinds of Gillow-flowers, are sown and planted in Gardens in this
Country; they are hardly sound els-where.

Time.] The great Castle Gillow-flower, floureth in March and April, the
second year after it is sown; but the smaller Stock-Gillow-flower, yields its
flowers in July and August the same year in which it is first sown.

Government and Virtues.] The Stock-Gillow-flowers are of temperature hot and
dry, and of nature somewhat like unto the Yellow-Gillow-flowers or
Wall-flowers; they are plants of Mercury. The flower of the Stock-Gillow-flower
boiled in water and drunk is good against difficulty of breathing, and the
Cough; Difficulty of breathing Cough, Courses, sweat
these flowers do likewise drive down Women's Courses, and provoke Urine, and a
bath made of the decoction thereof does cause Sweat, if one sit over it.

The Wall, or Yellow-Gillow-flower.
Names.] THe Yellow-Gillow-flower is reputed amongst the kinds of Violets. It
is a little shrub or bush, and is called in Latin Leucoia Lutea, and by the
Apothecaries Keyri, in English Yellow-Gillow-flowers and Wall-Gillow-flowers.

Descript.] The Yellow-Wall-Gillow-flower is a little shrub, that is green both
Winter and Summer; the stalks thereof are hard, and of a woody substance, and
full of branches, the leaves are thick set thereupon, long, narrow, and green,
at the tops of the stalk do grow the flowers, which are of a very fair, yellow
color, a strong, but pleasant smell, every flower divided into four small
leaves; after the flowers are fallen away there succeed long Cods or husks
wherein is contained, large, flat and yellow-seed.

Place.] The Yellow-Gillow-flower plentifully grows upon the old ruined
Stones of the walls of Monasteries, Castles, and such old buildings: it is
likewise very frequently planted in Gardens, where it usually grows very full
set with double flowers, but those which grow naturally upon the old walls have
only single flowers.

Time.] The Yellow-Gillow-flower usually flowers in March, April, and May.

Government and Virtues.] The Yellow Violets or Wall-Gillow-flowers are hot and
dry plants of the Sun, whose influence they are subject unto, and are of
subtle parts. Wall-flowers dried and boiled in water provoke Urine, Urine
and drive down Women's Terms, Terms
it helps the Scirrhus, or hard Imposthumes of the Matrix, Matrix
when the same is fomented therewith, a plaster made of the same flowers with
oil and Wax, do heal chops of the Fundament, and falling down thereof, and
closes up old Sores, Fundament, old Sores
the same flour mingled with honey cures Ulcers and Sores of the Mouth; two
drams of the seed hereof drunk in Wine, drives down the Terms, Secondine
Secondine
and Dead child: Dead-Child
a pessary made of the same and put up into the Matrix works the same
effects; the juice of this Gillow-flower dropped into the Eyes, Eyes
takes away Spots and dimness of the same; and the root, stamped with Vinegar
and applied to the Spleen Spleen
helps the hardness thereof.

The Gall-Oake.
Descript.] THe strong or Gall-Oak, so called because it bears Gauls, grows
not so great or high as other Oaks, but shorter and more crooked with fair
spreading branches and long leaves very much cut in on the edges and hoary
underneath; this tree also floureth and bears Acorns, and besides those it
bears also a round woody substance, which is called a Gaul, the wood or
Timber hereof is hardly to be bored; of this kind there be diverse sorts some
growing much lower then others, some having their leaves less cut in, or
jagged on the edge, and some bearing more store of Gauls; and others no Acorns
at all: some bear great Gauls, others smaller, some knobbed or bunched, others
smooth: and of color some white-some red, others yellow, and some small and
green which is the Omphacitis.

Place.] These Oaks grow frequently in Italy, Spain, and other hot Countries.

Time.] They put forth their long Catkins or bloomings early in the Spring,
which fall away for the most part, before the leaves do come forth; the Acorns
are not ripe until October.

Government and Virtues.] My intention here is to declare the temperament use
and virtues of the Gauls of these foreign trees; their Acorns, being like
those of our English Oaks.

The small Gaul called Omphacitis, is dry in the third degree, and cold in the
second; Saturnine, of a sour, harsh nature: Weak
it it fit to draw together and fasten faint and loose Loose
parts, Parts.
as the overgrowing of the flesh: it expels and dries up rheums Rheums
and other fluxes; Fluxes
especially those that fall upon the Gums, Gums
Almonds of the Throat Throat
and other places of the Mouth. Mouth


The other whiter Gaul does also bind and dry but not so much as the former;
having a lesser quantity of sower harshness in it, and is good against the
dysentery Dysentery
or bloody Flux. Flux


The decoction of them in water is of a mean astriction; but in Wine is
stronger, and in harsh or red Wine strongest; this decoction being warm is good
for Women to sit in that are troubled with the falling down of the Mother;
Mother
the Gauls themselves after the boiling being bruised and applied to the
Fundament Fundament
that is fallen down, or has any hot Swelling Swelling
or inflammation does wonderfully help them, the coals of them when they are
burned and quenched in Wine or Vinegar is good to be applied to stanch bleeding
Bleeding
in any place.

They dye the hairs black, and with them is made our writing Ink, and they are
used by dyers for a black dye.

The Oak-Apple is much of the nature of the Gaul yet much inferior thereunto,
but may be used (for want of Gauls) for Rheums fluxes and other such distempers.

Sweet Gaul.
Names.] IT is called also Sweet, Willow, Rhus Silvestris in Latin, and Myrtus
Anglica, English Myrtle.

Descript.] It is a small low shrub, or woody bush not above a yard in height,
having spreading slender branches, with many brown, yellowish, green leaves,
somewhat long, narrow, thick and fattish; round-pointed, resembling both box,
and Myrtle-leaves in some sort, having a strong sweet smell: the flowers are
yellow and stand upon short stalks, coming forth at the joints with the leaves
in small tufts, many set together; which being past, the said stalks are
plentifully stored with cornered yellow seeds, bedewed with a clammy moisture,
of a very bitter taste, but a strong sweet s^ent; the root is hard and woody.

Place.] It grows in boggy, moorish grounds, in lower Danmoore at Hailshot in
Hampshire, and at Bramsil, in a boggy Moore of William Turners, which they call
Gold-Moore.

Time.] It blossoms about August, and the seed is ripe in September, or
thereabouts.

Government and Virtues.] Saturn ownes this plant; the nature of it is by the
bitterness and harshness found to be drying, and di^cussing, and is very
effectual to kill Worms, in the Belly or Stomach. Worms, Belly Stomach head
It mightily affects the Brain, causing first, perturbations, and then
stupifying the senses: It is much used to be laid in Wardrobes, Chests,
Presses; and the like, to keep Moths from Clothes, and to give them a good
scent.

Ginger.
Names, Description, and Place.] THe Latin appell^tion is Zinbiber; Ginger
grows in all Countries of the East Indies, and many parts of the West as in
Bar^adoes. It is planted either by the root or sown of seed: we have two sorts
of Ginger brought unto us, differing in the subst^nce and color of the roots,
but not in the form, saving that the one is more slender which is the blacker,
than the white; for the one is white within and cutteth soft, which is the
Ginger which is wholly ^sed with us both in Meats and Medicines; the other is
hard and almost woody, and cutteth blackish within, so that it may be very
probable that the one sort with the soft white root, has flag-like-leaves, and
seed also like Iris. The other root which is more slender and black, yet of the
same fashion may be that which bears seed like leaves described by Lobel:
rather to be preserved than for ordinary use with us, but both sorts are
preserved best while they are fresh and green, and the black sort as well also
after it is dried, by steeping it, and then boiling it to make it tender; but
the white sort will not so well serve to be preserved or candied after it is
dried, but is best being preserved green.

Government and Virtues.] Ginger is a Solar plant: it is of excellent use to
warm a cold Stomach, to help Digestion, Digestion
and to dissolve Wind Wind
both in the Stomach Stomach
and Bowels; the Indians eat it in Sallads while it is fresh, the root being
sliced and put among the herbs; and it helps to mollify and loosen the
Belly, while it is moist, much of the heat which it has being dry, being
abated by the moisture; the Candied or Green-ginger is most comfortable to the
Stomach, and is profitable for all the purposes aforesaid.

Guiacum.
Names.] IT is also called Lignum Sanctum; Lignum-vitae, and Lignum Indicum.

Descript.] The Guiacum, that grows in some parts of the Indies, is better
than in others, yet the wood of all is hard firm, close and heavy, so that it
will sink in water more than Ebony, and not swim: it is of an hot sharp, and
resinous taste, somewhat burning in the Throat; the blacker or browner is better
then the yellow, being in a manner all heart: the yellow being as it were but
the sap. The tree grows great, with a reasonable thick greenish, gummy bark,
the tree is also spread with sundry Arms and branches great and small, and on
them winged leaves set by couples one against another, which are small, thick,
hard and almost round with diverse veins in them; and continue always green: at
the joints and ends of the branches come forth many flowers standing in a tuft
together every one on a long footstalk consisting of six small whitish yellow
leaves with some threads in the middle, which turn into flat yellowish gristly
fruit of the fashion of the seed Vessel of Shepherds purse; it yields forth
also a gum, or Rozen, of a dark color which will easily burn.

Government and Virtues.] Mars ownes this tree: both the wood, bark, and gum,
are hot and dry, and are used for all cold flegmarick and windy humors, Phlegm,
Wind Catharrhs Lungs, Coughs, Teeth
and are effectual against the Epilepsie, Falling-s ckness, Catharrhs, Rheums,
and cold distillations on the Lungs, or other parts, Co^ghs and Consumptions,
the Gout and all Joint-aches, and many other like diseases, and to make the
Teeth white and firm, if they be often washed with the decoction thereof; but
most particularly it is appropriated to the cure of the French Pox French Pox
by drinking the decoction of the wood and bark, which by reason of its heat
and dryness is somewhat rough in the Throat; it may be mollified by adding
Licoris and other proper qualifications.

There may an extract be made thereof which is not unpleasant to take, and most
effectual for the French Pox; which is made in this manner.

Extractum Ligni Guiaci, pro morbo Gallico.
Take of the chips of Guiacum one ounce, bark of the same half an ounce: let
them stand in digestion in Spirit of Wine 15 days, separating it so often until
all the strength thereof be extracted; then evaporate the Spirit by
distillation, until it come to the consistence of honey, then take this matter
while it is hot and cast it into an earthen pan, wherein is cold water, and it
will forthwith coagulate into a substance, like Pitch or Aloes.

This may be formed into pills of the bigness of Pease, whereof may given two
or three: it is a most excellent Sudorifick, and Bezo artick remedy, which will
so mundifie, and cleanse the body and whole Mass of blood, as that it will
suffer no corruption to abide therein: it does wonderfully provoke Sweat and
Urine, and takes down the great Bellies and Swelling legs of hydropick bodies.

The dose is from two pills to three, or at the most in strong bodies to four,
drinking after it some water of Carduus Benedictus.

The ordinary diet drink for the French Disease, is thus prepared.

Take of Guiacum four ounces, of the bark thereof one ounce and an half,
Sarsa-parilla eight ounces, Sassafras one ounce, China-root sliced three
ounces; let them stand in infusion hot in Spring water three gallons, by the
space of 24 hours, adding toward the end, Raisins of the Sun stoned, half a
pound, Hartshorn and shavings of Ivory, of each one ounce, fine Cinnamon one
ounce and an half, Coriander-seeds prepared one ounce, strain it and let the
patient drink it for an ordinary drink forbearing all other.

Although this be appropriated chiefly to the cure of the French Pox, yet it is
effectual and profitable to be used for the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundies, Gout,
Leprosy, old putrified Agues and Fevers, and indeed all Chronick diseases.

An excellent purging Ale may also be here with made, effectual not only for
all the purposes before mentioned, but for Coughs, Consumptions, shortness of
Breath, Tissicks: it restores natural heat, helps the Memory, quickens the
senses, helps Cramps and Palsies, stiches and pains that come of Wind; and is
good to prevent Miscarriages, and opens obstructions of the Liver, Reins and
Bladder: It is thus made.

Take Guiacum 6 ounces; bark of the same, one ounce and an half, Sarsaparilla
half a pound, China-root and Sassafras, each two ounces, Lignum Aloes,
Coriander-seed, Annise, and sweet Fennel-seeds of each three ounces, Citron
peeles two ounces, leaves of Coltsfoot, Ceterach, Maidenhair, Sage, Rue,
Hart's-tongue, Scabious, Egremony, each one handful, Sena, and Carthamum-seeds,
each 6 ounces; Rhubarb, Hermodactils each four ounces, Liquorice three ounces;
infuse all in 8 gallons of Ale; and let it work together, adding of the juice
of Garden-Scurvy-grasse, Watercresses, and Brook-lime each a pint, with two
Orenges sliced: after it is three days old, drink it, a pint in the morning
and as much at four a Clock in the Afternoon.

Gum Arabic.
Names, Descript.] THis Gum comes forth of a tree called Acacia seu Spina
Aegyptia vera, the true Acacia Egyptian thorn, or Binding-bean-tree, which
yields of its own accord a bright Gum, in small curled pieces, and greater
round pieces if it be wounded, which is called Gummi Arabicum, and Gum Arabic,
which being broken is clear, pure, white and transparent: some are very long
and large pieces, and clear and transparent but reddish; this gum will dissolve
of it self in waters and serves as a glue to stiffen, bind, and fasten things:
it distilleth and droppeth out of the tree in bigger, or lesser pieces, as
either issuing forth, or helped by slitting the bark and giving it way.

Place and Time.] This tree grows in Arabia in many places, and in Egypt,
and floureth and bears fruit twice a year, and has always green leaves.

Government and Virtues.] It is Saturnine: the gum has a thickning condensing
and cooling property, and is very effectual to repress and cool the heat and
sharpness of humors, and to bind or close up the open passages of the skin, and
keeping the places from blistering that are burnt with fire, being dissolved
with the white of an Egg and applied. It is also very serviceable for Limners,
Dyers, to make the best writing Ink, and many other external uses.

Gum Tragacanth.
Names and Descript.] THe tree hereof is called Goats-thorn, which is a small
bushy plant, rising up with many tough pliant or flexible woody stems, about
two foot high, divided into many slender branches covered with a white
hoariness; with diverse long white thorns, in a double row, among which rise up
many small, long and round leaves, which abide always green: there grow flowers
at the tops of the branches and amongst the leaves, of a pale yellow color,
which turn into small white cods, containing in them, small, whitish cornered
seed: the root is great and long, much spreading in the ground; which being cut
or broken yields a pure white shining Gum, in small crooked pieces, of a
sweet taste.

Place.] All sorts of these trees are found in Candia, and about Marselles, and
Mompelier.

Time.] In the places where they naturally grow they flower and seed in the
beginning of Autumn.

Government and Virtues.] There is no physical use known of either the leaves,
flowers, seeds or roots of Tragacantha, but only of the gum it self, which
partaketh of the influence of Venus: it is of a temperate property, and besides
the medicinal uses thereof, it serves for many external purposes, as a starch
or glue, for which young Ladies use it to make their Artificial flowers and
other gum-works.

This gum being dissolved is often used to be mixed with pectoral syrrups,
honey or juice of Liquorice, to help the Cough or Hoarseness Coughs, Hoarseness
in the Throat, salt and sharp distillations of Rhume upon the Lungs, Rhume
Lungs
being taken as an Electuary, or put under the tongue, so to go gently down: he
said gum di^^olved in sweet Wine, a dram at a time and drunk, is p^ofitable for
the knawing pains in the Bowels, Knawings-Bowels
and the sharpness of Urine, and frettings either in the Reins or Bladder;
Reins, Bladder
especially if it be mixed with some burnt Hartshorn: the said Gum is also
good for the Eye sight, Eyes Sight
being used alone or mixed with other things proper for the same purpose, to
allay the heat, and sharpness of hot Rhumes; the said gum, mingled with milk
takes away white spots growing in the black of the Eyes, and the Itching of
the Eyes, and Wheals, or scabs upon the Eyelids; and being mixed with the
juice of Quinces, and used in a glister, is good against the Bloody Flux, and
is generally used where there is cause of making smooth, the Lungs, breast or
Throat, or the windpipe, being grown sharp or harsh by Rhumes, and is
excellent to repress and dry up sharp and thin matter, and is excellent for
Ulcers in any of the parts before-named.

Gum Elemni.
Description and Virtues.] WHat tree this gum is taken from, we have no certain
description; it is a yellowish gum, clear and transparent, which being broken
shows more white and gummi within, it will easily take fire, and is of a
quick scent and taste. The properties of it are these; It is of excellent use
for all wounds and fractures of the Head and skull, to be mixed with Balsomes
and Ointments for that purpose, and is good for the Toothache when Rhumes fall
into them to be applied unto the Temples as Mastick.

Gum Tacamahacca.
THis Gum is reported to be gathered from a tree like unto Poplar, being very
sweet having a red fruit or berry like unto a Peony.

Government and Virtues.] Mercury rules it: the gum is good for many external
uses, but not being known to be given inwardly: it is useful for Women, to
retain the mother in its place, by laying a plaster thereof upon the Navel,
Matrix
and putting a little Musk, Amber, or a little Civet in the middle of the
plaster.

This gum being applied as a plaster spread upon leather, to the side or
Spleen, Side, Spleen Tumors Pains Joints, stomach digestion; headache, Brain
Memory, Defluxions, Face Eyes, Ears Teeth, Gout Sciatica Punctures
that is grown hard and Windy, disperseth the Wind, and dissolveth the Tumors,
and is effectual in all Tumors, and pains of the body, or Joints, which come
from cold raw, and Windy humors, applied thereon.

Take of this gum, with a third part of S^orax, a little Ambergreese, and some
Wax, and make a plaster thereof, and apply it to the Stomach, does much
strengthen the weakness thereof, and digestion, provokes appetite, and breaks
Wind: it is good in the Headache, and to strengthen the Brain and Memory, as
also in all defluxions from the Head, into the Face, Ears, or Teeth; to be
applied to the Temples, or to be put into the Ear tied in a little fine silk or
Cloth: it is good also for pains in the joints, Gout and Sciatica, it speedily
helps Punctures, and Wounds in the joints; it is hot almost in the third
degree, and dry in the second, with much astriction.

Herb Robert.
Names.] IT is called Geranium Robertianum vulgar, the common Herb Robert.

Descript.] The common Herb Robert, springs up with a reddish stalk about two
foot high having diverse leaves thereon, upon very long and reddish footstalks,
divided at the ends into three or four divisions, and each of them cut in on
the edges, some with deeper cuts than others and all dented likewise about the
edges, which oftentimes turn reddish; at the tops of the stalks come forth
diverse flowers, consisting of five leaves a piece, larger then those of the
Garden Musk, and of a more reddish color, after which come beaky heads, like
long bills; the root is small and threddy; the whole plant is of a very strong
smell.

Place.] Herb Robert, grows frequent every where by ways sides, upon the
banks of Ditches and wast grounds.

Time.] It flowereth chiefly in June and July, and the seed is ripe, soon after.

Government and Virtues.] Herb Robert is a plant of Mars, and is very much
commended against the Stone, and not only so, but also to stay blood, Stone,
Flux of Blood Green wounds, Ulcers
from what part soever flowing: it is excellent good, speedily to heal all
green wounds, and is effectual likewise in old Ulcers either in the secrets, or
any other parts.

Hermo-dactyls.
HErmodactils, are to be reckoned amongst the number of unknown drugs, they
being brought into England in abundance, but no Author has hitherto declared
the place or growing thereof, but only Mesne who says, it is the root of a
Mountain herb, whereof some are long and round like a finger, white both
without and within; but the Hermodactils used in shops are not such; they are
small and somewhat flat, thick, short, white roots, and some are blackish,
which are not good, they are of a firm substance, yet easy to be cut or made
into powder and of little or no taste but drying.

Government and Virtues.] They are Solar, hot and dry in the second degree, and
are effectual in purging forth phlegmatic, slimy and watery humors, Phlegm, Watery
Humors
from the joints, and therefore good to help the Gout, and other running
joint-aches, and is used to good purpose with other things in diet-drinks.

Hermodactils are apt to stir up Windiness and trouble the Stomach, but may be
corrected with either Ginger, long Pepper, Anniseeds, or Comin.

Hone-wort.
Names.] IT is called also Corn-parsly, and Selinum Segetale, and Hone-wort.

Descript.] It is a small low Herb; having sundry winged long leaves, lying on
the ground, many being set one against another, finely dented about the edges,
with one at the end, which are each of them longer than Burnet-leaves, and
pointed at the ends among which rise sundry round stalks, half a yard high,
with the like but lesser leaves on them, branching forth likewise from the
joints, and all of them bearing small Vmbells of white flowers, which turn into
a small blackish seed, less than Parsley seed, but in taste as hot, and sharp
as it; the root is small, long, and white, and perishes every year after it
has yielded its seed, and springs up again, of its own sowing.

Place.] It grows in Fields among Corn, or in places where Corn has been
sown; and by the sides of Cornfieldsd; I have found it grow plentifully in the
Fields between Camberwel and Dulwich.

Time.] It flowereth in Harvest time, and the seed is ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] It is under the planetary rule of Mercury, as the
other parsleys are; of a cutting exterminating nature, and effectual for the
same purposes Parsley is. Parkinson says, that Mr Goodier of Hampshire
reported to him, that the use of a handful of the leaves, being drunk in a
draught of Beer every morning for a fortnight, did cure one that had a Swelling
in her cheek arising there yearly: and Mr. Roger Dixon Surgeon did use it
for Swellings and Tumors.

Jack by the Hedge.
Names.] IT is called also Sawce-alone, and in Latin Alliaria.

Descript.] This Herb at his first springing up has roundish leaves, the lower
are rounder then those that grow toward the tops of the stalks, and are set
singly one at a joint being somewhat round and broad and pointed at the ends,
and jagged about; not much unlike Nettle-leaves, but greater and of a fresher
green color, and not rough nor pricking; the which being bruised between the
fingers, have the savor and smell of Gar-like, but more pleasant and tastes
somewhat hot and sharp, the flowers are very small and white, growing at the
tops of the stalks one above another like to Rocket, and after them succeed
long Cods or husks wherein is contained a small round blackish seed, the root
is stringy and threddy, perishes every year when it has given seed, and of
its own seed springs again.

Place.] This plant delights to grow in low untilled grounds, und^^ (...) the
borders of Meadows and moist pastures, and by He^ (...) and path ways in many
places.

Ti^^^^ ^ack by the Hedge, floureth in May and June, and the seed is rip^ soon
after.

Government and Virtues.] It is a plant of Mars; of temperature, hot and dry in
the third degree. Sawce-alone has been much used, and is still in some places
by people for sauce to their meat, in stead of Garlic and: it is likewise a
good sauce to fish, and helps to digest the crudities, and other corrupt
humors engendered by the much eating of Fish: it warmeth the Stomach Stumack
and causes digestion; Digestion
the juice boiled with honey, is very good for the Cough, Cough
to help to cut and expectorate tough Phlegm; Phlegm
the seed bruised and boiled in Wine, is a good remedy for the wind-Chollick,
Chollick
and S one, Stone
being drunk warm; the same for Women troubled with the Mother, Mother
both to drink warm, and the seeds put into a Cloth and applied warm, the
decoction of the leaves or seed is good in glisters to ease pains of the Stone;
the green leaves are good to cleanse and heal Ulcers Ulcers
in the legs; the root has a taste like unto Radishes, and may be used in the
same manner, and to the same purposes as they are.

Jessamine or Jesmine.
Names.] IT is called Jasminum, and Gelseminum vulgatius et album, there being
reckoned amongst Authors, four other kinds as Jasminum, vel Gelseminum,
Catalonicum simplex, the single Spanish Jasmine.

Gelseminum vel Jasminum, Catalonium multiplex; The double Spanish Jasmine.

Gelseminum sive Jasmimum Indicum flavum odoratissimum; The Indian, most sweet
yellow Jasmine; And,

Gelseminum sive Jasminum luteum, Odoratum, Virginianum, scandens, et semper
virens, The sweet yellow climing Virginian Jasmine.

Des^ript.] The ordinary Jasmine springs up with many long shoots from the
root, divided into many small branches, full of joints, or knots, and covered
with a dark grayish bark: these shoots or twigs are filled with a white spongy
pith within like the Elder; the leaves be of a dark green color, winged and
parted into several other little leaves, the flowers be white and long, of a
sweet and pleasant savor, standing diverse in a tuft together, at the tops of
the small branches, which fall away without bearing of any fruit in our
Country; but in hotter Countries where it naturally grows, it bears a flat
seed like a Lupine, the root spreads far in the ground, and increases by
yielding of many suckers.

Place.] Jasmine; the three first sorts thereof grow well in Spain, and are
supposed to have been brought thither out of Syria; none grows here, but such
as are planted in Gardens.

Time.] Jasmine floureth in July and August, but the fruit thereof never comes
to perfection in this Country.

Government and Virtues.] Jasmine is under the Solar Influence. It is hot
almost in the second degree, as says Serapio, and has a bitter taste. Jasmine
is effectual to cure the foul dry Scurff, and red Spots, Scurff, Spots,
Swellings, Wens phlegm, Catharrs Headache Freckles, Morphew, Tetters, Ring-worms
Cramp, Stiches.
and dissolveth cold Swellings and Wens, or hard lumps, or knobs, gathered
together in the flesh; being pultis-wise applied thereon. It discusseth humors,
is good against salt Phlegm, and is profitable for old men that are troubled
with Catharrs, and tough Phlegm; but it breeds the Headache in those who are
of an hot constitution if they use it: the leaves either green or dry do
cleanse Freckles, Morphew, Spots, and discolorings of the Face, and other
parts of the body, and helps Tetters and Ring-worms;

There is an Oil made of the flowers, by infusion, which is good for any cold
part of the body to warm it, and to ease the pains of the Cramp, and Stiches
in the sides.

There is also an Ointment made with the flowers and grease or butter, which
they call Jessamine-butter; which the barbers use to rub amongst men's hair, for
what purpose I know not; for in such as are young or of hot Complexions is
causes Headache; and the often smell thereof causes bleeding at the nose, as
Serapio says; but it profits such as are troubled with cold Rheumes, or
distillations of humors from the Head, and moistness and cold infirmities of
the brain.

John the Infants herb.
Name.s] IT is called in Latin Herba Johannis Infantis, and took the name from
one Inan Infanta, an Indian, the Son of a Spaniard.

Descript.] It is a small herb growing in the West Indies, and used, to cure
wounds, staunch their bleeding, and helps all hurts, pricks, and wounds in
the sinewss or any other part of the body; digesting, cleansing, and healing
them by laying some of the green herb bruised, thereunto; or else the powder of
the dried herb strewed thereon, which is thought to be most effectual.

The Jujube-tree.
Names and Kinds.] DOdoneus says, There be two sorts of Jujubes, red and
white; and since, there is found three kinds of the red Jujube; viz. The
greater Jujube-tre^ called in Latin Ziziphus sive Jujuba Major; The les^er
Jujube called Ziziphus or Jujuba minor; and the wild Jujube-tree.

Descript.] 1. The greater Jujube-tree, grows sometimes to be very high; but
rather and more often spreading in breadth, having a crooked body, the wood
thereof is hard and whitish, the bark rugged, the branches are great and
spreading, the lesser twigs about a foot long are full of leaves on both sides,
one a little above another, and an odd one at the end, these leaves are small,
broad and pointed at the end; finely dented about the edges, with long veins in
them, each standing on a long foot stalk, smooth, and feel hard; at the foot of
every leaf toward the tops of the Twigs come forth small yellowish flowers
consisting of five leaves apeece, after which succeed the fruit, which is like
unto a small Plum, or Olive, but a little long, green at the first, and then
they are harsh, afterward they become yellowish, and when they are ripe they
are red of a sharp sweetness and somewhat clammy; flattish next the stalk, and
the skin is thicker and harder then a plum, the stone within it is firm and
solid, pointed like an Olive or Cornelian Cherry-stone. The branches are all
thorny both great and small, standing two always at a joint; one whereof is
straight, the other crooked; the roots are long and fast in the earth.

Descript.] 2. The lesser Jujube-tree, is both in branches, leaves and flowers,
very like unto the former, but in all parts is lower and smaller; the fruit
also is alike, and red when it is ripe, but smaller and rounder, having also an
hard stone in it: it is thick set with thorns also as the other, but they are
somewhat shorter.

Descript.] 3. The wild Jujube-tree is lower and more like a shrub than the
last, but thicker set with small sharp thorns; the leaves are alike but growing
fewer on a twig, and smaller; the fruit is round and red like the last,
somewhat lesser, and dryer of substance, and more sharp when it is ripest.

Place.] The first grows naturally in Africa, Egypt, and those Easterly
Countries; and was, as Pliny says, brought thence into Italy, where it is now
plentifully in Gardens and Orchards in Italy; and also in Provence, in Fran.
The other is to be likewise found in Italy in some Gardens of the Curious: And
was of late times brought thence from Syria; the wild kind grows in the
fields by hedges not far from Verona, and such Countries.

Time.] They flower in May, and the plums, are ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] The Jujubes, especially being fresh, do open the body
and gently purge Choler, Choler
and cleanse the blood, Blood
as Simon Sethi and Actuarius say; but Mathiolus and Avicen, deny their purging
faculty; Heal
The plums Venus governs, and they are endued with a temperat quality in heat
and moisture, they cool the heat and sharpness of the blood and therefore are
good in hot Agues, Hot-Ague
and to expectorate tough Phlegm, and are good for other diseases of the Chest
Chest
and Lungs, Lungs
Coughs, Cough
and shortness of Breath, hot distillations; they appease the roughness of the
Throat and breast, being taken in syrrups or Electuaries. They are good to
cleanse the Reins and bladder, by their viscous quality making the passages
slippery, and the Gravel and Stones to avoid the more easily, they also stay
Vomiting which are caused by sharp humors; they are hard of digestion, being
eaten either fresh or dry; and therefore are used in decoctions, syrrups or
Electuaries, with other things, fit and proper for all the purposes
asorementioned.

A decoction may be made with Jujubes for all sharp and salt humors in the
Kidneys and bladder, and for all Ulcers or inflammations in the back Reins and
Bladder, and for the stone, Jaundies, falling sickness and dropsy. It is thus
prepared:

Take Jujubes, of the seeds of Parsley, Fennel, Annise and Carawayes, of each an
ounce; of the roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxifrage, and Carawayes, of each an
ounce and an half; let the seeds be bruised, and the roots washed and cut
small, let them all infuse all-night in a pottle of White Wind, and in the
morning boiled in a close earthen Vessel, until a third part thereof be
consumed; strain it, and drink four ounces hereof at a time, morning and
evening, first and last; abstaining from other drink three hours, this will
powerfully open obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cures the Dropsy,
and Jaundies, by Urine.

The white Jujube-tree, with thorns and without.
Names.] ZIziphus alba Spinosa, and non Spinosa, are the most proper Names:
there being two sorts of this tree, one bears Thorns, the other none, but in
all other things they are both alike.

Descript.] This tree grows as great as a middle sized Pear Tree, covered
with a whitish ash-colored bark over both body and boughs, full of short and
sharp thorns, two at each leaf, not far asunder on the one sort, and not any
on the other: the leaves are somewhat like those of the red Jujube tree but
greater; round pointed for the most part with three ribs in each, running all
the length: of a dark shining green color on the upper side, and somewhat
ash color under, standing singly on each of branches up to the top; At the
joints, with the leaves shoot forth small flowers of a greenish white, color,
in form like those of the Olive or Jujube-tree, each standing on a small foot
stalk: the flowers being fallen away there follows a small round fruit as big
as a Cherry, and sometimes of the bigness of a Walnut, in some whitish, in
others more yellow and reddish on the one side like an Apple, of a very sweet
taste with a round stone in the middle thereof, like an Olive-stone but not long.

Place and Time.] These plants in Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and those parts
thereabouts, they continue with their leaves green on them all the Winter
(which the red Jujubes do not) in those Countries: but in Candy and other
nearer Climats they fall off as other Trees do; in the hotter Countries they
bear twice a year; but the fruit of the spring is seldom ripe, being spoiled
by the moisture of the season, but in the Antumn the fruit is perfectly ripened
and pleasant.

Government and Virtues.] Venus also owns the Fruit, of both these. The fruits
before they are ripe are cold and dry in the first degree, and binding, but
when they are ripe they are moist, and are effectual to strengthen the
Looseness of the Stomach, and Belly, Looseness, Stomach, Belly Ulcers, Bowels
Fevers, Choler, Fevers
the juice of them either taken inwardly at the Mouth or given in a glister.

The dried fruit infused in water and the infusion drunk, is good against
slipperiness and Ulcers of the Bowels. The decoction or infusion of the dry
ripe fruit, is good against Pestilential Fevers and to resist putrefaction;
the fruit being endued with an excellent property against Venomous qualities.
The juice of the fruit, being thoroughly ripe is effectual to purge Choler from
the Stomach; the infusion of them is profitably used to cool the heat and
violence of all putrid Fevers.

Kali.
Names and Kinds.] IT is called also Glasse-wort, Salt-wort; There are 4 kinds
of Kali described by Parkinson, viz.

1. Kali majus Cochleatum, great Glasse-wort with snailt like seeds. 2. Kali
minus album, small Glasse-wort. 3. Kali Aegyptiacum, Glasse-wort of Egypt. And
4. Kali geniculatum, sive salicornia jointed Glasse-wort: I shall only describe
the last.

This jointed Kali or Glasse-wort, grows up usually, but with one, upright,
round, thick, and almost transparent stalk, a foot high or more; thick set, and
full of joints or knots, without any leaves at all, but shooting forth joints
one out of another with short cods at the heads of them, and such like smaller
branches on each side, and they also divided into other smaller ones: it is
thought to bear neither flower nor seed; the root is small long and threddy.
Some other kinds there are differing somewhat in the form of the joints, and
one kind wholly reddish, and differing from the other in nothing else.

The first and third are absolute strangers in our Countries, but grow in Syria
and Egypt, Italy and Spain; the second, grows not only in those Countries,
but in Colder Climates, upon many places of our own Coasts, especially of the
West Country. The last grows generally in all Countries, in many places of
our Seacoasts, where the salt water overfloweth it.

Tims.] They all flourish in the Summer, and those that perish give their seed
in August or later, the last abides all Winter.

Government and Virtues.] Kali, or Glasse-wort all the sorts thereof are under
the dominion of Mars, they are all of a cleansing quality, without any great or
manifest heat; the powder of any of them or the juice, which is much better,
taken in drink, does purge downwards phlegmatic, Phlegm
Waterish Water
and Adust or Melancholy Melancholy
humors, And therefore is very effectual for the Dropsy, to provoke Urine,
Urine
and expel the Dead-child. Dead-birth.
It also opens stoppings of the Liver Liver
and Speen, Spleen
and wastes the hardness thereof, but it must be used with discretion, for a
great quantity is dangerous, hurtful and deadly.

The Ashes hereof are very sharp and biting like a Caustic, and the Lie that
is made thereof is so strong, that it will fetch off the skin from the hands or
any part of the body, but may be mixed with other more moderate medicines to
take away Scabbs, Leprosy, and to cleanse the skin; The powder of stones and
the ashes hereof being melted, is the matter, whereof Glass is made; which
when it gloweth in the furnace it casts up a fat matter on the top of it,
which when it is cold is fat and brittle, and is called Sandiver.

It works much to the same effect with the herb or ashes: It is used often in
powder to blow into horses Eyes or being diossolved to be squirted in them, to
take away any superfluous film or skin beginning to grow thereon; both of them
likewise serve to dry up running Sores, Scabbs, Scabbs
Tetters, Tetters
Ringworms, and to help the Itch. Itch


Lacca, or Gum-lake.
DEscript.]. This is neither gum distilling out of any tree, as other gums do,
nor condensed juice; yet it will melt with heat and burn with fire; but is a
certain matter wrought by great winged Ants that breed in the ground, and
sucking out from trees of diverse sorts, but especially from that which is
called Mala Indica, from which they take the substanc^ of their work about the
smaller branches as Bees do Honey Combs, and make this Lacca, which is a dark
red substance, and somewhat transparent, harder than any gum, and being chewed
it will make the spittle look red. It is first wrought on sticks by the Ants;
and then melted being cleared from the sticks, and the wings of the Ants, and
made into Cakes, or small pieces, is so brought unto us as well as on the sticks
and is the original of the hard Wax, wherewith Letters are sealed, whose
colors of red green, yellow or black are added in the new melting of it again
and making it into such Rouls, as we buy it in; but some do Counterfeit it, by
putting of wax unto it; which makes it softer and run thinner.

The Painters Lake or Lack, is made of Brasill or other dying stuffes, and has
in former times been very ignorantly by some put into the composition called
Dia-lacca; but that Error is reformed.

Government and Virtues.] Lacca is governed by Jupiter: it is of temperature
hot in the second degree, it strengthens the Stomach and Liver, Stomach, Liver
and freeth them from obstructions, Obstructions
and dissolveth the hardness of the Liver, helps the yellow Jaundies, and
drives forth watery humors of the Dropsy; Jaundies, dropsies
provokes Urine and breaks the Stone, Urine, Stone
both in Kidneys, and Bladder.

Larch-tree.
Names.] IT is called in Latin, Larix; and the liquid Rozen, Resina laricea,
or larigna, and Terebinthia Venetia.

Description.] The Larch-tree is usually lower then the Pine, or Firre-tree,
but sometimes grows as high as either: it has a rugged thick bark, full of
Chaps, and reddish in the inside, the branches very comely one above another,
having several small yellowish knobs or bunches, set at several distances, from
which do yearly shoot forth many long, narrow, thick, soft and smooth leaves,
as it were in a tuft together, of a green-colour; which do not abide in Winter
but fall away, shooting fresh ones every Spring; the flowers are of a Crimson
color and very sweet, which afterward turn into small soft Cones, like to
Cypress Nuts, while they are close, but longer than they, made of many fine
scales, lying one upon another, standing on a short stalk having seed in the
inside of every scale, formed like a small bird with two wings, and a small
sweet kernel within them like the Pine kernel; the wood is very firm hard and
close, long in growing, and long lasting; It yields forth a liquid Rozen
being bored, very clear, and white, which is called Venice Turpentine. There is
also found upon the bodies, and great boughs thereof, a kind of hard and dry
Mushroom called Agarick.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in the Woods by Trent, and in many
other places of Germany, and between Germany and Italy. It shoots forth
leaves in the Spring and the blossoms presently after, and the fruit is ripe
toward the latter end of Summer.

The Turpentine is gathered in the hottest time of the Summer, but the Agarick
about November and December.

Governments and Virtues.] The Larix-tree is under the dominion of Venus: the
leaves, bark and fruit are of the same temperature as those of the Pine Tree;
the Turpentine thereof taken to the quantity of an ounce will gently open the
belly, provoke Urine, and cleanse the Reins, Kidneys, Reins, Kidneys
and Bladder; and helps to dissolve the Stone Bladder, Stone,
and drive forth the Gravel, and gives ease to those that have the Gout;
Gravel, Gout
if it be rouled up in Sugar, and taken, it helps the running of the Reins; But
pills most excellent for the Gonorrhaea or running of the Reins may be made
thereof in this manner:

Turpentine Pills for the Gonorrhaea, or Running of the Reins.
Take Turpentine-and wash it in Plaintain and Rose Water; then with the powder
of white Amber, red Corral, Mastick and a little Camphire, make it into Pills,
which are to be taken morning and Evening for certain days together.

It is good also for the Tissick, and Consumption of the Lungs, Tissick, Lungs.
being taken with honey in an Electuary; it expectorates tough phlegm, and helps
those that are troubled with a continual Cough; it is of excellent use also,
outwardly to be used as an ingredient amongst salves. It does, both draw
cleanse and heal all sores or Ulcers whether new or old; and green Wounds: the
Chemical oil drawn from Turpentine, is more drying and consolidating, than the
Turpentine it self, so that it is singular good to be used in Wounds; Wounds,
Vl^ers
and to warm and ease pains in the joints and sinews, caused with cold; and
being mixed with oil of St. John's Wort, it is singular good against Sprains,
Pains, Sprains
Wrinches, and outward Bruises Bruises-freckles
caused by falls or otherwise, the parts being fomented; This oil being drank
the quantity of twenty drops at a time in Ale or white Wine, provokes Urine,
cleanses and cures all Ulcers and Sores in the Kidney Kidneys
or Bladder Bladder
or Uretory passages. The water that is distilled with the oil is good for
freckles and spots in the Face; A scruple in weight of that water, taken in
white Wine, procures a Vomit; and gives much ease to those whose Stomachs are
overcharged with Phlegm.

Agarick which is the Tuberous substance which grows upon this tree; is a
good purging medicine, and often used by it self, but more commonly is mixed
with other medicines of a purging quality, to open obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Liver, Spleen
and entrails; it purgteh all vicious humors which offend the body: It is
usually corrected which Ginger, and given with Oxymel, that is, a sirrup made
with Vinegar and Honey; otherwise of it self it is apt to trouble the Stomach,
and cause Vomiting. It purges thin, and rotten tough phlegm, both yellow, hard,
and black, burnt Choler, Phlegm, Choler
from the Head, and Brain, Breast, Lungs, Head, Lungs
stomach, Liver Stomach, Liver
and Spleen; Spleen, Gout
and from the Reins; joints, Sinews and Muscles, whereby it helps such as are
troubled with the Gout, Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Jaundise, Chollick, Dropsy,
Chollick
Sciatica, shortness of Breath, Cough, Consumption of the Lungs, spitting of
Blood pains of the Womb, Blood, Womb
sharpness of Urine, and the Worms.

It is also helpful to cure all sorts of Agues, Agues.
to ease griping pains of the Stomach, and Belly, and such as have had Falls
and Bruises or are bursten-Bellied. Half a dram or two scruples being taken in
Wine, either by the infusion or in powder, is good against all poisons, and
bitings of Serpents.

The most usual way of preparing it for the other diseases before mentioned, is
to slice a dram, and put it into a gentle purging decoction or an Infusion.

If it be boiled in Lie with other Cephalicks, and the head washed therewith,
it comfort the, Brain Memory, Brain, Memory
and giddinessof the Head, and stays Rhumes, and Catarrhs; and cleanses it
from scurff, Rhumes, Scurff
and Dandriff.

Spurge-Laurel.
Names.] IT is also called Wild Laurel, and in Latin Laureola.

Descript.] The Spurge Laurel, springs up usually but with one stem, but
sometimes with more; very tough and pliant, having a whitish thick, tough bark*
branching forth into diverse parts toward the tops, whereon grow many long,
thick, somewhat broad and shining, dark, green leaves, longer smoother and
softer than Bay Leaves; and without any veins therein; the flowers come forth
toward the tops of the stalks and branches, and at the joints with the leaves,
many set together, which are somewhat long and hollow, having four small
leaves, of a whitish, yellow, green, color; after which come small round and
somewhat long, black berries, when they are ripe, wherein is contained a white
kernel, the root grows deep into the ground and spreads with long white
strings; and is somewhat woody: The leaves flower bark and root are very hot
in taste, burning the mouth and Throat of any that shall taste them; the leaves
continue green all the Winter.

Place.] Spurge Laurel grows Wild in many places of this land, particularly
in Cobham Park in Kent.

Time.] It floureth very early as about January if the Winter be mild, and the
berries are ripe about June.

Government and Virtues.] Mars rules this plant: both leaves and berries hereof
are violent purges: of a heating, burning quality so that they inflame the
throat and Stomach of whosoever shall take thereof; yet being given advisedly,
and prepared by a skilful hand, it cleanses the Stomach of Phlegm Phlegm, Terms
both by purge and Vomit, it drives down Women's Courses, and being chewed in
the Mouth, it draws down much corrupt matter from the Head and brain; if the
leaves and berries when they are fresh be boiled in oil and the oil strained
forth; this oil looseneth the belly and helps the Chollick, the belly being
anointed therewith; it provokes Urine, and helps the Piles; some give the
powder of the leaves, in a little broth to ease the pains of the Chollick, and
purge forth watery humors in the Dropsy.

The Correction of Spurge Laurel.
Lay the leaves or berries in steep in Vinegar a whole day, then dry it and
make it into powder adding to it Annise or Fennel seed, gum Tragant, and
Mastick, and so give it together with some cooling water, as of Endive,
Succory, or Orenges, it will perform its operation, without troubling or
inflaming the Throat nor the inward parts.

Indian-leaf.
Names.] IT is called by the Indians Cadegi Indi, that is, Folium Indum; It is
called also Malabathrum, and of the East-Indians Tamala patra.

Descript.] They are broad leaves with three ribs only in them; a little
pointed at the ends, which have been brought unto us, but in small quantity,
and amongst them some leaves on their branches, two usually at a joint; tasting
somewhat hot, like unto bay leaves, and the bark of the branches has the same
taste: amongst these leaves sometimes has been found a small fruit like unto an
Acorn, in the cup; which is probably the fruit of the tree, and gathered with
the leaves.

Government and Virtues.] It is Solar; The virtues are, to provoke Urine, to
warm and strengthen the Stomach, and it makes the Breath sweet.

It is good to be put into Cordial and Stomachical compositions. It resists
poison and Venom, and the infusion thereof in Wine warm, helps inflammations
and redness of the Eyes, being bathed therewith.

Lentills.
Kinds and Names.] THey are called Lens, and Lenticula, in Latin. In some
Countries of England where they sow them, for meat for their Cattle, they call
them Tills.

There are found three sorts hereof. 1. Lens Major, the greater Lentill. 2.
Lens Minor, the lesser Lentil. And 3. Lens Maculata, the spotted Lentil.

Descript.] 1. The greater Lentil grows about two foot long with many hard,
yet slender and weak branches, from whence at several places shoot forth long
stalks of small winged leaves; many on each side of a middle rib, which middle
rib ends in a small clasper: between the leaves and the stalks come the
flowers which are small, of a sad reddish purplish color, almost like the
flowers of Vetches; they stand for the most part two at the end of a long
footstalk: after the flowers are gone, there succeed, small short flat Cods,
wherein is flat round smooth seed, of a pale yellowish Ash Color; the root is
fibrous and dies every winter.

2. The lesser lentill differs from the former only in this, that the
stalks, leaves and seed is lesser, the flowers are more pale, and the seeds are
whiter

The third differs not much from the last, but the seed which is blackish is
spotted with blacker spots.

Place and Time.] The two first in parts beyond the Seas are sown in manured
Fields, and so they are in some Countries in England, especially the smaller
sort. The greater does seldom come to maturity with us, if the season be not
very mild and dry: the spotted kind has been growing wild in Portugal.

Government and Virtues.] They are under the dominion of Saturn of a mean
temperature, between heat and cold; yet they are dry in the second degree
according to Galen; they are somewhat astringent and bind the body especially
the outer skin. It is of contrary qualities for the decoction thereof does not
bind but loosen the body: therefore those that would have it bind, let them cast
away the first water and use the second, which stops Lasks, and
strengthens the Stomach Lasks, Stomach
and inward parts.

Lentils husked lose the strength of binding but nourish more than those that
are not husked; but Galen says, that to cat much of the broth of Lentils,
breeds Cankers and Leprosy, being gross and thick meat. It breeds the
Melancholy humor, but is good for moist and watery bodies, but forbidden to
those that are of a dry constitution. It is also hurtful to the fight, but is
convenient for Women that have their Courses in too much abundance, the
decoction thereof applied with Wheat flower eases the Gout; Terms, Gout
and used with honey, it closes up the Lips of Wounds and cleanses foul sores:
being boiled with Vinegar it dissolveth knots Sores, knots
and kernels, Kernels
and a decoction made thereof with Quinces, Melilot, and a little Rose Water
put thereto; it helps the Inflammation of the Eyes and Fundament. But for the
chaps of the Fundament, let it be boiled with dried Roses, and Pomgranate
rindes, adding a little honey unto it. And so it is good for creeping Cankers,
adding some Sea water unto it, and for Wheals, and running watery sores, St.
Anthonies-fire, Kibes, and for the curdling of Milk in Women's Breasts: And a
decoction there of with Rose leaves and Quinces, is a good lotion for Ulcers in
the Mouth, Privy parts, or Fundament. Cankers, Kibes St. Anthonies-fire, Mouth
Privy parts Fundament


Lentisk, or Mastick-tree.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Lentiscus, and the gum or Rozen, resina
Lentiscina, and Mastiche and Mastix; in English, Mastick.

Descript.] The Mastick or Lentisk-tree, grows like a tree if it be suffered
to grow up, and often it rises but as a shrub: the body and branches are of a
reddish color; tough and gentle having their ends bending somewhat downwards,
whereon do grow winged, dark green leaves consisting of four couples, standing
one against another, of the bigness of the large Myrtle leaf; with a reddish
Circle about their edges, and somewhat reddish veins on the underside, smelling
sweet, and always continuing green; the flowers grow in clusters at the joints,
with the leaves, being small and of a pale purplish green color, after them
come small blackish berries, of the bigness of a Pepper-corn, with a hard black
shell under the outer skin, and a white kernel within: it bears also certain
horns, with a clear liquor in them which turns into small flies, that fly
away. It yields also a clear white gum in small drops, when the stocks are
cut in sundry places, which is carefully gathered and preserved.

Place.] The Lentisk-tree grows in Provence of France, and also in diverse
places of Italy, and Candy, and in many places of Greece; but yields little
gum there, But especially in the Isle of Chio now called Sio.

Time.] It floureth in April, and the berries are ripe in September: It is
pruned and manured with as great care and pains, as others do their Vines; it
goes beyond them, in the profit of the Gum.

Government and Virtues.] The Lentisk-tree is under the influence of Jupiter.
It is of temperature moderately hot, but both root and branch, bark, leaf,
fruit and Gum, are of a binding quality, and do stop all Fluxes, Fluxes
and spitting of Blood; Blood
strengthens a weak Stomach, Stomach
and helps falling down of the Mother Mother
or Fundament. The decoction heals up hollow sores, Fundament, sores
sodereth broken bones, Bones
fasteneth loose Teeth, Loose-teeth, Itch
and stays creeping Sores, they being fomented therewith. The oil that is
pressed out of the berries, helps the Itch, Leprosy Leprosy
and Scabbs Scabbs
both in Men and Beasts; the gum-Mastick does bind and stay fluxes in like
manner taken any way in powder, or if 3 or 4 grains of it be swallowed whole at
night when you go to bed, it not only eases pains of the Stomach Stomach
but keeps it from the like afterward; the powder of Mastick, with Amber and
Turpentine, is good against the running of the Reins, Reins
and to stay the Whites Whites
and Redds Redds
in Women; The powder of Mastick mixed with conserve of red Roses is good to
stay distillations of thin Rhumes falling upon the Lungs; which causes a
continual Cough, and spitting of Blood; And if some white Frankincense in
powder be mixed therewith also, it will be more effectual; It comfort the
Brain, procures an Appetite to meat, stays Vomiting, and makes the Breath
sweet. Mastick being heated in Wine and the Mouth and gums washed with it,
cleanses them from corruption, and fastneth the Teeth; It is much used in
Salves and plasters, to cleanse and heal, Ulcers and Sores, and to stay the
flowing of humors unto them, and dries them up and fills up their
hollowness. It comfort a king joints and sinews, being applied thereunto.

There is an oil made thereof by infusion and ebullition, which is singular
good against all the aforesaid diseases, and does moderately comfort, bind, and
mollify, and is effectual against diseases of the Mother; the Chollick Mother,
chollick
and pains in the Stomach and Belly, Stomach, Belly
pains of the Joints and sinews and hardness of Tumors. tumors, Sinews
It comfort the Brain, Brain, Memory
and strengthens the Liver and Heart. Liver, Heart
There is also a pure Chemical oil, drawn from Mastick, one drop whereof is
more effectual then an ounce of the former, for all the purposes aforesaid.

The Lemon-tree, or Lemons.
Names.] THere are several sorts of Lemons, some great, others small; some
having very thick and rugged peels, and some very smooth; some are of a wild
juice, others sharp, and some very tart and crabbed: which alterations may be
made both by the Soil, and place where they grow or are planted.

1. The ordinary Lemon-tree is called Malus Limonia, acida, vulgaris.

2. Malus Limonia, acida, cortice tenui; the thin rin'd sower Lemon.

3. Malus Limonia, acida, fructu rotundo; The sower round Lemon.

4. Malus Limonia, dulcis, major; The greater sweet Lemon.

5. Malus Limonia dulcis minor. The lesser sweet Lemon, or Civil Lemon.

6. Malus Lemonia Silvestris minima. The least wild Lemon-tree.

Descript.] 1. The ordinary Lemon-tree grows great and high, with great Arms
and slender branches, with long greenish thorns, the leaves are long like unto
Bay Leaves, but dented about the edges, and full of holes: the flowers are
white and sweet, the fruit long and round, of a pale yellow color, and the
rind rugged and uneven; the juice is sharp.

Descript.] 2. All the difference between this and the former, is this; that
the other is bigger, the rind is of a fine pale, yellow color and smoother
then the other, and thinner full of a pleasant sharp juice, with seeds amongst
it as the other has.

Descript.] 3. The tree that bears the round Lemons, is in all things like
the last, only in this, that it has few or no thorns upon it; and the fruit
is like it, having a thin rind, but is somewhat rounder, with a small Crown at
the head.

Descript.] 4. The greater sweet Lemon is greater then any other of the former
Lemons, the rind is more smooth and yellower; and the juice more sweet and
pleasant.

Descript.] 5. This Lemon is of the same size as the thin-rinded sower Lemons,
and so like that it is hard by the outside to know one from the other but this
has a little deeper colored rind, and the juice of a sweet pleasant taste,
with a little sharpeness.

Descript.] 6. The least wild Lemon, grows wild in Syria and Egypt; and
hears very small fruit no bigger then Pigeons Eggs.

Place.] These Lemons are brought unto us from Spain and several of their
Islands.

Time.] They hold their leaves on, always green and are never without
blossoms, green, and ripe fruit, at all times throughout the year.

Government and Virtues.] The Lemons are Solar, yet of different parts, and
contrary effects; it is of good use to resist poison, Venom or Infection;
Venom, Infection
an ounce and an half, of the juice of unripe Lemons, drunk in Wine, cleanses
the Kidneys of the Stone and gravel; and kills Worms Stone, Worms
in the body and drives them forth.

An Antidote against the Plague, or any malignant or contagious disease is thus
prepared.
Take 4 ounces of the pure juice of Lemons, steep therein an Angel of Gold, or
the weight thereof in leaf Gold, the space of four and twenty hours, then take
out the Gold, or draw the juice dear from it, and give some of it in a draught
of Wine, with a little of the powder of Angelica-root unto any infected with
the plague, and if there be any hopes of recovery it will help them. The juice
of sweet Lemons is neither so cooling nor operative as the other. The distilled
water, drawn from the inner pulpe or white substance of the Lemons, clears
the skin and Face from Freckles and Spots, Freokles, Spots
provokes Urine, expels the Stone, being drunk; and helps the running Scab,
Stone, Scabs
kills Lice in the Head, the Worms Lice, Worms
in the hands or Nose, and Wheals Wheales
or pushes in the skin: The juice of Lemons is good for Seamen and others in
Voyages at Sea, to put into their Beverage to keep them from the Scurvy;
whereunto long voyages much subject their bodies, and also to quench thirst in
hot Countries: But I need not teach the Seamen to make a bowl of punch, but
pray they may at no time want materials.

An excellent remedy for Scabs and Itch.
Take a Lemon and cut it through the middle and cast thereon some fine powder
of Brimstone; then roast him either against the fire or under the Embers as you
do a Warden-Pear, and therewith rub the parts troubled with Itch or Scabs.

It is also the best most sovereign and clear remedy to destroy those pediculi
inguinales, vulgarly called Crab-lice, the parts afflicted with them being
rubbed therewith.

Line or Linden-tree.
Kinds and Names.] OF the Line-tree, there are accounted two sorts the Male,
and the Female; and of the Female also two sorts, the greater and the lesser.
It is called in Latin Tilia.

Descript.] 1. Tilia mas, the Male Line, grows to be a great tree, with large
spreading boughs but not so much as the Female, nor so flexible but harder and
more brittle, and of a thicker bark; the leaves are like unto Elder-leaves but
smaller and longer; and on every one for the most part grow small bladders full
for Worms which turn into flies, which being ripe do fly away.

This tree seldom bears either flower or fruit, yet when it does bear, it is
round flat husks; many growing close together, each hanging on a long
foot-stalk by it self, with a notch or clift at the head or end thereof. The
wood hereof is harder, more knotty and yellower then the Female.

Descript.] 2. Tilia foemina, major. The greater Female Line-tree grows to be
a larger tree then the former (especially if it happen to be planted in good
ground;) covered with a dark colored bark, the next thereunto being very
pliable to bend and bind, having some other thin rindes within it, the leaves
are fair and broad greener smoother, gentler, and rounder than Elm-leaves, and
with a longer end; dented about the edges, and of a reasonable good scent: at
the end of the branches oftentimes and at the foot of the leaves, shoot forth
long and narrow, whitish leaves, along the middle rib, whereof springs out a
slender long stalk with diverse white flowers thereon, smelling very sweet,
after which follow small berries, wherein is contained black round seed, the
wood is whitish, smooth, and light.

Descript.] 3. Tilia foemina, minor. The lesser Linden-tree is like the last in
all things, saving that it grows smaller in body, leaves and flowers, the
leaves are of a darker green color, and bears no fruit after the flowers.

Place and Time.] The greater Female-kind is planted in many places in this
land, in pleasant Walks it making a large sweet shadow, and usually flowreth in
May. The other are great strangers, and scarce to be seen any where in this
land.

Government and Virtues.] There is no medicinal use made of the Male Linden:
The Female is under the dominion of Venus, of a moderate temperature, and
somewhat drying and astringent, the decoction of the leaves being sod in water
is a pood Lotion to wash the sore Mouths Sore mouths
of young Children, or any sore Mouths that have Ulcers, blisters, Ulcers,
blisters
or Cankers in them. The leaves being pounded or bruised after the boiling, and
applied to the Legs or Feet cankers, swelled Feet.
that are swelled with falling down of humors, does help them; the hark is also
effectual for the same purpose.

The flowers of the Line-tree, and of Lilly Convally, distilled together, the
water thereof is good against the Falling Sickness; so likewise is the
distilled water of the bark, and is good against those fretting humors, that
cause the bloody Flux, and griping in the Guts; the water wherein the inner
bark has been steeped till the water become thick and muscilaginous, and
applied with clothes wet therein, helps burnings and scaldings.

Liquid Amber.
Descript. and Place.] LIquid Amber is a thick Rozen like gum, droping by
incision from certain great trees in the West Indies; which trees are full of
branches covered with a thick Ash-colored bark, the leaves are like unto Ivy
leaves, and the Gum which issues from the tree is of a strong and sweet smell,
and is somewhat like unto Liquid Storax; and may pass instead thereof for the
same uses; but there is a coarse sort, which is the scum of the uppermost
fatness that is made by boiling the branches, and is supposed to be that Storax
liquida sold by Druggists and Apothecaries: out of the first sort while it is
fresh and laid in the Sun, there droppeth a certain clear reddish oil, called
oil of Liquid Amber, and, of some, Liquid Amber it self.

Government and Virtues.] Both Tree and Gum are under the influence of Jupiter,
of a moderately hot and moist temperature; and is useful either of it self or
mixed with other things, to comfort and warm a cold moist brain, Brain Stomach
Digestion* Apetite, Mother Tumors
being used as an ointment; and eases all pains proceeding from a cold cause
being applied thereunto: It comforts and strengthens a weak Stomach, helps
digestion and procures an Appetite; But more effectually if a plaster be made
thereof with some Storax, Musk and Amber, and applied to the Stomach: it is
also profitably used in all cold griefs of the the Mother; it warms mollifies,
and dissolves, Tumors, and opens obstructions, and stoppings of the Terms.

Lung-flower, or Autumn Gentian.
Kinds and Names.] THere are several sorts of these plants, and are generally
called Autumn small* Gentians, Gentianellae Autumnales, and of some
Pneumonanthe.

Descript.] 1. The greater Autumn Gentian, Pneumonanthe dicta, rises up
according to the richness of the ground, higher or lower, sometimes two foot
high, and sometimes not above a foot, and sometimes with many and sometimes
with fewer stalks; of a brownish green color, with many long and narrow dark
green leaves, set by couples upon them, up to the tops^ which seldom branch
forth, but bear every one a large hollow flower, in most of them of a deep
bluish purple color, but in some a little paler, ending in five points; the
roots are many small and long; growing deep into the ground; and abiding all
the Winter.

Descript.] 2. Gentianella Autumnalis simbriato flore; Antumn-Geatian of
Naples. This does creep up like Couch-grasse from a long yellowish small root,
shooting forth a few long and narrow leaves, lik^ those of Flax, but shorter;
but those that grow up, to the middle of the stalk are larger, and lesser again
from the middle to the top, two set at every joint all along, and striped from
every one of the joints on both sides, to the top of the stalk, which is green,
and about a foot high: at the top comes a purplish green husk, which has
four large pointed leaves and encloseth the flower, which is long and writhed
before it be blown, and of a pale blew color; but when it is blown open is of
a deeper blew color, having four leaves somewhat long: and as it were purfled
about the edges, with a little hairiness at them; and a small leaf at the
bottom of each flower with a few yellow threads in the middle standing about a
head, which grows to be the seed-vessel, forked into two parts at the head,
being greater there then below, and contains in it very small black seed when
it is ripe.

Descript.] 3. Autumn-Gentian with small Centory-leaves, called in Latin
Gentianella Autumnalis, Centaureae minoris folio. This rises up with sundry
stalks scarce a foot high, parted into many small branches whereon do stand two
leaves together very like those of the lesser Centaury, not so long as either
of the former, but a little broader and of a whiter green color; at the tops
of the stalks and branches grow diverse blew flowers, set in small long husks,
half way rising above the tops of them; the seed is small and grows in long
horned vessels; the root is small and fibrous.

Descript.] 4. There is another sort with small Centory-like flowers; which is
more spreading; small, but has larger leaves and flowers than Centory; and of
the same color as are the flowers of Centory, yet having many more and lasts
longer; the root abides not the Winter.

Descript.] 5. Another smaller Gentian with Centaury-leaves is very like unto
the last but smaller, and the stalks much lower, not above three inches high,
having many small branches whereon are large blew flowers; the seed and vessels
when they are ripe are like unto the last; the root is also small, but has
many more fibers than the others.

Place.] The first is found growing in many places of Germany, and other
outlandish parts; and in diverse places of our own land, as by Gravesend, near
Greenhith, in a Chalk-pit not far from Dartford, and at Cobham in Kent; it
grows both in wet and dry grounds. The second upon the hills in Naples as
says Columna; The third in diverse place^ of Kent; as about South-fleet, and
Long-field, and also in Bedfordshire and Hartfordshire near old Verulam; The
rest are strangers here.

Time.] These flower not until August, and thence got the name of
Autumn-Gentian.

Government and Virtues.] These Lung-flowers, or Autumn-Gentians, are also
under the dominion of Mars, as the Gentian or Felwort is; and much of the same
temperature, in heat and dryness; and may be used both inwardly and outwardly
as effectually as Gentian, and where these are in plenty, and the other not
easy to be had, may well serve instead thereof.

Poison, Plague.
They are powerful against Putrefaction, Venom, and Poison: The Germans account
it their Treakle and did formerly make a Treakle with it and other things, at
Jena: which was brought unto us and called Jenes-Treakle, made of these
Gentians, Aristolochia, Bay Leaves, and other things, which were very good for
griefs and pains in the Stomach, Stomach, plague
and very effectual against infection of the Plague, and other infectious
diseases, to expel the malignity thereof, and to preserve the Heart, and
strengthen it against Fainting and Swoonings: which Treakle was of a bitter
taste. But that which is now commonly used by the vulgar people, and generally
by them called Treacle, which is of a sweet and pleasant taste, is not any kind
of Treacle, but is called properly Molosses; and is nothing else but the gross
dross of Sugar, taken in the refining or boiling thereof, and is not helpful in
any disease, yet usually and greedily desired and taken by the common People as
an universal medicine.

The roots of these Gentians, being made into fine powder, and taken in Wine,
either by themselves or with other things, as Myrrh, Rue, Pepper, or the like,
is an effectual remedy against the bitings or stingings of Serpents, Venomous
bitings Mad-Dogs
Scorpions, or any other Venomous Creatures, and against the bitings of
Mad-Dogs being taken three or four days together, and the wound carefully kept
open with Vinegar and Salt Water, and orderly cleansed and dressed.

The same roots also, being so taken in Wine, open obstructions of the Liver,
and help such as are Liver-grown. It eases pains in the Stomach, Liver grown,
stomach, lameness, Sides Stiches, bruises Agues
and helps such as cannot keep or relish their meat, or have lost their
appetite to meat: It refreshes such as are overweary with Travail; being
steeped in Wine and drunk, helps such as are Lame in their joints by cold or
bad lodging: and is effectual for pains, stiches and prickings in the sides:
and is good for those who are bruised by falls, dissolving congealed Blood, and
easing the pains thereof. The root is held to be good also against Agues, to be
taken not in Wine but in some other drink, or the distilled water of the herb.

Dead-Child Courses, Urine Stone, Cramps
The fresh root of the dried made into a pessary and put into the Matrix
expels the Dead-Child, and Afterbirth. And being taken inwardly it drives
down the Courses and provokes Urine. The decoction of the root is excellent to
give ease to them who are pained with the Stone; the same taken in Wine is very
good for those that are troubled with cramps or Convulsions; and is good also
for Ruptures and those that are Bursten.

Dioscorides commends the roots hereof not to help men only, but also for
beasts that are troubled with Coughs, out-going of their entrails, and that it
kills and drives forth Worms, and breaks Wind in the body. It is available
in all cold diseases either inward or outward. It does extenuate and make thin,
thick Phlegm or gross humors, cleanses corrupt and filthy sores or Ulcers,
purging of offensive and peccant humors: Liver, Lungs, Gaul, Spleen
and opens obstructions of the Liver, Lungs, Gaul and Spleen, and freeing the
parts affected with any the diseases incident unto them.

The decoction of the leaves, or the juice of them, or the roots, works the
same effect, and so does the distilled water thereof.

The distilled water of the leaves, flowers, and roots, drawn in a glasse-body
in Balneo Mariae, has been found effectual in a wonderful manner to cure
putrified Agues, Agues, Worms Green Wounds Ulcers, King's Evil, Piles, Eyes
and cleanses the blood, and kills Worms in the belly; the same water used to
the Face, cleanses it from Spots, Freckles and Morphew; The powder of juice of
the root heals Green Wounds, and all sorts of foul putrid and rotten Ulcers;
the same or the powder of the dried roots, helps the knots or kernels of the
King's Evil; and the soreness of the Piles; the juice either fresh or condensate
is good to take away inflammations and swellings of the Eyes; and to cleanse
them from films.

The decoction of the herb or root, is good to drench Cattle with, to free
them, from Bottes and Worms; or if they have received any harm by licking up
any Venomous Worm or Tick with their grass (as often they do) the same
decoction of juice of the bruised leaves is good to bath the Udders of kine,
which have been bitten or stung by any hurtful worm or other poisonous vermin,
by two or three times so bathing they are perfectly cured.

Lupines.
Kinds and Names] THere are several kinds of Lupines, as, The great white
Lupine called Lupinus sativus albus. 2. The spotted white Lupine called Lupinus
alter albus; and the smallest blew Lupine, called Lupinus minimus Coeruleus.

Descript.] 1. The great white Lupine, rises up with a strong, upright, round
woolly stalk, set confusedly with diverse soft woolly leaves upon long
footstalks, each being divided into several parts, narrow long and soft,
greenish on the upperside, and woolly underneath: the main stalk is divided
into two parts, after the flowers are grown from the uppermost joint, and are
like unto the great Garden-bean, but wholly white without any spot: after the
flowers, come long soft woolly stalks containing in them flat, white leaves,
somewhat yellowish within; of a very bitter taste. The root is long hard and
fibrous, and perishes every Winter.

Descript.] 2. The spotted white Lupine, differs from the former, in the
greatness, and in the flower: which is spotted with blew, on the head of the
inner most leaves, and the hollow of the uppermost.

Descript.] 3. The smallest blew Lupine, is very like unto the other blew
Lupine; but smaller both stalks and leaves; the flowers are blew, the seed a
little spotted.

Place.] They grow naturally wild, but in England are only planted in Gardens.

Time.] The Lupines do flower in July and August, and the seed is ripe soon
after.

Government and Virtues.] Lupines are under the dominion of Mars; and have an
opening, cleansing dissolving, and digestive property: but if they be steeped
in water until they have lost their bitterness, they may be eaten; but they
are very hard to digest and breed gross humors, and pass slowly through the
belly, yet do not stop any flux: If they be so steeped, Appetite, Stomach,
Liver Spleen, Urine Terms, Dead-Child, Scabbs Morphew, cankers, Tetters Sores.
and afterward dried and taken with Vinegar, they provoke Appetite, and help
the loathing of the Stomach to meat. The decoction of Lupines taken with honey,
opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provokes Urine, and the Terms and
expels the Dead-child, if it be taken with Myrrh. The decoction of them
cleanses the body of Scabs, Morphew, Cankers, Tetters, and soul running
Ulcers, or Sores; It also cleanses the Face, and takes away the marks or pits
which the Pox leaves behind it; and clears the skin of Marks, and black and
blew Spots.

An ointment of Lupines to beautify and make the Face Amiable is made after
this manner.
Take the meal of Lupines, the gaul of a Goat or Sheep, juice of Lemons, and a
little Alumen Saccharimum; mingle them into the form of a soft ointment.

The meal of Lupines, being boiled in Vinegar and applied, takes away knobs,
and kernels, or pimples: The smoke of the shells, being burned drives away
gnats and flies, which annoy many houses in Summer.

Madder, great and small.
BEsides the Garden and Wild Madder, there are many other kinds hereof sound
out; Parkinson makes six kinds of the Rubia major, or greater Madder, and eight
sorts of the Rubia minor, or little small Madder; Rubia Tinctorum, is the
general name of the manured Madder in Shops; not only so called from the
color of the root, but also from its propety to dye a red color. The names of
the other kinds follow in their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Culpepper has described the Garden or manured Madder, therefore
I say no more of it.

Descript.] 2. Rubia sylvestris, wild Madder, is very like unto the manured;
but the stalks are smaller and not so spreading, neither are they so rough or
hairy; the leaves are less, the flowers are white, the root grows greater
but not so red as the Garden-kind.

Descript.] 3. Wild Madder with long leaves, called Rubia sylvestris,
longioribus foliis, has diverse round jointed stalks, two or three foot long or
thereabout, not so rough as the other wild sort: the leaves that stand at the
joints are somewhat rough, narrower and longer than the other, seven or eight
at a distance: the flowers are white, and stand at the tops of the stalks,
having four leaves apeece, which turn into small round seed like the other; the
root is red as the former but smaller.

Descript.] 4. Smooth-leaved-Madder, Rubia levis Taurinensium, has diverse
round smooth stalks, two or three foot long, whereon stand leaves not rough at
all but smooth, larger and broader than garden Madder: toward the tops, of the
branches and at the joints, with the leaves standing round about the stalks,
come white flowers, consisting of five or six small leaves apeece; the roots
are smaller then the other, and run not far into the ground.

Descript.] 5. The (...) smooth Candy-Madder, called Rubia levis arborescens
Cretica; It has a thick short stalk, about the thickness of one's singer, from
whence spring many straight smooth branches with small short leaves, standing
at distances like the former sorts; at the tops of the branches shoot out two
or three slender sprigs which bear whitish flowers like those of the ordinary
Madder; the root is long and reddish, and of a bitter harsh taste.

Descript.] 6. Sea-Madder, Rubia marina, has many square hard and somewhat
rough stalks full of joints, and spreading round, about the root upon the
ground; the leaves are somewhat rough, small and long, broadest at the bottom,
and pointed at the end, growing lesser toward the tops; the flowers are of a
star-like fashion and whitish: the root is more red on the outside then within;
more woody and harder then the other.

Place.] The first is manured in Gardens and large fields, for the profit that
is made of it for dyers, as well as medicinal uses; the second grows by
hedge-sides in many places of Germany: and so does the third which grows also
in many places of our own Land: the fourth is found by Turin, on the hills of
Piemont, according as Pena and Lobel say; the fifth in Candy: and the sixth by
the Seaside in Provence, and near Mompelier.

Time.] They flower toward the latter end of Summer, and the seed of some of
them is ripe shortly-after.

Government and Virtues.] All the Madders are plants of Mars; our Ancient and
modern writers have controverted each other, about the properties of Madder,
whether it be of an opening or binding quality; Galen and Dioscorides say that
the root does open and cleanse the body of thick and tough Phlegm; Urine Terms
Dead-Child Afterbirth Yellow Jaundice Liver Spleen Melancholy Palsy Sciatica
that it provokes Urine, brings down Women's Courses, and expels the
Dead-child and afterbirth; but Dodoneus, affirms that it is dry and
astringent, and has no opening faculty at all; but it is sound to have both an
opening and an astringent quality, even as Rhubarb has; which first opens and
then binds and strengthens; it turns the Urine into a red color, as Rhubarb
does color it yellow; it is an excellent remedy for the yellow Jaundies
opening obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cleanses those parts; it
abates Melancholy humor: it is effectual for those that have the Palsy, and
Scitica; the roots boiled in Ale, and drunk, is good for those that have
received any hurts by bruises or falls: and for all these purposes, the root
may be boiled in Wine, Ale, or Water, and some honey or Sugar put thereunto
afterward. The seed taken with Vinegar and honey helps swellings and hardness
of the Spleen: Spleen, Freckels. Deformity of the skin
the decoction of the leaves and branches is good so: Women to sit over, to
drive down their Courses.

The leaves and roots b^^^sed and applied, cleanse and take away Freckles,
Morphew, white Scurff, or any deformity of the skin.

Small or little Madder.
Descript.] 1. Candy-Madder with a spikey head and larger leaves, called in
Latin, Rubia spicata Cretica, latiore folio; It has diverse square rough
slender stalks full of joints, from which shoot many branches, with four or
five small rough leaves compassing them, the top-branches end in small long
spiked four square heads, with many short rough husks set close one above
another which send forth small whitish green flowers scarce to be seen, after
which come small greenish Seed. The root is fibrous, and woody, but dies
every Winter.

Descript.] 2. Spiked-Madder with small leaves, Rubia spicata angusti-folia.
This differs from the former, in that it has lesser leaves, stalks, and
branches, not growing above a hand breadth high; and perishes every year.

Descript.] 3. Small smooth Madder with sharp-pointed leaves: Rubia Pratensis
levis acuto folio. This springs up with one smooth square jointed stalk,
about a foot and a half high, from the joints grow small branches, whereat are
set usually four long leaves, ending in a small point. The flowers come forth
at the tops consisting of four leaves, and are small and yellow at the first
and afterward become of a pale white color.

Descript.] 4. Small smooth Madder with round pointed leaves: Rubia
quadrifolia, rotunda, levis. This has many square stalks about half a foot
high, which send forth other smaller branches and at every joint four small
round pointed leaves, a little rough, and not so smooth as the last, the
flowers are small and white, and stand at the tops, upon small threddy
footstalks each having four leaves; the root is small threddy and reddish.

Descript.] 5. Small creeping Madder with purplish blew flowers, Rubia minor
pratensis Coerulea. This has many small square branches, which creep upon the
ground, divided into other small ones, full of joints, and at every of them
five or six round green leaves, smooth or very little rough: from the joints
and tops of the branches come small flowers consisting of five bluish purple
round pointed leaves, having some small threads in the middle; the seed is small
and long; the root is small and of a reddish yellow color; it continues green
all the Winter.

Descript.] 6. Small rock-Madder, Rubia minima Saxatilis. T^is grows not
above a hand-breadth in height: it has a small square stalk sending small
branches from the joints at which grow seven or eight small pointed leaves,
and somewhat rough; the flowers are very small, of a pale red, standing in
Vmbells at the tops of the branches; the root is small and reddish.

Descript.] 7, Small rock-Madder with prickly heads, Rubia Echinata Saxatilis.
This has a small whitish threddy root which sends up many square render
branches, small and slender below, and thicker up higher, having many thick and
hairy joints, whereat grow four small leaves, between which and the branches
come forth small greenish flowers of four leaves a piece, standing together
upon a footstalk, having small threads in the middle; after which come small
heads somewhat rough, which become sharp and prickly when they are ripe,
divided into four parts, on each side of the head, the middle part being also
prickly; the seed is small and yellow. It flowreth at the lower joints first,
and afterward at the higher.

Descript.] 8. Candy Silver-leaved Madder: Rubia argentea Cretica. This is like
the former small Madder, but that the leaves are longer and whiter, and the
flowers yellow.

Place.] The fifth grows plentifully in many places in England, and so does
the sixth, as upon the Chalky hills near Drayton over against the Isle of Wight;
the others are strangers in our land.

Time.] They flower in the Summer Months, and perfect their seed shortly after.

Government and Virtues.] These small Madders are all likewise plants of Mars;
and are of the same property and temperature as the former greater Madders are,
but not so powerful.

Mayweed.
Kinds and Names.] THere is found three sorts of Mayweed. 1. Cotula foetida
stinking Mayweed. 2. Cotula non foetida, Mayweed with no scent. Stinking
Mayweed grows more upright then that which s^nelleth not, or the common
Camomile; neither of them creep or or run on the ground as Comomile does: the
leaves are longer and greater then these of Camomile yet very like unto it, but
of a paler green color; the one sort has a very strong smell, the other no
scent at all: the flowers are like those of Camomile but larger; there has
also been found of this sort, in many places of this Land, a Mayweed which has
double flowers, almost as large as double Camomile-flowers, which is called
Cotula flore pleno.

Place.] The stinking Mayweed grows abundantly among Corn, and will blister
the hands of the reapers: that which stinketh not, grows also very
plentifully wild in many places, and often amongst wild Camomile.

Time.] They flower all the Summer-Months, some earlier, and some later.

Government and Virtues.] Mayweed is governed by Mars, yet Galen says, The
Sophi of the Egyptians consecrated Camomile to the Sun, which is much of the
same temperature: but the stinking Mayweed is more hot and dry, and is used for
the same purposes that Camomile is to dissolve Tumors and Wind, and to ease
pains and Aches in the joints and other parts, Tumors, Wind, Pains, Aches
Matrix Fallen down, Suffocations of the Matrix
it is also good for Women whose Matrix is fallen down, or loosed from one side
to another, their feet being washed with a decoction thereof made in water. It
is likewise good to be given to smell unto for such who are troubled with the
rising or suffocation of the Matrix.

Jewes-Mallow.
Names.] IT is called Melochia, or Molochia, and Corchorus.

Descript.] It is a small low herb, rising up a foot and an half: from the
stalks shoot forth diverse branches on all sides, whereon grow many leaves
without order up to the tops, somewhat longer and broader then the leaves of
Basil, and some are shorter and broader almost round; all of them finely nicked
and pointed about the edges, having at the bottom of each leaf a small thread as
it were on each side, which are of a little sourish taste, the flowers for the
most part come forth singly but one standing at a place, every one upon a short
footstalk, consisting of five broad small pointed leaves, of a yellow color
with some threads in the middle, which being past there rise up slender long
pods, somewhat like unto those of Swallow-wort, which when they are ripe open
into five parts, having within them small seed like unto Nigella, but lesser,
and of a bluish green color: the root is long, fibrous, and perishes every
year.

Place.] It grows in Syria, Asia, Egypt, and in those places abundantly in
the Gardens where it is sown; and in many places of Spain, and Italy.

It is so common in Egypt, that they seldom make a meal without a dish thereof
as says Alpinus.

Time.] It seldom comes to flower with us, and being sown grows not above a
hand high, a cold night quickly kills it.

Government and Virtues.] Alpinus assimilateth the faculties hereof unto the
Marsh-Mallow; that, is of a temperature moderate in heat and moisture, but this
thought to be dryer even in the first degree; it is under the government of
Venus: It is much used to suppurate, digest, resolve, and mollify all hard
Tumors, in that the muscilage hereof is more slymy then that of our
Marshmallows: Hard tumors Dry Coughs Hoarseness Throat
two drams of the seed (he says) is usually taken at a time to purge all sorts
of humors, the decoction of the leaves is very frequently used against dry
Coughs, hoarsness of the Throat or voice, and shortness of breath; and taken
with Sugar Candy it is a present remedy. Alpinus further says, that the oil
thereof is so familiarly used by the Egyptians in their meals, as that they do
seldom eat without it; yet it breeds many obstructions, and the viscous
nourishment of it turns into Melancholy and other diseases.

It will not be improper here to add somewhat of the virtues of our
Marshmallows both leaves seeds and roots, wherein Culpepper falls too short.
It is the chiefest of all other Mallows and most effectual, and is therefore
called Dismalva, being twice as good as any other.

The root, being boiled in wine and drunk, is good against the pain and grief
of the Gravel and Stone, Gravel, Stone Bloody Flux Sciatica, cough Toothache
the blood Flux, the Sciatica, the trembling, and shaking of any member, and
for such as are troubled with Cramps and burstings. Pliny writes, the same
boiled in sweet new milk heals the Cough; and being boiled in some Vinegar,
and holden in the, mouth it asswageth the pain in the Teeth.

The same being boiled in Wine or hony-water, and bruised or pounded very
small, Green Wounds Tumors, Swellings, Wens Kernels, Impostumes, chaps of the
fundament
does cure and heal new Wounds, and does dissolve and consume cold Tumors and
Swellings, Wens and hard kernels, and Imposthumes behind the Ears, and is good
for the burning Imposthume of the Paps.

It does soften, ripen, digest, breaks and covers with skin, old
Imposthumes, blastings and Windy Swellings; Mother
it cures rifts and chaps of the Fundament and trembling of the sinews and
sinewy parts: the same being so prepared and pounded with hog's grease,
goose-grease, and a little Turpentine; and a Pessary or Mother suppository made
thereof and put up, does mollify and assuage Imposthumes, and sores of the
Mother, and opens the stoppings of the same.

The leaves are likewise used instead of common Mallows to loosen the belly
gently, and are very effectual in decoctions for Glisters, to ease all pains in
the body, Pains in the body, Stone
to open the straight passages and make them slippery; whereby the stone may
descend the more easily out of the Reins and Kidneys, and the bladder, and to
ease the great and torturing pains that come thereby, the roots being boiled
very well in water and after they be strained out, the decoction being boiled
again with Sugar to a just consistence, and troches, rowls or Lozinges made
thereof, is effectual against the diseases of the Breast, Chest, and Lungs, as
Coughs, Hoarseness, Wheefings and shortness of Breath: Coughs, hoarseness
shortness of Breath, Guts Bloody flux
the roots and seeds of the Marsh-mallow boiled in Wine and Water, is very
effectual to be used by such as have any excoriation in the Guts, or bloody
flux, by qualifying the violence of the sharp Choleric fretting humors, which
are the cause thereof; and by sliminess easing the pains and healing the
soreness, and in some sort staying the further erruption of blood. Ruptures,
cramps Convulsions, Kings Evil, Chin cough
It is very profitable for them that are troubled with Ruptures, Cramps, or
Convulsions of the sinews, and being boiled in White Wind, it is profitable for
the Impostumes of the Throat called the Kings-evill, for kernels behind the
Ears, and swellings or Inflammations in Women's breast. The dried roots boiled in
Milk and drunk, are singularly good for the chin-Cough.

Hippocrates used to give the decoction of the roots or the juice thereof to
drink, to wounded persons who were ready to faint through loss of blood, and
applied the same mixed with Honey and Rozen unto the Wounds: he gave also the
decoction of the roots in Wine, to those to drink, that were hurt by bruises or
Falls, or by blows or stripes; and to such who had any bone or member out of
joint, and to those who had any swelling, pain, or Ach in the muscles, sinews,
or Arteries; it is good also to be used in all Ulcers and sores that happen in
any Cartilaginous place. The muscilage of the roots and of Linseed and
Fenegreek put together is of much use in pultisses, ointments, and plasters,
to mollify hard tumors, and the Inflammations of them, and to ease pains in any
part of the body. The seed either green or dry mixed with Vinegar, cleanses
the skin, of Morphew and other discolorings thereof, being bathed therewith,
either in the Sun, or in a Hot-house or Stove.

Mandrake.
Kinds and Names.] THere is described by Authors, both a Male and Female
Mandrake, and two of the Males-Mandrak. It is called Mandragoras, both in
Latin, and Greek; and Dioscorides says, in his time called Circaea, because
Circe the great Witch or enchantresse, used it as is thought in love-matters.

Descript.] 1. The more ordinary Male Mandrake, Mandragoras mas vulgatior,
sends forth from a somewhat great and downright root; in some; but with one
in other, two three or four twines or branches, divided a little below the head
or top, and diverse small fibers besides, blackish on the out side and whitish
within, having many large leaves lying on the ground, greater then any
Beete-leaves; from the middle whereof rise up sundry pale green flowers, of
five round leaves a piece each standing on a small slender footstalk within, a
green five-leaved husk, wherein afterward is set the fruit, being of the
bigness of a reasonable Pippin, and as yellow as Gold when it is through ripe,
with diverse round whitish flat seeds in it, of a heady or strong stuffing
scent. This is the true Description of the plant, without other shape of Man's
or Woman's parts, although some Cheats have made counterfeit forms thereof, and
have exposed them to public view, both in our own and other Countries, but
they are utterly deceitful forgeries to cheat people of their money.

Descript.] 2. Mandragoras mas alter, another Male-Mandrake; whose leaves were
of a more grayish green color, and somewhat folded together; herein differing
from the former. This Mr. Parkinson says, he saw in the Lord Wottons Garden at
Canterbury, when John Tradescant, had the keeping of it, but that it had never
born any fruit.

Descript.] 3. The Female Mandrake, Mandragoras foemineus, has many leaves
lying on the ground; but smaller, narrower, more crumpled and of a darker green
color then the Male, like those of Lettice, as says Dioscorides. The flowers
also rise from among the leaves, each on a slender footstalk as the former, but
of a bluish purple color: the fruit is much less then those of the Male, but
round like them; of a paler yellow color when they are ripe and of a more
pleasing and less heady-scent, having in them such like seed as the Male, but
smaller and blacker; the root is also like the former, blackish without and
white within near unto the same form, parted into sometimes more and sometimes
fewer branches.

Place.] They grow in Woods and shadowy places and the Female by Rivers-sides,
in diverse Countries beyond the Alps (but not naturally on this side thereof,)
as in Greece, Candy Isles, and other places of the Mediterrenean Sea, and in
Italy and Spain: in our Countries they are carefully nursed up in Gardens: the
Male in many places but the Female, only with the Curious, being rare to get,
and tender to keep.

Time.] The Male flowreth in March, and the fruit is ripe in July: the Female
Clusius says he found in some parts of Spain in flower in Febuary; and in
other places in Spain in the same Month it had ripe fruit, but with us, it
flowreth not until August, or September, and the fruit seldom or never comes
to any perfection.

Government and Virtues.] The Mandrake is a plant of old Saturn, endued with a
very cold quality, of temperature cold in the third degree; but the bark of the
root has in it some dryness, and the apple some moisture it has a very
soporiferous property, causing sleepiness or drowsiness; Levinus Lemnius
reports, that sitting in his Study at his from Book upon a sudden he became
drowsy; and found the cause to be the scent of one of those apples which he
had laid on a shelf therein, which being removed, the drowsiness ceased. The
bark or juice thereof is given to those that cannot sleep in their sickness,
the decoction of the root in Wine, also does the same. It is given in like
manner to those that are to be feared or are to have any member cut off, to
cast them into a sleep that they may not be sensible of the pain; the
condensate juice taken to the weight of a scruple in sweet Wine, Phlegm,
Melancholy, Matrix Courses, Deadcholy, Inflammations. Eyes; Imposthumes
Hardness, knois kernels, burning St. Anthonies fire,
purges Phlegm and Melancholy like unto Hellebor, but taken in a greater
quantity it kills. It is used also in pessaries, either by it self or with
other emoldient things to take away the hardness of the Matrix, to drive down
the Courses, and expel the Dead-birth but use not above half a scruple at one
time. The said juice is also used with ocular medicines to cool inflammations in
the Eyes; the leaves are likewise used for the same purpose, as also to
Imposthumes; and also to discuss all hardness, knots and kernels in the flesh,
and Scars of burning. The root beaten with Vinegar and applied, helps St.
Anthonies-fire, and applied with honey, or oil, it takes away the sting of
Serpents.

The Apples, and especially the seeds in them, do purge, and cool the hot
Matrix, as Serapio, Avicen, and Paulus Aegineta write; which might be the
reason that Rachel so desired them, as knowing them to be available for her hot
and dry body which was the cause of her barrenness.

Manna.
Kinds.] THere is two kinds of Manna, the one hard and in pieces, either
greater or lesser; the other liquid and thin, like the less thick honey. Of the
hard fort there is some difference: for that which is gathered in Arabia
differs from that in Persia, being in small grains somewhat like unto
Coriander-seeds, and is gathered as Rauwolfius says, from those trees the
Arabians call Agul or Alhagi. Another sort is reddish and gathered from herbs
and plants. That of Persia is called Xireast, lac Arborum, that is, milk of
trees, and is white like that of Calabria, whereof some is as small as
Hemp Seed, others as big as Almond-Comfits, another sort is gathered in Armenia
in great lumps of a brownish color. Another sort is affirmed by Aphrodiseus
(cited by Niger) that, falling as an hony-dew on mount Libanus in Syria, it is
by the heat of the Sun congealed into an hard Sugar which the inhabitants call
Saccar: from whence came the Latin word Saccharum.

Some have been, and some still are of the opinion, that some of these smaller
white sorts might be the Manna of the Israelites wherewith they were fed in the
Wilderness, and therefore called Bread; But the Scripture does flatly
contradict such conceits, with diverse reasons. 1. The Manna which was given to
the Israelites to eat, had no purging out a Nutritive quality. 2. It was not so
sweet as ours, in taste. 3. It fell not on their Sabbaths, although it did all
the week after. 4. It fell all the year long, and not, as our Manna does, in
the Summer only. 5. It vanished away as soon as it felt the heat of Sun, but
the Sun condenseth and hardneth ours. 6. It would putrify, if it were kept but
two days besides the Sabbath day. And lastly, that Manna ceased to fall any
more after they had eaten of the Corn of the Land.

There is Manna in Europe called Calabrina: great controversies have been
amongst writers whether it be a dew condensate by the cold of the night, or
whether it be a gum issuing from trees, being cut as other trees that yield
gums are; some do affirm, that it is only gathered from the manured or Wild
Ash. The Liquid sort is gathered both in Europe and Asia, but that of the
Levant is more plentiful, and more operative: it is gathered in diverse other
Countries both of Europe and Asia, (besides Calabria, where no Ash-trees grow.)
from many other trees, and differs in drines, form of greater or lesser pieces,
and color, as it is altered by the disposition and temperature of the Climate,
either hotter or colder.

Government and Virtues.] Both these sorts of Manna are governed by Venus, and
have properties alike in purging, and are of a mean temperature; a little
inclining to heat, and moisture; and by their gentle working they may safely be
given to Children, and Women with Child, and being mixed with other purgers
they help their working and evacuate Choler; but the grained Manna, is much
more frequent and more in use with us, Choler, quench thirst, hoarsness
nauseous Stomach
and the properties thereof are, that, besides its purging quality it quenches
Thirst, and does Lenifie the Hoarseness of the Throat, and allayes the
sharpeness of Choler, and the nauseous humors in the Stomach. It is very
profitable to be used often by those who are subject to be costive, to be taken
alone, or to be put into brothes, drinks, or other things in stead of Sugar: it
is excellent good to be taken dis^olved in whey in Sunmer to abate heat and
choler, and quench thirst.

The greater Maple-tree.
Names.] IT is called the greater broad-leafed Maple or Sycomore-tree, Acer
majus latifolium, Sycomorus falso dictum; because it has been and still is
falsely called the Sycomore-tree; it grows quickly to be a great tree,
spreading many fair branches, which make a goodly shadow covered with a
reasonable smooth bark having very many fair large leaves thereon, set upon
reddish footstalks, cut deeply into five long parts, dented about the edges,
green above and grayish underneath, the flowers are of a whitish yellow, green
color; standing on a long stalk, with some few threads within them, each flower
yielding two winged husks, parted at the stalk which are thin skins at the ends
and bunched out where the seed lies within, and are very like unto the common
or wood Maple, but much larger and many more standing together: the wood is
whitish and smooth; but not so smooth hard and close as our common Maple is.

Place.] This great Maple, or falsly-called-Sycomore, grows no where wild or
natural in this Kingdom, but is only planted before houses, or in walks for
the shadows sake, but grows naturally in many places in Germany, etc. This,
as-well as our Wood-Maple, flowers about the middle of April, and the fruit is
ripe, in the end of September.

Government and Virtues.] It is a tree of Jupiter, and is nevertheless scarcely
made any mention of, for its medicinal virtues; but only Pliny says that the
root of the Maple being bruised, is with very great effect applied unto those
that have obstructions, or other pains of the Liver and Spleen: but the root
made into powder, and given the quantity of a dram in Wine often is more
effectual.

The Mealy-tree.
Names.] IT is called in Latin Viburnum, and it is also called the
Way-fairing-tree, and by Mr. Parkinson, from the pliantness of the twigs and
branches, the Pliant Mealy-tree.

Descript.] This tree has (from a small body rising to the height of a
hedge-tree or bush, covered with a dark greyish bark) sundry small, short but
very tough, and pliant branches, of a fingers thickness, whose bark is smooth
and whitish, whereon grow broad leaves like Elm-leaves, but long and hoary,
rough, thick, white like meal, and a little hairy, set by Couples and finely
dented about the edges: at the ends of the branches stand large tufts of white
flowers, which turn into large branches of round and flat seed like unto
Lentils but greater; green at the first and afterward, and black when they are
ripe.

The branches hereof are so tough and strong, that they serve for bands to tie
bundles or any other thing, or to make fast gates of the Fields better than
withy, or any other.

Place.] It grows as a hedge-bush, and is often cut and plashed by
Countrymen to spread on the hedges in length, and is very frequently found in
Kent, and in many other places of this Land.

Place.] It flowreth about the end of May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] It is a plant of Saturn, the leaves thereof have a
harsh binding quality, and are good to strengthen and fasten Loose-teeth;
Loose-teeth
the decoction of the leaves hereof, and of Olive leaves together in Vinegar
and Water is excellent good to wash the Mouth and Throat that are swelled by
sharp Rhumes falling into them, and is good to set the Palate of the Mouth or
Uvula in the right place, and to stay Rheums that fall upon the Jaws: the
kernels of the fruit hereof, taken before they be ripe, dried and made into
powder and drunk, do stay the Looseness of the belly, and all other fluxes. Of
the roots being steeped under ground and then boiled and beaten a long time
afterward, is made Bird-lime to catch small birds with all.

The leaves boiled in Lie, and the Head or Hairs washed therewith, does keep
them from falling, and make the Hairs black.

Mechoacan and Jalap.
Kinds and Names.] THe Mechoacan of Peru, is called also in Latin, Brionia
alba Peruana, sive Mechoacan. There is also another kind called Wild Mechoacan,
and a third sort called black Mechoacan or Jalap.

Descript.] 1. The Mechoacan of Peru, that has grown in these parts, sends
forth diverse dark greyish long branches, winding themselves about poles, that
are set for them, or any other things that are next unto them whereon do grow
fair broad leaves pointed at the ends, of a dark green color, thin and hard in
handling, seeming so dry as if they had no juice in them; the flowers are many
standing in long clusters, (of a sullen yellow color in the Indies, as
Monardus says, and as large as an Orenge-flower, with an Umbone in the middle
which afterward comes to be the fruit; which when it is ripe, is as big as an
Hazel-nut; divided by a thin skin in the middle, in each side whereof lie two
black seeds of the bigness of Pease) of a dark whitish color, in the warmer
Countries of Europe; but not with us, yielding berries and seed, but not so
large; the root grows to be as large as any Briony-root, being not bitter, or
loathsome to taste as it is, but rather without either taste or smell, having
many circles in it, as may be discerned in the dry roots, and may easily be
brought into powder.

Descript.] 2. Wild Mechoacan, called in Latin Mechoacan Sylvestris, is
altogether like the other, both in manner of growing, with branches leaves,
flowers, and roots but in every particular lesser; and the root (wherein is the
chiefest difference) being sharp and loathsome, procures Vomiting and
troubling the Stomach, when it is taken, as much as any ordinary Briony.

Descript.] 3. Mechoacan nigricans sive Jalopium, black Mechoacan or Jalap. The
dried roots of this plant, are brought as a Merchandise unto us in England: It
comes to us in small thin pieces, some greater, some smaller; yet nothing so
large as the greater, but rather as the smaller pieces of Mechoacan; of a
brownish black Color, somewhat more solid compact and Gummy, for out of it
will rise a black Gum, being laid on a burning Coal, and of no unpleasant taste,
but sticking a little in the Teeth when it is chewed.

Place.] Mechoacan grows beyond Mexico in the Province of Mechoacan: but
since has been plentifully brought from the main Land of Nicaragna; and Quito.
The wild Mechoacan was brought from the Promontory of St. Helen, which is on
the same Continent with Nicaragna. The last is brought from a place in the
Indies called Chelapa, or Calapa, from whence it obtained the name of Jalap.

Time.] They flower in the months of July and August, some earlier or later
than others, as their original is from colder or hotter Climates; and do seed
soon after, where they give any.

Government and Virtues.] The Mechoacans are plants of Mars; the Mechoacan of
Peru is a familiar Medicine, used by many; It is given to all Ages young and
old, and to young Children and Women with child, without any harm or danger; as
also at all times of the year: for, being without any evil taste or smell, it
may be the better taken of the most delicate and tender stomachs, that loath
all other medicines; It is most usually being made into powder taken in wine,
or the Root may be boiled in a little broth or wine and so taken. The Dose in
powder is from half a dram to a whole dram, or a dram and an half or two drams,
as there is cause, and according to the Age, and strength of the Patient.

It purges choleric and Phlegmatic, gross viscous and putrid humors
whatsoever, Choler, Phlegm, putrid humors. Liver Spleen. Dropsy Jaundice,
Wind, Pains in the head, Bladder, Reins Urine Cholick Mother shortness of
breath, Cough, French Pox.
as also the yellow waterish humors of the Dropsy, with much ease and
facility; It cleanses the Liver and Spleen, strengthens the Stomach and
corroborates the inward parts, after purging and opening the obstructions of
them; It helps also all diseases proceeding from them, as Dropsy, Jaundice;
it rectifieth the evil constitution of the Liver, opens and dissolveth the
hardness thereof; as also of the Spleen and Stomach and expels wind; It
helps and takes away all old and inveterate pains in the head, by cleansing
the brain; and the nerves, and purging those Rheumatick distillations and
humors that are in them; It helps also Joynt-Aches or Gout-pains in the
bladder and Reins, provokes Urine. It helps the Chollick, powerfully expelling
the wind. It also helps pains and windiness of the Mother, shortness of breath,
and an old Cough. It is also effectual in the French disease, by taking it as
often as there is cause, purging old peccant humors, especially if the disease
be not of any long continuance. It takes away also the cause of old and long
lingering Agues.

The Jalap is in operation and purging somewhat like unto the Mechoacan, but
works more strongly, and somewhat more churlishly both upon Phlegmatic, and
watery humors, yet it strengthens both the Liver and Stomach. The manner to
take it, is, being made into powder to drink it in White wine fasting; or in
the distilled water of Cichory or Borrage, or else in broth made with cold
herbs, and some use to drink it in Posset Drink.

Millet.
Names, Kinds.] THere are three sorts growing in Europe: they are generally all
called by the name of Millium, with their Adjectives for distinction. Gesner
calls it Panicum Indicum.

Descript.] 1. Common white Millet, Millium vulgar album. This grows with
many hard joynted tall stalks, full of white pith; yet soft and a little hairy,
or downy on the outside; with long and large Reed-like Leaves, compassing one
another; The tops of the stalks are furnished with a great many whitish yellow
long Sprigs, like feathers, bowing down their heads, set all along with small
seeds enclosed in whitish husks of a shining pale yellowish color, somewhat
hard, little bigger than the Seed of Fleawort; the Root spreads much in the
ground, but perishes every year.

Descript.] 2. Black Millet, Millium nigrum, differs from the other but
little, being somewhat less, saving that as the tuft is brownish, so is the
seed blackish and shining, else it is very like to the other.

Descript.] 3. Indian Millet, called also Melica sive Forghium, and higher than
the former, rising to be five or six foot high, or more: the stalks are full of
joints and large long leaves at them, the juba or Tuft, stands upright, and
does not hang down the head as the others; whereon stand somewhat round seed as
big, but not as flat, as Lentils, and is either whitish, yellow, red, or
blackish, hard and shining: the root busheth more than the other, yet endures
all Winter.

Place.] All the sorts of Millet came first into Europe, out of the Eastern
Countries, and require a strong well watered ground, they soon will impoverish
a ground that is not still enriched, it will not prosper in dry or hungry
ground.

Time.] It is to be sown in April, and the grain in the hotter Countries will
be ripe in August or September.

Government and Virtues.] It is Mercurial. of a cooling temperature in the
first degree, and dry almost in the third, according to Galen; and is also
endued with a little tenuity of parts. Theophrastus says, that if the grain be
kept from wind and weather it will last always. It is sometimes made into
bread, but it is very brittle, it dries up moist humors. In Germany they much
use it, boiled in milk and some sugar put to it; Mathiolus says that, at
Verona, they eat the bread thereof with great delight while it is hot, by
reason of the sweetness, but being cold it is hard and unpleasant.

Dioscorides says that Gruel or Pottage made with it, Binding of the belly
Urine. Fevers thirst. Chollick Sides Pains Joints Sinews.
binds the belly and provokes Urine; the Apozeme made thereof called Syrupus
Ambrosianus, or Syrupus Ambrosii, taken warm with white wine, procures sweat
very much, the party being covered in bed, and is effectual to cool hot
Fevers, and to quench thirst. Being put into a bag and fried, and applied hot
it eases the griping pains of the Chollick and of the sides, and pains in the
Joints and Sinews; in Italy and other places they fat their Poultry with the
grain. Mathiolus says, that the Indian Millet-stalks are good to help those
that are troubled with kernels under the ears or else where, to be used in this
manner,

For Kernels under the Ears or elsewhere.
TAke ten of the joints of the Indian Millet of the Stalks thereof, take out
the pyth of them: which, burn with a new red Sponge, take the powder of them
with twelve grains of pepper, and an ounce of Wheat Paste or Dowe: make it up
into a Cake, with a new-layd egg, and let it be baked under the Embers; this
Cake divide into six parts, and let the Patients take one part of it every
other night, when the Moon is decreasing, as they go to bed; and not drink
after it that night. This must be repeated two or three Moons; and by this, he
says, he has known many to have been cured. He also says that the red
flowers taken in red wine, to the quantity of a dram, cures women of the Reds,
as the white flowers does the Whites. It is also good for all Fluxes of the
belly.

Myrtle.
Names and Kinds,] THere are several kinds hereof, whose names shall follow
with their descriptions. The Druggists, and Apothecaries; in their Shops call
the berries Myrillus, and we in english Myrtle-berries.

Descript.] 1. The greatest open Laurel Myrtle; Myrtus latifolia maxima. This
greatest Myrtle has great and thick woody branches, set with a double row of
large leaves, coming near unto the smaller leaves of the Baytree, but of a
paler green color, abiding always green, and very ^weet. Clusius says, that
this sort, in Spain seldom bears either flowers or fruit, because they prune
it often, being kept in Hedges for pleasure.

Descript.] 2. The strange broad-leaved close Myrtle, Myrtus Latifolia Exotica.
This does grow up higher than the former; and shoots from the root many
strong thick stemmes, more pleasantly stored with large leaves, yet not fully
so large as the first sort, but closer set together; that they almost touch one
another, sometimes in a double row, and sometimes in a treble, and very sweet;
The flowers are white like unto others but larger, the fruit is somewhat longer
than in the small sorts, green at the first, purplish before it be ripe, and
black when it is full ripe; with many crooked white seeds in them.

Descript.] 3. The usual broad-leafed Myrtle, Myrtus latifolia vulgaris. This
Myrtle grows to be four or five foot high with us, and in the hot Countries
to be a little Tree; full of branches and leaves, like a small Bush: the leaves
are somewhat large, but not so large as the first; as sweet as the other, and
the flowers white like the rest, and sweet likewise: and the fruit black.

Descript.] 4. Strange narrow-leaved Myrtle, Myrtus angusti-folia exotica. This
grows in all parts like unto the second, but that the leaf is smaller,
narrower, small pointed, and of a darker green color; the flowers are alike
and so is the fruit, but greater and rounder; having crooked white seeds in
them like the other.

Descript.] 5. The Spanish wild Myrtle, Myrtus Boetica sylvestris. This wild
myrtle grows not so high, nor so thick with leaves as the former sorts, but
has slender and brittle branches, with broader leaves than the last; set more
thinly on both sides than the rest, and of a dark green color; the flowers are
like the rest, and the fruit is round, standing on long footstalks, between the
leaves, green at first, then whitish and blackish, when they are ripe, full of
pleasant sweetish juice; and with some astriction to the Taste.

Descript.] 6. Small white myrtle, Myrtus domestica, minutissimis foliis,
fructu albo. This grows reasonable tall, with slender reddish branches,
thick, bushing together; and thick-set with very small leaves; narrowest of any
other, and sharp-pointed; and somewhat dark, green also; the flowers are white
like the rest; and so is the fruit: but of a whitish color, tending to a
little blush; and so abide, not turning blackish.

Descript.] 7. The small and pointed Myrtle, Myrtus minor acuto folio. This
rises not so high as the third, or ordinary broad-leaved sort, but grows
fuller of branches, and thick-set with small fine and green and almost shining
round leaves; a little pointed at the ends, abiding always green; as all the
sorts of myrtles do: which with the flowers are sweet, and bear black berries,
but they never bear in our cold Country.

Descript.] 8. Box-leaved myrtle, Myrtus minor rotundiore folio. This grows
in all points like the last, but that the leaves being as small and fresh,
green, thick, are rounder at the ends, very like unto the small box-leaves and
bears flowers as sparingly.

Descript.] 9. Double-flowred myrtle, Myrtus flore pleno. Of the greater kind
of Myrtle, there has been of late nursed up, one in the Gardens of the
Curious, with as double flowers as the double Feaverfew, coming forth of a
round reddish husk, continuing flowring at the least three months, and each
flower a fortnight; and is not over-tender to be kept, yet will not endure the
frosts.

Place and Time.] Many sorts of myrtles are found generally upon all the
Seacoasts of Spain, and in diverse other hot Countries, but generally in hot
Countries they must be defended from the cold; but in the warm Countries they
must have shadow also: for they love both shadow from the heat and moisture in
hot Countries.

Government and Virtues.] The Myrtles are under the dominion of Mercury, and is
endued with contrary qualities, as Galen says: for it has a very cold quality
in it, and a certain thin warm offense also; and therefore it dries and
binds powerful. The dried leaves are more drying and binding than the fresh;
which being beaten and boiled in water, is good to drink against Catarrhes;
falling to any part of the body, and does help Fluxes of the belly and stomach:
moist Ulcers, Catarrhes. Belly, Stomach, Ulcers, Cods, Swelled Arteries, Broken
bones.
fretting and creeping Sores, Swellings and heat of the Cods, Imposthumes of
the Fundament, and St. Anthonies fire. The decoction of the leaves is good for
the resolution of the Arteries and Joints, and their weakness, to sit in as a
Bath; and helps to consolidate bones that be broken or out of joint that will
hardly be cured; It helps the soreness of the nayls, and the rising of the
skin about them, if the powder of the dried leaves be laid thereon; The juice
of the leaves works the same effects, whether taken out of the fresh leaves,
or from the dry, by infusing them in red wine, and is safely used where there
is any need of binding medicines; or to heal Ulcers of the mouth, or privy
parts; The same also helps watring eyes, and those that begin to have a film or
skin to grow over them, which will take away the sight. Watery eyes, Passion,
Heart, Spitting blood. Venomous Beasts, stinking breath, old Ulcers, Blanes,
Wheals, Matrix, Piles.
The seed is good against trembling and passion of the heart, spitting of
blood, and the bloody Flux; It stops the Terms, and the Whites, helps the
stinging of Scorpions, and biting of venomous Creatures, and of the Spider
called Phalangium, and the danger of Mushrooms: being drunk in wine, it helps a
stinking breath; and being warmed with wine, it helps old Ulcers that are hard
to cure. It provokes Urine, helps diseases of the bladder, binds the belly and
stays the Flux of humors, Blanes, Wheals and breakings out of the skin: the
decoction of them is good for women to sit over, that are troubled with the
falling down of the Matrix, and for the falling down of the Fundament, and the
Piles. The excrescence called Myrtidanum, is of greater force to dry and bind,
than either leaf juice or seed.

Myrobolans.
Kinds, Names.] THere are brought unto us five sorts of fruits of the
Myrobolan, well known in the Apothecaries Shops; called Cytrine, Chebul,
Bellericks, Emblick, Indian; They are also called Indian purging Plums.

Descript.] 1. The yellow Myrobolan, or purging Indian Plum, Myrobolanus
Citrina; Is said to grow on a Tree as great as a Plum Tree; having many
branches and winged leaves like unto the leaves of the Service-tree; The fruit
is for the most part as big as an ordinary Plum, somewhat long, having many
fair ridges on the outside, especially when it is dried, showing it to be
five-square though round; of a yellower color on the outside than any of the
rest: The flesh or substance being of a reasonable thickness, the stone is
white, thick, and hard to break; with ridges also therein, and a very small
long kernel in the middle, of an astringent taste as the dried fruit is, but
much more than it.

Descript.] 2. The purple Myrobolan, or purging Indian plum, Myrobolanus
chebula. This kind grows in bigness and branches like a Plum-tree, having
leaves like unto Peach- leaves; the fruit thereof is the greatest, and longest
of all the five sorts, of a blackish purple color on the outside while it is
fresh, which it holds in the dry fruit, (which, as says Mathiolus, is the
best,) being five square as the former; of a more thick and fleshy substance
than any of the other, and with the smallest stone in it, not so hard to break
as the former; but with the smallest kernel therein.

Descript.] 3. The round Myrobolan or purging Indian plum, Myrobolanus
Bellerica. This is like the rest for growth, but has leaves like the Bay-
tree; but of a paler green color, the fruit is of a mean bigness round and
smooth, yet in many being as it were three square; of a pale rushetish color
when they are fresh, but of a dark or dusty color on the outside, when they
are dry, of the thinnest substance of any of the sorts; the stone is thick and
greater than any other kind, very hard to break, and having within it a pretty
big kernel.

Descript.] 4. The bearded or six square Myrobolan, or purging Indian plum. The
tree is for height and growing like a Plum-tree; the leaves are about an
hand-breadth long, finely cut in about the edges, the fruit appears round, but
will separate or break into six parts, without any stones, as may be observed
in the dry fruit; but more plainly in the fruit preserved: which is many times
brought over to us, and which will be divided into many parts, the stone
whereof within it is six-square, with three greater ridges, and three lesser
lying between them, and bearded at the head of the three greater ridges, the
kernel within it is parted into, three equal divisions, having each of them
two Cauls, wherein the parts of the kernells do lie almost three square.

Descript.] 5. The black Myrobolan or purging Indian plum, Myrobolanus Indica.
The tree hereof is like the rest, the leaf like unto a Willow- leaf, (as says
Garcias) and the fruit is eight square, (as he also says.) but they cannot be
plainly discerned to be so in those that are brought over unto us dry, the
fruit is the smallest and blackest of all the rest, somewhat long, and
altogether fleshy, having no stone therein.

Place and Time.] All these Plum-trees grow in the East Indies wild, and not
manured; but in diverse Provinces, as Goa, Batecula, Malavar, and Dabul,
Cambaya, Bisnagar, Decan, Surrate, and Bengala. The time of their flowring and
hearing fruit we have no relation of.

Government and Virtues.] All these sorts of Myrobolans are under the
particular influence of glorious Sol. They are all endued with a gentle purging
quality, in some more powerfully than in others, some also purge Choler, some
Phlegm, and some melancholy; and have also in all of them an astringent nature
more than is in Rubarb; the Citrines and Bellericks, that is, the yellow and
round Myrobolans do purge Phlegm, and yellow Choler gently.

The Chebules and Embelici, that is, the purple and six-square Myrobolans, do
purge Phlegm, and the Indian or black one Melancholy.

But generally the Decoction or infusion of them all together do purge better
than any other ways; so gently evacuating the humors, that they strengthen
the Stomach, Liver, and heart; Stomach, Liver, Heart.
but given in powder they bind more than purge, the binding quality being most
predominant in them all, especially in the dried fruits; And Garcias says,
that the Indians wholly use them for that purpose. Therefore they are good to
be mingled with Scamony and other violent purgers to correct them.

The Bellericks and Emblicks purge the stomach from rotten Phlegm, strengthen
the brain and Joints, Stomach from Phlegm, Brain, Joints, Heart, Liver,
appetite, Vomiting, Choler, Quench thirst, Piles, hot Agues.
the heart, and Liver, and are very effectual for the trembling of the heart,
to stir up appetite, stay vomiting, and belchings of Choler: it fortifies the
Spirit, qualifies the heat of the inward parts, and quenches thirst; eases
the pains of the Hemorroides, or Piles, they are good for all hot
constitutions, and hot Agues where there is no obstruction; but where there are
obstructions they are to be corrected with Wormwood, or the juice of Fumiterry,
or with Rubarb, Agarick, Spiknard, and with other opening and diuretical things.

The Chebules especially do purge Phlegm, Phlegm, Memory, Sight, Stomach, Dropsy.
sharpen the memory, clear the eyesight, cleanse and strengthen the Stomach,
and are available against the Dropsy, and all old Agues.

Melancholy, Quartane Agues.
The Indian or black Myrobolans, do in special purge melancholy, and black or
adust Choler, and therefore are effectual in Quartane agues, Leprosy, and
paralytick diseases.

The Emblicks and Bellericks in a special manner purge Phlegm, Brain, Heart,
Stomach,
and comfort the brain heart and Stomach, stay vomiting, and stir up an
appetite to meat, generally they are all of special use to stay all Fluxes of
the Stomach and belly, by gently purging the malignity of the humors, and
strengthening and binding the parts afterward; Sore eyes.
The Chebule myrobolans, broken and steeped in Rose Water, or in the clarifi'd
Juice of Fennel for two or three days, Ulcers. Sores.
and strained, this water dropped into the eyes does clear the sight; and a
fine cloth wet therein and often applied, takes away the heat and inflammation
in them, and stays Rheums and distillations that fall into the eyes. The
powder of any of the Myrobolans and Mastick put into running Ulcers and Sores,
dries up the moisture thereof, and consolidateth them. The Chebules and
Emblicks are often brought over hither preserved; whereof the Chebules are
physically used for the forementioned purposes, but the Emblicks are only eaten
as other Sweetmeats.

There is an excellent Receipt composed of the Myrobolans, very effectual to
stay any Flux, looseness of the Belly, or old continued lask. It is prepared in
this manner.

Take a pynte of Clarret-wine, and burn it with a little Rosemary and Sugar,
then steep in it all night one Dram of Rhubarb, first sliced and toasted at the
fire, and half a Dram of Chebul Myrobolans; which let stand by the fire all
night, and strain it out in the morning, and let the Patient take it at twice,
a draught in the morning fasting, which if it help not the first time, being
renewed and taken two days more, it will stay the Lask wholly, if the
malignity of the humors have not so prevailed over the body that no medicine
can Cure it.

Myrobolans are also a substitute in a noble and excellent Pill, against all
Agues, putrid Fevers, Jaundice, and Cachexia or the ill habit of the body, and
are effectual in the beginning of the Dropsy.

Take of the Citrine and Chebule Myrobolans of each half in ounce, Turbith one
ounce, Agarick, Aloes, Rubarb, the best, of each half an ounce, Leaves of Mint,
Wormwood, Egrimony each two drams, Ginger, Anniseeds, Mastick, Pepper,
Spiknard, Raisins of the Sun stoned, Liquorish, each one dram; Oxymel of Squils
as much as will serve to make them into a mass, the Dose is from one dram to
two, if any would have them purge more strongly he may add Esula prepared, and
Diagridium, of each two drams, or three;

Mushrooms.
Kinds.] THere are of Mushrooms or Toad-stools two sorts, one called wholesome
or edible Mushrooms, because they are often pickled and eaten, rather out of
idle and vain curiosity than for any goodness that is in them; And the
poisonous or deadly Toadstools. Of the edible kind there are numbered amongst
Authors two and thirty sorts, they are called in Latin fungus.

Descript.] I shall not stand to describe all the various forms of these
Mushrooms, but only a word or two of the most usual; The most usual sorts have
small smooth round heads, standing upon thick short stalks, and are for the
most part white, yet in some the upper skin is brownish, or yellow; but
generally more yellow when they are decaying, most of them are somewhat flat
and hollow underneath, with many lines running directly from the middle to the
edges round about; the substance of them generally is loose and spongy, the
taste of them is according to the Soil of the place where they grow; for those
that grow in our own Land, in open Champion fields and Meadows, are safer from
danger and of better relish, than those of the same kinds that grow in Woods
and under trees.

Some of this kind grow bigger than others, and some more topped or spiring;
some are parted as it were all over into sundry divisions, making it seem like
unto an Honeycomb, and therefore are called Favaginosi: Another sort is more
sharp small and spiring than any other of the edible kinds; another sort is
round soft and whitish, having a slit on the edges most usually, and are called
St. Georges Mushrooms; because they grow up usually about that time. There are
a great many other sorts too tedious for my intention in this work, but for the
quality and property of them all, Avicen says, they have a more earthy than
watery substance, breeding gross and melancholy humors; and they that eat much
of them are subject to the Apoplexy, and Palsy, besides they are hard of
digestion, and trouble the stomach which way soever dressed; whether boiled,
stewed, pickled or eaten with pepper oil and vinegar.

But to cause that the edible Mushrooms may be less offensive, (and many do
greedily desire them;) It is held that if they be boiled with wild Pears, they
may be eaten without danger, or for want of wild Pears to take a harder and
harsher sort of other pears, the leaves also and bark are conducing to that
purpose, and so is Garlic and Vinegar.

All the sorts of Mushrooms called edible, that is, that may be eaten, are all
but at the best dangerous, if not poisonous; there are a great many sorts more
called fungi perniciosi, hurtful poisonous and deadly Mushrooms; but half of
them grow not in our Land; yet some of them do; and so much resemble, and are
like unto some of the edible sorts, that they deceive many that gather them,
and oftentimes are a speedy death to those that eat them; therefore whosoever
is addicted to the delight of them, let them beware upon this admonition; that
although many may be found of a pleasant and delightful show in our own
Country as well as in others, yet the danger of the best is such, that many by
eating them have died remediless.

There are likewise kinds of Mushrooms which are Excrescencies growing about
the stems of trees, as about old Willows, Oaks, and Hazels, which are called
Touch-woods; these grow harder than the others, and are of a dry fungous or
spongy substance on the inside, that they may be cut or broken into several
pieces, having a hard or woody crust on the outside, and are of differing forms
and colors, some being very great and flat at the head, and smaller and
rounder underneath; of a brownish yellow color the way to make Touchwood of
them is to boil them once or twice in Lie made of Woodashes; and afterward
being dried and broken in pieces, they are kept, serving to take fire like Lynt
or Tynder.

Myrrh.
Myrrh is the Gum of a certain tree growing in Arabia, Ethiopia, and other
places; Dioscorides says, that it is gotten out of a Tree much like the
Egyptian Thorn; by cutting or wounding of the tree, that the gum may flow
forth. There are many sorts hereof brought over unto us, some better and some
worse than others, as in great and small pieces, fat and dry,
pulverulentous-like; pale and more red, all alike, or else discolored, with
some whitish pieces in it, which is the best; Dioscorides commends that which
is somewhat green, but it is supposed he intended the Greek word (...), to be
understood, pro color pallescente.

Myrrh is in sight very like unto Bdellium, so that those that are not expert
in it, may easily be mistaken and take one for another; but there are these
differences between Myrrh and Bdellium: Myrrh is very bitter and so is not
Bdellium; It is paler, fatter, easier to be broken, and of a more quick sharp
scent; so that the best Myrrh may be both known of it self and hereby from
Bdellium that it is of a purplish brown color, in great pieces and fattish,
with some whitish veins therein; very bitter in taste and smells somewhat
sharper and bitter.

Government and Virtues.] This Solar Gum is of nature hot and dry in the second
degree according to Galen. Wounds, Head, Worms, Deadchild, Ulcers, Scars,
Cough, Shortness of breath, Hoarseness, Sides pained.
It is good for wounds in the head, and by the bitterness it kills worms in
the belly; and the living child, and expels the dead Child: It also has a
binding quality in it, whereby being mingled with other medicines it helps
Ulcers and Scars; And is good to be mixed with other ingredients for an old
Cough, and shortness of breath, the bitterness not harming the windpipe or
throat, but gently cleansing and healing. It helps the roughness of the
windpipe and throat, and those that are hoarse. It is good against pains of
the sides, Lask and Bloody Flux, and distillations of Rheum; it provokes the
Terms, and mollifies the hardness of the Matrix; and prevents the shaking of
Agues being taken two hours before the fit; Mathiolus says, it cured him of a
Quartane Ague, by taking a dram of Myrrh in Muscadine two hours before the
fit, and sweating upon it and using it three times. Pills made with it and
Treakle, is effectual for the same purpose; to take one at a time as big as a
pease before the fits for several days; It is a great Antidote against the
Plague, and against the poison of venomous Creatures; It is effectual for a
stinking breath, fasteneth loose teeth, and stays the shedding of the hair,
being used with Laudanum, and the wine of Myrtles, it helps watring ears and
watery eyes, and takes away any film beginning to grow there; It also helps
to breed flesh in a deep wound, a Liquor or oil may be made thereof to
beautify the face, which is made in this manner.

Take Eggs and boyls them hard, and cut them in the middle, and then take out
the yolks, and fill them with Myrrh, then put it in a glass and set it in a
Cellar or moist place, and use the Dew or Liquor thereof.

It may be done likewise by sprinkling White Wind upon a hot Iron dish or pan,
and receiving the fumes thereof upon the face, and then the fumes of Myrrh and
powder afterward cast on it being heated again, and the head covered: this is
to be used before Bedtime for eight days together.

The Nutmeg-tree, and Mace.
Names and Descript.] THe fruit of this tree is called in Latin Nux mystica,
and in Shops Nux moscata; the Tree grows very tall like our Pear Trees;
having leaves always green, somewhat resembling the leaves of the Orange-tree:
the fruit grows like our Walnuts, having an outer thick husk, which when it
grows ripe it opens it self as the shell of the Walnut does; showing the nut
within covered with the Mace, which is of an orient crimson color while it is
fresh, but the air changes the color to be more dead and yellowish.

Government and Virtues.] The Nutmegs and Maces are both Solar, of temperature
hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent, and are good to stay
the Lask: they are effectual in all cold griefs of the head or Brain, Lask,
Head, Brain, Sinews, Mother, Wind, Stomach, sight.
for Palsies, shrinking of Sinews, and Diseases of the Mother, they cause a
sweet breath, and discuss wind in the Stomach or Bowels, quicken the Sight and
comfort the Spirits, provoke Urine, increase sperm, and are comfortable to the
Stomach; they help to procure rest and sleep being laid to the temples, by
allaying the distemper of the Spirits.

The way to use it to cause rest, is, to take two pieces of red Rose-cake and
warm them in vinegar over a Chafing Dish of Coals, then scrape nutmeg upon the
cakes and bind it warm to the temples.

The Mace is of the same property, but somewhat more warming and comforting
than the Nutmeg; the thick oil that is drawn from both Nutmegs and Mace is good
in pectoral griefs, to warm a cold Stomach, Stomach, Cough.
and help the Cough, and to dry up distillations of Rheum falling upon the
lungs.

Navelwort of Mathiolus.
Kinds and Names.] THere are hereof three sorts called 1 Androsaces major, 2.
Androsaces minor, and 3. Androsaces minima Mathioli; Mathiolus his greater,
lesser, and least Navelwort.

Descript.] 1. Androsaces major has diverse broad fresh green leaves, a little
hairy lying upon the ground, like Plantain-leaves but smaller and unevenly
dented about the edges, from among which spring up diverse round hairy stalks
four or five inches high, without any leaves up to the tops, where stand four
or five leaves like the lower, but lesser; and among them grow diverse slender
foot stalks; bearing every one of them a small white flower, with five small
notched leaves standing in a green husk, divided at the top into five parts,
wherein after the flower comes a small round head full of small blackish seed;
the root is small and fibrous, and perishes as soon as it has born seed, and
rises again of its own sowing, which if it spring before winter or that it
does not run to seed the first year of the sowing; it will abide the first
winter, and flower the Summer following.

Descript.] 2. The lesser Androsaces or Navel-wort of Mathiolus, grows like
the former, but the leaves are smaller and narrower; yet hairy and dented about
the edges, the stalks are like the other, but have no leaves at the tops but an
Vmbell or Tuft of many small flowers, like the former but whiter; after which
shoot forth small round heads with seeds, the root is more fibrous than the
former small and fibrous; and perishes every year after it has given its seed.

Descript.] 3. Androsaces minus, the least Navel-wort of Mathiolus, is very
like the former; having very many hairy leaves lying on the ground, like those
of the smallest Shepherds-purse, with edges dented deeper than the former, and
having smaller and shorter stalks, but as hairy as the others; having five
small green leaves set in a round compass at the joint; from whence arise three
or four small white flowers, which bear seed in heads as the former; The root
consists of a few small threads.

Place and Time.] They all grow in diverse places of Germany, they flower in
May, and their seed is ripe in June and July.

Government and Virtues.] These Plants are governed by Mars, and are of a
somewhat sharp taste, of temperature hot and dry in the second degree: they
cleanse old Sores and Ulcers and stay the malignity of those that are
corroding or fretting, Old Sores, Ulcers.
drying up the superfluous moisture which hinders their healing; cleanses the
roughness of the skin, and Sun-burning: the juice being clarifi'd and dropped
into the eyes cleanses them from films or skin growing over them.

Apple-bearing Nightshade.
Kinds and Names.] OF these there are several kinds, which are accounted
amongst the number of Nightshades, called Solanum pomiferum; and also, Mala
insana, or mad Apples.

Descript.] 1. Lobel's red berried Nightshade, called in Latin solanum
pomiferum herbariorum Lobellii; this grows like common nightshade but
greater, the leaves are like small Tobacco-leaves, the flowers are white, the
Berries small and round, of a reddish color; containing white seeds within
them, of an insipid taste, and perishes every year as Nightshade does.

Descript.] 2. Mad Apples of Syria, called in Latin mala insana Syriaca. This
springs up with a great hard round purplish or brownish green stalk, about
two foot high, divided from the bottom into diverse branches, whereon are set
many hairy broad rough leaves, unevenly cut in on the edges. At the joints with
the leaves come forth several large flowers, having six large pointed leaves,
in some Plants white, in others of a pale deadish purple color, with yellow
threads in the middle, after which come a somewhat long round fruit, in hot
countries as big as a Cucumber, but in colder places seldom exceeding the
bigness of an egg, set in the same husk that contained the flowers before;
having a thin skin, and full of a whitish pulp and juice within; having many
small flat and whitish seeds within it, the root is fibrous and perishes with
the first cold frosts.

Descript.] 3. Mad-apples of Ethiopia, Mala insana Ethiopica: These are
somewhat like the former but that it grows not so high, nor so much
spreading; and has but one upright stalk about half a yard high, set in diverse
places with many small pricks, and at several joints with ragged leaves; having
some pricks on the middle rib in the back side, the flowers stand on the
branches at the joints, consisting of six white short leaves with a yellow
point in the middle; of diverse threads joined together, after which comes the
fruit, which is round and pointed at the end, smaller and harder than the
greater kind of Love-Apples; and straked in several places, of a fine red
color, more deeper when it is ripe; having sometimes small bunches on them
like unto other small apples growing unto them; having within them a juicy pulp
more sharp than the other, with flat yellowish white seed within it, the root
consists of threads and perishes every year.

Descript.] 4. Mad-Apples of Europe, Mala insana Europaea. this kind grows
with a round upright stalk a foot and an half high, from whence spring forth at
several joints diverse long and somewhat broad green leaves, unevenly cut on the
edges; and ending in a long point, three for the most part coming together,
each of them upon a short foot stalk; at the tops of the stalks grow the fruit,
which are round and reddish, of the bigness of a plum, and full of seed within.

Descript.] 5. Apples-of-Love of a greater middle and lesser size, Poma amoris
majora media and minora; These sorts do all resemble one another, in their
branches, leaves, yellow flowers and red berries or fruit.

Place and Time.] The first is natural in Spain, the second in Egypt and
Syria, and those Eastern Countries; the third is supposed to be brought out of
Ethiopia and the back parts of Barbary, the fourth is found in shadowy places
upon the Appenine Mountains; the last is natural in Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and
those parts. The three first do flower in August, their fruit not coming to
perfection with us; but the other sorts ripen well if the Summer be not too
cold.

Government and Virtues.] The first sort of these are Plants of Saturn, and, as
Avicen says, are very hurtful; yet being first boiled in fat broth they are
eaten as a pleasant Junket with vinegar or salt, oil and salt, amongst the
Genoa's and others; and neither breed frensies nor other harm: yet though the
fresh ones be better, yet they which are old are very hurtful; for by their
bitterness they are accounted hot and dry in the second degree, and do engender
Melancholy, Leprosy, Cancers, and the Piles; the Headache, and a stinking
breath, breed obstructions on the Liver and Spleen, and change the complexion
into a foul black and yellow color unless they be boiled in vinegar; And
Fuschius says, that they do superabound in coldness and moisture, as do the
Cucumbers and Mushrooms; yet the beauty of the fruit, the delight to the
palate, and most of all their supposed faculty of inciting to venery, do
transport a great many; especially in Italy and other hot Countries where they
come to their full maturity and proper relish; that they eat them with a great
deal of desire and pleasure, and therefore prepare and dress them diverse ways:
as some eat them raw, as we do Cucumbers, some roast them under the embers, and
others boil them; and then pare and slice them, and having strowed flower on
them do fry them with oil or butter; and with a little pepper and salt eat
them: and some keep them in pickle to serve in the winter and Spring; but
certain it is that they do hardly digest in the Stomach, whereby they breed
much windiness, which probably may cause a provoking to Venery; they engender
bad blood and melancholy humors, and give little nourishment to the body, and
that not good.

The Poma Amoris, golden apples or apples of love; are under the dominion of
Venus, they are cold and moist, more than any of the former and less offensive;
these are eaten with great delight and pleasure in hot Countries, but in our
Country for want of sufficient heat of the Sun to ripen them, they are flashy
and insipid, and not so fit to be eaten.

Thorny Apple-bearing Nightshades.
Kinds and Names.] THere are recorded two sorts of these, viz. The thorny
nightshade of Jericho with round apples, Solanum spinosum fructu rotundo: And,
Indian apple bearing Nightshade with round leaves; solanum pomiferum Indicum
folio rotundo.

Descript.] 1. The thorny Nightshade of Jericho has leaves like unto those of
the mad Apples of Peru, but whiter and softer; having many small thorns in the
middle rib of every leaf on the under side, and on the stalks and branches are
diverse thorns, and purplish flowers at the top of them, after which come small
apples, green before they be ripe, changing yellow and brownish afterward,
being round and somewhat sweet in smell, but as unsavory or without taste as
the former.

Descript.] 2. The Indian Apple-bearing Nightshade with round leaves, grows
in manner of a shrub or Hedg-bush, as Monardus says, of an excellent green
color, having small thin round leaves, bearing long fruit round at the lower
end, and flat toward the stalk, of a greyish or Ash Color on the outside, and
of a pleasant and grateful taste; without any Atrimony therein, having many
small seeds within it.

Place and Time.] The first grows in Syria and Palestine, and other Countries
adjacent. The second grows in the Mountains of Peru only, but at what time
they flower or bear fruit it is not men^ioned.

Government and Virtues.] These Plants are certainly governed by Mars, but the
Physical virtues of the first no mention is by any Author made thereof. But the
second, as Monardus says, is in great estimation in the West Indies; both
amongst the Spaniards and Indians, in that it provokes Urine, expels Gravel
and the Stone in the kidneys and bladder. Gravel, Stone.
It breaks the stone in the bladder if it be not so hard as that it will
yield to the force of no medicine; It is said of this, that the seed taken in
any fit in some proper water for that purpose, will by degrees dissolve the
stone into small Gravel, which after it is expelled forth will again petrifie
and grow together into an hard stone.

Nipplewort.
Kinds and Names.] OF this there is some three kinds, 1. the ordinary
Nipplewort, called in Latin Lampsana vulgaris, 2. The Nipplewort of Austria
called Lampsana papillaris, and 3. Wild or wood bastard-Nipplewort, Soncho
affinis Lampsana Sylvatica. And in Prussia, as says Camerarius, they call it
papillaris.

Descript.] 1. The ordinary Nipplewort grows with many hard upright stalks,
whereon grow dark green leaves from the bottoms to the tops, but the higher the
lesser, in some places without any dents in the edges, and in others with a few
uneven jags therein, somewhat like a kind of Hanckweed; the tops of the Stalks
have some small long branches which bear many small starlike yellowish flowers
on them which turn into small seed, the root is small and fibrous, the Plant
yields a bitter milk as the Sowthistles do.

Descript.] 2. Nipplewort of Austria, has slender smooth and solid stalks, not
easy to break; about two foot high, whereon stand without erder somewhat long
and narrow leaves; broadest in the middle and sharp at the ends; waved a little
about the edges, and compassing them at the bottom, yielding a little milk;
from the upper joints with the leaves grew forth small firm branches yet a
little bending, hearing each of them four or five long green husks, and in them
small purplish flowers of five leaves a piece, nicked in at the broad ends,
with some small threads in the middle; which turn into Down, and are carried
away with the wind; the root is small and shreddy, and lasts many years.

Descript.] 3. The wild or wood Bastard-Nipplewort is like unto the first sort,
but with somewhat broader leaves and more store of branches; but in flowers and
other parts not much different.

Place and Time.] The first groweth-common almost every where upon the banks of
ditches and borders of fields, the second Clusius says he found in Hungary and
Saxony, and other places; the last is found near Woods sides, and Hedge-rowes;
they flower in Sum and the seed is ripe soon after.

Government and Virtues.] THese are Plants of Venus and kindly endued with a
peculiar faculty for the healing of sore Nipples of women's breasts; for which
reason Camerarius says that in Prussia they call it papillaris because of its
excellent virtues in healing women's sore breasts, and their Nipples when they
are exulcerated; it having a singular healing quality therein, and is temperate
in heat and dryness, with some tenuity of parts able to digest the virulency of
sharp humors which break out into those parts.

The Indian Hazel-nut.
THese are also called purging cornered Hazel-Nuts, and of this tree there are
found in the Indies two kinds, they are generally by all the Indians called
Caramei, but by the Persians and Arabians Ambela. The one is as great as our
Medlar-tree, with Pear Tree pale great leaves, and yellowish fruit, somewhat
like to Filbirds, or hazel-nuts, ending in sundry corners, of the taste of sour
grapes, yet more pleasant, which they pickle up as well ripe as unripe, and
usually eat them with salt.

The other kind is of the same bigness, but has lesser leaves than the
Apple Tree, and a greater fruit; which the Indians use being boiled with
Saunders, and give the decoction thereof against Fevers. The Bark of the root
of the former kind which grows by the water-sides is chiefly used (so as it
grow far from the Sea) which yields milk by taking four fingers length
thereof; which being bruised with a dram of Mustard Seed, they give to those
that are pursie and short-winded; for it purges mightily both upwards and
downwards. But if a super-purgation do happen thereupon, they give one of the
fruits of Carambola's to help it, or else a draught of the vinegar of Canara,
(which is the decoction of Rice kept until it be sour.) The fruit is familiarly
eaten through all parts, unripe as well as ripe, and pickled and eaten with
salt and vinegar to procure an appetite, putting it to their meats to give them
a relish by reason of its tartness.

The Olive Tree.
Kinds and Names.] OF these there is the tame or manured Olive, and the wild
Olive Tree: the first is called in Latin Olea sativa, and the wild kind
Oleaster, sive Olea sylvestris.

Descript.] 1. The manured Olive Tree rises in some places to be very great
and tall, like a great Walnut-tree, in others much smaller, with diverse Arms
and branches not very thickly set together; whereon grow somewhat long and
narrow leaves, like those of the Willow-tree, but lesser and shorter; thick fat
and sharp-pointed, with short footstalk under them; greenish above, and
whitish underneath, never falling off the tree; of a bitter taste and somewhat
sharp; the blossoms are many, set together at the joints with the leaves,
small and of a greenish white color, consisting of four leaves a piece, after
which come somewhat long and somewhat round berries; green at the first and
changing pale afterward, and then purplish, and when they are full-ripe, of a
deep black, and some white; when they are ripe some are great and others are
small, and some of a mean size between both, some are longer, some rounder than
others; some are fitter to eat and yield not much oil, others are not so sit to
eat and are smaller, yielding more store of oil; some are gathered unripe and
pickled up in Brine (which are the olives we use to eat) others are pickled or
dried when they are ripe, and so kept all the year to eat; of these olives
whereof the oil is made, some will he delicate sweet and neat; others more full
and strong, some upon the taste will leave no bitterness nor heat in the mouth,
but wilt taste as sweet as butter; others again will he more or less hot and
unpleasant in taste: the wood is fair firm and solid full of curled veins, and
will burn as-well green as dry, and will not rot in a long time.

The manner of making or extracting the Oil of the Olives, according to the
Relation of Mathiolus.
After that the Olives are gathered, they are laid a little to wither, and
afterward ground in a Mill, and then put into a strong Press, with some hot
water poured on them to yield out the oil, which after it has stood and is
settled, the pure oil is drawn off from the bottom and preserved for use.

The manner to pickle Olives to have them keep their green color.
Mathiolus says, The way is, to take six pound of quick Lime-stones, made into
powder, which dissolve in so much water as to make it thin, then put thereunto
twelve pounds of fine sifted Oak ashes, dissolved in as much water as will be
sufficient, into which put 25 pounds of fresh gathered green olives and let
them lie therein eight or ten hours at the most to take out their bitterness,
stirring them a little, and afterward washed in many waters, shifted for five
days together, which are lastly to be put into Brine or Pickle; wherein some
Fennelstalks and leaves have been put into the boiling, and then put them up
into vessels. The foot or bottom of the oil is called in Latin amured. The gum
which the wild Olive does yield, as says Dioscorides, is yellow, somewhat like
unto Scamony, being in small drops, and is hot and sharp, biting upon the
tongue.

Descript.] 2. Oleaster, the wild Olive Tree, grows somewhat like unto the
manured, but that it has harder and smaller leaves and thicker set on the
branches, with sundry sharp thorns among the leaves; the blossoms and fruit
come forth in the same manner as the other do, and in as great plenty, yet much
lesser; and scarce coming at any time to ripeness; where they naturally grow;
but where they do become ripe they are small with crooked points, and black: Of
the Olives hereof is sometimes made, oil, which is colder and more astringent
than the other, and harsher in taste and greenish in color, but the Olives are
much respected, and gathered to be eaten.

Place and Time.] Both kinds of Olives grow in the hot Countries only; in any
cold Climate they will never bear fruit, nor hardly endure a winter; the
manured is planted where it grows, and according to the nature of the Soil
and Climate, brings greater or lesser Olives, and in more or lesser plenty;
and sweet oil, or more strong in taste. From the Isles in the Mediterranean
Sea, as Zante and Cerigo etc. comes the finest and sweetest oil; and from
Majorea etc. a fuller and fatter oil; from Provence in France a stronger and
hotter tasted oil: The wild Olive grows naturally in Spain, Portugal, Italy,
and many other Countries; They flower in June and July, but their fruit is not
ripe until November or December.

Government and Virtues.] The Olive Tree is a plant of Venus, of a gentle
temperature, the green leaves and branches of the Olive Tree but much more of
the wild Olive, do cool and bind, and especially the juice with vinegar is good
against all hot Imposthumes, Inflammations, Swellings, St. Anthonies fire,
fretting or creeping Ulcers, Hot Imposthumes, Inflammations Swellings, St.
Anthonies fire, Ulcers, Canker in the mouth, Bleeding of wounds, Rheums in the
Eyes, Ears.
Cankers in the flesh or mouth. The same also stauncheth the bleeding of
wounds, and women's too abounding courses, being applied to the places; the said
juice being dropped into the eyes stays the distillation of hot Rheums into
them, and clears the sight from films or clouds that offend the sight, or any
Ulcer that does breed therein, or Ulcers in the ears.

The Pickled Olives do stir up an appetite to meat, and although they be hard
of digestion, Appetite, Ulcers, Scars, Wheals,
yet are pleasing to the Stomach, being apt to putrify therein; but they are
not good for the eyesight, and breed headache, yet if they be dried and
applied to fretting or corroding Ulcers does stay them, and takes away the
Scars of Carbuncles or Plague-sores. Gums, loose teeth.
The pickled Olives burned, beaten, and applied unto wheals, does stay their
further increase; and hinder them from rising and cleanse foul Ulcers, helps
the Gums that are loose and spungy, and fasteneth loose teeth.

Scurf, Scab, Ulcers, Nails rugged.
The water that is taken from the green wood, when it is heated in the fire,
heals the Scurf or Scab in the head or other parts; The Olive-stones being
burned are used for the said purposes, and also to stay foul spreading Ulcers,
and being mixed with fat and meal they take away the ruggedness of the nails.

The other parts of the Olive which are the oil and the foot or bottom thereof.
First the oil is of diverse and variable properties according to the ripeness or
unripeness of the fruit whereof it is made, and then of the time, and age
thereof, and of the washing thereof from the salt, wherewith some of it is
made; The Oil that is made of unripe Olives, is more cooling and binding than
that which is made of those that are ripe; which when it is fresh or new is
moderately heating and moistning; but if it be old it has a stronger force to
warm and to discuss, which properties are perceived by the sweetness; for if
the oil be harsh it is more cooling than warming; and if that oil be washed, it
takes from it all harshness.

The green oil of unripe Olives while it is fresh is most welcome to the
stomach, it strengthens the Gums, and fastneth the teeth if it be held in the
mouth for any time; Gums, Teeth, Sweating.
and being drunk it hinders their much sweating that are subject thereunto;
the sweet oil is of most use in Sallets and meats being most pleasing to the
Stomach and taste; but the older the oil is, the better it is for medicines;
both to warm any part and to discuss any thing that needs it, and to open and
move the belly downwards, and is most effectual against all poisons, especially
those that do exulcerate the Guts, or not being passed down so low, Poisons.
do abide in the Stomach; it brings it up by vomiting, or hinders the
malignity from further spreading; It is also a principal Ingredient into almost
all Salves, helping as-well the form as the virtue in working.

The foot or dregs of oil the older it is, the better it is for diverse
purposes, as to heal the Scab in man or beast, being used with the decoction of
Lupines. It is very profitably used for the Ulcers of the Fundament or privy
parts; Scabs, Ulcers of the Fundament or privy parts. Teeth.
with honey, wine and vinegar; it heals wounds and helps the Toothache
being held in the mouth; if it be boiled in a Copper vessel to the thickness of
honey it binds much. And is effectual for all the purposes for which Lycinus
may be used: And if it be boiled with the juice of unripe grapes to the
thickness of honey, and applied to king teeth, it will cause them to fall out.

If this foot or dregs of oil be put into that Mortar that shall parget the
walls or floors of Wardrobes, or any rooms, it will not only preserve the
places dry from gathering moisture, but warm also, and will keep away Moths,
Worms, Spiders, Moths, Worms, Spiders, Flies.
and Flies, from hurting any Cloths, Silks or Garments there laid, not
suffering any of them to breed here.

The Gum of the Olive Tree, Eyes, Urine, Womens-Courses, Teeth, Abortment,
dead-Child, Tetters, Ringworms, Scabs, and Leprosy.
(whether tame or wild) is used in ocular medicines to help the dimness of the
eyes: the same also provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and helps the pains
of hollow teeth, it causes Abortment, it expels the dead Child, and heals
Tetters, Ring-worms, Scabs, and Leprosy.

The Orange-Tree.
Kinds and Names.] OF Oranges we shall describe five kinds or sorts. These
Apples were called by the Ancients Mala aurea Hesperidum, the golden apples of
Hesperides; and therefore Hercules made it one of his labors to kill the
Dragon that kept the Garden where they were, and to bring them away with him.
The flowers of the Orange-tree are called Napha; and the ointment that is made
of them Vnguentum ex Napha: Oranges are now generally called Aurantia.

Descrpt.] 1. The ordinary Orange-tree, Mala aurantia vulgaris: grows often
to a very great height and bigness, spreading large Arms and branches: with a
rougher Bark below and smooth, green on the branches; yet it is less in
less-fruitful Soils; sparingly armed with sharp but short thorns; the leaves
are some what like to those of the Lemon, but that each leaf has a piece of a
leaf set under it, and are not dented at all about the edges, and are full of
small holes in them; the flowers are whitish, and of a strong sweet scent, the
fruit hereof is round with a thick bitter rynde of a deep yellowish red color,
which from it takes the name of an Orange color, having a soft thin white
loose substance next unto the outer colored rynde; and a sour juice lying
mixed amongst small skins in several parts, with seed between them in
partitions; the juice of some is less sour than others, and of a taste between
sour and sweet near unto wine.

Descript.] 2. The wild or Crab Orange-tree, Malus aurantia sylvestris, This
Tree grows wild as our Crab-trees do, and is fuller of branches and thicker
set with thorns than the former; the flowers and leaves are alike but lesser;
and the fruit is very small, and of a pale yellow color, with a thick, rind
and little juice within it; but plainly tasting as sour as a Crab with us.

Descript.] 3. The Apple-Orange, called in Latin Malus Aurantia, cortice dulci
eduli. The Spaniards call this Orange Naranja caxel: this differs from others
not so much in the color of the outer bark which is of a deep gold yellowish
red, but in the whole fruit which is throughout almost as firm as an Apricock
and yet distinguished into parts in the inside, like others; which together
with the Bark and Rind, is to be eaten like an Apple; the rynde not being
tough nor bitter as the rest.

Descript.] 4. The Orange without seeds, Malus Aurantia, unico grano. This only
differs from that Orange with the best sour juice, in having but one grain or
seed in the whole juice lying within it.

Descript.] 5. The Dwarf-Orange-tree, Malus Aurantia pumilio; The stock of this
Dwarf-tree is low, and the branches grow thick; well stored with leaves, but
they are lesser and narrower than the other; the flowers also are many, and
thick set on the branches, which bear fruit more plentifully than the former;
but is lesser than the greater sorts; yet as well colored.

Place and Time.] All these sorts of Oranges as well as the Lemons and Citrons
are brought unto us from Spain, Portugal, Biscany and places adjacent: they
hold time with the Lemons; having their leaves ever green, and have on them
blossoms green, and ripe fruit altogether continually.

Government and Virtues.] All these trees and fruits are governed by Jupiter,
the fruit is of differing parts and qualities; the rynde of the Oranges are
bitterer and hotter than those of the Lemons or Citrons; and do warm a cold
Stomach the more; breaking away the wind therein and the Phlegm, and after that
the bitterness is taken from them, Stomach, Wind, Phlegm, Heart, Spirits.
by steeping them in water for sundry days; and then preserved either wet or
dry, besides their use in Banquets, they are very effectual for the
strengthening of the heart and spirits, and other vitals: the juice is
inferior to those of the Citron and Lemon, and fitter for meat than medicine,
yet four or five ounces of the juice taken at a time in wine or Ale, will drive
forth putrid humors from the inward parts by sweat, and strengthen and comfort
the heart; the distilled water of the flowers besides the odoriferous scent it
has fit for any perfume, Pestilence, Fevers, moist womb, Cough, Phlegm.
is good against Contagious Diseases, and pestilential Fevers; to drink
thereof at sundry times, it helps also the moist and cold infirmities of the
Womb, the ointment that is made of the flowers is good to anoint the Stomach,
to help the Cough, and expectorate cold raw phlegm, and to warm and comfort the
other parts of the body.

Yellow Oranges of Malabar.
Names Descript. and Virtues.] THis is called Carcapuli, and is a great Tree
growing in Malabar in the Indies; the fruit is like an Orange when the outer
pill is taken away, which consists of sundry lumps of pulp not to be
separated; as they may be in the Orange: whose rynde is thin, smooth, and
shining as gold when they are ripe, of a sharp taste and binding quality, yet
pleasant to the taste; and are good to stay Fluxes of all sorts, and to refresh
the stomach and restore a dejected appetite taken with sour milk or boiled
Rice; Stomach, Hard labor, Mists and Rheums in the eyes.
The Midwives give it women in hard labor, to cause a speedy Delivery, as also
to expel the Afterbirth; the juice is profitably used to clear the stomach,
and Mists and Rheums in the Eyes.

Pepper.
Kinds and Names.] THere are several sorts of Pepper, as black, white, and long
Pepper; called Piper nigrum, album, and longum. The black and white Pepper
differs not either in manner of growing or in form of leaf or fruit; the long
pepper also does grow after the same manner, but differs in the fruit: All
these sorts do grow each on a several climing bush, in the East Indies; but
after one manner, that is, as Hops do grow with us; so that if they be not
sustained by some tree or Pole on which they may climb and spread, they will
lie down on the ground and thereon run and shoot forth small fibers at every
joint. But the usual manner is to Plant a branch taken from the Bush, near to
some tall tree, great Cane or Pole, and so it will quickly by winding it self
about it get to the top thereof being full of joints; and shooting forth fair
large leaves one at a joint, being almost round, but ending in a point, green
above, and paler underneath, with a great middle rib, and four other ribs
somewhat lesser, spreading from it, two on each side, and smaller veins therein
also unto the edges, which are smooth and plain, somewhat thin, and set on a
pretty long footstalk; the fruit or pepper it self, whether black, white, or
long, grows at the same joint; but on the contrary side opposite to the leaf,
(and not between the stalk and the leaf as some have falsely described it) round
about a long stalk somewhat thinly set all along thereon, or not so thick as a
bunch of grapes; the root has sundry joints creeping in the ground with sibres
at the joints, the white pepper is hardly distinguished from the black, by the
very plants thereof, until it come to ripeness; (for the white and black Pepper
do grow on several bushes,) but that the leaves are of a little paler green
color; the grains or berries are white, solid, firm without wrinkles, and more
aromatical. The long Pepper has leaves very near to the same form and bigness,
but a little longer-pointed, of a paler green color, thinner also, and with a
shorter footstalk, and not having four so eminent ribs passing from the
middle-one as in the other; but four or five or more sometimes on each side,
according to the largeness of the leaf, with other smaller veins therein, and
with lesser acrimony and hot taste than the black; the fruit of this also
grows in like manner at the joints, opposite to each leaf, which are closer
set together than in the black; being some greater or lesser, shorter or longer
than others; consisting of many small grains as it were set close together in
rows, and not open and separate as in the black and white pepper; of an
Ash Color when it is ripe.

Government and Virtues.] All the Peppers are under the dominion of Mars, and
of temperature hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, but the white Pepper is
the hottest, which sort is of much use both with the Indians and other nations.
The Indians use to chew the leaves spitting it out again, as some amongst us do
Tobacco; and the pepper it self they also chew, and from the branch take every
grain one after another while they are fresh.

Pepper is much used with us in meats and sawces, which it very well does if
not taken too much at once; and comfort and warmeth a cold stomach,
consumes crude and moist humors therein, Stomach, Wind, Bowels, Cough,
Breast, Serpents, Poisons.
and stirs up the appetite; It helps to break or dissolve wind in the
stomach or bowels, to provoke Urine, to help the Cough, and other diseases of
the breast, and is effectual against the bitings of Serpents and other poisons,
and to that purpose it is an ingredient in the great Antidotes: but the white
pepper as being more white sharp and aromatical, is of more effect in
medicines; and so is the long, being more used to be given for Agues to warm
the stomach, before the coming of the fit, thereby to abate the shaking
thereof; All of them are used against the Quinsie, being mixed with honey,
Quinsie, Kernels.
and taken inwardly as well as applied outwardly, and disperseth the kernels
as well in the throat as in the other parts of the body.

Mathiolus writes of a kind of Pepper which he calls Piper Aethiopicum,
brought with other Merchandise from Alexandria, into Italy; and grows in long
Cods like beans or pease; but many cods set together at a place whose grains
within them being like Pepper both in form and taste, but smaller, stick very
close to the inside: this sort Serapio calls granum Zelin.

Monardus also makes mention of a kind of long Pepper, that grows in all the
tract of the Continent of the West Indies. This kind of pepper is half a foot
long, and of the thickness of a small Rope, consisting of many rows of small
grains, set close together as in the head of Plantane, and is black being ripe;
and hotter in taste, and more aromatical and pleasant than Capsicum, and
preferred before black Pepper, and grows, says he, on high Trees or Plants.

Guinny Pepper.
Kinds and Names.] THere are many sorts hereof found out and brought to our
knowledge in these latter days more than formerly were; one Gregorius de
Reggio a Capuchine Friar, makes mention of a dozen several sorts, or varieties
at the least, in the fruit or Cods; though in any thing else very little
differing: there are likewise some other varieties, observed by Clusius and
others.

Descript.] 1. The most ordinary Guinny Pepper with long husks, Capsicum majus
vulgatius oblongis siliquis. By this you may frame the Description of all the
rest, the main difference consisting in the form of the fruit, whether husks or
Cods; This Plant rises up with an upright firm roundstalk, with a certain pyth
within them; about two foot high in our Country, and not above three foot in
the hotter, spreading into many branches; on all sides even from the very
bottom which divide themselves again into other smaller branches, at each
joint whereof come forth two long leaves upon short footstalks, somewhat bigger
than those of Nightshade, else very like; with diverse veins in them, not dented
about the edges at all, and of a very sad green color, the flowers stand
severally at the joints, with the leaves very like unto the flowers of
Nightshade, consisting most usually of five, and sometimes of six white
small-pointed-leaves standing open like a star; with a few yellow threads in the
middle, after which come the fruit (either great or small, long or short, round
or square, as the kind is, either standing upright, or hanging down, as their
flowers show themselves, either of this or that form) in this somewhat great
and long, about three inches in length, thick and round at the stalk, and
smaller toward the end, which is not sharp but round-pointed, green at the
first, but being full ripe of a very deep shining Crimson red color; on the
outside which is like a thick skin, and white on the inside, smelling
reasonably well and sweet, having many flat yellowish white seeds therein,
cleaving to certain thin skins within it, which are broader at the upper end
and smaller at the lower, leaving the end or point empty within, not reaching
so far; the which husk but especially the seed, being of so hot and fiery a
taste that it enflameth and burns the mouth and throat for a long time after
it is chewed; almost ready to choke one that takes much at a time thereof; the
root is composed of a great Tuft or bush of threads, spreading plentifully in
the ground, and perishes even in hot Countries after it has ripened all its
fruit.

Descript.] 2. Capsicum minus Brasilianum, small round Guinny-pepper. This
grows in the same manner as the former does, not differing in any thing but
in the leaves, which being of the same form are not so great and large; and in
the fruit which is small and round, (standing some forthright, and some
upright, but none hanging down; each of them upon a long footstalk) about the
bigness of a Barbery, but round and nothing so red; and in another sort almost
black, having such like seeds within them, but somewhat smaller; no less hot
and fiery than the former; and abides the winter-colds no otherwise than the
former, and seldom bears ripe fruit in our Country.

Descript.] 3. The greater round upright Guinny Pepper, Capsicum rotundum majus
surrectum. The chiefest difference in this sort of Guinny-pepper consists
most in the form of the fruit, which stands upright as the flowers do; being
great and round like an apple, even the greatest of all the sorts that bear
round fruit, of an excellent red color when it is ripe, like unto a polished
Coral.

Descript.] 4. The great upright Spire-fashion'd Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum
erectum pyramidale majus. This differs very little from the first: the
difference of the fruit is, that this stands upright, great below and smaller
and smaller to the point, which is sharper than in the first; of as brave an
orient Corall-like color as the last.

Descript.] 5. The lesser upright Spire-fashion'd Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum
erectum pyramidale minus. As the fruit of this sort is lesser by the half than
the last, and not so sharp or small at the end, but somewhat round, so the
green leaves also are smaller and narrower, and the stalk smaller, and not
growing so high; the flowers of this as of all the rest that bear their fruit
upright, do stand upright also; which is a certain rule to know what fruit will
be pendulous, and what will be upright.

Descript.] 6. The least Spire-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum exiguum
erectum Pyramidale. The form of this is very like the second sort, but these
are smaller and longer than those of the second sort, of an inch long at the
least, and of a blackish red before they be through-ripe; and then as red as
the rest: This grows taller, fuller of branches, and more stored both with
flowers and fruit, the leaves are of the same dark green color with the rest.

Descript.] 7. The greater upright Heart-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum
Cordatum erectum majus. This grows not so high as most of the former, having
large leaves, but not so small at the ends; the fruit is not pendulous, or
hanging downwards with his footstalk, but standing upright, being somewhat
great, flattish, and as it were bunched out at the upper end next unto the
stalk, and smaller below; short and round-pointed, somewhat resembling the form
of a mans-Heart, as it is entitled Cordatum.

Descript.] 8. The lesser upright Heart-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum
Cordatum erectum minus. This does not differ from the last but in the smallness
of the fruit, standing also upright, but much smaller and shorter.

Descript.] 9. Pendulous Heart-fashioned Guinny-Pepper; Capsicum Cordatum
propendens. This sort is somewhat like the greater upright Heart-fashioned
Pepper, about the same bigness, but more uneven, and not so round, but is as
red being ripe and hanging downwards.

Descript.] 10. Pendulous Olive-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum siliqua
Olivaria, propendeus. This Pepper has small long and round Cods, smaller below
than above, very like unto an Olive-berry, as red being ripe, as any of the
rest, and with the stalk hanging downwards.

Descript.] 11. Upright Olive-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum siliqua
Olivaria erecta. This is greater than the last, and standing upright, not
differing from the last in any thing else.

Descript.] 12. Cherry-fashioned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum siliqua rotunda
Cerasorum. There are two sorts of this Pepper, one which is fully round, like
unto our Cherries; the other has a little point at the end thereof, and is a
little bigger than the other, and both hanging down.

Descript.] 13. Broad and Crumpled Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum siliqua lata et
rugosa. The Cods of this Pepper are somewhat large, greater above and smaller
below, somewhat flat also, and not round, but Crumpled as it were or shrunk
half together, and smells pretty sweet.

Descript.] 14. Long and upright Guinny Pepper, Capsicum erectum majus longum.
This Pepper is long and round, yet not like that which bears the form of the
Olive-berry, but much longer and of an equal bigness all the length thereof,
and stands upright.

Descript.] 15. The greater Crooked or Horned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum oblongum
majus, recurvis siliquis. This has large great Cods above 5 inches long,
sometimes little or nothing crooked at the lower end, which is long and small,
sometimes a little crooked or bended upwards, and sometimes very much.

Descript.] 16. The lesser Horned Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum oblongum minus,
recurvis siliquis. This is not half so thick and long as the last, and keeping
his end bowed or crooked constantly, not varying as that does; both this and
the last hang down their Cods toward the ground; the whole plant also grows
less then the other.

Descript.] 17. Double pointed Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum bifurcata siliqua. This
Pepper is very like the long upright Pepper, and much about the same form and
bigness, being almost of an equal size, all the length thereof but the lower
end is parted as it were into two short round points; and is a little smaller
there than upwards, in nothing else differing from the rest.

Descript.] 18. The shorter Gold-yellow Guinney-Pepper, Capsicum, siliqua flava
breviore. This has like leaves, stalks and flowers in every part as the rest
and only differs in that it bears Cods very like unto the first sort,
which is the most common, but that they are shorter, and ending in a smaller or
sharper point, and of a fair Gold-yellow Color and not red as all the other
before are.

Descript.] 19. The longer Gold-yellow, Guinny-Pepper, Capsicum, siliqua flava
longiore. This yellow-Pepper differs in nothing from the last, but in the
Cods which are not so thick as they, but a little smaller from the middle
thereof being longer, or lessening very finely unto the pointed end, of as fair
a Gold-yellow color as the other.

Descript.] 20. Guinny-Pepper with hairy stalks, Capsicum, caul piloso. This
grows with green round stalks; set full of white hairs thereon, contrary to
all the former sorts: at the joints with the branches come forth two such
leaves, as the first here set forth has, but larger then they; the flowers are
white consisting of five leaves like the rest, but larger then any of them;
after which come the Cods, green at the first as all the other are,, but as red
as the rest, when they are ripe, which are somewhat great and long, ending in a
very long point, in the rest as in the seed and roots not differing from the
former sorts.

Place and Time.] All these sorts of Pepper came first from the West Indies
called America, and the several parts thereof; Brasile being reckoned as a part
thereof: and our Sommer-Islands also; but here in England (though erroniously)
we give it the name of Guinny-Pepper; as though it originally came from thence;
they are now nursed up in Gardens in all the Provinces of Europe, (except cold
Countries) and grow in many places of Italy and Spain, etc. Set in pots, about
windows, either for their beauty, or for the use it serves; or both.

They do not sow them in the hot Countries before the end of March or beginning
of April, and at the soonest they do not flower before the beginning of August:
and their beautiful red Cods ripen not thoroughly, until the beginning of Winter,
and so will abide both with flower and fruit, most of the Winter with them in
the warmer Regions; but in our colder Climates they presently perish with the
first frost, and therefore must be carefully housed, if any will preserve them.

Government and Virtues.] All these sorts of Pepper are under the Planetary
Regiment of Mars, and are of a fiery hot and sharp biting taste, and of
temperature hot and dry, to the end of the fourth degree; they burn and inflame
the Mouth and Throat so extremely that it is hard to be endured; and if it be
outwardly applied to the skin in any part of the body, it will exulcerate it,
and raise blisters as if it had been burnt with fire or scalded with hot Water.
The fierce vapors that arise from the husks or Cods, while one does but open
them to take out the seed (especially if they do but beat them into powder, or
only bruise them) will so pierce the brain by flying up into the Head through
the Nostrils, that it will procure violent Sneesings, and draw down abundance
of thinn Rhueme, forcing tears from the Eyes in abundance; and will all pass
into the Throat, and provoke a sharp Coughing, and cause such violent Vomiting,
that the very Bowels as well as the Stomach, will be much perplexed with it: and
if any shall with their hands touch their Face or Eyes, it will cause so great
an Inflammation both in the Face and Eyes, that it will not be remedied in a
long time, by all the bathing thereof with Wine or cold Water, that can be
used, but yet will pass away without further harm. If any of it be cast into
the fire, it raises grievous strong and noisome Vapors, procuring Sneezings
very fiercely and Coughing and strong Vomiting, to all that be near unto it; if
it should be taken simply of it self, (though in a very small quantity, either
in powder or decoction) it were scarce to be endured and would prove very
dangerous to Life.

Having now given you an Account of the dangers of these violent plants and
fruits; I shall now direct you how to tame and master them, and to make them
become serviceable for health, being corrected and cleansed from all their evil
and noisome Qualities.

The safest way to reduce these Peppers to be taken familiarly and often
without offense, both in meat as well as medecin, as also to work those good
effects in Physic whereunto it is conducible; is laid down and prescribed by
the Friar Gregorio de Reggio, beforementioned, whose Receipt is this following.

The Correction of the Guinny Peppers.
TAke the ripe Cods, of any sort of the Guinny Pepper (for they are in property
all alike,) and dry them well, first of themselves, and then in an Oven; after
the bread is taken out; put it into a pot, or pipkin, with some flower that
they may be thoroughly dried, then cleanse them from the flower, and their stalks
if they have any; cut them or clip them very small, both husks and seeds within
them, and to every ounce of them put a pound of fine Wheat Flour, make them up
together into Cakes or small Loaves, with so much leaven, as ye think may be
convenient for the quantity you make; bake these as you do Bread, of the small
size, and being baked, cut it again into smaller parts and bake it again, that
it may be as dry and hard as biscuit, which beaten into fine powder and sifted
may be kept, for any of the uses hereafter specified, or may serve instead of
ordinary Pepper to season Meat, or broth; or for Sauce or any other purpose the
East-Indian-Pepper does serve: for it does not only give as good but rather a
better taste or relish, to the Meat or Sauce, but is found to be singular good
both to discuss the Wind, and the Chollick in the body: It is singular good to
be used with flatulent or windy meats, and such as breed much moisture and
crudities, whereof Fish is one especial; one scruple of the said powder taken
in a little broth of Veal or of a Chicken does very much comfort a cold
Stomach, Stomach
causing Phlegm, Phlegm
and such viscous humors as lie low in the bottom thereof to be avoided,
helps digestion, for it provokes an Appetite Appetite
to Meat, it provokes Urine, Urine
and taken with Saxifrage water expels the Stone Stone
in the Kidneys, Kidneyes
and the Phlegm that breeds them; and takes away the dimness or mistiness of
the Sight Sight
being used in Meats; taken with Pillulae Aleophanginae it does help the
Dropsy: Dropsy
the powder taken for three days together in the decoction of Pennyroyal,
expels the Dead-birth, Dead-birth
but if a piece of the Cod or husk, either green or dry be put into the Mother
after Delivery it will make them barren barrenness
for ever after: but the powder taken for four or five days fasting, with
as much Fennel-seed, will case all pains of the Mother. Pains of the Mother
The same also made up with a little powder of Gentian and oil of bays into a
Pessary, with some Cotton-wool does bring down the Courses; Courses
the same mixed with a Lohoch or Electuary for the Cough, Cough
helps an old inveterate Cough, being mixed with Honey and applied to the
Throat, helps the Quinsie, Quinzy
and made up with a little Pitch or Turpentine, and laid upon any hard knots or
kernels kernells
in any part of the body, it will dissolve them and not suffer any more to grow
there, and being mixed with Nitre and applied, it takes away the Morphew,
Morphew
and all Freckles, Spots, marks and discolorings of the skin: applied with
Hensgrease it dissolveth all cold Imposthumes Imposthumes
and Carbuncles; Carbuncle
and mixed with sharp Vinegar it dissolveth the hardness of the Spleen: if some
thereof be mixed with some Vnguentum de Alabastro, and the Reins of the back
anointed therewith it will take away the shaking fits of Agues; a plaster made
thereof, with the leaves of Tobacco, will heal the sting or biting of any
Venomous Beast.

The decoction of the husks themselves made with Water, and the Mouth gargled
therewith helps the Toothach, and preserves the Teeth from rottenness; the
Ashes of them being rubbed on the Teeth will cleanse them, and make black Teeth
White. The decoction of them with Wine helps the Hernia Ventosa, or watery
Rupture, if it be applied warm Morning and Evening: if they put it to steep
three days together in Aquavitae, it helps the Palsy, the place affected
being bathed therewith; and steeped for a day in Wine and two Spoonfulls drunk
thereof every day fasting, helps a stinking Breath; and snufft up into the
Nostrills, it will help the stink of them, caused there in by corrupted Phlegm.

Pines.
Description and Names.] THere is one sort called the West-Indian delicious
Pines, called in Latin Anana seu Pina, and another sort called Anana
Silvestris, Wild-Indian Pines.

These Pines (which for their excellent and pleasant sweet fruit are much
esteemed in all the West Indies) are the fruit of a kind of thistle, growing
with many long, hard, rough, stiff and narrow leaves thickest in the middle
and thin, cut in the end, dented about the edges, with reddish points seeming
prickly like a thistle, but are not; from the middle whereof rises up a round
and shorter stalk, than that of the wilder sort, set with like leaves but
lesser, and at the top one head of the bigness of a reasonable Musk-melon, or
Pome-citron, of a yellowish green before it be ripe, and more yellowish being
thorow-ripe, showing as it were scaly like an Artichoke at the first view, but
more like to a Cone of the Pine Tree, which we call a Pineapple for the form,
yet the outside has no hardness at all therein, but may be cut or pared like
unto Mellow Peach and are so sweet in scent, that they may be smelled afar off,
and of a pleasant sweet taste and substance, tasting as if Wine, Rosewater, and
Sugar were mixed together, and having no seed at all in it, whereby it may be
increased; but, as some say, it has whitish seed like a Musk-melon, but lesser
and longer; this fruit does bear a bush of leaves at the top, and some small
heads on small branches underneath it, which being taken from it and planted
half way deep in the ground, will take root and bear fruit the next year, which
is the only way of propagating thereof.

In Brasile, it is said they have sundry sorts hereof, one they call Jaama,
which is longer and pleasanter than any other, and of a yellowish substance.

Another they call Benjama being whiter within, and of a Wawmish taste, with the
Lusciousness; a third they call Jajagna, white also within but tasting like
sweet Wine with a little tartness; the root is great with many strings thereat,
but perishes with the stalk after the fruit is ripe; it was first brought from
Sancta Cruce, in Brasil, where it naturally grows, into both West and
East Indies, being not natural to either of them, but is only manured there,
and now is grown there plentiful; They of Brasile call it Nana, others Anana;
the Spaniards and Portugalls call it Pinus from the likeness, and so do most
Countries following that name. The chiefest time of their ripeness is in the
Spring, when they are sweetest.

But this Pina, surpasses all other fruits in the West Indies, for
pleasantness, and wholsomeness, so that many eat them abundantly, but a surfeit
with them is dangerous, as it is with the best Meats, drinks or fruits
whatsoever; The Physicians there forbid it their Patients lest, it should breed
inflammations. Some wonders are reported hereof, which I never had experience
of, neither do intend to go thither to disprove them. As namely, That if one of
these fruits be cut through the middle with a knife, and they joined together
again, the pieces will join and stick so fast together, as if they had not been
cut asunder at all; Another property it has, that if one cut the fruit with a
knife; and leave the knife sticking therein until the next day, so much of the
blade thereof as stuck within the fruit will be wholly consumed and wasted, or
as it were eaten away; the knife also that did cut one of them, if it be not
forthwith clean wiped, but let alone unwiped, will seem as if it had been eaten
in with Aqua fortis.

Descript.] 2. Wild-Indian Pine, Anana Sylvestris, this Wild kind of Pine
grows naturally both greater, higher, and more prickly or thistle-like;
having a great tuft of leaves, at the bottom of their stalks or stems next the
ground, seeming to be Aloe-leave, afar off but lesser, and of a pale green
color set with sharp prickles; It is increased by the off-sets, one arising
from another: from the main stem grow sundry branches, bearing at their ends,
heads of soft tender leaves closed, round together which are nothing but the
flowers, and are of a yellowish color, smelling very sweet; out of these heads
rise spikes not unlike to those of the Reed but thicker, closer set, and far
more beautiful, smelling like the Cedar: from the branches hang down the fruit
called by the Portugalls Anana's Breva's, that is Wild Anan's or Pina's, which
do somewhat resemble the manured ones, of the bigness of a Melon, of a
beautiful red color, very pleasant to behold, which is divided into parts,
like unto Cypresse-nuts, when they are dry, and set with bunches or knobs, very
much resembling a Cone or Pineapple, which are nothing so good although a
little pleasant, but harsh withal, whereof few do* at for pleasure, but they
are more physically used.

Government and Virtues.] These rare fruits, are plants of Venus, and of a
moderate temperature: six or eight ounces of the juice of this Wild kind taken
in a morning fasting with some Sugar is a most present and certain remedy,
against the heat or inflammations of the Liver or Back, Liver, Back
and is of singular use and very effectual against Ulcers, inflammations and
soreness of the Kidneyes and Bladder, and foul purulentous Urines, Kidneys,
Bladder, Vrines
and is good for the Excoriations of the Yard; all which diseases this cures
in three days time.

The Pine Tree.
Kinds.] There are two kinds of the Pine Tree: that is, the Garden and the wild
Pine Tree; and of the Wild Pine Tree, there be diverse sorts.

Names.] The Pine Tree is called in Latin Pinus, and the nuts which are found
in the Pine-apples, are called in Latin Nuces Pineae, in English Pineapple
kernels or nuts; in French, Pignous. The tame or Garden kind of Pineapple, is
also called in Latin, Pinus Sativa, and the wild Pine is called in Latin
Pinaster, and Pinus Sylvestris; the first wild kind is supposed to be the Pinus
Tarentina, whereof Pliny writes, the second kind is called in Latin humilis
Pinus or Pinus terrestris; and in Italian, Mughi. The third is called in some
places; in the Mountains betwixt Italy and Germany. Cambri, and Cirmoli, and is
that kind which the Frenchmen call Sniffe, The Fourth is called in Latin
Pinus Idaea. The fifth is called in Latin Pinus marina. and in French
Pin-marin. The fruit of the Pine Tree is called in Latin Conus, and nux pinea,
and in English a Cone or Pineapple, in French Pome de pin.

Descript.] The Pine Tree grows to a great and lofty height, with many
branches at the top, parted into other round branches, set round about with
little hard leaves, and almost sharp-p^inted or prickly, very straight and
narrow, and of a green whitish color. The Timber is red and heavy, and within
about the heart full of sap and liquor. The fruit is great balls of a brown
Chestnut color; which are called Cones or Pine-apples, in which grow small nuts
wherein is a sweet white kernel.

Descript.] 1. Of the first Wild kind. The first wild sort, of the Pine-trees
is high great and thick and yet not so high as the Tame or Garden Pine the
branches be spread abroad, with long, sharp-pointed leaves; the fruit is short,
and not hard, which does open easily, and soon falls.

Descript.] 2. The second kind of the wild Pine does not grow so high, neither
is the stem growing straight up, but brings forth many branches suddenly from
the root, creeping by the ground, long, slender, and pliable, or easy to be
bent, or ployed, insomuch that hereof they may make hoops for Wine Hogs-heads,
and other Vessels and Casks: the fruit of this tree is greater than the fruit
of any other of the Wild Pine-trees.

Descript.] 3. The third kind grows straight upright, and waxes great and
high, yet not so high as the other Wild kinds, the branches of this sort do
grow like the Pitch-tree: the fruit is long and big almost like the fruit of
the Pitch-tree, in the same is contained triangled small nuts, like to the Nuts
of the Pineapple, but smaller and britler, with a kernel of a very good taste
like unto the kernel of the tame Pine.

Descript.] 4. The fourth wild kind has a long hard fruit, the which will not
open easily, nor fall lightly from the tree.

Descript.] 5. The fifth kind has small round nuts, not much greater than
Cypresse-nuts, the which will open and fall quickly.

From out of these trees comes that liquor called Rozen, especially from the
wild-trees; and it runs most commonly out of the bark, or from the Timber,
and is sometimes found in the fruit. And from these trees comes also Pitch,
both liquid and hard.

Place and Time.] The Tame or Garden Pine grows in many places in Greece,
Italy, Spain, France, and in some places in England, where it has been
planted. The wild Pines grow upon Mountains, and that sometimes on very high
Mountains; where none other Trees or Herbs do grow, especially the first wild
kind, which also grows, in Germany, Poland, Leifland and other cold Regions.
The fruit or Pine-apples are ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] The Pine-trees are under the dominion of Saturn: the
bark is dry and astringent, especially the scales of the Cones or Apples, and
the leaves be almost of the same temperature. The kernels of the nuts are hot
and moist, and somewhat astringent. The scales of the Pineapple, with the bark
of the Pine tree do stop the Lask and bloudy-flux, and provoke Urine,
Lask-Bloody Flux, Urine
and the decoction of the same drunken has the like property. The same is also
good against all Scorchings and burnings with fire, to be pounded together with
litharge of silver and Frankincense; and if there be some Coperas mixed
therewith, it will cleanse, and heal Consuming and fretting Sores. The leaves
of the Pine Tree heals Green Wounds, and boiled in Vinegar they ease the
Toothache. The kernels of the Nuts which are found in the Pine-apples, are good
for the Lungs, Burning, Old Sores, Green Wounds, Toothache, Lungs
they cleanse the Breast, and expectorate tough Phlegm, Breast, Phlegm
also they nourish well, and engender good blood, and are good for such as have
the Cough, and begin to pine away and consume, in what sort soever they be
taken.

These kernels also do open the Liver Cough, Liver
and Spleen, and mitigate the sharpness of Urine, Spleen, Urine
and are good for those that are troubled, with the Gravel and Stone. Gravel,
Stone


The Pitch-tree.
Names.] THis Tree is called in Latin Picea and Pytis.

Descript.] The Pitch-tree is also of an indifferent bigness, and tall stature,
but not so great as the Pine Tree, and always green like the Pine and
Firre-trees. The Timber is fat and resinous, and does yield Rozen of diverse
sorts; The branches be hard and parted into other sprayes, most commonly
cross-wise, upon which grow small green leaves not round about the branches,
but by every side, one right over against another like to little Feathers; the
fruit is smaller than the fruit of the Pine Tree. In burning of this tree there
does issue out Pitch, a^ also there does out of the Pine Tree.

Place and Time.] The Pitch-tree grows in many places of Greece, Italy,
France, and Germany, and the fruit hereof is also ripe in September.

Government and Virtues.] The leaves, bark, fruit, kernels or Nuts of this
Tree, are almost of the same Nature, Virtues, and operations, as the leaves,
bark, fruit, and kernels, of the Pine Tree.

The Rozen that comes out of the Pine and Pitch-trees.
OUt of the Pine and Pitch-trees rises three sorts of Rozen; besides the Pitch
and Tar.

1. The one flows out by force of the heat of the Sun in Summer, from the
Wood or Timber where it is broken or cut.

2. The other is found both upon and betwixt the bark of the Pine and
Pitch-tree, and most commonly in such parts thereof as are Cloven or hurt.

3. The third kind grows betwixt the scales of the fruit.

Names.] All the kinds of Rozen are called in Latin Resina. In French Resine,
and in Dutch Herst. The first kind is call Resina liquida and Resina Pini; of
this sort is also the Rozen which is Molten with the Sun in Summer, and
remains dry, and may be made into powder, which some call Resina Arida, or
dry Rozen.

The Second kind is called in Latin Resina arida, but that which sweateth out
of the Pine Tree is called Resina Pinea, and that which comes out of the
Pitch-tree Resina Picea. The third kind is called Resina Strobilina.

Government and Virtues.] All these Rozens are Solar, and of an hot and dry
temperature, and of a cleansing and Scouring nature. Rozen does cleanse and
heal new Wounds, and there- New-wounds fore is a principal ingredient in all
Ointments and Emplaisters that serve for that purpose. It softneth hard
Swellings, and is comfortable to bruised Parts, or Members; being applied or
laid to, with Oils, and Ointments, or Plasters, appropriate thereunto.

Pitch and Tar.
Kinds and Names.] THere be two sorts of Pitch, the one moist, and that is
called liquid Pitch; the other is hard, and dry: they do both run out of the
Pine, and Pitch-trees; and out of certain other Trees: as the Cedar,
Turpentine, and Larch-trees; by burning of the Wood and Timber of the lame
Trees. Pitch is called in Latin Pix, in Frenc^ Poix, in Dutch Peck: The liquid
Pitch is called in Latin Pix liquida, in Brabant Teer, and in English Tarr.
The dry Pitch is called in Latin. Pix arida, and Pix Navalis, in English
Ship-Pitch or Stone-Pitch, in Dutch Steen-peck.

Government and Virtues.] The Pitch and Tar are both Solar, hot and dry in the
second degree; and of subtle parts, but the Stone-Pitch is the dryest, the
liquid Pitch or Tar is the hotter and of more subtle parts. Liquid Pitch taken
with Honey, does cleanse the Breast, and is good to be licked in by those that
are troubled with shortness of Breath, breast shortness of Breath
whose Breast is stuffed with corrupt Matter. It mollifyeth and ripeneth all
hard Swellings, Hard swellings
and is good to anoint the Neck against the Squinancy or Swelling of the
Throat: it is good to be put into mollifying Plasters, Anodynes to take away
Pains, and Maturatives, or ripening Medicines: being applied with Barly-meal,
it softneth the hardness of the Matrix and Fundament; Squinancy, Matrix,
fundament
Liquid Pitch mingled with sulphur vivum, or quick Brimstone, represseth
fretting Ulcers foul Scabs, Ulcers, Scabs
and Scurff; and if that some Salt be put thereunto, it is good to be laid upon
the Bitings and Stingings of Serpents and Vipers. It cures the rifts, and
cloven Chaps that happen to the Hands, Feet, Scurff, Venomous Beasts, Hands,
Feet
and Fundament, Fundament
being laid thereto.

The Stone-Pitch, being pounded very small with the fine powder of
Frankincense, heals hollow Ulcers and Fistula's, Ulcers, Fistulas
filling them up with Flesh; the Stone-Pitch is not so strong as the Liquid
Pitch, but is better, and apter to soder and glue Wounds together, as Galen
says.

Sea-Plantane.
Kinds and Names.] THere are several sorts of Herbs referred to the Plantanes,
the first whereof is called Holostea; but, more fitter, Sea-Plantane, or
ordinary Sea-Plantane; their several Names shall follow, in their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Ordinary Sea-plantane, Plantago Marina vulgaris. This
Sea-plantane has many narrow long and thick green leaves, having here and
there a dent or two on the edge; pointed at the end, among which, rise up
sundry bare stalks, with a small spiked head thereon smaller than Plantane;
else a like both in blooming and Seed: the root is somewhat white thick and
long, with long fibers thereat abiding many years.

Descript.] 2. Spanish Sea-plantane, Holosteum Salmanticum. This Spanish
Sea-plantane also differs not much from the former greater kind, having many
narrow hoary leaves lying on the ground, but shorter and broader then they are;
among which rise up diverse naked short stalks, little more than an hand breadth
high, furnished from the middle almost to the tops with many whitish green
flowers, standing more sparsedly in the spiky heads then the former, which do
afterward yield small Seed in husks, like unto Plantane-Seeds: the root is
somewhat long and hard with diverse Fibers at it. There is another sort hereof
much lesser than the former, the leaves greener and narrower, and the heads of
Flowers are smaller.

Descript.] 3. The greater Sea-plantane with grassy leaves; Holosteum,
angusti-folium majus, sive Serpentaria major. This greater Sea-plantane has a
number of small long leaves, almost like Grass; but that they are stiff and
hard, sometimes lying upon the ground, and sometimes from a stem under them
raised a little higher; of a grayish or hoary green color, and having on some
of them some small gashes on the edges, among which rise up naked stalks about
half a foot high, with small spikey heads like unto Plantane-heads set at the
top of them, wherein also is contained such like Seed: the root is somewhat
thick, long and woody, with some fibers growing thereat.

Descript.] 4. The lesser Sea-Plantane with Grassy leaves, Holosteum
angusti-folium minus. This lesser Holosteum, is very like the former, but that
it is smaller, and scarce having any dent on the edges, and grows much lower,
not exceeding three or four inches in height, having such like heads but
smaller.

Descript.] 5. Candy Sea-Plantane, Holosteum Creticum sive Leontopodium
Creticum. This plant has a reddish root, somewhat great, and as it were scaly
at the head, growing smaller downwards, and spread into many long fibers from
whence springs up many long and narrow soft, woolly leaves, a hand-breadth
long with three Ribs in each of them, among which rise up diverse small and
short footstalks, about two or three inches long, and covered with a soft
woolliness; on every one whereof stands a thick, short reddish woolly head
like unto a Plantane-head, having diverse whitish flowers upon them, with
blackish spots within them seeming so many holes in them; which after they are
past, have small brownish Seeds, enclosed in their husks, very like unto
Plantane-Seed or the Seed of Psyllium, or Fleawort, which heads when they are
fully ripe do bend downwards to the ground, and are so drawn or bended together
that they resemble herein a Lyons-foot clasped together, whereof it obtained
the name of Leonto-podium.

Descript.] 6. Mouse-tail, Holosteum Loniceri, cauda muris vocatum. This being
in taste and property like unto these Holostea's, is therefore ranked amongst
them. It shoots forth diverse small Grassy leaves, very short, rough, and
hard; among which spring diverse small slender stalks, with small, long,
blackish, green spiked heads like unto a small Plantane-head. but smaller; with
white flowers on them, which quickly fade and fall away: after which, there are
found very small blackish Seeds in the long heads, which then in some are a
little crooked and in others straight, resembling a Mouse-tail; the root is
small and threddy.

Place and Time.] The first grows in diverse places, about our Seacoasts,
as well as others. The second of both sorts grows in Valentia, Salamanca, and
diverse other parts of Spain, as Clusius says; the third and fourth (as says
Mathiolus) by the Seaside in Italy; Camerarius says by a lake of Salt Water
near Istebia, which is in Germany; The fifth, in Candia; The last grows in
many fertile Pastures and Meadows, as also on dry Banks, and by the path-sides
in diverse places of our own Land.

They do flower in the Months of June and July, and their Seed ripeneth
quickly after. The last, which is the earliest of them all, flowreth often in
April, and is almost gone in May.

Government and Virtues.] These are of the same temperature and regiment, as
our ordinary Plantanes so very little differing in quality of cold and dryness,
that all the virtues of the other Plantanes may properly be attributed to
these; only the third kind, Mathiolus says that the people of Gorilia ( who
call it Serpentina) have used it to very good purpose, as he himself also
says, he has found by good experience, against the Bitings or stingings of
Venomous Beasts, Serpents serpents-bitings
especially; as also to help those that are troubled with the Dropsy,
especially that which has possessed the whole body. The Mouse-tail is cooling
and drying like the Plantane; and the Country people in some places of this
Land, apply it not only to those that bleed at the Nose, Dropsy, bleeding at
the Nose
by bruising of the leaves, and putting it up therein, or pounding it, and
letting the party snuff up the juice, but also use it with good effect, to
stay the much bleeding of Wounds, and to heal them up: it being a singular good
Wound-herb.

The Pomegranate-Tree.
Kinds and Names.] THe Pomgranate-tree is distinguished into three kinds; that
is, The manured Pomegranate bearing fruit, and the greater, and lesser wild
kinds, the first is called Malus Punica, and Malus granata, and the fruit Malum
Punicum and Malum granatum, because it is supposed that they were brought over
from that part of Africa where old Carthage stood into that part of Spain,
which is now called Granada, and from thence called Granatum. The flowers of
the manured kind ( Dioscorides says) are called Citini; but Pliny calls the
flowers the wild kind Citinus, and the flowers of both kinds, Balaustium but
Cytinus is more properly the cup, wherein do stand the flow of both kinds; and
Balaustium is with us generally taken for the doble flowers of the wild kind
only.

Descript.] 1. The Pomgranate-tree bearing fruit, Malus Punica sa^va. This Tree
grows not great in the warm Countries, and, where it is natural, not above
seven or eight foot high, spreading into manny slender branches, here and there
set with thorns, and with many very fair, green, shining leaves; like in form
and bigness unto the leaves of large Myrtle-leaves, every one upon a small
reddish footstalk. Among the leaves come forth here and there, the flowers,
which are like Bell-flowers, broad at the brims, and smaller at the bottom,
being one whole leaf, divided at the top into five parts: of an orient red
Crimson color naturally, but much paler with us, and many veins running
through it, with diverse threads in the middle; and standing in a brownish hollow
cup, or long hard husk: the fruit is great and round, with a hard, smooth,
brownish, red rind; not very thick, but yellowish on the inside: and a Crown at
the top, stored plentifully with a most clear Liquor or juice like Wine; either
sweet or sower, or between both; full of seeds enclosed in skins and the liquor
among them: Sometimes this breaks the rind as it grows, which will cause it
to rot very soon.

Descript.] 2. The greater double blossomed Pomgranate-tree, Malus Punica
Sylvestris major, sive Balaustium majus. The great wild Pomegranate-tree
grows into slender brownish branches, with some thorns amongst them, and
shining green leaves somewhat larger than the former; but it is a shrubbish low
Tree: naturally from the branches shoot forth flowers very double, as large as
a double Provence-Rose, but with shorter small leaves of an excellent bright
crimson color; tending to a silken carnation, standing in brownish hard cups
or husks, divided into five parts; but no fruit follows.

Descript.] 3. Balaustium minus, the lesser double Pomgranate-tree. There is
but little difference in this from the other, the leaves only are of a sadder
green color; the flowers smaller, and less thick, and double, and of a sadder
red Orenge-tawny color, set also in such like hard cups, or husks; of one of
these two double sorts, it is said that there is one that bears white
flowers, and another that has the mixed, white and red.

Place and Time.] The manured kinds grow in Spain, Italy, Portugal, and other
warm Countries, but with us they are preserved and housed with great care, (yet
come not to perfection) and the wild kind with much more; they seldom flower
with us.

Government and Virtues.] The Sun governs these plants and fruits. Pomgranates,
are hot and moist, but yet moderate: all the sorts breed good blood, yet do
they yield but slender nourishment, they are very helpful to the Stomach: those
that are sweet, are most pleasant; yet they somewhat heat, and breed Wind and
Choler, and therefore, they are forbidden in Agues: the four do bind, and are
fit for a hot fainting Stomach, and stay Vomiting, and provoke Urine; Stomach,
Vomiting, Urine
but are somewhat offensive to the Teeth and Gums, in the eating; those that
are of a mean or winy taste are indifferent to each part: The Seeds within the
fruit, and the rind thereof do bind very forceably; either the powder or the
decoction taken; and stay Casting, the Bloody Flux, Blood-flux
Women's Courses, Red or White; Courses, whites
the Spitting of Blood, Blood spitting
and Running of the Reins: and is said to be good for the Dropsy; the Flowers
work the same effects: the Fruit is good against the Bitings of the Sea-hare,
and the Bitings of the Scorpion, and stays the immoderate Longings of Women
with Child; the decoction of the rind or Seeds of the fruit, with a little
Syrrup put to it, is good against the Cankers in the Mouth, and Ulcers in the
Privy parts, the Fundament, or any other part of the Body, and is good against
the Rupture; it helps also the Ulcers in the Ears or Nose, or Rhumes in the
Eyes running of the Reins, Scopi-Longings, Can-Vlcers, Rhume in the Eyes
to be dropped or injected, and fastneth Loose-teeth, Loose-teeth
and destroys the flat Worms in the Body, and helps to take away Wens.
Worms, Wens
With the rinds of Pomgranates instead of Gauls, or else with the Galls also
is made the best writing ink both for blackness and durability.

The Pomcitron-tree.
Kinds and Names.] THree kinds of Pomcitrons I shall here set down. The tree is
generally called, Malus Medica vel Citria.

Descript.] 1. The greater Pomcitron tree, Malus Citria major. The greater
Citron tree grows not very high in some places, but with a short crooked
body, but in others not much lower than the Lemon tree, spreading sundry great
long Arms, and branches; set with long and sharp thorns, and fair large and
broad fresh green leaves, a little dented about the edges, with a show of
almost invisible holes in them, but less than the Orange leaves have; of a very
sweet scent, the flowers green at the leaves, all along the branches, being
somewhat longer than those of the Orange; made of five thick whitish purple or
blush leaves, with some threads in the middle, after which follows fruit all
the year, being seldom seen without ripe fruit, and half-ripe, and small young
and green, and blossoms all at once. This kind bears great and large fruit,
some as great as a Musk-melon, yet others lesser, but all of them with a
rugged, bunched-out and uneven yellow bark; thicker than in any of the other
sorts, and with small store of sour juice in the middle, and somewhat great,
pale whitish or yellow seed, with a bitter kernel lying in it: the smell of
this fruit is very strong, and very comfortable to the senses.

Descript.] 2. The lesser Pomcitron tree, Citria Malus minor, sive Limonera;
this tree grows very like the former, but the leaves are somewhat lesser and
shorter, and so are the thorns also; the flowers are of a deep blush color,
and the fruit lesser and longer than they, and no bigger than the lesser fruit
of the former; the rynde also reasonable thick and yellow, but not so rugged,
having more store of sour juice within them, and fewer seeds.

Descript.] 3. Citria malus, sive Limonera pregnans; this differs not in the
tree or any part thereof, from the last; but in the fruit which is as large as
the last; and a little paler yellow on the outside, having another small fruit
growing within it lying at the very top or head; yet not to be seen before you
cut it; and is divided from the whole fruit with a yellow rind, covering the
most part of it, and sticking only to the other at the head or top; the greater
fruit has both juice and seed within it, but the lesser has no seeds; and but
little or no juice, and is more sweet than sour.

To these Pomcitrons also are referred three other kinds called Limeroones. The
Spaniards call the first Limones del Emperador, the second is called Limonera
acida, the third Limonera multiformis, but the Spaniards do call it Limones de
figuras.

Descript.] 1. Sweet Limeroons, Limonera dulcis: this differs not much from
the last, but only in the fruit, which is smaller than it; but twice as big as
a great Lemon; of a deeper yellow colored bark, and much thinner, being full
of juice, but sweet and pleasant, and may familiarly be eaten with the rind
and all.

Descript.] 2. Limonera acida, sour Limeroons. This is very like the last, but
somewhat bigger; more yellow-rinded, and somewhat rugged; the juice whereof is
more sour than it, yet lesser than of a Lemon.

Descript.] 3. Changeable Limeroons, Limon^ra multiformis. The fruit hereof is
wholly near unto a flesh color, and of diverse forms; some being of one and
some of another fashion, not constant in any; for which cause the Spaniards
named it Limones de figuras.

Place and Time.] All these sorts of Citrons grow in Spain, with those that are
curious, but were transported thither from sundry places abroad. The great
Pomcitron, that is, Malus medica, Theophrastus says that it was brought first
from Media and Persia, and was therefore called Malum Medicum, and Malum
Persicum. The last was brought from the fortunate Islands: their time is
continual flowring and bearing fruit throughout the year.

Government and Virtues.] These are Solar Plants, yet they are of different
qualities, all the parts of the fruit hereof both the outer and inner rind,
both juice and seed are of excellent use, and of contrary effects one to
another; as some are hot and dry, others cold and dry: the outer yellow rind
is very sweet in smell, very Aromatical and bitter in taste, and dried is a
very Sovereign Cordial for the heart, and an excellent Antidote against venom
and poison. against the Plague or any other Infection: Poison, Plague, Stomach,
cold humors, Wind, Stinking breath, digestion, Melancholy, Infection.
it warmeth and comfort a cold and windy stomach, and disperseth cold raw
and undigested humors therein, or in the bowels; and mightily expels wind,
being chewed in the mouth it helps a stinking breath, it also helps digestion
and is good against Melancholy. These outer rinds being preserved with Sugar
are used as a Junket at Banquets; yet they are often used in Cordial
Electuaries, and preservatives against infection and Melancholy. It also
helps to loose the body, and therefore there is a solutive Electuary made
therewith called Electuarium de citro, solutivum, to evacuate the bodies of
cold phlegmatic Constitutions, and may safely be used where Choler is mixed
with Phlegm. The inner white rind of the fruit is almost unsavory and without
taste, and is not used in Physic, but being preserved is used at Banquets; the
sour juice in the middle is cold, and far surpasses that of Lemons in the
effects; although not so sharp in taste; it is singular good in all
pestilential and burning Fevers to restrain the venom and Infection, to
suppress the Choler, and hot distemper of the blood, and to quench thirst, and
corrects the ill disposition of the Liver, stirs up an Appetite, and
refreshes the over-spent and fainting spirits, Burning Fevers, Choler,
Thirst, Appetite, Faint Spirits.
resists drunkenness, and helps the turnings of the Brain, by the hot
vapors arising therein, which causes a Frenzy for want of sleep; the seed not
only equalleth the rind, but also surpasses it in many particulars, yet Galen
and Avicen contradict one another herein. Galen says that the seed is cold,
which Mathiolus excuses with diverting his intent to the juice; and Avicen
says, it is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, the Bark or rynd
hot in the first and dry in the end of the second degree, the inner white
substance between the outer bark and the inner juice hot and moist in the first
degree, and the sour juice cold and dry in the third degree; These seeds are
very effectual to preserve the heart and vital spirits, from the poison of the
Scorpion and other venomous creatures, as also against the infection of the
Plague or Pox, or any other contagious disease, they kill the worms in the
stomach, provoke the Terms, cause an Abortment, and have a digesting and a
drying quality, fit to dry up and consume moist humors both inwardly in the
body and outwardly in any moist or running Ulcers or Sores, Heart, poison of
Scorpions, Plague, Pox, Worms, Terms, Moist humors, Ulcers, Sores.
and to take away the pains that come after the biting of any venomous
Creature. The whole fruit or the branches of the trees laid in Presses, Chests,
or Wardrobes, keeps Cloth, or silk Garments, from Moths or worms, and
likewise gives them a good scent.

Quick-Grass
Kinds and Names.] THere are several sorts of these Grasses, some growing in
the fields and other places of the upland grounds, and others near the Sea; it
is also called Dogs-grass, and Gramen Caninum: the other several names shall
follow in the Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Common quick-grass, Gramen caninum vulgar. This grass creeps
far about under ground, with long white joynted roots, and small fibers almost
at every joint, very sweet in taste, as the rest of the herb is, and
interlaceing one another; from whence shoot forth many fair and long grassie
leaves, small at the ends, and cutting or sharp at the edges; the stalks are
joynted like Corn, with the like leaves on them and a long spiked head, with
long husks on them, and hard rough seed in them.

Descript.] 2. Quick grass with a more spread Panickle, Gramen caninum longius,
radicatum, and paniculatum. This differs very little from the former, but in
the tuft or panickle, which is more spread into branches, with shorter and
broader husks; and in the root which is fuller, greater, and further-spread.

Descript.] 3. The lesser quick-grass with a sparsed tuft, Gramen caninum,
latiore panicula, minus. This small quick-grass has slender stalks about half
a foot high, with many very narrow leaves, both below and on the stalks: the
tuft or panickle at the top is small according to the Plant, and spreads into
sundry parts or branches: the root is small and joynted but creeps not so
much, and have many more fibers among them than the others have, and is a
little browner, not so white, but more sweet.

Descript.] 4. Low bending quick grass, Gramen caninum, arvense; This creeps
much under ground but in a differing manner, the stalks taking root in diverse
places, and scarce rising a foot high; with such like green leaves as the
ordinary, but shorter; the spiked head is bright, and sparsed or spread abroad
somewhat like the field grass.

Descript.] 5. Gramen caninum supinum Monspeliense. This differs very little
from the last, in any other part thereof than in the panickle or spiked head;
which is longer and not spread, or branched into parts as that is.

Descript.] 6. A small sweet grass like Quick-grass, Gramen exile tenuifolium,
Canariae simile, sive gramen dulce. This small grass has diverse low creeping
Branches and rooting at the joints as the two last; having many small and
narrow leaves on them much less than they; and a small sparsed panickle,
somewhat like the red dwarf-grass.

Descript.] 7. Wall-grass with a creeping root, Gramen murorum radice repent:
this Wall grass from a blackish creeping root springs forth with many stalks
a foot high, bending or crooking with a few narrow short leaves on them, at
whose tops stand small white panickles, of an inch and a half long, made of
many small chaffy husks.

Place and Time.] The first is usual and common in diverse plowed Grounds and
Gardens, where it is often more bold than welcome, troubling the Husbandmen as
much after the plowing up of some of them (as to pull up the rest, after the
springing, and being raked together to burn them) as it does Gardners, where it
happens, to weed it out from amongst their trees and Herbs: the second and
third are more scarce, and delight in Sandy and Chalky grounds; the three next
are likewise found in Fields that have been plowed and do lie Fallow; and the
last is often found on old decayed Walls in diverse places; they flourish
chiefly in the beginning of Summer.

Government and Virtues.] These are Plants of Mercury. The root is of
temperature cold and dry, and has a little mordacity in it, and some tenuity
of parts: the herb is cold in the first degree, and moderate in moisture and
dryness; but the seed is much more cold and drying; of some tenuity of parts,
and somewhat harsh. This quick grass is most medicinable of all other sorts of
grasses: it is effectual to open obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and the
stoppings of Urine, the decoction thereof being drunk, and to ease the griping
pains in the belly, and Inflammations, and wastes the excrementitious matter of
the Stone in the Bladder; and the Ulcers thereof, also the root being bruised
and applied does knit together and consolidate wounds: the seed does more
powerfully expel Urine, binds the belly, and stays vomiting, the distilled
water is good to be given to Children for the worms. Liver, Spleen, Urine,
Griping in the Guts, Inflammations, Stone, Wounds, Lask, Vomiting, Worms.


Sea-spiked Quick Grass.
Kinds and Names.] THere are several sorts hereof: whose names shall severally
follow before their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Sea-spiked quick grass, or dogs grass, Gramen caninum
geniculatum maritimum spicatum; this Sea grass has diverse joynted stalks about
a foot high, with hard leaves thereon, long and like the other quick grass, the
spiked heads are much shorter and harder than the common kind; the root is full
of joints, and creeps under ground like it.

Descript.] 2. Sea quick grass Gramen caninum, vulgar, Canariae simile. This
other grass is a slenderer lanker and harder grass than the ordinary quick
grass, and of a bluish green color, and differs not in any thing else; but
there are two other differing sorts hereof: the one in the roots which at the
several joints as it runs does shoot up the like stalks of leaves and spiked
tufts, and will be sometimes twenty foot in length, with many of these tufts of
stalks and leaves at them; the other in the spikes, which will have two rows
or orders in them.

Descript.] 3. Sea quick grass with long roots, Gramen caninum alterum
maritimum longius radicatum; this long rooted Sea grass differs little from
the former, either in the hard leaves or in the running roots, but that they
spread more; and instead of spiked heads at the tops of the stalks this has
chaffie heads among the leaves.

Descript.] 4. Sea-spiked quick grass of Mompelier, Gramen caninum maritimum
spicatum Monspeliense; this French Sea-grass has slender woody roots, with few
fibers thereat, from whence rise diverse trayling stalks a foot or more high,
with sundry joints and branches at them, and short narrow reed-like leaves, at
the tops whereof grow spiked heads of three inches long apiece, of a darkish
Ash Color.

Place and Time.] The three first are found on our Seacoasts especially in
Kent, and the fourth about Mompelier and Narbone; near the Sea Coasts: they are
in flower and seed toward the end of Summer.

Government and Virtues.] These are under the same Planetary regiment as the
ordinary Quick grass of the Land, and the roots hereof are held as effectual to
all the effects and purposes that the ordinary sort serves for; only this has
been observed, that Cattle will not feed on these of the Sea, because of their
hardness roughness and sharpness.

Rattle, Red and yellow.
Kinds, Names.] OF this we shall describe two sorts: the one called common red
Rattle, pedicularis pratensis rubra vulgaris; the other yellow Rattle or
Coxcomb, pedicularis sive crista galli lutea; it is also called Fistularia, of
the hollowness of the stalks, and Coxcomb, because the flowers as some think do
stand like a Cocks comb at the tops of the stalks; it is also called Rattle
grass and Louse-wort.

Descript.] 1. Common red Rattle, Pedicularis pratensis rubra vulgaris; this
has sundry reddish hollow stalks and sometimes green, rising from the roots
lying for the most part on the ground, yet some growing more upright with
sundry small reddish or greenish leaves set on both sides of a middle rib,
finely dented about the edges; the flowers stand at the tops of the stalks, and
branches of a fine purplish red color, like small gaping hoods: after which
come small blackish flat seeds in small husks, which lying loose therein, will
rattle with shaking: the root consists of small whitish strings with some
fibers thereat.

Descript.] 2. Yellow Rattle or Coxcomb, Pedicularis sive crista galli, lutea;
The common yellow Rattle has seldom above one round green stalk, rising from
the root, about half a yard or two foot high, and with but few branches
thereon, having two long and somewhat broad leaves, set at a joint deeply
dented or cut in the edges, resembling therein the Crests or Comb of a Cock,
broadest next to the stalk and smaller to the end; the flowers grow at the tops
of the stalks, with some shorter leaves with them, being hooded after the same
manner that the red ones are, but of a fair yellow color in most, or else in
some paler and in some more white: the seed is contained in large husks, and
with lying loose in them will rattle when they are ripe: the root is small and
slender, and dies every Winter.

Place and Time.] Some of both these kinds grow in Meadows and Woods generally
through out our Land, where they are rather an annoyance than of any good use
for Cattle. They are in flower from Midsummer till after August sometimes.

Government and Virtues.] These Plants are Saturnine, of a cold and drying
property: the red Rattle is good to heal up Fistula's and hollow Ulcers, and to
stay the flux of humors to them, and also the abundance of women's courses,
Fistula's, Ulcers, Courses.
or any other flux of blood to be boiled in harsh or red wine, and drunk. The
yellow Rattle is also held to be good for those that are troubled with a Cough
or dimness of Sight, Cough, Dimness of Sight.
if the herb being boiled with Beans and some honey put thereto be drunk, or
dropped into the eyes; The whole seed being put into the eyes does draw forth
any skin, film or dimness from the sight without trouble or pain.

Sweet or Aromatical-Reed.
Kinds and Names.] THere is one sort called Calamus Aromaticus, Mathioli,
Mathiolus his Aromatical-Reed; a second called, Calamus Aromaticus Syriacus,
vel Arabicus, suppositivus, the supposed true Syrian or Arabian
Aromatical-Reed; and the third the true Acorus of Dioscorides or sweet smelling
Reed, called in shops Calamus Aromaticus, and likewise Acorus verus, sive
Calamus officinarum.

Descript.] 1. Mathiolus his Aromatical-Reed. This grows with an upright tall
stalk, set full of joints of certain spaces up to the top, (not hollow but
stuffed full of a white, spongeous pith, of a gummy taste, somewhat bitter, and
of the bigness of a man's finger) and at every one of them a long narrow leaf,
of a dark green, brown color, smelling very sweet, differing therein from all
other kinds of Reeds; on the tops whereof, grows a bushy or Featherlike
pannicle, like unto those of the common Reed: the root is knobby, with diverse
heads thereat, whereby it increases and shoots forth, new heads of leaves,
smelling also very sweet, having a little binding taste, and sharp withal.

Descript.] 2. The supposed true Syrian or Arabian Aromatical Reed, rises up,
from a thick root three or four inches long, big at the head and small at the
bottom, with one and sometimes more stalks, two Cubits high, being straight,
round, smooth, and easy to break into splinters; full of joints, and about a
fingers thickness, hollow and spongy within of a whitish yellow color; the
stalk is divided into other branches, and they again into other smaller ones,
two usually set together at a joint, with two leaves under them likewise, very
like unto the leaves of Lysimachia, the Willow-herb or Loose-strife, but
lesser; being an inch broad, and an inch and an half long; compassing the stalk
at the bottom, with sundry veins, running all the length of them; from the
joints, rise long stalks, bearing sundry yellow small flowers, made of leaves,
like also unto Lysimachia, with a small Pointel in the middle, after which
follow small, blackish, long heads or Seed-Vessels, pointed at the end, and
having in them, small blackish seed: the stalk has little or no scent, yet not
unpleasant as Alpinus says, being bitter with a little Acrimony therein; but
Bauhinus says, it is of an Aromatical taste, and very bitter.

Descript.] 3. The sweet smelling Reed, or Calamus officinarum, or Acorus
verus, has many flags, long and narrow, fresh, green leaves two foot long a
piece, or more; yet oftentimes somewhat brownish at the bottom, the one rising
or growing out of the side of the other, in the same manner that other flags,
or flower-De-luces grow, which are thin on both sides, and ridged or thickest,
in the midst; the longest for the most part, standing in the midst, and some
of them as it were curled or playted, toward the ends or tops of them;
smelling very sweet, as well when they are green and fresh, as when they are
dried and so kept, a long time; which do so abide in a Garden a long time, as
though it never did nor never would bear flower; the leaves every year dying
down to the ground; and shooting out fresh every Spring, but, after three or
four years abiding in a place, without removing; besides the leaves it shoots
forth (not any stalk, as other Flower-de-luces do but,) a narrow long leaf by
it self, flat like unto the other leaves, especially from the middle thereof
upwards, but from the bottom to the middle it is flat-like, at which place
comes forth one long round head, very seldom two; in form and bigness like
unto the Catkin or Aglet of the Hazelnut-tree, growing upright and of the
length and thickness of ones finger, or rather bigger; set with several small
lines or divisions, like unto a green Pineapple; of a purplish green color
for the most part: out of which bunches, shoot forth small pale whitish
flowers, consisting of four small leaves a piece, without so good a scent as
the leaves, falling quickly away, and not yielding any seed. The root is thick,
and long, lying under the upper face of the ground, shooting forward, and with
small roots or suckers, on all sides like unto the Garden Valerian, whitish on
the outside, or greenish if it lie above the ground and more pale or whitish on
the inside, with many joints thereabouts, and whereat it has, or does, shoot
forth long thick fibers underneath, whereby it takes strong hold in the
ground; of a firm or fast substance, yet not hard or woody but easy to be
cut, of a sweet scent, and somewhat bitter taste.

Place and Time.] The first is said by Mathiolus, and others, to grow in India,
Syria and Judea; the dry stalks of the second are said to grow at the foot of
Mount Libanus, in Syria; not far from Tripoli, in the wet grounds there: The
third in sundry moist places in Egypt and by the lake Gennesareth in Judea,
and in diverse places of Syria and Arabia.

The other Calamus of the shops, or true Acorus, grows in many places of Turk
y (in moist grounds) from whence the largest roots, the firmest, whitest, and
sweetest are brought unto us: it grows also in Russia, and those places
thereabouts, in great plenty. Mr. Morgan has of it growing in the
physick-Garden at Westminster, and he himself told me that he was informed by
some that they had found it growing in moist grounds in Yorkshire, and the
Northern parts of England.

Government and Virtues.] These Reeds are under the dominion of Venus; of a
temperate quality.

The Calamus of Diosco^ides, he says, has these properties, it provokes
Urine and boiled with Grass roots and smallage, it helps those that have the
Dropsy, Urine, Dropsy,
it fortifieth the Reins, and is good against the Strangury or pissing by
drops, and is also profitable for those that have the Rupture, Reins,
strangury, Rupture
or are broken Bellied; It provokes Women's Terms, or Courses; either drunk,
or applied to the place: the fumes of it taken through a Tobacco-pipe, either
by it self or with some dried Turpentine, cures them that have a Cough;
Terms, Cough
it is put into bathes for Women to sit in, as also in Glisters to ease Pains.
Pains eased


It is used in mollifying Oils and Plasters, that serve to ripen hard
Imposthumes, Imposthumes
as also for the sweet scent thereof. Galen says, it being of a temperature,
moderate, between heat and cold, and somewhat Astringent, and having a very
little Acrimony; it is profitably used among other things that help the Liver
Liver
and Stomach, Stomach
does gently provoke Urine, and is used with other things in fomentaions for
the Mother, Mother
when it is troubled with inflammations, and gently to move the Courses. Courses
Dioscorides says, that the sweet flag, it good to provoke Urine, Urine
if the decoction thereof be drunk. It helps to ease pains in the Sides, Sides
Liver, Liver
and Breast, Breast
as also to ease the Griping pains of the Chollick Chollick
and Cramp, Cramp
and is good against Ruptures; It wastes the Spleen, Spleen
helps the Strangury; strangury
and Bitings of Venomous Creatures: Serpents
It is also good in Baths for Women to sit in, for distempers of the Womb. Womb
The juice dropped into the Eyes, Eyes
dries Rheums Rheums
therein, and clears the sight, taking away all filmes Filmes
that may hurt them.

The Root is of much use in all Antidotes against Venom and Poison, or
infection; it is a good remedy against a stinking Breath, Stinking Breath
to take the Root fasting every Morning for some time together. The hot fumes
of the decoction made in Water, and taken in at the Mouth through a funnel, are
Excellent good to help those that are troubled with a Cough: Cough
a dram of the powder of the Roots with as much Cinnamon taken in a draught of
Wormwood Wine, is singular good to comfort and strengthen a cold weak Stomach:
Cold Weak stomach
the decoction thereof drunk is good against Convulsions Convulsions
or Cramps, Cramps
and for falls Falls
and inward Bruises; Bruises
an Oxymel or surrup made hereof in this manner is wonderful effectual, for all
cold Spleens, Spleen
and cold Livers; Liver
Take of the Roots of Acorus, one pound; wash and pick them clean, then bruise
them, and steep them for three days in Vinegar, after which time let them be
boiled together to the Consumption of the one half of the Vinegar, which being
strained forth, set to the fire again putting thereto as much Honey, as is
sufficient to make it into a syrrup; an ounce of this syrrup in a Morning, in a
small draught of the decoction of the same Roots is sufficient for a dose; the
whole Roots preserved either in Honey or Sugar is effectual for all the same
purposes; but the green Roots preserved, are better then the dried- Roots which
are first steeped, and then preserved. The Roots Bruised and boiled in Wine and
applied to the Cods, and Stones, that are swelled, dissolveth the Tumor Cods,
Stones, Tumors
and eases the pains. It likewise mollifieth hard Tumors in any part of the
body.

Sweet-Rush.
Names.] IT is also called, Camells-hay, in Latin it is called Juneus
odoratus, and Schaenanthos, and corruptly Squinanthum, and Squinant.

Kinds and Description] There are found two kinds hereof, a finer and a Course;
or the true, and bastard kind.

Descript.] 1. The finer sweet smelling Rush, called in Latin. Juncus odoratus
Tenuior. This has many tuffts or heads of long Rush-like leaves, thick set
together, one compassing another at the bottom, and shooting forth upwards, the
outermost whereof are bigger or grosser then those that grow within, which are
a foot long and better, small round and stiff, or hard (and much smaller from a
little above the bottom of them, then any of our Rushes) of a quick and spicy
taste, somewhat pleasant, and of a fine sweet scent. It bears, in its natural
soil, diverse strong round hard jointed stalks having diverse short, brownish or
purplish husks at the tops, containing within them, mossy whitish short threads
or hairs, wherein lies a chaffy seed, the Root is stringgy, full of long
fibers and very hard.

Descript.] 2. Juncus odoratus Crassior. The grosser sweet smelling Rush, This
grows in the same manner as the former does, but is greater in every part of
it, and has less smell, as well as less taste, whereby it seems to be a kind
of it self, that grows so great in the natural as well as foreign parts, or by
growing in moister places, comes to be the larger.

Place and Time.] They grow naturally in Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and all
those Eastern Countries as also in some places of Africa: It comes not to
flowring in those colder Countries, but in those hotter places it flowreth in
the Summer time.

Government and Virtues.] This is a plant of Venus, of a moderate temperature,
the Root is accounted to be somewhat astringent; and is effectual for those
that have a loathing in their stomach to their Meat, it provokes Urine,
Loathing Stomach, Urine
and Women's Courses, Women's courses
discusseth all Swellings and Wind, swellings, Wind
it gently cutteth and breaks Humors, and digesteth them, and looseneth the
Breathing places of the Veins; Humors, Veins
The decoction of the flowers being drunk, (as Dioscorides says,) stays
spitting of Blood, and is good for the griefs of the Stomach, Lungs, Liver,
Lungs, Liver
and Reins; a dram of the Root taken with the like quantity of Pepper every
Morning fasting, for certain days together, is a very good remedy for those
that have the Dropsy, Reins, Dropsy
and for Convulsions, or Cramps; the decoction thereof is profitable for Women
to sit in, that are troubled with the Mother, Cramps, Convulsions, mother
it opens their Obstructions, Obstructions
digesteth Crudities, expels Corrupt humors, cutteth tough Phlegm, Crudities,
Corrupt humors, Tough, Phlegm
and consumes congealed matter in the Body; and therefore it is of excellent
use for the stopping of Urine Matter congealed, Urine
and Women's Courses, taken either in drink or by fomentation, allayeth the
inflammations of the Liver, Courses, inflammations, Liver
Stomach, and body; the Roots do bind more and the flowers are more hot, but
there is some Astriction in all the parts thereof, and therefore is very
profitably mixed with those things that stay Bleeding, it is used to be boiled
in the broth of a Chicken to ease the pains of the Womb, that Women feel after
Childbearing.

The powder thereof is singular good for all Sores stomach, bleeding, Womb, Sore
of the Mouth, and for all creeping Ulcers, Mouth, Ulcers
and, taken with Wine and Vinegar, it is very effectual for those that have an
Ulcer in their Stomach, if the Stomach or Belly be fomented with the decoction
thereof, it takes away all Inflammations therein, and eases the pains.

Rhubarb.
Kinds and Names.] THe Rha or Rubarbe, both true, and Bastard, are all
accounted, and numbered amongst the Kinds of Docks; so is our Garden Dock, or
that called Patience, or Moncks Rubarbe, so is also the Rha-pontick; I shall
give you 5 or 6 kinds of these plants, the true China, and oriental, the
Bastard, and such sorts as grow in England.

Descript.] 1. Garden-Patience, or Moncks Rhubarb; the Latin Appellation is
Lapathum sativum sive Patientia. This is a Dock, yet bears the name of
Rubarb, because of some small purging quality it is endowed with; it grows up
with large tall stalks set with somewhat broud and long, fair, green leaves,
not dented at all; the tops of the stalks are divided into small branches
bearing reddish or purplish flowers, and three square seed like unto other
Docks; the Root is long, great and yellow, like unto the Wild-Docks, but a
little redder.

Descript.] 2. Common, great, round leafed Dock or Bastard Rubarbe. It is
called in Latin Hippolapathum rotundifolium, vulgar. This has diverse large,
round, thin, yellowish, green leaves; a little waved about the edges, every one
standing on a long brownish footstalk, from among which rises up a stalk,
about two foot high, with some such leaves thereon, as grow below, but smaller,
at the top whereof stand, in a long spike, many small brownish flowers; which
turn into hard, three-square, shining-brown seed, like unto the Garden-Dock or
Patience; the Root is greater then that of Patience, having many strings or
branches thereat, yellow on the outside, and somewhat pale, yellow within, with
some discolored Veins therein, especially when it is dry.

Descript.] 3. True Rubarbe, or Rubarbe of Pontus, or English Rubarbe, called
Hippolapathum maximum, rotundifolium, exoticum, sive Rhaponticum, Thracium, vel
Rubarbarum verum. This springs up with a great, round, brownish head, rising
from the middle or sides of the Root, which opens it self into sundry leaves
one after another, very much crumpled or folded together at the first, and
brownish; but afterward spreads it self and becomes smooth, very large and
almost round, every one standing on a brownish stalk of the thickness of a man's
thumb, when they are grown to their fullness, and most of them two foot and more
in length, especially in any moist or good ground, and the stalk of the leaf
also, from the bottom thereof, next unto the Root unto the leaf it self being
in length about two foot or more, of a sad or dark green color of a fine tart
or sowrish taste, much more pleasant then the Garden or Woodsorrel; from among
these rises up sometimes but not every year, a strong thick stalk, with such
round leaves as grow below, but smaller; at every joint up to the top, and
among the flowers which are whiter, spreading forth into many branches, and
consisting of five or six small white leaves a piece, hardly to be discerned
from the white threads which are in the middle, after which come brownish three
square seed; the Root grows in time to be very great, with diverse and sundry
great spreading branches, of a dark brownish or reddish color on the outside,
and with a pale yellow thin skin under it, which covers the inner substance
or Root, which rind and skin being pared away, the root appears of so fresh
and lively a color, with fresh colored Veins running through it, that the
chiefest of that Rubarb, brought us from the Indies, does not excel it, which
Root being carefully dried, will hold his color almost as well as when it is
fresh.

Descript.] 4. The true Rubarb and Rhapontick, of China, and of the shops.
Rhabarbarum ponticum genuinum and officinarum.

The form of the root is somewhat great, round, and long, for the most part,
yet there are smaller and shorter pieces that come together, the color on the
outside is not all alike, for some is of better color, and sounder than other:
the best is firm and heavy, not spongy or light, somewhat brown, but fresh; on
the outside without many blackish spots, with fresh colored veins, running
through it, bitter in taste, and somewhat Aromatical in smell, especially if it
be fresh, and causing the spittle to be yellow being a little chewed in the
Mouth; The True Rhapontick, brought to us with the Rubarbe, is only the lesser,
and longer pieces of the Root of the true Rubarb.

Descript.] 5. The broader Elecampane leafed Rubarb. Rhaponticum Enuliae folio
latiore. This has diverse leaves rising from the root, somewhat large and long,
but not so large as the leaves of Elecampane; greenish on the upper-side, and
greyish or woolly underneath; every one standing on his own stalk, pointed at
the end, and dented about the edges; from amongst which rises up, a reasonable
big round stalk, about half a yard or a foot high, bearing at the top thereof,
one great scaly head, consisting of very broad and loose or open brown scales,
like a small Artichoke head at first, but that the scales are much more open.
The flower stands in the middle, and is composed of many bluish red or
purple thrums very pleasant to behold, after which come blackish, round and
long seed, the Root is somewhat long and thick, blackish on the outside; and of
a deadish color, on the inside. And has formerly been used for Rha Ponticum.

Descript.] 6. The narrower Elecampane leafed Rhubarbe. Rhaponticum alterum
angustifolium. This differs not much from the last, but only in the leaves,
which are a little narrower and longer then it, and a little unevenly waved on
the edges; the head flowers are alike, but a little larger, and so is the Root.

Place and Time.] Tragus says, that the first grows naturally about
Lausanna, in Savoy; but only in Gardens with us. The second grows upon the
hills not far from Caria in Germany, as also near Friburg in Switzerland; and
on the Mountains in Austria. The third, as is reported, was natural in Thracia;
and from some seeds thereof it has been planted both in England, and other
Countries. The fourth grows chiefly in China, and Cataga, and in the
Mountains of Persia. The fifth grows on Mount Baldus, near Verona in Italy;
and upon the Hills in Switzerland, and in some craggy places in Savoy.

All these sorts of Rhubarbe do grow with us in our Gardens, and do flower
about the beginning or middle of June, and the Seed is ripe in July. The Roots
that are to be dried, and kept all the year following, are not to be taken up
before the stalk, and leaves be quite withered and gone, which will be about
the middle or end of October.

Government and Virtues.] Culpepper, with a great deal of foolish nonsense,
assigns all these plants to the Government of Mars: But I say that they more
properly are under the particular influence of Jupiter; the leaves of these
kinds of Docks do a little mollify and loosen the Belly, being boiled in Broth
and taken; but the Roots have a more, opening and purging quality in them; and
some more, or less, then others, according to their quality; The round-leafed
Rubarb is stronger in operation than the Garden-Patience, or Moncks Rubarb; but
this last is of Excellent use in diet drinks, and decoctions, to purge the
Liver and cleanse the Blood. Liver, Blood


Tragus says, that a dram of the dried Roots of Moncks Rubarb, with a scruple
of Ginger made into powder and taken fasting in warm Broth, purges Choler and
Phlegm Choler, Phlegm
downward very gently, the seed thereof contrariwise does bind the Belly; and
helps to stay any sort of Lask or Bloody Flux. The distilled Water of the
leaves is used with good success to heal Scabs and foul ulcerous Sores, Lask,
Bloody Flux, Scabs, Sores.
and to allay the inflammations of them; the juice of the leaves or Roots, or
the decoction of them in Vinegar is a most effectual remedy to heal foul-Scabs
and Running-Sores.

The round-leafed or bastard-Rubarb has all the same properties, but more
effectual; and is also good against the stinging of Scorpions, as Dioscorides
says: the decoction thereof in Vinegar dropped into the Ears, Scorpions, pain
in the Ears
takes away the pains thereof, and gargled in the Mouth takes away the pains
of the Toothache, Toothache
and being drunk heals the Jaundice; the Seed thereof taken helps the
gnawing and Griping pains in the Stomach; Jaundice, gripings in stomach
and takes away the loathing thereof unto Meat, which comes by vicious sharp
humors which are gathered together at the Mouth of the Stomach, the Root
thereof helps the ruggedness of the nails, Rugged Nails
and being boiled in wine, it helps the King's Evil, Swellings of the Throat,
and kernels Kernels.
of the Ears, being swollen; and it helps them that are troubled with the
Stone, provokes Urine, and helps the dimness of the sight.

The Roots of this bastard Rubarb are of good use in diet-drinks, which are
opening and purging; or in Ale, or Beer, prepared; for opening the Liver,
cleansing the blood, and to allay the heat thereof.

The properties of the round leafed Dock or English Rubarb, are the same with
the former, but much more effectual, and has all the virtues of the Indian
Rubarb, but only is not so purgative, but being taken in a double quantity, it
works almost in an equal quality, without bitterness or Astriction.

The true Indian Rubarbe, does excellently and safely purge the body of Choler
and Phlegm, Phlegm, Choler
either taken it self in powder in a draught of White Wind, or steeped therein
all night and taken fasting, or mixed among other purgers, cleansing the
Stomach, Stomach
Liver, and Spleen, Liver, Spleen
and the Blood, opening Obstructions, Obstructions
and helping those griefs that come thereof, as the Jaundies, Jaundies
Dropsy, Dropsy
Swelling of the Spleen, and the pricking pains of the Sides, Spleen, Sides
it also stays the spitting of Blood, coming as well from the Lungs as any
other part. The powder taken with Cassia, dissolved, and a little Turpentine
washed, cleanses and strengthens the Reins; and is effectual for the
Gonorrhea or Running of the Reins. It is also good for pains and Swellings in
the Head, and against Melancholy, the Sciatica Reins, Headache, melancholy,
Sciatica
and Gout, and pains of the Cramp, Gout, Cramp
for which purpose one dram or two of the Extract thereof made in this manner
does work effectually being given in Broth. Take a sufficient quantity of
Rubarb, and let it be steeped in Cinnamon Water, which being strongly
pressed-forth let it be stilled in a glass Limbeck in Balneo, until the Water
be drawn forth, and the substance remaining, be of the thickness of Honey, which
keep in a close covered-pot or glass, for the use aforesaid.

The powder of Rubarb taken with a little Minnia and Madder-roots, in some red
Wine, dissolveth congealed or clotted-Blood in the Body, happening by any fall
or Bruise, and heals Burstings and broken-parts, as well inward as outward;
the Oil likewise wherein it has been boiled works the same effect, the part
being anointed with it.

It helps also the Yexing Hiccop Yexing Hiccop
and all Fluxes of the Belly, if it be toasted or dried a little by the fire,
but much more if it be roasted or half burnt, and taken in Wine after this
manner. Take a pint of good Claret Wine, and burn it with some Sugar, and a top
or two of Rosemary, into which put a dram and an half of Rubarb roasted, as
aforesaid; and one dram of Chebol Merobalanes, a little broken or bruised; let
these stand in the burnt Wine all night by the fire, and strain it forth in the
Morning, giving this at two times fasting, which will in three or four days,
stay any scouring or Lask, Scouring Lask
strengthening the Stomach, and inward parts afterward.

It is used to heal those Ulcers that happen in the Eyes Stomach, Eyes
or Eyelids, and to assuage the Tumors; and allay the inflammations, being
steeped and strained and applied with Honey, or Cute, that is to say, any boiled
Wine; it takes away any black and blew Spots, or marks that happen therein.
This Rubarb is so gentle a medecin, that it may be given to all Constitutions,
whether they be Children or Women with Child, and that safely at all times of
the year; the whey of Milk but especeially of Goats Milk, is the best and most
proper liquor wherein it is to be steeped and taken, or else in White Wind,
whereby it works more effectually; in opening Obstructions, and purging the
Stomach and Liver from Choler and Phlegm; a little Indian Spikenard used
therewith is the best Correcter thereof.

Rosemary.
Kinds and Names.] THere was formerly but one kind of Rosemary known to us,
which was the ordinary Rosemary; but now we have discovered several sorts,
which shall follow with their Names, before their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Ordinary Rosemary. It is called in Latin Libanotis coronaria,
sive Rosmarinum vulgar.

This is no natural English plant, yet in diverse Gardens in this Land, where it
has stood long, as well as in its natural Soil; it grows in time to a great
height, with a great and Woody stem of a close firm substance and whitish
within branching forth into many Arms, and from them again into many other
smaller branches, at the joints whereof are set at several distances, many long
and very narrow leaves, green above, and greyish underneath; and with all,
along the stalks toward the tops, diverse small gapeing flowers, of a pale,
bleak, bluish color, standing in whitish husks; the seed is small and
reddish, but seldom does any that is sown in our Country endure the first
Winter without Extraordinary care, and therefore is usually increased by
slipping. The whole plant has an Aromatical smell.

Descript.] 2. Gilded Rosemary. Rosmarinum striatum sive Aureum, is the Latin
appellation. This differs not from the former in any thing, but in the
leaves, which are edged, or striped, or pointed with with a fair Gold yellow
color, which so continues all the year, yet fresher in Summer than Winter.

Descript.] 3. Broad-leafed Rosemary, called in Latin Rosmarinum Latifolium.
This grows like the former, but not so great in our Country nor with such
Woody branches, and is more tender to keep; the leaves are larger, and of a
more shining deep green color on the upper side, and little or nothing whitish
underneath, more thinly also or sparsedly set on the stalks; the flowers differ
nor from the former kinds.

Descript.] 4. Double flowred-Rosemary. Rosmarinum flore duplici. This differs
from the former, in this, that it has stronger stalks while it is young, then
the last, or not so easy to break; fairer also, and larger leaves then the
first, and the flowers are double like those of the Larkes-heel, or Larks-spur.

Descript.] 5. Whild-sweet Silesia Rosemary, or Mathiolus his Wild Bohemian
Rosemary. Rosmarinum sylvestre Bohemicum Mathioli, sive Laedum Silesiacum
Clusii. This rises with Woody ash-colored branches, two foot high or more,
which shoot forth other branches of a purplish color covered with a
brownish-yellow hoariness, on which are set many narrow, long, green leaves,
like unto those of Rosemary, but covered with the like hoariness as the stalks
are, especially in their natural place, but not so much being transplanted, and
folding their sides so close together that they seem nothing but ribs or
stalks, of an excellent pleasant and sweet smell; at the ends of the branches
grow certain brownish and scaly leaves, out of which spreads a tuft of many
flowers, consisting of five white leaves a piece, with ten white chines or
threeds in the middle, and in some plants with six leaves, and twelve threads or
Chives, after which follow five long square heads, spotted with silver-like
white spots, while they are green; but grow brownish, when they are ripe, and
turn down their tops, opening their husks at the stalks, least the seed which
is as small as dust should fall out; the Root is Woody with short sprigs.

Descript.] 6. Unsavory Wild Rosemary, Rosmarinum sylvestre, (...). This does
nearly resemble Rosemary, but is not sweet like them: It grows above a foot
high, having diverse reddish branches which divide themselves into others,
smaller, of a whitish color, set confusedly with long and narrow leaves, green
on the upperside and hoary underneath, like those of the Dwarffe-Willow, of no
pleasant scent at all, but of an Astringent taste; At the tops of the branches,
stand diverse heads, composed of many short scales, out of which shoot forth
sundry flowers, standing on long footstalk, made of five leaves a piece, of a
fine pale reddish or flesh color, after which rise short five-square heads,
with blunt points containing small pale colored seed.

Descript.] 7. Our Wild Rosemary. Rosmarinum sylvestre minus, nostras. This
Wild North Country Rosemary, grows not so high, with smaller leaves; nothing
so great and long as Rosemary leaves, but thicker, and shorter; of a dark green
shining color above, and somewhat yellowish, green underneath, set very
sparsedly on very slender and pliant, blackish, green twigs, at the tops
whereof grow the flowers not out of scaly heads as in the former, of a reddish
color: the whole plant has very little scent, if any at all, that can be
perceived.

Place and Time.] The Ordinary Rosemary grows in Spain, abundantly near the
Seaside, on Commons as Heath does with us; the scent whereof is many times
smelt, by those that pass by in Ships, very many leagues off from the Land; in
Provence also of France, and sundry other those hot Countries, but will not
abide (unless kept in Stows) the Winter, in diverse places of Germany, Denmark,
Swedland and those other Northerly Regions. The fifth in Silesia, Bohemia, and
the parts thereabouts. The sixth in the same places with the fifth. The last in
diverse places in Lancashire and Yorke-shire.

The first flowereth in April and May with us, and sometimes in August, the
others not until August; But at Christmas last, at Hedsorwharffe in
Buckinghamshire there was Rosemary with very fresh blossoms.

Government and Virtues.] Rosemary is an Herb of the Sun, and is endued with
many physical Remedies both for inward and outward diseases, it helps all
cold diseases both of the Head, Stomach, Head, stomach
Liver, and Belly; Liver, Belly
the decoction of it in Wine helps the cold distillation of Rheum in the
Eyes, Rheum, Eyes
and all cold diseases of the Head and Brain, Head, Brain
Giddiness or Swimming therein, Drowsiness Drowsiness
or Dullness of the Mind and Senses, the dumb Palsy Dullness, Palsy
or loss of Speech, the Lethargy and Falling Sickness, Lethargy,
falling sickness
to be both drunk and the Temples bathed therewith; It helps the pains of
the Gums and Teeth, Gums, Teeth
by Rheums falling to them, or by putrefaction causing a stinking-breath: It
helps a Weak Memory by heating and drying up the cold moistures of the
Brains, and quickening the Senses. Stinking-Breath, Weak-Memory, Senses
It is very comfortable to the Stomach in all the cold griefs thereof; and to
stay the aptness to Vomiting, causing the Stomach the better to contain and
Digest Stomach, cold griefs, vomiting, Digestion
the Meat, either the decoction or powder taken in Wine.

It is a remedy for the Windiness in the Stomach or Bowels, Wind in the
stomach, or bowels
as also for the Hypochondriack passion, and Wind in the Spleen; Hypocondriack
Passion, Wind in the Spleen
it opens Obstructions of the Liver, and helps those that are Liver-grown.
Liver-grown
It helps dim Eyes, Dim-Eyes
and to procure a clear sight, Clear-sight
if all the while it is in flower, one take of the flowers fasting with Bread
and Salt. If a decoction be made thereof in Water, and they that have the
yellow Jaundice, do take thereof, and Exercise their Bodies presently after the
taking thereof, it will certainly Cure them thereof, as Witness both Galen and
Dioscorides.

The flowers, and the conserve made of them, is singular good to comfort the
Heart, Yellow-Jaundice, Heart
and to expel the Contagion of the Pestilence, Pestilence
to burn the Herb in Houses and Chambers to Correct the Air in the time of
Infection; Both the flowers and leaves are good for Women that are troubled
with the Whites, they being taken daily; the dried leaves shred small, and
taken in a pipe as Tobacco is taken, helps much those that are troubled with
the Tissick, Whites in Women, Tissick
Cough, or Consumption; Cough, Consumption
the leaves are effectual in Bathings, and like-wise made into Ointments or
Oils is very good to help cold benumbed Nerves, Joints, Nerves, joints
Sinews or Members. Sinews, Members.
The Chemical Oil drawn from the leaves and flowers is a Sovereign Remedy for
all the diseases aforesaid, to touch the Temples and Nostrils, with two or
three drops thereof for all these diseases of the Head and Brains spoken of
before; and for the inward griefs before metioned: some drops thereof being
taken in Ale or Wine; you may make Rosemary-Ale with four or six drops thereof
in a pint of Ale at any time, which is good for the aforesaid purposes. There
is another oil made by insolation in this manner: Take what quantity you will
of the flowers, and put them into a glass close stopped, and digest them in
Horse-dung fourteen days, which then being taken forth and unstopped, tie a
fine linnen-cloath over the mouth, and turn the mouth down into another strong
glass, which being set in the Sun an oil will distill down into the lower glass
which is precious for diverse uses; both inward and outward as a sovereign Balm,
to heal the diseases before spoken of, to clear a dim sight, and to take away
spots, marks, and scars in the skin.

Roses.
Kinds and Names.] IT is not our intention here to say any thing of the Garden
or manured Roses, but I intend liere to show you the several kinds of the Rose
sylvesters, or wild Roses; of which I shall set down about ten several kinds,
whose names follow with their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. The ordinary wild Bryar-bush or wild-Bose, called in latin Rosa
sylvestris inodora sive Canina. This wild-Rose or Bush, grows of it self on
the Hedges very high, with upright hard woody stems, covered with a greyish
bark, especially the old ones; set with sharp thorns up to the tops, not so
thick as the sweet Bryar, having diverse leaves somewhat large thereon, but not
so green on the upper side, nor so greyish underneath as the other; the middle
Rib whereof has diverse small crooked thorns, and without any scent at all,
the flowers stand at the tops of the branches diverse set together, of a whitish
blush-colour made of five round-pointed leaves, somewhat longer than the
Eglantine Rose; standing in such husks as the other Roses do. After the flowers
are gone, the fruit comes somewhat long and round, of a reddish color when it
is ripe, having a soft sweetish pulp under the skin, and seeds lying therein;
the root is somewhat great and runs deep, and far under the ground: upon
this Rose is often found a Burre or Ball of brown threads as well as upon the
Eglantine Rose.

Descript.] 2. The wild bush bryar Rose, whose latin appellation is Rosa
sylvestris odorata, carneo flore. This is so like the former that it is hardly
to be discerned from it, either for the height of the stem or store of thorns,
or smallness of the leaves, but only for the flowers which are somewhat
larger, and of a deeper blush or pale purple color, somewhat sweet withal.

Descript.] 3. The wild Bryar of Muscovy, called in latin Rosa sylvestris
Rustica. This has sundry reddish yellow stalks rising from the root, spotted
or rather bunched out as it were with blisters in diverse places, with thorns
thereon like a Bryar or wild-Rose, the leaves are not many but small, like the
wild hedge-bryar, or rather smaller, and turning red in Summer; the Roses are
single and small, of a deep incarnate color, more than the former.

Descript. 4. The Virginia Bryar Rose, called in Latin Rosa sylvestris
Virginiensis. The Virginia Rose, has diverse, as great stems and branches, as
any other Rose, whose young are green, and the elder greyish; set with many
pricks, and a few great thorns among them, the leaves are very green and
shining, small and almost round, many set on a middle rib one against another,
somewhat like unto the single yellow-Rose; the flowers stand at the tops of the
branches consisting of five small leaves, of a pale purple or deep
Carnation-colour, like unto those of the sweet Bryar.

Descript.] 5. The single sweet white Rose, called in Latin, Rosa Campestris
flore, albo, odora. This Rose has woody stems about three foot high, set as
thick with sharp thorns as any of the other, and has the like leaves but not
so green; at the tops of whose branches stand usually but one flower apiece,
consisting of five white leaves reasonable large, and of a sweet smell with
diverse yellow threads in the middle, in their places come such like round and
short heads or berries as are in other Roses, but are black when they are ripe,
and not red; with white seeds lying in flocks of Down.

Descript.] 6. The Vermilion Rose of Austria, Rosa sylvestris Austriaca, flore
phoeniceo. The younger branches of this Rose are slender and reddish, the elder
brownish gray, set with diverse thorns but not very thick, great or sharp, the
leaves are somewhat sharper than those of the single yellow Rose, else not much
unlike; the flowers are single and as large as those of the yellow-Rose, but of
an excellent Orange-tawny-colour, with an eye of vermilion cast over it, and of
a paler-yellow on the outside, after which the fruit follows.

Descript.] 7. The single dwarf red-Rose of Austria, Rosa pumila rubra
Austriaca. This Dwarf-Rose grows not above half a yard high, with slender
green stems, set with few or no thorns below, but having many higher, having
whitish green leaves upon them, like the other roses, and greyish underneath;
five or seven set on a stalk together; at the top of the branches come forth
very great bearded husks, wherein stand large flowers made of five leaves
apiece, somewhat sweet; red at the first, but decaying with standing, growing
much more pale before they fail away; with yellow threads in the middle, after
which come the fruit which are red as the others but greater, somewhat more
like unto a pease than the others.

Descript.] 8. The small Burnet-Rose or Pimpinel-Rose, Rosa Pimpinella sive
pomifera minor. This small Rose seldom rises above a foot high, being of two
sorts, whereof the one has but few thorns, and the other full of small thorns,
which is most frequent, set with long winged stalks of leaves, being many small
leaves, round and greenish set one against another upon the stalk, finely
dented about the edges, seeming like unto a Burnet leaf, for the form and
number set together: The flowers are single small and white, without any scent,
after which come small round heads, black when they are ripe, and full of seed
as the other Roses.

Descript.] 9. Dwarf single white Rose, Rosa pumila sylvestris alba. This
scarce rises above a foot above ground, being set with small thorns and
leaves, according to the proportion of the Plant and the wildness of the kind;
the flowers are white and small, giving heads and seed like the rest; the root
creeps about more than others.

Descript.] 10. The single Dwarf-Rose without thorns, Rosa simplex pumila sine
spina. This Dwarf-Rose grows also very low, almost upon the ground with green
stalks without any thorn thereon, set with small winged leaves, the flower is
small, and of a pale reddish color, and single, in some places very sweet, and
in others little or nothing, flowring also in some places both in the Spring
and Autumn.

Place and Time.] The two first grow in the Hedges of our Land, every where
almost, yet the second not so frequent as the first; the third came from
Muscovy, the fourth from Virginia, the fifth from Germany in sundry places, the
sixth and seventh from Austria, the eighth is found in diverse places of our own
land, both in barren Heathy grounds and by Woods and hedges sides, the ninth on
some of the hills among the Switzers, and the last near unto Lions in France,
upon Pilates Hill there; some of these Roses flower earlier than others, some
in May, and others not until June.

Government and Virtues.] The Roses are certainly all under the dominion of
Venus; I shall first set down the properties of the manured-Roses. Both the
white and the red, are of a cooling binding quality, yet the white is taken to
exceed the red in both these qualities, but is seldom used in any inward
medicine; The red has a watery substance, and a warm, joined with the other
Qualities; The yellow threads in the middle, do bind and dry, more then the
Rose it self; The Juice of the Roses when they are fresh, purges Choler and
watery Humors; Choler, watery humors.
but being dried, they have a stopping and astringent quality. The decoction of
the red-Rose in wine, is very good for the Headache, and pains in the Ears,
Eyes, Throat, and Gums.

The Fundament also, the lower-bowels, and the Matrix, being bathed or put into
them. The same decoction with the Roses remaining therein, is profitably
applied to the Region of the Heart, to ease the inflammations therein, as also
St. Anthonies fire, and all other diseases of the Stomach; and being dried and
beaten to powder, and taken in steeled wine, or water, they stay women's
Courses, Headache, pains in the Ears, Eyes, Throat and Gums, Fundament,
Lower-Bowels and Matrix, Inflammation of the Heart, St. Anthonies fire, stomach,
Women's Courses, Eyes.
and are good for the eyes, being mixed with other medicines for that purpose.

The yellow threads in the middle of the red Roses, being powdered, and drunk
in the distilled water of Quinces, stays the abundant flux of women's Courses,
and helps the defluxions of Rheum upon the Gums and Teeth; Women's Courses:
Rheums, Gums and Teeth-loose.
and preserves them from corruption, and fastneth them, if they be loose; if
they be washed and garbled therewith, and some Vinegar of squils added thereto;
the heads with seed being used in powder, or in a decoction, stays the Laske,
and the spitting of Blood. Red Roses do strengthen the heart, the stomach, and
the Liver, and the retentive faculties; and mitigate pains that arise of heat,
assuage Inflammations, procure sleep and rest, stay women's Courses, Gonorrhaea,
and the fluxes of the belly. The husks of the Roses, with the beards, and the
nails of the Roses, are binding and cooling; and the distilled water of either
of them, is good for the heat and redness of the Eyes, and to dry up the Rheums
and watering of them; Lask, Spitting of blood, Heart, Stomach, Liver,
Retentive-faculties, pains of heat, Inflammations, Sleep, Rest, Women's Courses,
Gonorrhaea, Fluxes, Heat and redness of the eyes, Rheumes and watering.
Of the red Roses are made several Compositions, as Electuary of Roses,
Conserve, Sugar of Roses, Syrup of dried Roses, and honey of Roses; The Cordial
powder called Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Aromaticum rosatum; The distilled water
of Roses, Vinegar of Roses, ointment, and oil of Roses, and the Rose-leaves
dried.

The Electuary is purging, whereof two or three drams may be taken for one of a
weak constitution, but six drams for stronger bodies. This purges Choler, and
is good in hot Fevers, in pains of the head, arising from hot and Choleric
humors, and heat in the Eyes: The Jaundies also and Joynt-Aches proceeding from
hot humors. The moist Conserve is both binding and Cordial, some of the
younger Conserve taken with Mithridate is good, for those that are troubled
with Rheums and defluxions of Rheums into the eyes. And for Fluxes and Lasks of
the Belly, and being mixed with some powder of Mastich, it is good for the
running of the Reins, Choler, hot fevers, heat in the eyes, Jaundies,
Joint-aches, rheums, Defluxions, Eyes, Lasks, Running of the Reins.
and for looseness of humors in the Body. The old Conserve mixed with
Diarrhodon Abbatis, or, Aromaticum rosarum, is a very good Cordial against
Faintings, Swoonings, and weakness; and tremblings of the heart; it
strengthens also both them nd a weak Stomach, Faintings, Swoonings, Trembling
of the heart, Weak Stomach,
helps digestion, stays Casting, and is a very good preservative in time of
Infection. Digestion, Casting, Infection
The Sugar of Roses is a very good Cordial to strengthen the heart and Spirits,
as also to stay defluxions. The Syrup of dried red Roses strengthens a
relaxed stomach, given to Casting, cools an overheated Liver, relaxed,
Stomach-Casting, Liver-heated
and the blood in Agues; comfort the heart, and resists putrefaction and
Infection, and helps to stay Lasks and Fluxes; Agues, Infection, Lasks and
Fluxes.
honey of Roses is much used in gargles and Lotions, to wash sores, either in
the mouth, throat, or other parts, both to cleanse and heal them, and stay the
Fluxes of humors falling upon them, hindering their healing; It is used also in
Glisters to cool and cleanse. The Cordial powders called Diarrhodon Abbatis,
and Aromaticum rosarum, does comfort and strengthen the heart and stomach,
causes an Appetite, helps digestion, stays vomiting, and is good for those
that have slippery bowels, to strengthen and confirm them; Red Rose Water is
cooling and Cordial, and of better use than Damask Rose Water, it refreshes
and quickneth faint and weak Spirits, Mouth, Throat, Fluxes of humors,
strengthens the heart and Stomach, Appetite, Vomiting, Bowels, Faint and weak
Spirits.
either used in meats or broaths; to wash the temples, or to smell to at the
nose; or else by the sweet vapors thereof out of a perfuming-pot or cast on a
hot fire-shovel. It is also of much use against the redness and Inflammations of
the eyes to bathe them therewith, and the Temples of the head against pains and
ach thereof; Vinegar of Roses is of much use for the same purposes, and to
procure rest and sleep; Inflammations of the eyes, Headache, Rest and sleep.
if the nose and temples be moistened therewith, but rather if a piece of red
rose Cake made fit for the purpose, be moistened thereon, and heated between a
double-folded cloth, with a little beaten nutmeg and poppy-seed strewed on that
side shall lie next the forehead and temples, and so bound thereto for all
night. The ointment of Roses is much used against heat and inflammations in the
head, to anoint the forehead and temples, and being mixed with some Populeon to
procure rest; It is also used for heat of the Liver, Back, and Reins, to cool
Inflammations, pushes, wheals, or other red pimples Heat and Inflammations in the
head, Heat of the Liver, Back and Reins, pushes, wheals, Pimples.
rising in the Back and other parts. Oil of roses is also used by it self for
the same purposes, and is likewise put into many Compositions both ointments
and plasters, to cool and bind and restrain the flux of humors. The dried
leaves of the red roses are cooling, binding and cordial, Rose-leaves and Mynts
heated and applied outwardly to the stomach, stays vomiting, and
strengthens a weak stomach Vomiting, weak stomach.
very much; And applied as an Epitheme, or fomentation to the Region of the
Liver and heart, Liver and heart.
does much cool and temper the distemperature in them; Of the Damask roses are
not made so many medicines and Compositions, but only the Conserve and
Preserve; the Syrup and honey of those roses (both which are called solutive)
the water and the distilled oil or spirit, which serves more for outward
perfumes than inward physic, the Syrup of Damask-Roses is both simple and
Compound, and made with Agarick; the simple solutive Syrup is a familiar safe
and gentle easy medicine, purging Choler taken from one ounce to three or
four; The Syrup of roses with Agarick is more strong and effectual in working
than the simple Syrup, and works as much on phlegm as Choler; The compound
Syrup is more forceable in working on melancholy humors, and available against
the Leprosy, Itch, Tetters, and the French disease. Honey of roses solutive,
is made of the same Infusion that the Syrup is made of, and works the same
effect in opening and purging; but because the honey is not so convenient to be
given to hot and Aguish bodies, it is oftener given to phlegmatic than
Choleric persons, and is more used in Glisters than potions, as the Syrup made
with sugar is; The Conserve and Preserved leaves of these roses, are operative
to the same effect in gently opening the belly, the dried Damask rose leaves
powdered and drunk in Whay gently purges.

The Musk Roses both single and double, do purge more forceably than the
Damask; and the single is held more forceable than the double, the wild roses
are few or none of them used in physic, but are generally held to come near to
the nature of the manured roses, both in the earthy and binding quality. Pliny
lib. 8. Cap. 4. says, that the root of the wild-Rose is singular good to cure
the biting of a mad dog, the fruit of the wild Bryar which are called Heppes,
and in some Countries Canker-berries, being thorow-ripe, and made into a
Conserve does gently bind the belly, and is very pleasant to the taste, and
stays defluxions Bind the belly, Defluxions.
from the head upon the stomach, and dries up the moisture thereof and helps
digestion; the pulp of the Heppes dried into an hard consistence, like to the
juice of Liquorish, or so dried that it may be made into powder and taken in
drink, stays speedily the Whites in women; the Bryar-ball is often used,
being made into powder, and drunk, to break the stone, to provoke Urine, and to
ease and help the Chollick; Whites, Stone, Urine, Chollick.
In the middle of these balls are often found certain white worms, which being
dried and made into powder and some of it drunk is found by long experience of
many to kill, and drive forth the worms of the belly.

Rice.
Descript.] THis grain or Corn rises up with a stronger stalk than wheat,
about a yard high; with sundry joints, and a large thick leaf at each of them,
like unto the Reed; at the top it bears a spiked tuft spread into branches,
whose blooming is said to be purplish, with the seed standing severally on
them; enclosed in a hard brown straked husk, and an Arm at the head of every
one of them; which being hulled, is very white, of the bigness almost of wheat
Corns, blunt at both ends.

Names.] Rice is called in latin Oriza, and the Italians call it Rizo, the
French Rys.

Place and Time.] This grain originally was brought out of the East Indies,
where in many places it yields two Crops in a year, being the chiefest Corn
they live upon, and not with them only, but through all Aethiopia and Africa,
and from thence has been brought into Syria, Egypt, Italy etc. It delights
to grow in moist grounds, and is a Summer Corn, ripe about the middle of Autumn.

Government and Virtues. It is a Solar grain. The physical use thereof is
chiefly to stay the Lasks and Fluxes of the stomach and belly, especially if it
be a little parched before it be used, and steel quenched in the milk wherein
it is boiled, being somewhat binding and drying; It is thought also to increase
seed, Lasks, Fluxes, increase Seed.
being boiled in milk and some sugar and Cinnamon put thereunto; The flower of
Ryce is of the same property, and is sometimes also put into Cataplasmes, that
are applied to repel humors from flowing or falling to the place, and is also
conveniently applied to women's breasts, Repel humors, Inflammations in women's
breasts
to stay Inflammations therein in the beginning thereof.

Spanish Safron.
Kinds and Names.] I shall describe severally the sorts hereof, and therein set
down their names.

Descript.] 1. The manured Spanish or bastard Safron, called in Latin, Cnicus
sive Carthamus sativus. This has sundry large leaves, lying next the ground,
without any pricks, or with very few white ones, at the corners of the leaves,
and divisions, among which rises a strong round stalk three or four foot high
branching it self up to the top bearing shorter leaves, sharp-pointed and
prickly at the edges, and at their ends a great open scaly head, out of which
shoot forth many gold yellow threads, of a most orient and shining color,
which being gathered in a dry warm time and kept dry, will abide in the same
delicate color which it bare when it was fresh for a long time; the seed when
it comes to maturity is white and hard, somewhat long and round, and a little
cornered, the root is long white and woody, perishing yearly after seed time.

Descript.] 2. Wild or bastard Safron of Candy, Cnicus alter Creticus. This
has a thick and long black root, from which rises up one straight round stalk
half a cubit high, set here and there with long sharp-pointed leaves, thick set
with prickles at the dents of the edges, at the top whereof stands a scaly
head, compassed with prickly leaves, of the bigness of the Atractylis or
distaff-thistle, out of which break forth diverse thick yellow Safron-like
threads, thrust thick together, a fire which the seed grows therein, being
white, and as big as the greater Centory-seed,

Descript.] 3. Clusius his everliving bastard Safron, Cnicus alter perennis
Clus^i. This grows up with diverse hard strong and round stalks, without any
branches at all from them to the height of three or four foot; bearing thereon
at several places somewhat large and long leaves, dented about the edges, of a
sad or dusky green color, at the top of every stalk stands one great close
hard scaly head, but not prickly at all, not so great as the other
bastard-Safron, never opening the scales of the head as that does, from the
middle whereof comes diverse threads, yet nothing so many as in the other; of a
sad bluish ash color, and whitish at the bottom of them; the seed which lies
among the down in those heads is greater than of the other, thick and short but
not white, and in lesser quantity than it; The Roots run down deep into the
ground, and being there increased, do run and spread themselves, taking up a
great deal of room.

Place and Time.] The first is generally sown in Spain, Italy, and other places
for the especial use thereof. The second, Alpinus says, was brought out of
Candy; the last grows wild in Spain, as well about Sevil as Cordula; and in
several other places as Clusius says; These kinds of Safron are called both in
Greek and Latin, Cnicus and Cnecus and in Apothecaries shops Carthamus; of
some also Crocus Saracenicus, the Arabians call it Kartan, the Italians
Saffarano, Sarasenisco; the Spaniards Alacor and Acafran Salvia; the Germans
call it wilder Safron, the French Safron-bastard, and grain de Peroquets,
because they use to feed Parrots with the seed; in English wild Safron,
Bastard-Safron, Spanish Safron, and Catalonia Safron.

Government and Virtues.] These are all Solar, the flowers of the first Spanish
Safron are much used in Spain and other places, to be put into their broths and
meats; they are also of great use in dying silk into a kind of a
Carnation-colour, the seed is chiefly used in physic, or rather the kernels
within the seed, which beaten and the emulsion thereof taken in honyed water or
the broth of a Pullet, and taken fasting, does open the body and purges watery
and Phlegmatic humors, Phlegm, Watery humors, Chollick, Dropsy.
both upwards and downwards, which it also performs if the emulsion thereof
be given in a Glyster, and thereby helps the Chollick and dropsy, and those
other diseases that proceed from those humors. Being made into a lohoch or
licking Electuary with Sugar and honey, and a few Almonds, and Pine-kernels it
wonderfully cleanses the breast and lungs of phlegm sticking thereon, causing
it to be spit forth, Phlegm, Breast, Lungs, Sperm, Voice cleared.
it clears the voice, and increases seed by the often use of it; but it does
somewhat trouble the stomach, and therefore some stomachichal helpers are to be
used with it, As, Anniseed, Galanga, Mastich, (or if need be of more forceable)
Cardamoms, Ginger, Salgem; a dram of the flowers in powder taken in Hydromel or
honyed water, or in Barley-water helps the Jaundise, Jaundise.
a dram of the pulp of the seed taken with an ounce of Syrup of wormwood does
the like also; the Confection made of the seeds of it called in Shops
Diacarthamum, is an especial good medicine to purge Choler and phlegm, as also
to clear and cleanse the body of the watery humors of the dropsy; the second
sort is used to the same purposes; of the last little is said, but being alike
in form it may be so likewise in quality.

Sarsaparilla.
THis is reckoned amongst the sorts of prickly bindweeds, of which there are
two sorts, and this Sarsaparilla brought from the West Indies makes the third
kind. Their names with their Descriptions severally follow.

Descript.] 1. Prickly Bindweed with red berries, called in Latin, Smilax
aspera, fructu rubro, This grows up with many branches wherewith it windeth
about trees, and other things, set with many crooked pricks or thorns like a
bramble, all the whole length bending this way and that in a seemly proportion,
at every joint it boweth or bends it self, having somewhat a broad and long
leaf thereat, standing upon a long footstalk, and is broad at the bottom with
two forked round ends, and then grows narrower unto the point: The middle rib
on the backside of most of them having many small thorns or pricks, and also
about the edges; The lowest being the largest and growing smaller up to the
top, smooth and of a fair green color, and sometimes spotted with white spots,
at the joints with the leaves also come forth clasping tendrels, like as a Vine
has, whereby it winds it self; the flowers stand at the tops of the branches
at three or four joints, many breaking forth in a cluster which are white,
composed of six leaves a piece, star-fashion, and sweet in scent, after which
come the fruit which are red berries when they are ripe, of the bigness of
Asparagus- berries or small grapes; and in some lesser, wherein are contained
sometime two or three hard black stones, like also unto those of Asparagus, the
root is slender white and long, in hard dry grounds not spreading far, but in
the looser and moister places running down into the ground a pretty way, with
diverse knots and joints thereat, and sundry long roots running from thence.

Descript.] 2. Prickly Bindweed with black berries, Smilax aspera fructu nigro.
This other prickly bindweed grows like the former, his branches being joynted
in like manner with thorns on them, but nothing so many climbing like the
former, the leaves are somewhat like it, but not having those forked ends at
the bottom of every leaf, but almost wholly round, and broad at the bottom, of
a darker green color also, seldom having any thorns or pricks, either on the
back or edges of the leaves, with tendrels like a Vine also: the flowers come
forth in the same manner, and are Star-fashion, consisting of six leaves like
the other, of an incarnate or blush-colour, with a round red umbone in the
middle of every one, which is the beginning of the berry, which when it is ripe
will be black, being more sappy or fleshy than the other, with stones or
kernels within them like unto it; the roots hereof are bigger and fuller than
the former for the most part, and spreading further under the ground.

Descript.] 3. Sarsaparilla of America, Smilax aspera Peruana.

The Sarsaparilla that comes from America into Spain, has been seen fresh,
even the whole plant; and has been verified in all things to resemble the
prickly Bindweed; and in nothing different from it. But certainly the Plant of
Sarsaparilla that grows in Peru and the West Indies, is a peculiar kind of it
self, differing from the Smilax aspera, as Mechoacan does from our Briony; This
does wind it self about Poles or any thing else it can lay hold on to climb on,
the branches have crooked prickles growing on them as the Smilax aspera has,
but fewer and not so sharp, it has very green leaves like those of Bindweed,
but longer and cornered like Ivy-leaves ending in a long point, the flowers are
said to be very great and white, every one as big as a middle-sized dish, which
opening in the morning fades at night; which occasioned the Spaniards to call
the whole Plant Buenas noches, that is goodnight: Gerard describes the
Sarsaparilla to be the roots of a shrub, having leaves like Ivy; but says
nothing of the flowers or fruit, which it may be believed was not then
discovered.

Although I have set down the usual and common names of these three kinds in
their Descriptions both English and Latin, yet because the word Smilax is
among writers diversely taken, and with various and several significations, it
is not improper here, by the way, to make some exposition thereof; It is taken
for two sorts of trees, and it is also taken for three kinds of herbs.

Theophrastus makes mention of one of the trees in lib. 3. cap. 16. of his
History* calling it Smilax Arcadum, a soft Oak, which is like unto an Ilex or
Holly-oak.

The other, which the Grecians call Smilax, simply, is called in Latin Taxus,
the Yew-tree.

The Herbs are: first, this here* expressed as well as the other more gentle
sort, which is the common Bindweed; this the Grecians call Smilax Tracheia,
Smilax Aspera, as they call the other Smilaxlia, Smilax Laevis, sive levis. And
the other the Grecians call Smilax Kepaia, Smilax hortensis, which is Dolichus
or Phaseolus, the French or Kidney Bean.

Place and Time.] The two first grow in Italy, Spain, and other the warmer
Countries, whether Continent or Isles, throughout Europe and Asia; The third is
found only in the West Indies; The best is said to come from the Honduras;
others not so good from other places, as the fertility or barrenness of the
ground, and the temperature of the Climate affords it, and it has ripe
berries early in hot Countries.

Government and Virtues.] These are all plants of Mars, of an healing quality,
howsoever used; Diascorides says, that both leaves and berries being drunk
before or after any deadly poison is taken, are a remedy there-against, Remedy
against deadly poison.
serving to expel it; It is said also, says he; that if to a new born Child,
some of the juice of the berries hereof be given, it shall not be hurt by
Poison ever after; it is given as an antidote against all sorts of Poison and
Venomous things: Venomous things.
if a dozen or sixteen of the berries being beaten to powder, be given in wine,
it procures Urine, Procures Urine, cleanses the Reins, inward Inflammations,
Heat, and Redness in the Eyes, Dries Humors, and washes away.
when it is stopped; the distilled water of the flowers being drunk, works
the same effect, and cleanses the Reins; and asswageth inward inflammations. If
the eyes be washed therewith, it takes away all heat and redness in them, And
if the Sores of the Legs be washed therewith, it heals them thoroughly. The
true Sarsaparilla is held generally not to heat, but rather to dry the humors;
yet it is easily perceived, that it does not only dry the humors, but wastes
them away, by a secret and hidden property therein* much whereof is performed
by sweating, which it performs very effectually. It is much used in many
kinds of diseases; as in all cold fluxes from the head and brain, Fluxes,
Head, Brain, Rheum, Catarrhes, cold Stomaks, Wind, Mother, French-disease,
Aches sinews, Joints, Sores Swellings; tetters, ringworms
Rheums, and Catarrhes, as also in all cold griefs of the stomach, and
expels wind very powerfully, from the stomach and mother. It helps not
only the French disease, but all manner of Aches in the Sinews or Joints; all
running sores in the legs, all phlegmatic swellings, Tetters or Ringworms, and
all manner of spots, Spots in the Skin.
and foulness of the skin; It is not proper to be given to those whose Livers
are over-hot, or to such as have Agues. The manner of using it is, and has
been diverse: in former times it was used beaten to powder, and so drank; others
used to boil it so long until it became tender, which being beaten or broken,
was afterward strained into the decoction, making a kind of thick drink like
cream. Some others, and that most usually, boiled it in water, to the half, or
the consumption of the third part, as they would have it stronger or weaker;
and that either, by it self or with other things proper for the disease it was
intended for, and others also put it amongst other things into drink; either
Beer or Ale new tunned up, to drink after it has stood three or four days for
Physick-drink, for the remedy of those griefs, it is conducible unto as
aforesaid.

A dyet-drink with Sarsaparilla for the French-disease, Aches, pains, or any
the diseases before mentioned.
Take Lignum Vitae, which is Guiacum, nine ounces; bark of the same, two
ounces, Sassafras one ounce, Sarsaparilla four ounces, Juniper Berries one
ounce; Boil them in two ounces of fountain water, to the Consumption of half,
add to the strained liquor, Coriander-seeds four drams, Cinnamon, Liquorish,
each two drams; for an ordinary drink.

Saracens Consound.
Descript. and Names.] There have several plants been mistaken and set forth
for the true Saracens Consound. The true is called Solidago Saracenica vera,
Salices Folia, the true Saracens Consound, with willow leaves. This grows
very high sometimes, with Brownish stalks, and sometimes with green, and
hollow, to a man's height, having many long and narrow green Leaves, snipt about
the edges, set thereon somewhat like unto those of the Almond or Peach-tree, or
Willow-leaves, but not of such a white Green-colour; The tops of the stalks are
furnished with many pale yellow star-like-flowers, which stand in ^green-heads,
which when they are fallen, and the seed ripe, which is somewhat long, small,
and of a yellowish brown-colour, wrapped in down, is therewith carried away
with the wind; the root is composed of many strings or fibers set together at
the head, which perish not in winter, but abide, though the stalks dry away,
and no leaf appears in winter; the taste hereof is strong and unpleasant,
and so is the leaf also.

Place and Time.] It grows in moist and wet Grounds, by woods sides, and
sometimes in the moist-places of the shaddowy-Groves, as also by water-sides;
It is rare to be found in England. Gerrard says, it grows by the highway
sides in Essex. I have sought many ways there, but could never yet find it; In
July it is in flower, and the seed is soon ripe and carried away with the wind.

Government and Virtues.] This singular Wound herb is a Plant of Mars, so that
he can sure as well as kill; It is of temperature hot and dry almost in the
third degree, and somewhat binding; In Germany it is preferred before all other
Wound-herbs, being boiled in wine and drunk, it helps the indisposition of
the Liver, and freeth the gall from obstructions; Liver, Gall obstructed,
Yellow Jaundise, Dropsy, Ulcers of the Reins, Wounds and bruises.
and for the dropsy in the beginning thereof, as also in all inward Ulcers of
the Reins or elsewhere; and inward wounds or bruises, and being steeped in wine
and then distilled, the water thereof drunk is singular good to ease all
gnawing in the stomach or any other pains or torments in the body; as also the
pains of the Mother: Gnawings on the stomach, Pains, Mother, Agues, green
wounds, Old Sores, Ulcers, Sores, Mouth and throat, privy parts.
and being in wine and drunk, it helps continual Agues; This said water or
the simple water of the herb distilled or the juice or decoction are all very
effectual to heal any green wound, or old Sore or Ulcer whatsoever, both
cleansing them from any corruption is in them and healing them up quickly
afterward; the same also is no less effectual for the Ulcers of the mouth or
throat be they never so foul or stinking, by washing and gargling the mouth and
throat therewith; and likewise for such Sores as happen in the privy parts of
man or woman, and is as effectual to all the purposes, as are Bugle or Sanicle.

Sassafras or Ague-tree.
Descript. Names.] THis Indian tree is called by some Ind ans Pavame, of some
Winanke, but its general name amongst the French, Spaniards, and all other
Nations, is Sassafras.

The tree grows great and tall, bare of branches unto a reasonable height,
covered with a greyish brown bark somewhat thick, in taste hotter and quicker
than the wood or root; toward the top it does spread forth many Arms and
branches into a round compass or form; having large dark green leaves growing
thereon, one at a place, standing on the contrary side each to other, tasting
like the root, but more weakly, some cut into three Divisions, somewhat
resembling Fig Tree leaves, but lesser by the half for the most part; with a
middle rib running through each Division, and two others to the inner cuts,
with veins besides and some with little or no division at all upon them, smooth
also and not dented about the edges, the flowers are small and yellow, made of
threads very like to the male Cornel-tree; and the fruit small, blackish
berries, set in small cups upon long footstalks, many clustring together; The
roots are not very great, neither do they grow deep, but are covered with the
like brownish bark that the trunk and branches are, but somewhat redder, which
are most in use, being of more force and efficacy than any other part of the
tree, and of a spicy taste.

Place.] This is brought unto us from the parts near Florida, and other places
of the West Indies.

Government and Virtues.] This is a solar plant, of temperature hot and dry in
the beginning of the third degree, the decoction is very useful in all cold
diseases of the liver and spleen, as also in cold rheums and defluxions of the
head, Liver, Spleen, cold Rheums.
on the teeth, defluxions on the teeth, eyes, or Lungs.
eyes, or lungs; warming and drying up the moisture, and strengthening the
parts. It is available in coughs, Coughs, Breast, Stomach.
and other cold diseases of the breast stomach and lungs, restrains castings,
and helps digestion, Castings, Digestion, wind, gravel, Kidneys, Urine,
Terms, Agues.
breaks and expels, wind, the gravel and stone in the kidneys, and
provokes Urine, and women's courses, it dries up the moisture in Women's wombs
and helps conception; It is of very good use in Tertian and Quotidian Agues,
that come of humors or are of long continuance. It is thought also to be good
in Plague-time, to wear some thereof continually about them, that the smell
thereof may expel the corrupt and evil vapors of the Pestilence: It is
generally used in all the diseases that come of cold, raw, thin and corrupt
humors; the French disease, and other of the like foul nature; the Indians use
the leaves being bruised to heal theit wounds and Sores.

Saunders.
Kinds, Descript.] IN our Shops for physical use, we have three sorts of
Saunders, whereof the white and yellow are sweet woods, and the yellow is the
sweetest; the red has no scent. The Saunder-Tree grows to be as big as a
Walnut-tree, having fresh green leaves like unto the Mastick-tree, and darkish
blew flowers, the fruit being like unto cherries for the size, but without any
taste, black when they are ripe, and quickly falling away, the wood it self is
without scent, as it is said, while it is living and fresh, and smells sweet
only when it is dry, the white and the yellow woods are so hard to be
distinguished before that time, that none but those Indians that usually fell
those trees, do know their difference beforehand; and can tell which will
prove better than others: the chiefest part and smelling sweetest, is the heart
of the wood; they are distinguished by these names, Santalum album, citrinum,
and rubrum.

Government and Virtues.] All the Saunders are under the Solar regiment, they
are all cooling and cordial, and used together in sundry cordial medicines, but
the white and the yellow are the more cordial and comfortable by reason of
their sweetness; and the red more cooling and binding; which quality neither of
the other are without though in a less proportion. The red is often used to
stay thin rheum, Thin Rheum, Inflammations, Gout, Agues, Headache, Weak and
fainting Stomachs, hot Agues, palpitation of the heart, melancholy, mirth,
Sperm, Fluxes.
falling from the head, and to cool hot Inflammations, hot gouts, and in hot
Agues to cool and temper the heat, but the white and yellow are both Cordial
and Cephalical, applied with Rosewater to the temples, procuring ease in the
headache, and are singular good for weak and fainting Stomachs through heat, and
in the hot fits of Agues; They are very profitably applied in fomentations for
the stomach, spirits, and palpitations of the heart, which also do comfort and
strengthen them; and temperate the melancholy humor and procures Alacrity and
mirth, which quality is attributed to the yellow more than the white; which is
used more to stay and bind fluxes of the Sperm in man or woman; for which
purpose either the powder taken in a real Egg or mixed with other things for
that purpose, or steeped in red wine and kept in an hot Balneo, or hot Embers,
close stopped all night, and strained forth and drunk both in the morning and
evening, stays both the Gonorrhea or running of the Reins in men, Gonorrhea,
Whites, abates great breasts. in Maids.
and the whites in women: being applied also to maids and women's great breasts,
mixed with the juice of Purselan abateth their greatness, and represseth their
overmuch growing.

Scamony.
Descript.] The true Scamony, has a long root of a dark Ashcolour, on the
outside, and white within, and of the bigness of an Arm, with a pith in the
middle thereof, and many fibers thereat, (which being dried, as says
Mathiolus, the pith taken out, seemed so like unto the roots of Turbith, which
are brought to us, from the far remote Eastern parts, none knowing what plant
it is, nor whereunto it is like, some thinking it to be the root of Trifolium,
or Sea Starwort, that otherwise it might be thought to be the right Turbith of
the Apothecaries shops,) from whence arise many long, round green-branches,
winding themselves like a bindweed about stakes and trees, or any other things
that stand next unto it, unto a good height, without any clasping tendrels,
like the true or wild Vine: from the joints of the branches come forth the
leaves, every one by it self upon short footstalks, somewhat broad at the
bottom, with two corners next thereunto, and some also round; and then growing
long and narrow to the end, being of a fair green-colour, and smooth, somewhat
shining; Toward the tops of the branches, at the joints with the leaves, come
forth large whitish bell-flowers, with wide open brims, and narrow bottoms,
after which come round heads, wherein is contained three or four black-seeds;
if any part of this plant be broken, it yields forth a milk, not hot, not
burning nor bitter, yet somewhat unpleasant, provoking loathing, and almost
casting.

Names.] It is called Scammonia, both in Greek and Latin, The dried Juice,
which is most in use, is called also Scammoniacum, in the Druggists and
Apothecaries shops, as also with most Writers, and some call the plant so too.
When it is prepared, that is baked in a Quince under the Embers, or in an oven,
or any other way, it is called Diagridium.

Place and Time.] Scamony grows in Syria, and the farther Eastern parts,
where no frosts come in the winter; for where any frost comes it quickly
perishes, and therefore flourishes always in those hot Climates.

Government and Virtues.] This is a Martial plant, and of a Churlish nature, so
that there had need be great care taken in the choice thereof, that only that
be used in Physic which is sincere and pure, without dross or adulteration;
which may be known if it be not heavy, or close compact together, but that it
be moderately light, with some small holes, or hollowness here and there,
therein; and that it be smooth and plain in the breaking, and not in grains or
knots, or having small sticks or stones in it; somewhat clear and blackish, but
not of a deadish dark or il-favoured color, and that it will be made quickly
into a very fine and white powder. It purges both phlegm, yellow-choller, and
watery-humours, Phlegm, Yellow-choler, watry-Humours.
very strongly; but if it be indiscreetly given, it will not only trouble the
stomach, more than any other medicine; but will also scowr, fret and raze the
guts, in working too powerfully, oftentimes unto blood, and oftentimes unto
faintings and swoonings, and therefore is not fit to be given to any gentle or
tender body. Mesue declares three several hurts or dangers that come to the
body thereby, and the remedies of them; The first is, says he, that it
ingendereth certain knawing winds in the stomach, so much offending it, that it
provokes to vomit. To be baked therefore in a Quince, and some parsley, fennel,
or wild Carrot-seed, or Galanga mixed with it, is the remedy hereof. The next
is that it inflameth the Spirits, by the overmuch sharpness or fierceness
therein; whereby it readily induces fevers, especially in those that are
subject to obstructions, and repleat with putrid humors, which inconveniences
are taken away by putting those things into your decoctions, that do cool and
quench the heat thereof; and such are the Muscilage of the seeds of Psyllium,
or Fleawort; Prunes boiled or rather the pulp of them, the juice or the julep
or the water of Roses or Violets, or if before the boiling thereof (that is the
Scamony) you steep it in the oil of Roses, or Violets, or in the juice of a
Quince, and mingle it with a little Sumach or Spodium. A third is, that having
a strong opening and drawing faculty, it causes immoderate fluxes of the
Belly, by opening the mouth of the veins more than is fit; This harm is also
taken away by mixing restringent and restraining things with it, such as
Mastich is, and especially yellow Myrobolans, and Quinces or the juice of them.
Again, it raseth the intrails and guts, by reason of the sharp juice wherewith
it does abound, and by which it procures torments and pains therein;
Dysenteria or the Bloody flux and Tenasmus which is a disease when one desires
to go often to the stool and can do nothing; This danger is remedied if moist
fat and slippery things be used with it, as Gumtragacanth, Bdellium, and oil of
Almonds and Roses, as also the pulp of prunes made up with Sugar, the muscilage
of Fleawort-seeds, Mastich, and Quinces taken afterward, and warm water last
of all; all which cause it to pass the quicklier from the stomach and bowels,
and thereby prevents its doing harm. This fault is also helped if cold
medicines as well as hot be mixed together to be given, thereby to yield help to
the heart liver and stomach, thus far Mesue.

Dioscorides says, that if the juice be applied to the womb it destroys the
birth, Birth destroys, Wheals, Pimples, pushes, Leprosy, headache.
being mixed with honey and Ox-gall; and rubbed on wheals pimples and pushes
takes them all away: and boiled in vinegar and anointed takes away the
Leprosy, and outward marks in the skin, being dissolved in Rosewater and
vinegar; and the head moistened therewith eases the continual pains thereof; A
dram or two of the roots of Scamony purge in the same manner as the juice does,
if some of the things that are appointed therewith be given in it. The roots
boiled in water and made into a Pultice with Barley meal eases the Sciatica,
Sciatica, Scurfs, Scabs, Imposthumes.
being laid thereon; it takes away Scurfs and scabs if they be washed with the
Vinegar, wherein the Roots have been boiled, and also heals Imposthumes.

The Scarlet Grain.
Descript. Names.] THis is called in latin Chermes, seu Coccus insectorius.
This grain or berry is a kind of Excrescence that nature thrusts forth upon
the holme-oaks, while the branches are young, and grows all along the
branches at the several joints and footstalks of the leaves, being as big as a
pease, of a reddish ash color before they be ripe, but of the color of the
holly or Asparagus-berries when they are ripe, or somewhat darker; but are
gathered for the most part before they be too ripe: When as they will contain a
clear juice of a crimson color, as deep as any pure fresh blood: which by the
heat of the Sun breed small red worms little bigger than fleas at the first,
but being suffered to grow great, consume the inward substance of the berry or
grain, creeping away and leaving the husk or shell empty. They are gathered for
the Apothecaries use, to make the Sovereign Cordial-confection called Alkermes,
which is Cordi Amica; and press forth the juice: which being boiled up, with a
proportion of Sugar fit to preserve it from sowring is kept for a whole year
after; when they are somewhat more ripe they are gathered for the Dyers use to
dye fine Scarlet withal, and are brought into powder in this manner; when these
grains or berries are gathered in their fit time they cast them on a sheet or
other such thing, sprinkling them with some wine or vinegar, born up from the
ground by the sides or four Corners and dry them in the hot Sun; some put them
in a bag or Bolter, and dry them in an oven.

Place and Time.] These trees grow in Spain, Portugal, Italy and France, in
Provence, in Africa also and Asia, both greater and lesser, the berries begin
to appear in April, and are gathered in May.

Government and Virtues.] These berries are solar, and are used to heal green
wounds and sinews that are cut, to be mixed with vinegar or Oxymel, Green
wounds, Sinews cut, Miscarriage.
and is much commended to be given to women with Child who are subject to
miscarry with their Children; but especially the Confection which is called
Alkermes, which is made of the juice of these berries, is effectual for that
purpose; and is also a sovereign Cordial to revive the fainting spirits of the
heart, and to drive away melancholy. This Confection also is used with good
effect against the trembling and shaking of the heart, Faintings, heart,
Melancholy, heart, Trembling, Swoonings Passions.
and against Swoonings: it is used also against melancholy passions, and sorrow
proceeding of no evident cause, and to procure mirth, as much as physical means
may effect.

Sebesten or the Assyrian Plum.
Descript. Names.] THe Sebesten-tree grows not so high as the Plumtree,
covered with a whitish bark, the branches are green, whereon grow rounder
thicker and harder leaves than they; The blossoms are white, and consist of
five leaves a piece, growing many together on a long stalk, which afterward
turn into small Berries rather than Plums; of a blackish green color when they
are ripe, every one standing in a little cup, of a sweet taste, and glutinous
or clammy substance, and a very thick skin; within which lies a three-square
hard stone, with a thick shell and a small kernel, these are gathered and laid
in the Sun, whereby they grow wrinkled, and so they are kept and brought to us
in Boxes.

The wild Sebesten, Sebesten Sylvestris.
THe wild Sebesten is in all things like the other, but that it grows lower;
much like unto a Hedge-bush, and with lesser and thinner leaves. The flowers
and fruit are alike but less.

In shops they have only the name of Sebesten, but in Latin the Tree is called
Myxos and Myxa, and Myxaria for the fruit.

Place and Time.] The first grows in Syria, and is but planted in Egypt,
from thence they were brought into Italy in Plinies time, which were grafted in
the Service-tree, and do now grow in many places in their Orchards: it is so
tender that it will not endure the cold with us. The wild kind, as Alpinus
says, is natural in Egypt: they flower in May, and the fruit is ripe in
September.

Government and Virtues.] This is a Plant of Venus: the Arabians and Greeks
hold that they open the body as much, Open the Body, Cool the stomach and Liver,
hot Agues, Choler, hoarsness, roughness of the throat,
or rather more, by reason of the muscilage in them, than the damask prunes,
yet more while they are green, and less when they are dry; yet the decoction of
them or the Infusion of them in broth, although dried and taken whole works
effectually; which Fuschius denies and affirms that they bind rather; they
serve to cool any intemperate heat of the Stomach or liver, and therefore are
good in hot Agues, and to purge choler, whereof they come; Mathiolus says,
that ten drams or twelve at the most, of the pulp of Sebestens taken from the
skins and stones works as well, and to as good purpose as the pulp of Cassia
Fistula. They are very effectual also to lenifie the hoarsness and roughness of
the throat, they help the Cough and wheasing of the Lungs, Cough, Wheasing,
Lungs.
and distillations upon them, by lenifying of the passages and causing much
phlegm to be avoided. They also give ease to such as are troubled with pains in
their Sides, Pains in the Sides, Sharpness of Urine, Choler, Worms.
and marvelously help those that are troubled with heat in their Urine, and
sharpness thereof proceeding from Choler or Salt phlegm, they also drive forth
the long worms of the belly; There is a kind of Birdlime made of these fruits
by boiling them a little in water to take away the skins and stones, and
afterward boiling them more to a Consistence; the which (as says Mathiolus)
was used at Venice to catch Birds; but Alpinus says they use it in Egypt, as
a plaster to dissolve hard tumors or swellings.

Sena, or Purging Seen.
Kinds.] THere are two sorts of this purging Sena-tree, differing very little
between themselves, as also three or four bastard-sorts, more churlish than the
other in working.

Descript.] 1. Seen of Alexandria, Sena Alexandrina. This Seen grows not
above a Cubit high, with slender branches set with many leaves together on a
rib, somewhat like unto Liquorish; being narrow and pointed, which being dried
and brought over unto us, if they be fresh will smell very like unto fresh
new-made Hay; The flowers stand at the tops of the branches one above another,
being (as Mathiolus says) of a yellow color, like to the flowers of
Coleworts, after which come crooked thin husks. fashioned somewhat like an
half moon, in the middle part whereof grow flat seeds like unto Grape-kernels,
but of a blackish green color, and somewhat flat: the whole Plant perishes
every year.

Descript.] 2. The Seen of Italy, Sena Italica. This Sena differs in no other
thing from the former but in the form of the leaves, which are not so
narrow-pointed but broader and rounder; which difference is plainly to be
discerned by comparing the leaves of that Sena which comes from Alexandria,
with that which grows in Italy.

Place and Time.] The first grows in Arabia Felix, and in Syria, and is
brought to Alexandria in Egypt as other things are; which from thence is
transported unto all other Countries. The other ( Mathiolus says) was in his
time frequently sown, in the Duke of Florence his Dominion in Italy.

Government and Virtues.] These are Plants of Mercury, the leaves of Seen
howsoever used are a safe and gentle purger, as well made into powder, and the
weight of a dram thereof taken in wine or ale, or broth fasting, as the
Infusion of half an ounce in wine or ale for a night, or the decoction of half
an ounce, or if need be of six drams; with some other herbs or roots, (but
because they are somewhat windy, a few Anniseeds, or Fennel-seeds and a little
Ginger, is to be added unto them, to correct that evil quality. And then they
purge melancholy, Choler, and phlegm, Melancholy, Choler, Phlegm.
from the head and brain, the lungs and heart; the liver and Spleen, Head and
Brain, Lungs, Heart and Liver, and Spleen, Stomach.
cleansing all those parts of such evil humors as by possessing them, are the
causes of those diseases incident unto them, and comforting the Stomach,
especially if some cordial or stomachical helper be put into it. Mesnes says
it hurts the stomach, but Monardus and Mathiolus deny, it can do so; in
regard that Sena has somewhat a bitter taste, partaking of heat and dryness,
all which qualities are known rather to strengthen the stomach than to trouble
or weaken it: it strentheneth the senses both of sight and hearing, and
procures mirth by taking away that evil humor, Sight, Hearing, Mirth,
Obstructions, Bowels.
which was the inward cause of sadness in the mind; opening the obstructions of
the bowels, and causing a fresh and lively habit in the body, prolonging youth
and keeping back old age; diverse things are added hereunto to quicken the
working hereof, and to make it the more effectual; As Rubarb, Agarick, Cassia
Fistula, Dracon, Syrrup of Roses etc. according as the nature of the disease,
age, strength, and necessity of the Patient do require.

Serapio says, it wonderfully helps such as are distracted of their senses,
by the extremity of fits in Agues or other diseases which makes them rave,
Raving idle talking. Falling Sickness, Headache. Palsy^, Lowsie-Evil.
or talk idly. The Epilepsie or the falling sickness, headache, Palsy, the
Lousy Evil, all sorts of Itches, Scabs, Wheals or Pushes. Sena is a
good-Ingredient to put into a Bag for purging Ale, to be taken in the Spring of
the year, not only for the forementioned diseases, but to cleanse the blood
from all sharp humors mixed or running therewith, purging-Prunes and
purging-Currans are made herewith, by boiling Sena and some opening herbs or
roots with some Anniseed, Fennel-seed, Cynamon Ginger and Cloves, some of these
or all of them a little quantity, and according to the proportion of the Prunes
or Currants, being set to stew with the decoction of the Sena, and the other
things above specified: this does open the body and purge the humors
above-specified: But because the Decoction of Sena is too unpleasant to weak
and render stomachs, the Infusion thereof for a night in warm Embers, is much
less offensive, but no less purging: In that Infusion while it is warm you may
dissolve some Manna, or put into it some Syrrup of Roses, and so take it.

Cassia Fistula may be drawn with the Decoction of Sena, corrected as
aforesaid; and so given of it self or made into a bole with Rubarb powdered, or
with the powder of Seen leaves and a little Anniseeds and Fennel-seeds
together: The Lie wherein Seen and Camomile-flowers have been boiled, is good
to comfort and strengthen a weak brain, Brains, Sight, Hearing, Sinews shrunk,
Cold, Cramps, Itch.
as also the sight and hearing, if the head be washed therewith; The same lie
is also profitable for Sinews that are shrunk or stiff with cold or Cramps, to
warm comfort and extend them, and to cleanse the body of the Itch, being washed
therewith.

Seasamum.
Names, Descript.] IT is called the oily purging pulse; Sesamum and Sesama, in
Latin. Upon the first springing up of this Plant from the seed, it rises up
with four long small and somewhat broad leaves, between which come forth
others, that when they are full grown are as large and long as the great
Nightshade leaves, but some deeplier dented than others; almost torn,
especially at the lower end of the leaf next the stalk, each standing on a long
footstalk; The stalk rises from among the leaves, being straight, thick, fat,
strong and round, two or three foot high, from whence shoot forth on all sides
(if it be in warm fat ground) diverse stalks of leaves, like unto the other; (or
in a barren ground its bare without branches) two for the most part set at a
joint, and at each joint of the stalk up to the top, comes forth one flower of
a whitish color, which is somewhat long like unto a Bell-flower, made of one
leaf; without division at the edges, having a few long threads at the bottom,
not rising so high that they may be seen without opening the flower; after the
flowers are past, there come up in their steads, small long hard Cods, having
three or four or five Ribs or Crests, which do open themselves into many parts,
having in each part small whitish yellow flat seeds lying therein; the root is
somewhat great and long, with many strings and fibers at it, taking fast hold
in the ground: both leaves stalks and seeds are very bitter while they are
green, but being dried they become more pleasant; The seed is more oily than
Linseed, from whence is pressed forth a whitish oil, very sweet while it is
fresh, and will not in a long time decay or grow stronger.

Place and Time.] It grows naturally in the Indies and other Eastern
Countries. It flowreth in July, and the seed is ripe about the end of September.

Government and Virtues.] This is an herb of Mars, both seed and oil are of
temperature hot and moist near in the second degree, and are of a mollifying
and dissolving quality. The green leaves are fit for fomentations to be used
for the eyes, to repress inflammations and pains thereof; the seeds may be taken
inwardly in decoctions or otherwise, or used in a glister looseneth the belly;
the oil is often used for the same purposes. It sticks in the teeth when it
is eaten, thereby causing a stinking breath; It is said that the Egyptians use
the Decoction of the seed for the Cough, shortness of breath, Eyes inflamed,
Bellly, Cholick, Cough, Shortness of breath.
Plurisie, and hard swellings of the Liver. Mesue says, it lenifieth the
roughness or hoarsness of the throat and voice, Plurisie, Liver, Throat, Voice.
and making it clear and free of pain; It eases pains of the head proceeding
from the heat of the Sun. The decoction of both herb and seeds with some honey
is good for women to sit over, whose wombs are hard or swollen, Womb Hard,
Courses to bring down, Scurf, Dandrif, Scabs.
and to bring down their courses; and to wash their heads who are troubled with
scurf dandrif or dry scabs, the herb or seed does stay vomiting Vomiting.
taken in an egg, the oil is effectual to anoint the face or any other part of
the body to cleanse the skin, and to take away Sun-burning, Morphew, Freckles,
Sun-burning, Sinews shrunk, Freckles, Morphew.
Spots, or skars, or any other deformities of the skin; it helps sinews that
are shrunk, and is good to anoint any part scalded or burnt.

The true Sycomore-tree.
Names Descript. Kinds.] THere are two sorts of this tree: the one bearing
fruit out of the Body, and greater Arms of the tree only, the other upon stalks
without leaves.

The first is called in Latin Sycomorus, and Ficus Egyptia, the Egyptian,
Fig Tree, and is the true Sycomore tree; those trees which are vulgarly called
Sycamores in England are a kind of Maples.

Descript.] 1. This Sycamore grows to be a very great tree, bigger than the
Mulberry tree, with great Arms and Branches, full of round and somewhat long
leaves, pointed at the ends, and dented about the edges, very like the leaves
of the Mulberry tree; but harder and rougher like Fig Leaves; this bears
small Figs or fruit and no flower, differing in that from all other trees; for
it puts forth the fruit out of the very body or trunk of the tree only, and
the elder branches next to the body and no where else; And are very like unto
white or wild Figs, and of the same bigness; but much sweeter, and without any
kernels therein. The whole tree and every part abounds with milk, if the bark
be but gently wounded; but if it be cut too deep, it yields no milk at all;
which makes it to bear three or four times a year, new rising out of the
places where the old grew; The root is solid hard and black, and will abide
fresh long after it is felled.

Descript.] 2. The other Sycamore is called Sycomorus altera, ceu Ficus Cypria,
the Sycamore of Cyprus. This grows to be as big as a Plum-tree, or white
Poplar-tree, the Arms and Branches bearing broad and somewhat round leaves,
like unto the Elm, but very like unto the former; This bears such like fruit
as Figs but smaller, which rise both from the body and the greater Arms, but
not as the former; but on certain stalks in branches, which rise by themselves
without any leaves with them, and are as sweet as Figs; and bear four times
every year, but not unless they be slit; that the milk in them may come forth.

Place and Time.] The first chiefly in Egypt, Syria, and Arabia, and other
places adjacent; The other in Cyprus, Caria, Rhodes, and the neighboring
parts; their time you may know by their Descriptions.

Government and Virtues.] These are under the particular Influence of Venus.
The fruit makes the belly soluble, but by its overmuch moisture it troubles
the Stomach and gives but little nourishment. The milk that is taken from the
tree by gently piercing the bark, and afterward dried and made into Trochiss,
and kept in an earthen pot, has a property to dissolve Tumors, and soften
them; and to soder and close together the lips of green wounds. Belly soluble,
Tumors mollified, Green wounds.
The fruit it self being applied as a plaster works the same effect; The
said dried milk is good against venomous creatures and the Plague, Venomous
Creatures, Plague, Pains in the head, Ears, Spleen.
and eases the pains of the head and Ears, and is good to be drunk by those
persons that are Splenetick.

Spikenard.
Descript. Names.] IT is a Root called Spike because it shoots up hairy
stalks of hairy-like Spikes, many set together, of a brownish color: the root
does somewhat resemble that of the French Nardus but of a paler blackish
color, and without any scent.

Place.] Its natural growth is in the East Indies.

Government and Virtues.] It Is Venu's Plant, the properties are these: It is of
a gentle heating drying quality, provokes Urine, Urine, Fluxes, Reds, Whites,
Loathing meat
stays Fluxes, and both the reds and whites in women; it takes away the
loathing to meat and the gnawing in the stomach; Gnawing of the stomach,
Swellings, Stone, King's Evil.
helps swellings, the Stone in the kidneys, and the Kings evil; the decoction
helps the Inflammations of the Mother, if they sit therein; and causes hair to
grow on the Eyelids.

Squinant.
Kinds Descript. Names.] THere are two sorts of this Squinant, a finer and a
coarser; or the true, and a Bastard kind.

Descript.] 1. The finer sweet smelling Rush. It is also called Camels hay, and
Juncus odoratus tenuior, sive schenanthos. This Rush has many tufts or heads
of long Rush-like leaves set thick together, one compassing another at the
bottom, and shooting forth upwards, the outermost whereof are bigger and
grosser than those that grow within, which are of a foot long and better; small
round and stiff, or hard, of a quick and spicy taste, somewhat pleasant, and of
a fine sweet gentle or soft scent. It bears diverse round hard-joynted stalks,
having diverse short brownish or purplish husks on the tops, containing within
them mossie whitish short threads or hairs, wherein lies a chaffy seed; The
root is full of long fibers and has the least scent or taste of any part
thereof.

Descript.] 2. The grosser sweet smelling Rush, in Latin called Juncus
odoratus crassior. This grows in the same manner that the former does, but is
greater in every part thereof; and less sweet, as well as less sharp, and hot in
taste.

Place and Time.] They grow naturally in Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and those
tracts of the East countries; and in some places of Africa. It never flowers in
these colder Countries, if it be here planted, but in those hotter parts it
flowreth in the Summertime.

Government and Virtues.] This Plant is under the dominion of Jupiter in Libra,
it discusseth Swellings and Wind, but does a little trouble the head;
Swellings, Wind, Urine, Women's Courses, Humors, Spitting blood, Lungs, Liver,
stomach, reins, Loathing meat* Dropsy, Cramps, Convulsions, Mother, Liver,
Stomach, Body.
It provokes Urine and women's courses, it gently cutteth or breaks humors,
and digesteth them, and loses the breathing places of the veins; The
decoction of the flowers drunk stays the spitting of blood, and helps the
griefs of the Lungs Liver Stomach and Reins. The Root is held to be of an
astringent property, and is effectual for those that have a loathing to their
meat, a dram taken every morning fasting for certain days together, with the
like quantity of Pepper; It is good for the Dropsy, Cramps, the decoction is
good for women to sit in, that are troubled with the Mother, it allayeth the
Inflammations of the Liver Stomach and body; the roots do bind more, and the
flowers are more hot, but in all the parts thereof there is an Astriction; The
whole Plant being boiled in the Broth of a Chicken, is helpful to ease the
pains of the womb, which women feel after Childbearing; Pains of the womb,
Sores of the mouth, Ulcers.
The powder thereof is good against Sores of the mouth and all creeping Ulcers,
and taken with wine and vinegar is good for those that have an Ulcer in their
stomach, if the stomach or belly be foment^d with the decoction thereof, it
eases the pains and takes away all Inflammations therein.

Stoechas.
Descript. Names.] THe ordinary Stoechas or Stoechados, as it is usually
called, and also French-Lavender^ is a more tender plant than Lavender; and
more like an herb than a Bush or Shrub, not above a foot and an half high,
having many narrow long whitish green leaves, like unto Lavender but softer and
smaller, set at several distances about the stalks, which spread into sundry
branches, at the tops whereof stand long round and sometimes apiece heads,
of a dark greenish purple-colour, compact of many scales, from which come forth
the flowers, of a bluish purple color, after which follow seed-vessels, which
are somewhat whitish when they are ripe, containing blackish brown seed in
them; the root is somewhat woody, and will hardly endure our cold winter,
except in some places, or before it have flowred; the whole Plant is somewhat
sweet of scent, but nothing so much as Lavender.

Place and Time.] This Staechas grows in Arabia as well as France and Spain. In
their natural Climate they flower in March and April; but those which are
planted in Gardens in our cold Countries, flower not till May or June.

Government and Virtues.] This is a Plant of Jupiter, the decoction thereof
helps diseases of the breast, coughs and colds. It is good in Medicines against
Infections and poisons, Breast, Coughs, Colds, Poisons.
it is of a mixed temperature, of a small earthy cold essence, as says Galen,
from whence it has the quality of binding; and of another earthy more
extenuated, whereby it is bitter; by the mixture of both which it opens
obstructions and freeth the body from them. It extenuateth cleanses and
strengthens all the inward parts and bowels, as also the whole frame of the
body; Inward parts and Bowels, Brains, Sinews, Heart, Black Choler, Phlegm,
Head, Brain, cold griefs, Brains, Sinews, Falling Sickness, Giddiness, head,
Stomach, Sadness.
it strengthens the brain, sinews and heart, and all the other inward parts;
It purges black Choler and phlegm, as well from the head and brain, as other the
instruments of the senses, and comfort them; It is effectual in all cold
griefs, used in drinks, baths, or fomentings; an oil made therewith and
fomented, gives as it were life to the brains and sinews by warming and
comforting them. Taken with vinegar of Squils it helps the Falling Sickness
and swimming of the head, and is helpful for all pains of the head or stomach;
Taken with juice of Bugloss and of Pippins, it helps sadness of the heart and
melancholy; it eases the pains of the sinews, Arteries, muscles and joints,
taken in what form you will; the fumes thereof taken into the nostrils, opens
them when they are closed; taken in a Syrrup it helps Agues, especially in
those that are phlegmatic; being boiled in Lie it is effectual for all those
diseases of the head to wash it therewith; Agues* Scurf, Dandrif, Lice.
besides it cleanses the head of Scurf and Dandrif, and kills Lice therein.

The Storax-tree.
Kinds, Descript. Names.] THere are accounted three sorts of the Storax tree,
whose names shall follow with their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. The usual Storax-tree called in Latin, Styrax Arbor vulgaris.
This Storax-tree grows very like unto the Quince-tree, both for form and
bigness, the leaves also are long and round, and somewhat like but far less;
whitish underneath and stiff, the flowers stand both at the joints with the
leaves, and at the ends of the branches consisting of five or six large whitish
leaves, like unto those of the Orange-tree, with some threads in the middle,
after which come cound berries, set in the cups that the flowers were in
before, of the bigness of Hazel-nuts, pointed at the ends, and hoary all over;
each standing on a long footstalk, containing within them certain kernels in
small shells; This yields a most fragrant sweet Gum, and clear of the color
of brown honey.

Descript.] 2. Storax with Maple-leaves, Styrax folio Aceris. From a round
ruggish root covered with a crested or as it were a joynted Bark; come forth
out of knots three or five broad leaves, like unto those of the Maple or
Plane-tree, standing on small blackish long stalks, and are divided in three or
five parts, full of veins, dented about the edges, and pointed at the ends.

Descript.] 3. Red Storax, called in latin Styrax rubra. This has formerly by
some been thought to be the bark of some kind of tree that went under that name
of Storax; But Serapio and Avicen divide Storax into liquida and sicca: by
liquida meaning the pure gum flowing from the tree, and not that liquida which
we have now adays by that name; and by the sicca the feces of the expressed
oil, from the fruit; but Calumita is now taken of some to be red Storax.

Place and Time.] The first, grows in Provence of France, in Italy, Candy,
Greece, and some hither parts of Turkey where it yields not gum; but in
Syria, Silicia, Pamphylia, Cyprus, and those hotter countries it grows much;
It flowreth in the Spring, yielding fruit in September.

Government and Virtues.] This is a solar Plant: there is no part of this tree
in use with us, but the gum that issues out of it; It is of temperature hot in
the second degree, and dry in the first, it heateth mollifieth and digesteth,
and is good for Coughs, Catarrhes, Coughs, Catarrhes, Rheums Courses, Mothr,
Loosen the belly, Afterbirth, Ears, cold Aches, Lameness.
distillations of Rheums, and hoarsness; It provokes women's courses, and
mollifieth the hardness and contractions of the Mother; Pills made with it and
a little Turpentine, and taken gently looseneth the belly, it resists cold
poisons, used as a Pes^ary it draws down the courses and Afterbirth, dropped
into the ears it helps the singings and noise in them; applied to the hips
joints or shoulders, afflicted with cold Aches, it resolves and comfort
much, and is good to be put into baths, for lameness of the joints, and
weariness by travail; It is also good to be put with white Frankincense to
perfume those that have Catarrhes, Rheums, and defluxions from the head to the
nose, eyes, Rheums, head, Nose, Eyes.
or other parts; by casting it on quick coals and holding their heads over the
smoke; and to air their night-caps therewith. It dissolveth hard Tumors in any
part, as them about the throat, and the King's Evil. Tumors, King's Evil.


Sumach.
Descript. Names.] Sumach grows like a bushy shrub, about the height of a
man, bringing forth diverse branches, upon which grow long soft hairy or velvet
leaves, with a red stem or sinew in the middle; the which upon every side has
six or seven little leaves standing one against another, nipt about the edges
like the leaves of Egrimony, the flowers grow among the leaves, upon long stems
or footstalks, clustring together like the Cats-tails; or blowings of the
Nut-tree, of a white green color; the seed is flat and red, growing in round
berries clustring together like grapes. This Plant is called in Latin Rhus,
and in English Sumach, and Coriers Sumach; The seed is called in Latin Rhus
obsoniorum, and in English Meat-Sumach, and Sauce Sumach.

Place and Time.] It grows in Spain and other hot Countries; It is seldom
found in this country, but in the gardens of diligent Herbarists, where it
flowers in July.

Government and Virtues.] This is a Saturnine Plant, of temperature cold in the
second degree and dry in the third; of a strong binding faculty, the leaves have
the same power that Acacia has, they stop the Lask and women's flowers, with
all other issues of blood, Lask-flowers, Bloody Issues, Bloody Flux, Watery Ears.
to be first boiled in water and wine and drunken; the same decoction stops
the Lask and bloody flux, to be used as a Glyster, or to bathe in the
decoction. It also dries up the running water and filth of the ears, when it
is dropped into the same; and makes the hair black being washed therein.

The seed of Sumach being eaten in sawces with meat, does stop all Fluxes of
the belly, with the bloody flux, and the whites. Bloody Flux, Whites.
The same laid upon new bruises and green wounds, defends them from hurts,
inflammations, Swellings and Exulcerations; the same pounded with Oaken-coals,
and laid to the hemerrhoids, heals and dries up the same; The decoction of
the leaves works the same effect.

Swallow-wort.
Kinds, Names.] OF this there are three kinds. The usual latin names of
Swallow-wort is Asclepias or Vnice toxicum; their distinct names follow in
their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. Swallow-wort with white flowers Asclepias flore albo. This
Swallow-wort rises up with diverse slender weak stalks, to be two or three foot
long, not easy to break, scarce able to stand upright, and therefore for the
most part does lean or lie down upon the ground, if it find not any thing to
sustain it, and sometimes will twine themselves about it; whereon are set two
leaves at the joints, being somewhat broad and long-pointed at the end; of a
dark green color, and smooth at the edges: At the joints with the leaves
toward the tops of the stalks, and at the tops themselves, come forth diverse
small white flowers, consisting of five pointed leaves apeece, of an heavy
sweet scent, after which come small long pods, thick above and less and less to
the point; wherein lie small flat brown seed, wrapped in a great deal of white
silken down, which when the pod is ripe it opens of it self, and sheddeth
both seed and cotton upon the ground, if it be not carefully gathered; The
roots are a great Bush, of many strings fastened together at the head, smelling
somewhat strong while they are fresh and green; but more pleasant when they are
dried; both leaves and stalks perish every winter, and rise anew in the spring
of the year, when the stalks at their first springing are blackish brown.

Descript.] 2. Swallow-wort with black flowers, called in Latin, Asclepias
flore nigro. This grows in the same manner that the former does, having his
long slender rough branches, rise to a greater height than the other, and
twining themselves about whatsoever stands next unto them; having such like
dark green leaves set by couples, but somewhat smaller than they: the flowers
likewise stand in the same fashion but somewhat smaller also, and of a dark
purplish color, that it seems to be black, and are scarce discerned unless
one look very earnestly upon them; after which come more plentifully than the
other such like Cods, with a white silver down and seeds in them as the former:
the roots hereof are not so bushy as the other, neither smell so strong;
neither does it give any milky but a watery juice when it is broken.

Descript.] 3. Swallow-wort of Candy, Asclepias Cretica. This rises up in the
same fashion that the former do, with many slender flexible green branches,
with leaves set at the joints on either side as the white kind has, and are
very like unto them, but somewhat of a paler white color; The flowers stand in
the same manner three or four together upon a stalk, but are somewhat of a
paler white color; to whom succeed sometimes but one, and sometimes two pods
together, which are thicker and shorter than those of the white kind; straked
all along and double-forked at the ends, wherein lie silk and seeds as in the
former; The roots have not so strong a smell as the last, and have, as well as
the rest of the Plant, a strong smell like Box-leaves.

Place and T me.] The two first grow in rough and untilled ground, upon diverse
Mountains in France, about Narbone, Marseilles, and Mompelier, and in Italy
also; The last in Candy. They flower in the months of June and July, and
sometimes not until August; and their Cods are ripe about a month after; the
empty husks abiding on the dry branches, when the seed and silk is fallen out.

Government and Virtues.] These are Solar Plants: the roots have a most
sovereign faculty against all poisons, Poisons, Venomous beasts, Serpents, mad
do^ Plague, P^stilence, P^ssions of the heart; Griping in the Belly.
particularly against the Apocynum or Dogs-bane; and is effectually given to
such as are bitten by any venomous beast, or stung by any Serpent or other
Creature; as also against the biting of a mad dog, and a dram and an half
thereof taken in Carduus-water for diverse days together It is taken also in
wine every day against the Plague and pestilence, a dram thereof taken in
Bugloss-water is effectual against all passions of the heart, if the same
quantity of Citron-seeds be taken therewith, it eases all the griping pains in
the belly; the Decoction of the roots made with white wind, taken for diverse
days together, a good draught at a time, and sweating thereupon cures the
dropsy; The same also cures the Jaundice, Jaundice, Dropsy, Urine,
provokes Urine, and eases the cough, and all defects of the Chest and lungs;
The powder of the roots taken with Peony-seeds is good against the
Falling Sickness, Cough, Chest, Lungs, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, Worms.
or with Basil-seed or the rind of Pomcitron-seeds is good against
melancholy,, and taken with the roots of Dictamnus albus, or bastard-Dittany,
will kill and expel worms of the maw or belly: the roots are also used amongst
other things, for baths, for women to sit in, to ease pains of the Mother, and
to bring down their courses: the decoction hereof with comfrey roots made in
wine, Pains of the Mother, Courses, Rupture, Bruises, Ulcers, Sores.
is good for those that have a Rupture or are bursten, or have received hurts
by bruises. The powder of the roots or leaves is effectual to cleanse all
putrid rotten and filthy Ulcers and Sores* and may safely be used, in all
Salves, Unguents and Lotions made for such purposes. The leaves and flowers
boiled and made into a Pultis and applied to the hard tumors or swellings of
women's breasts cures them speedily, and all sores in the matrix. Women's
breasts, Matrix.


Tobacco.
Names, Descript.] IT is called Petum and Nicotiana. There have several kinds
thereof been planted here in England, which they did manure for Smoking, but
that is now prohibited; I shall only describe one kind which is planted here
for its uses in physic and Surgery only.

It rises up with a thick round stalk about two foot high, whereon do grow
thick fat fleshy green leaves, nothing so large as the other Indian kinds,
neither for breadth nor length, somewhat round-pointed also, and nothing dented
about the edges: the stalk brancheth forth and bears at the tops diverse
flowers, set in green husks, scarce standing above the brims of the husks
round-pointed also, and of a greenish yellow color; after which follows the
seeds contained in great heads; The root is woody byt perishes in winter, but
generally rises of the seed that is suffered to shed it self.

Place and Time.] This (as is supposed) was first brought from Brazile, it
gives ripe seed in our Country here earlier than the other Indian sorts. It
flowreth from June to the end of August, or later, and the seed ripeneth in the
mean time.

Government and Virtues.] Tobacco is a Plant of Saturn, Culpeppers deity; of a
stupifying quality: it is held to be available to expectorate tough phlegm out
of the stomach chest and lungs; the juice thereof made into a Syrup, Phlegm,
Stomach, Chest, Lungs, worms,
or the distilled water of the herb drank with Sugar; The same also helps to
expel worms in the stomach and belly, as also to apply a leaf to the belly,
and to ease the pains in the head or Meagrim, Pains in the head, Meagrim,
Stone, Gravel, Mother.
and griping pains in the bowels; It is also profitable for those that are
troubled with the stone in the kidneys, to ease pains, and, by provoking Urine,
to expel gravel and the stone engendered therein; and has been found very
effectual to suppress the malignity and windy vapors which cause the
strangling of the mother; The seed hereof is much more effectual to ease the
pains of the teeth, than Henbane-seed, and the ashes of the burnt herb to
cleanse the gums and teeth, and make them white; The herb bruised and applied
to the place of the King's Evil, is a speedy rememdy as is said. It is also said
to be effectual to cure the Dropsy, King's Evil, Dropsy.
by taking four or five ounces of the juice thereof fasting; which will
strongly purge the body both upwards and downwards, (And too strongly too,
unless it be a well steeled body indeed.) The distilled water is often given
with some sugar before the fit of an Ague, to lessen the fits and alter them,
and to take them quite away in three or four times using; if the distilled
faces of the herb having been bruised before the distillation, and not
distilled dry, be set in hot dung to digest for fourteen days, and afterward
hung up in a bag in a Cellar, the liquor that distilleth therefrom is singular
good to use for Cramps, Aches, the Gout and Sciatica, and to heal Itches,
Cramps, aches, Gouts, Sciatica, Scabs, Cankers, Lice, Green wounds, Old Sores.
Scabs, and running Ulcers, and foul Sores whatsoever; The juice is good for
all the said griefs, and likewise to kill lice in childrens heads. The herb
bruised and applied to any green wound does speedily heal the same, the juice
put into old sores does heal the same. A good salve thereof may be made in this
manner; Take of the green herb three or four handfulls, bruise it, and put it
into a quart of good oyl-olive, boil them on a gentle fire, till the herb grow
dry and the oil will bubble no longer, adding thereto, wax Rozen and
sheeps-tallow, or Deers suet, of each a quarter of a pound, of Turpentine two
ounces, which being melted put it up for your use: Some will add to it the
powder of round Birthworth, and white Frankincense, each half an ounce, which
is to be put in when it is nigh cold and well stirred together; This Salve
likewise will help Imposthumes, hard tumors, and other Swellings by by Bblows
or Falls.

The Gum Taramahaca.
Descript.] THis Gum is said to be gathered from a great Tree like a Poplar,
that is very sweet having a red fruit or berry, like to those of the Peony.

Virtues.] The Gum is of good use for outward remedies, it serves most in
women's diseases, to retain the Mother Mother,
in its place by laying a plaster thereof upon the Navel; as also when it
rises up and is ready to strangle them, put some Musk and Amber to it, or a
little Civet in the middle of the plaster: This Gum being spread on leather,
and applied to the side or spleen, Spleen, Wind,
that is grown hard and windy, dis^olveth the tumors, disperseth the wind, and
brings much ease and help to the grieved part, and is no less effectual in
all tumors pains and torments, in the body or joints, proceeding of cold raw
and windy humors, Tumors, Pains, Joints, Stomach, Brain, Memory, Digestion,
Stomach, Wind, Arms, Joints, Gouts,
applied plaister-wise thereon: To be applied to the stomach with a third part
of Storax, a little Amber-greese, and some wax; is a singular help to
strengthen the weakness thereof, to strengthen the brain and memory, as also in
all defluxions from the head, it likewise helps the appetite, digestion, and
dissolves wind; It helps also all running humors and pains in the Arms,
shoulders, or any other part of the body; the Joints likewise, Gout, and
Sciatica.

It is of temperature hot almost in the third degree, and dry in the second;
the best is pure, and clean without dross, clear, and some of a whitish brown
color, and more whitish in some parts, of a little quick and sharp scent, and
quickly consuming into smoke being cast on quick coals.

Sealed Earth, Terra Sigillata.
Though this be not an Herb, yet because of its singular use in Physic, I have
here set forth whence it comes, and its eminent Virtues; The place of its
growth is by all reports, The Isle of Lemnos in the Aegean-Sea; The best fine
Bole is very like it; The chiefest effects of it is to expel Poison, The
venom of Serpents; it is good against Lasks and Fluxes, Poison, Serpents,
Lasks, Fluxes, Plague, and Bloody-fluxes,
the bitings of a Mad-dog; it wonderfully helps old sores, and consolidateth
green wounds; The fine bole of Armenia, is found to be very effectual in the
Plague; it is also singular good in Lasks, Bloody-fluxes, and spitting of
blood, Spitting of Blood, Catarrhes, breath Ulcers, Fistulaes,
for the Catarrhe, or defluxion of thin humors, upon the Breast and Lungs, and
shortness of breath, and likewise against foul Ulcers of the mouth, lungs, or
other parts, and Fistulaes.

Turbith.
TUrbith used in shops is a root, yet somewhat small, and of an Ashcolour on
the outside, and white within, having a pitch in the middle, which is cut out
and cast away as good for nothing, and some pieces, but not gummy at the ends,
having no manifest taste.

Place] It grows in many places of the Indies naturally, and has been
transported into Asia, Persia, and Portugal.

Virtues.] It purges phlegm and tough clammy humors, Phlegm, tough-humours,
belly, Dropsy, Leprosy, Pox, Adust humors, black Jaundies.
that fall on the joints and those parts that are more remote, it looseneth the
belly of those Excrements that stick close thereto, and cleanses the breast
from thick phlegm; It is good for those that have the Dropsy, Leprosy or Pox,
as also those that are troubled with those diseases that arise from adust
humors, the black Jaundies or the like, it helps day-Agues, and all other
diseases bred of Phlegm.

The true Turpentine tree.
Kinds, Description, Names.] There are two sorts of the Turpentine-tree, the
one bearing broad-leaves and the other narrower leaves.

Descript.] 1. The broader leafed Turpentine-tree, called in Latin Terebinthus
Latifolia. This Turpentine-tree, in many places grows but like a shrub, yet
in some to be a great tree; the bark of the body and brances are Ash Color,
the lesser being greenish and red while they are young, sparingly set with
large winged-leaves, like unto the Pistack-tree, but larger and smelling
somewhat like unto a Bay-leaf, falling away, and not holding on in winter; The
flowers are Mossy, like unto the Olive-blossomes, and grow on long-stalks
coming out of certain knots, from the ends of the branches in small tufts set
in clusters together, of a purplish brown Color, which pass into berries,
greenish at first, reddish after, and of a bluish color, tending to green,
when they are ripe; glutinous in handling, and sticking to their fingers that
touch them, having a kernel within them; most of those berries that grow red
before they be ripe, fall away, being empty: this bears also certain red
hollow skinny bladders, like long-horns, full of a blackish liquor, which breed
small flies, or knats, in them; This tree being wounded in sundry places,
yields forth a liquid Rozen, or clear Turpentine, but nothing so thin as that
of the Larch-tree.

Descript.] 2. The narrow-leafed Turpentine-tree, called in Latin Terebinthus,
angustiore folio vulgatiore. This Tree is in all things like the former, but
that it never rises so high, and the leaves are long and narrow much smaller
than the former; the berries are many of them red on the stalks at their full
time, which are empty husks, and no good seed, but some that will be full and
good.

Place and Time.] The Turpentine-tree grows in Narbone and Provence, in
sundry places of Italy and Spain, Cyprus and Greece; where for the most part it
abides small and low, but grows great and high in Syria, Arabia, Cilicia,
Armenia; they flower somewhat early in the spring, and the fruit is ripe in
September and October.

Government and Virtues.] These plants are Solar, both leaves, bark and fruit,
and do bind, strengthen and repel: but the Turpentine does heat cleanse and
purge, draws and mollifieth, and excels all other Rozens. The berries
being dry, very nigh unto the third degree, provoke Urine and are good for the
spleen, Urine, Spleen,
and for the biting of the Spider Phalangium; of the berries, is made an oil,
as out of the berries of the Lentisk-tree, which heals and binds, and is
good in Cramps, Convulsions, hardness of the sinews, and to close wounds:
Cramps, Convulsions, Sinews, wounds.
The berryes themselves are much eaten by the people in Turkey, (where they
grow) and make them their daily food, warming, comforting, and opening the
Uretory passages, and do provoke lust; The Turpentine, heals, mollifieth,
dissolveth, digesteth and cleanses; if a dram or two be taken in a rear egg it
helps the Cough, which comes by phlegm, stoppings of the lungs, wheesings,
Cough, lungs, Wheesings, Shortness of breath, phlegm, Back, Reins, Urine, Stone,
Gravel, Impostumes, wind, stomach, sides, Gout, Sciatica, pains in the joints,
Green-wounds and fractures in the head, sinews, itch, Scab.
and shortness of breath, and all imperfections of the chest by phlegm: It
cleanses the back and Reins, and stays the running of the Reins: wi^h a
little powder of Rubarb put thereto, it provokes Urine, and helps to expel
both stone and gravel; it ripeneth Impostumes, and helps to expel them, and
mightily dissolveth wind in the pains of the Chollick, stomach or sides, and
is good also against the Gout, Sciatica, and all pains in the joints, as well to
take it inwardly with Chamepitis, Sage, and Stoechas: as to be made into a
Cerecloth, and applied thereto; It is a special ingredient, in those Balsoms
that are to heal any green wounds, and is effectual in all wounds, and
fractures of the head, all punctures in the head and sinews, and all breakings
out in the skin, be it Itch or Scab, Piles, Pushes or wheals; it draws forth
Splinters, Piles, Pushes, Thorns, Lips, Hands, Fundament.
thorns, or the like out of the flesh; and heals the chaps of the lips,
hands, fundament, or other parts; It is put into all salves, oils, ointments or
plasters; that serve to cleanse Ulcers, to draw or heal any sores, and to warm
and comfort any cold and weak parts: the Chemical oil of this Turpentine is
very effectual in many of these diseases if it be carefully applied, it being
of very subtle parts, and therefore inwardly or outwardly it must be used as it
were by drops.

Descript.] The Turmerick brought unto us is an Indian Root: In which Countries
it springs up, and bears larger and thinner leaves than Millet, of a paler
green color, a stalk full of leaves, compassing one another to the top; The
Root is slender and yellow, near unto the form of Ginger.

Government and Virtues.] It is a Plant of Mars, and is of great use in the
yellow Jaundise, Jaundise, Old diseases, Dropsy.
either the powder or the decoction being taken, for it does open obstructions
of the gall and other parts; It is of very good use in old and inveterate
griefs and sicknesses, and the evil disposition of the body, called Cachexia,
and is very profitable against the dropsy.

Turn-Sole.
Kinds, and Names.] OF Turn-Sole there are several kinds, whose names shall
follow with their Descriptions.

Descript.] 1. The greater Turnsole called in Latin Heliotropium maius. This
rises up with one upright stalk, about a foot or more high, dividing it self,
almost from the bottom, into diverse smaller branches, of a hoary color: At
each joint of the stalk and branches grow two small broad leaves, somewhat like
unto those of Calamint, or Basil, somewhat white or hoary also: at the tops of
the stalks and branches, stand in any small white flowers, consisting of four,
and sometimes of five very small leaves, set in order one above another, upon a
small very crooked spike, which turns inwards like a bowed finger, opening by
degrees as the flowers blow open; after which in their places come small
cornered seed, four for the most part standing together, the root is small and
threddy, perishing every year, and the seed shedding it self rises again the
next spring.

Descript.] 2. The greater creeping Turnsole is in a manner but the same with
the fomer greater Turnsole; because it is in most things so like it, yet
differs in these particulars: That it has more and slenderer stalks, not
standing upright as the other does, but leaning down to the ground: the stalks
and leaves are lesser, but hoary in like manner; the flowers are white, and
stand in crooked spiky heads, bowing like a Scorpions tail, as the other, but
the seed being smaller standing singly, or but two together; the roots are
small and perish in like manner.

Descript.] 3. The smaller Turnsole, Heliotropium minus, this smaller Turnsole
grows very low, lying almost with his slender weak branches upon the ground,
having thereon many small leaves, like the other in form, but three times less
in substance, neither stalks nor leaves white nor hairry, but of a dark green
color; the flowers are much smaller and yellowish, not growing in long crooked
or bowing heads like the former, nor at the tops of the branches, but standing
at the joints upon very small stalks, some above the leaves, and others under
them, which afterward turn into small round heads or buttons, like unto warts,
wherein is such like seed as the last, but smaller and rounder.

Descript.] 4. The Coloring or dying Turnsole Heliotropium triconum. This
dying Turnsole, that bears berryes, three always set together, rises up
with an upright stalk, branching it self diversely, to the height of half a yard
or there-abouts, whereon grow broader and softer leaves than on any of the
former, like unto those of the sleepy nightshade, and whitish withal, set
without order at the joints up to the tops, yet lesser above than below; at the
ends of the branches come forth small mossy, yellowish flowers, which quickly
perish, and fall away without giving any seed; herein like unto the Ricinus or
Palma Christi, called the great Spurge: for in the same manner also at the
joints, with the leaves, come forth the fruit or berries, standing three for
the most part always joined together; upon short footstalks, which are of a
blackish green color, and rough or rugged on the outside, wherein is
contained, ash-colored seed, which if the heads be suffered to grow over-ripe,
and be dried with the Sun, will fall out of themselves upon the ground, and
spring again in their natural places the next year, thereby renewing it self;
for the root is small, and perishes after it has born seed; But these berries
when they are at their full maturity, have within them, that is between the
outer skin and the inward kernel or seed, a certain juice or moisture, which
being rubbed upon a paper or cloth, at the first appears of a fresh and
lively green color, but presently changes into a kind of bluish purple upon
the cloth or paper; and the same cloth afterward wet in water and wrung
forth, will color the water into a Claret Wine color; And these are those
rags of cloth called Turnsole in the Druggists and Grocers shops, and with all
other people; and serves to color Jellies or other things.

Place and Time.] These do grow in Italy, France and Spain, in diverse places;
The two first are planted in gardens here with us, and do flower and seed well
every year, but the other two will scarce grow to show any seed in our cold
Climate.

Government and Virtues.] These are Solar Plants, to whom they yield obedience;
the head of the flowers always facing the Sun: a good handful of the greater
Turnsole, boiled in water; and drunk, purges both Choler and phlegm, and being
boiled in wine it is good against the stinging of Scorpions, Choler, Phlegm,
Scorpions, Stone, Reins, Kidneys, Bladder, Urine Women's Courses, Easy birth,
Worms, Gout, Joints pained, Warts. Wens, Kernels, Excrescencies, Face, Eyelids.
to be as well drunk as laid upon the place that is stung. The same also boiled
with Cummin and drunk, helps them that are troubled with the Stone in the
Reins Kidneys or Bladder, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, causes an easy
and speedy birth when they are in travail. It kills the Worms of the belly,
both long and round, if the herb and seed of the lesser kind be taken with
Hysop, Cresses, and Nitre; the leaves bruised and applied to the places pained
with the Gout, or that are out of joint, and being set are full of pain, do
give much ease; as also for Children which are troubled with an Inflammation in
the parts about the brain and the tunicles thereof; The seed of the greater or
least kind being rubbed with a little salt, upon warts or wens and other hard
kernels or Excrescencies in the face, eyelids, or any other part of the body,
will take them away by consuming them by little and little with often using it;
The dying or coloring Turnsole, is good against all venomous creatures,
chiefly against the great Spider Phalangium, and the stinging of Scorpions,
being applied thereto.

The Vine.
Kinds.] THere are great varieties of Vines, both of the manured and wild
kinds, most whereof came at first from one original, but alter in nature and in
the wine, as the Climate differs.

Descript.] 1. The manured Vine, Vitis vinifera. This where it has stood long
grows to have a great stem spreading without end or measure, if it be
suffered; many slender weak branches that must be propped up from falling down;
the young being red, and the old of a dark color, with a pyth in the midst, at
the sundry joints whereof grow several large broad green leaves, cut into five
divisions, and dented also about the edges: at the joints likewise against the
leaves come forth long twining Tendrels, clasping or winding about whatsoever
it can take hold of; at the bottom of the leaves come forth clusters of small
greenish yellow flowers, and after them berries set thick together in branches
of several forms, of greatness, color, and taste, in some the clusters are
close and others more open, and some being long, others more round, tending to
a square; some likewise are very small, as the Curran-grape, others great, and
some in a mean, between both: some are white, others black, or bluish, or red,
or parti-colored; and for tastes they are very variable, some sweet according
to the several Climates they grow in; and sour, or harsh, or mixed, more or less
pleasant one than another; within which there are usually one two or three
kernels. They that keep their Vines in the best manner, do keep them low, and
cut them often, whereby they grow the better and take up less room; bringing
their grapes both fairer and sweeter.

Descript.] 2. The Parsly-Vine or Grape with thin-cut leaves, Vitis laciniatis
foliis. This also grows as other Vines do, the difference chiefly consisting
in the leaves, which are very much incised, or cut into many parts even almost
to the middle; and dented: the grapes which are white and great are like the
white muscadine-grape, and of as good a relish; bearing great bunches, and
ripening with the middle sort of grapes.

Descript.] 3. The wild Vine of Europe, Labrusca sive Vitis sylvestris
Europaea. The wild Vine, in regard it is natural and therefore neglected, lies
for the most part on the ground, and therefore is less fruitful, unless it meet
with some hedge or tree whereon it may climb, and then spreads as the
manured, being both in branches leaves and tendrels, like unto the manured
Vine; as also in blossoms, but bears either little or no fruit, or seldom
comes to ripeness; and what it does is small and black, and no way comparable
to any of the manured Vines, being rather binding and sour than sweet.

Descript.] 4. The wild Vine of Virginia, Vitis sylvestris Virginiana. This one
sort of the Vines of Virginia like all other wild sorts runs on the ground,
and takes hold of whatsoever it meets with, being in all things like the
former wild sorts, but that the grapes are small and white, and with little sap
or juice in them, and the kernels twice as big as others. There is another sort
that has bigger blew grapes and sour in taste: a third they call the
Fox-grape, and has a more rugged bark, a very broad leaf, without any division
almost, but dented, and the grape is white, but smells and tastes like unto
a Fox.

Descript.] 5. The wild Vine of Canada. This grows like unto the other wild
Vines of those parts, with slender reddish branches, climbing where it can get
thereon; but the leaves on them being little more than half so large as the
manured Vine, has only three partitions in every leaf; but each cut-in deep,
even to the long smooth stalk whereon they stand, making them seem as three
leaves, which are of a dark green color, and somewhat thick also; the fruit is
like the other wild sorts, having more skin and kernel, than substance or juice.

The chiefest sorts of grapes whereof Wines are made, and which are brought
unto us, are these.
The Damasco white grape, which is the true Vvae Zibebae, that the Apothecaries
should use in several of their compositions, if they can get it.

The Muscadine grape both white and red; most, if not all destroyed by the
Turks.

The Frontiniack or Musk-grape.

The Particoloured-grape.

The Raisin of the Sun-grape.

The Curran-grape is the small blew currants that the Grocers use, and have no
kernels, whereof there is another sort that bears red berries, almost as
small but not so sweet, but rather a little tarter.

The small early black grape.

The black grape of Orleance.

There is a grape without stones g owing in many places, as by the River Zyreck
near Ascalon in Palestina, giving a red wine; as also in diverse places of
Arabia, and in the Maderas.

There is reported also to be a Vine that bears green leaves continually, yet
yields fruit but at the same times that others do.

There is said likewise to be some that bear twice in a year, and some oftener,
having both ripe and green fruit together at one time upon the tree.

Place and Time.] The manured kinds are planted every where, and according to
the Soil and Climate is both the relish and strength of every sort. For the
Vine that grows in the Canary Islands is the same with that at Malaga and
Sherris, and yet the one excels the other still in strength and sweetness;
the other wild sorts are all expressed in their Titles: The first wild sort in
sundry places of Europe, both Italy France and Germany. The wild sorts flower
somewhat later than the manured, and therefore what fruit they bear, must
likewise be ripe later than others.

Government and Virtues.] The Vine has in it so many diverse differing and
contrary properties, some cold, some hot, some sweet, some sour, some mild,
some sharp, and some moistning, and others drying; that they may be assigned to
several stars. But the glorious Planet the Sun has the sole Regiment of this
most noble Plant; I shall distinctly set down the names of the several parts of
the Plant, and such medicaments and wines as are drawn from it.

The branches and leaves, Sarmenta and Folia.
The leaves and branches are cooling and binding, and good to be put into
Lotions for sore mouths, Sore mouths, Fevers, headache coming by heat, Stomach,
Inflammations.
and in drinks against Fevers being bruised; and with Barley-meal applied to
the temples eases the headache, coming by heat, and applied to the stomach
eases the Inflammations and heat thereof, the juice of them being drunk,
stays the lask, inflammations, spitting of blood, and women's immoderate
longings.

Vine-ashes and the Lie of them; Cineres clavellatae and eorum Lixivium.
The Ashes of the burnt branches or pressing made into a lie and drunk, is very
effectual for the gravel and stone in the Kidneys, Gravel, Stone, Kidneys,
warts, and Inflammations of the Fundament.
being mixed with a little vinegar it consumes the warts of the Fundament, and
inflammation thereof, being bathed therewith it does marvellously ease the
pains, and take away the swelling. The said Lie of Vine-ashes is good to wash
places out of joint, or burnt with fire, Places out of joint, Burning, Spleen,
hard tumors, Fistulaes, Ulcers, Shrinking Sinews, Falls, Wens, Warts.
and used with Rue and Vinegar is good for the swelling of the Spleen: The
ashes made up with axungia is good against hard tumors, cleanses Fistulaes and
hollow Ulcers, heals them up afterward, helps the pains, and shrinking of
the sinews; and being mixed with oil, eases those places that are bruised by
Falls or otherwise; and cures the bitings of Scorpions and dogs; used with
vinegar and nitre, it washes away Wens, Warts, and other excrescencies in the
flesh.

The Vine-tears or bleeding, Lachrymae Vitis.
The water that droppeth out of the grape when it is cut out of due time, that
is, too late in the Spring, when the Sap is ^un up; being drunk, helps to
expel and wash down ^he gravel and Stone in the kidneys: And it takes away
Sun-burning, and Freckles out of the face, Gravel, Stone, Kidneys,
Sun-burnings, Freckles.
being washed therewith.

The gum of the Vine, Gummi Vitis.
The Gum that issues out it self sticking to the bark, being drunk in wine
does the same, but that we seldom see any such in our Country: we may safely
use the water in the stead thereof, and being bathed on the skin, takes away
Scabs, Tetters, the Morphew, Scabs, Tetters, the Morphew, Leprous Scurf, Hairs,
Warts.
and the leprous Scurf, if the places be first washed with nitre. The said Gum
or the water that droppeth from the green branches when they are burned, being
used with a little oil, takes away hairs and warts.

Grapes and Raisins, Vvae and Passulae.
The fresh Grapes being eaten do breed a little windiness, (which is incident
unto all sorts of raw fruit) but stir up the Appetite, Appetite, Spittings of
blood, Head, Bladder, Agues, loosen the belly.
and are pleasant to the stomach, help to stay spittings of blood, but affect
the head and the bladder; and are forbidden in Agues, being hung up and dried a
little, or made into Raisins, they do help to loosen the belly, especially if
they be taken without the kernels, which are more drying and binding (to be
taken in Powder of themselves) than any other part of the vine. The Raisins of
the Sun are the best for this purpose with us, and for any other use in
physic. And herewith are made Tisane drinks, to help Coughs, hoarsness of the
throat, shortness of wind, Coughs, Hoarsness of the throat, Shortness of
breath, Stomach, Obstructions, Liver, Spleen, Bladder.
toughness of phlegm, causing it the more easily to be expectorated, and do
lenifie sharp and nauseous humors that offend the mouth of the stomach; They
serve likewise to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bladder, and
taken by themselves they nourish much, by reason of their thick sweet and
temperate substance, whereby they stay not long, nor putrify in the Stomach.

Currants, Passulae Corinthiacae.
The small Raisins or Currants are very nourishing likewise, and somewhat
opening the belly, especially being stewed with some other things conducible
thereunto; as with a decoction of Sena, Rubarb, and other such like things as
long as occasion shall need.

Pssulae Damascenae, or Damasco-Raisins.
The Damasco-Raisins have a little tartness in them whereby they are most
grateful to the stomach, and excel the Raisins of the Sun, for all the
purposes aforesaid.

Sapa agresta sive Omphiacum; the Juice of the Grape.
The juice of the grape is of two sorts. That is made of unripe grapes, which
is called varjuice, or of the ripe grapes called wine. The varjuice is a fine
tart liquor, fit to be used in broths, meats or sawces, to sharpen the stomach,
to get an Appetite, and to refresh and quicken fainting spirits; of this juice
is made a Syrrup of especial use in the same causes: the wine is of so many
sundry sorts, as not only the grapes but the sundry Climates and Soyls wherein
they grow are. The weak wines are very Rhumatick, and cleanse much; the strong
wines are very heady, and inflame the blood very much; those of a middle temper
are most proper for our bodies, and most wholesome for our health, and most
useful in physic; both to boil in drinks, and to serve as the vehiculum, to
extract the virtues of whatsoever shall be steeped in it; And is distributed
into many parts, for of it is made both Sapa and defrutum, in English Cuite
that is to say, boiled wine, and both made of mustum, new wine; the later
boiled to the half, the former to the third part. Then there is Acetum vinegar,
that is, sour wine, which is made by setting it in the Sun, which exhaling the
purer spirits and the heat, causes the other to grow acide, and is of great
use both in health and sickness, both in meat and medicine.

The Sapa and defrutum differing but only in the manner of boiling, they may be
both comprehended under Cuite. It helps the cough and shortness of breath,
Cough, Shortness of breath, Phlegm, Chest, Lungs.
and to expectorate tough phlegm from the Chest and Lungs. It also easily
passes through the belly and makes it soluble.

Vinegar contrariwise is cooling and drying as the Cuite is, heating and
moistning, and therefore serves to correct the heat in Fevers, and to resist
putrefaction; it cutteth tough phlegm that is hard baked, and not easily spit
up and brought forth; It is very sharp and penetrating, and very useful in
scabs, Itches, tetters, ringworms, Tough phlegm, Scabs, Itches, Tetters,
Ringworms.
and fretting and creeping Ulcers, to correct their malignity, and extirpate
their corroding quality; but is offensive to the sinews, by its piercing and
drying quality causes them to shrink, but the distilled Vinegar is of a more
fiery and penetrating quality, which it gains by the distillation thereof;
the manner and order in this being quite different from the distilling of wine,
wherein the purest and strongest spirits do first rise and come forth; when as
in vinegar almost two third parts are taken from it, which are the weakest
before the last and strongest rises; but not the last, which is the Empireuma,
and serves even as the vinegar it self does, but with more force, and as the
vehiculum wherein the tincture and spirits of simple medicines are reserved.

Vinum, Wine.
To show all the several colors, scents, strengths, ages, and tastes of simple
wines, were an Herculean labor, and so it is likewise, to show you all the
sorts of compound or artificial wines; which are as infinite as the herbs roots
seeds or other parts of them are, and take their names from the several
Ingredients that compound them; I shall therefore set down the particular
properties of Wine it self, both as it is mediclnable and nourishing.

Wine taken moderately by such as are of a middle age or well in years, or are
of a cold and dry Constitution, it increases blood, Increases blood,
Nourishes Appetite, Urine, Raw humors, Vital Spirits, Leanness, Fears, Cares,
Heaviness, Stomach, Liver.
and nourishes much; procures an appetite, and helps to digest being taken
at meat; it provokes Urine, and drives forth raw humors, thereby
strengthens the vital spirits and procures a good color in them that want
it, or are macilent, drawing to a Consumption so as it be not accompanied with
a Fever; It expels fears, cares, and heaviness; It does comfort all cold
infirmities of the stomach, Liver, Spleen, and womb; and helps windy
swellings in the body and general evi dispositions thereof, green sickness, and
the dropsy.

Virtues of the true Spirit of wine.

The pure spirit of wine must be taken but very little in quantity, and that
not of it self but in some wine or other liquor, for fear of inflaming the
blood and spirits, and chiefly upon symptoms and passions of the heart; And
then taken with respect and good consideration, it works much more effectual
than the wine it self does, to all the purposes aforesaid: (in comforting and
nourishing the natural heat in elder persons) given strength and quickness to
the senses; Strength, Senses, Memory, Brain, Faintings, Heart, Wind, Poisons,
Headache, Toothach, Sores.
it repaireth memory, and the cold and moist diseases of the brain; helps the
fainting and trembling of the heart; warmeth a cold and moist stomach, helps
digestion, expels wind from the sides and belly, and all cold poisons; Being
outwardly applied to the Temples it eases the pains in the head and cold
distillations, and the Toothach being gargled a little; and cicatrizeth old
Sores. These Spirits of wine as well as the wine it self, serve as a vehiculum to
draw out the tincture of diverse things.

The Lees of wine being hardened, is called Tartarum Tartar or Argall, and that
which is taken from the whitest wines is accounted the principal best for any
medicine; but the red sort serves Goldsmiths and others to pollish silver, and
the Dyers to set their dye. The best white Tartar is either given of it self
simply being made into powder and taken the quantity of a dram at a time, in
some convenient drink or broth, for some time together; in Dropsies or evil
dispositions of the body, Dropsies, Urine Siege, Watery humors.
to expel both by urine and siege, those wheyish and watery humors thereof; and
applied to women's breasts that are over-full of milk does dry it up; But the
Cremor tartari which is the purer part thereof, and especially if it be made as
clear as crystal, does work more safely and more effectually than the crude
Tartar can do; but this Tartar that is calcined until it be white, has then
put off all purging quality, and has gained a Caustic burning property, that
will corrode and eat away-scabbed nails and warts, and soon be brought into a
salt, and will also soon be resolved into an oil or liquor: if it be laid upon
a stone, or hung up in a linen bag in a moist cellar, to be received as it
dropped down; it is of admirable use in chemical operations. There is another
kind of oil of Tartar of a far milder temper and is more like unto clear water,
which is very effectual to cleanse the skin from all manner of spots, scars,
morphew, Spots, Scarrs, Morphew, Hair,
or discolorings whatsoever, and makes it smooth and amiable, and will help
to bring on hair on the places decayed; The wild vines are in property no less
cooling, but more binding than the branches of the manured; stays the lask
and spitting of blood, Lask, Spitting of blood, Stomach, Sore mouths, Privy
parts, Eyes.
provoking Urine, and is pleasing to a hot stomach, or that loatheth meat; the
leaves hereof are as good for Lotions as the other, for sores in the mouth,
privy parts, and Fundament. The ashes of the branches are likewise used to
clear the Eyesight of filmes, and what else may offend them; to cleanse sores
and Ulcers, and to take away the over-growing skins of the nayls of the hands
or toes.

Indian wheat, Maiz. Frumentum Indicum, vel Turcicum vulgar.
Kinds.] THere are two sorts hereof, the greater, and the lesser.

Descript.] 1. The usual Indian or Turkey wheat. This Indian wheat shoots
from the root which is thick and bushy, sundry strong and tall stalks, about
eight foot high, as thick as a man's wrist; if it grow in any rank ground, full
of great joints, with a white pyth in the middle of them; the leaves are long,
twice as large as of Millet, at the tops come forth many feather-like sp^igs,
bending downwards like unto the top of Millet, which are either white, or
yellow, or blew; as the grains in the ears will prove, which fall away nothing
appearing after them, but while they are in slower, at the joints of the stalks
with the leaves, from within two or three of the lower joints. up toward the
tops come forth the ears one at a joint which have many leaves folded over
them, smallest at the top, with a small long bush of threads or hairs hanging
down at the ends, which when they are ripe are to be cut off; which folds of
leaves being taken away, the head appears; much like unto a long Cone, or
Pineapple, set with six or eight or ten rows of Corns orderly and closely
set together, each being almost as big as a pease, not fully round, but flat on
the sides that join one to another, of the same color on the outside as the
bloomings were, hard but brittle* and easy to be broken or ground, with white
meal within them, somewhat dry and not clammy in the chewing.

Descript.] 2. The other lesser Indian wheat, Frumentum Indicum alterum sive
minus. This other Indian wheat is like the former both in stalks and leaves,
but not half so high or great; the ears likewise are not half so big, of as
differing colors as it, but they do not grow at the joints of the stalks as
the other, but at the tops, following the flowers, which makes a special
difference between them; the grain it self is, (being made into bread) not of
that nourishing quality as the greater sort is, but weaker by much* nor is so
strong, to breed so much blood as it.

Place and Time.] The first grows both in the East and West Indies, and from
both places have been brought unto us, and has grown with us, and sometimes
born ripe Ears but not always, and will desire a strong rich ground as the
Millet does, It is sown only in the Spring, and ripe in September; the other is
a stranger, and seldom seen with us.

Government and Virtues.] The grain is certainly Saturnine, of a dry quality,
the meat has in it some clamminess, which binds the bread close, and gives
good nourishment to the body; The sweetness also of the bread shows the power
of nourishment in it: but it breeds thick blood and humors, which cause
obstructions. It is properly used to be put into Cataplasmes to ripen
Imposthumes: Imposthumes.
much feeding thereon, ingenders gross blood, which breeds Itches and Scabs,
Itches, Scabs.
in those that are not used to it; of it is made drink also, both in the Indies
and in some of our English Plantations, that will intoxicate as soon as our
small Beer if it be made accordingly: But is found to be very effectual if it
be made accordingly, to hinder the breeding of the stone, so that none are
troubled therewith that do drink thereof; the leaves thereof are used also to
fatten their Horses and Cattle.

Wormwood.
I Would willingly have omitted this common Wormwood and said nothing of it,
but that Culpepper has so ridiculously Romanced upon it; and it remains still
under color of truth.

Common Wormwood called Absynthium vulgar, is well known to have many whitish
green leaves, somewhat more hoary underneath, much divided or cut into parts,
from among which rise up diverse hard and woody hoary stalks two or three foot
high, beset with like leaves as grow below, but smaller; divided at the tops
into smaller branches; whereon grow many small yellow buttons with pale yellow
flowers in them, wherein afterward is contained small seed: the root is hard
and woody with many strings thereat, the stalks hereof dye down every year, but
the root holds a tuft of green leaves, all the winter shooting forth new
again, which are of a strong scent, but not unpleasant; and of a very bitter
taste. The Seriphium or Seawormwood is much weaker but of a pleasant bitterness.

Place and Time.] It is plentifully found in most places in England, and
flowers about August.

Government and Virtues.] All the sorts of Wormwoods are Martial Plants. It is
of a heating binding property, and is said to purge Choler that cleaves to the
stomach or belly. It is said also to provoke Urine, help Surfets, Choler,
Urine, Surfeits, pains in the stomach, Yellow Jaundise.
and ease pains in the stomach. The decoction or the Infusion thereof taken,
does take away the loathing to meat, and helps those that have the yellow
Jaundise, for which purpose Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus gives a good
Receipt. Take says he of the flowers of Rosemary, Wormwood, and Blackthorn
each a like quantity, of Safron half that quantity, all which being boiled in
Rhenish wine, let it be given after the body is prepared by purging, a small
draught thereof taken a few days together, brings down women's Courses; Women's
Courses, Heart, Liver.
being taken with vinegar it helps those that are almost strangled by eating
Mushrooms. It helps the pains of the heart and Liver, being beaten and mixed
with Ceratum Cyprinum, and applied, as also applied to the stomach with
Rosewater, it gives much comfort to those that have layn long sick. It helps
those that are troubled with the swelling and hardness of the spleen, or those
that have a hot sharp water running between the skin and the flesh. It is often
used both inwardly and outwardly for the worms, the seed thereof helps the
Bloody flux, Spleen, Worms, Bloody Flux.
and all other fluxes, vinegar wherein wormwood has been boiled is good for a
stinking breath that comes from the gums or teeth, or corruption of the
Stomach. The Conserve thereof is good against the Dropsy; Stinking-breath,
Dropsy.
the Sea-wormwood works the same effects but weaker.

Thus I am sure I have set down all the true virtues of wormwood, and it may be
some more than will bear the Test when they are tried: if I should have written
all that Authors say of wormwood, I should have taken up a great deal of room,
stuffed full of falsities; for, besides Culpeppers idle Romancing upon it,
others have mightily commended it for dimness of sight, and to clear the eyes;
if they had said it is good to cause dimness of sight and put out the eyes,
they had been nearer the truth. Another story they have of it, that it
preserves clothes from moths and worms, and drives away Gnats, Fleas, and such
noisome Insects if the skin be anointed with the juice or oil thereof. This is
utterly false as I have had the experience upon my self; for being troubled,
and gnats lodging in the country near the Seaside, where gnats are very
troublesome in the night, to prevent which, as I then believed, I caused my
chamber to be rubbed all over, and both walls and windows, with wormwood, and
anointed my self with the juice of it all over, thinking to have a quiet night,
but was worse infested with fleas and Gnats than ever before; so that I was
forced to leave my Chamber and walk all night. These are the true virtues of
wormwood.

Yucca or Jucca.
Descript.] THis Indian Plant has a thick tuberous root, spreading in time
into many tuberous heads, from whence shoot forth many long hard and
narrow-guttured or hollow leaves, very sharp-pointed, compassing one another at
the bottom, of a greyish green color, abiding continually or seldom falling
away, with sundry hard threads running in them, and being withered become pliant
withal to bind things: From the midst whereof springs forth a strong round
stalk, divided into sundry branches, whereon stand diverse somewhat large white
flowers, hanging downwards, consisting of six leaves with diverse veins, of a
weak reddish or blush-colour, spread on the back of three outer leaves, from
the middle to the bottom, not reaching to the edge of any leaf, which abide not
long, but quickly falling away.

Place and Time.] It grows in diverse places of the West Indies, as in
Virginia and New England, and flowers about the latter end of July.

Government and Virtues.] There has no property hereof conducible to physical
uses as yet been heard of, but some of its vices. The Natives in Virginia use,
for bread, the roots hereof. And that the raw juice is dangerous if not deadly.
Aldinus relates that the wound made with the sharp point-end of one of these
leaves in his own hand, wrought such intolerable pains, that he was almost
beside himself, until by applying some of his own Balsamum unto it, he was
thereby miraculously eased of the pain and all trouble thereof; It is very
probable, that the Indians use to poison the heads of their Darts, with the
juice hereof.

Zedoaria.
Virtues.] THis Indian root is effectual against poisons of all sorts, and
venomes of virulent creatures; and is profitable in the pestilence, and other
contagious diseases, as also to warm a cold stomach and to expel wind, and
repress vomitings, to dry up and consume Catarrhes and defluxions of Rheums,
Poisons, Venomes, Contagious diseases, Cold stomach, wind, vomitings Catarrhes,
Rheums.
to dissolve the Imposthumes of the Matrix, and to stay the looseness of the
belly, and is very powerful to stay or disperse unsavory belchings.

Bitumen, Dry Pitch.
ALthough this is, and that which follows are, no Plants but rather Minerals,
for their medicinal properties and manner of production, and the place from
whence this Bitumen comes; I could not omit, but add them here.

The Bitumen or dry Pitch which the dead Sea in Judaea casts up at certain
times in the year, is set down by Dioscorides to be of a shining purple-colour,
but that which is black is adulterate. And Mathiolus says, that the Asphaltum
or Bitumen of the Shops in Italy (and so with us) is a mixture, and not the
true thing. The true Bitumen is that of the Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah and
those Cities mentioned in Genesis, which were destroyed by fire and Brimstone
from Heaven.

Many Writers diversely set down the dimensions, or length thereof; especially
Pliny and his followers: But the true description thereof as it was exactly
surveyed by one of our Countrymen who writes his own experience, and not the
relations of those who never saw the place, take it in his own words.

This Lake is called Lacus Asphaltites: it yields a kind of slime, named
Bitumen or Asphaltum, which bituminous savor no living thing can endure. And
now, Mare mortuum; Mare, because it is salt; and Mortuum, because it is dead,
for that no living thing breeds therein, and more properly for this cause,
called the dead-Sea, because of it self it is unmovable, such is the Leprosy
and stability of the water: it is also called so, because if a Bird fly over
it, she presently falls down dead. It smoaketh continually from whence
proceed filthy vapors, which deform the fields lying about for certain miles,
as it were blasted, scorched, and made utterly barren; This smoke I take only
to be but the exhalation of Jordan, for this River falling into it and there
ending his course, the two contrary natures cannot agree; the one being a
filthy puddle, and the other a pure water.

This Lake is eighty miles in length, and six in breadth, being compassed with
the Rocks of Arabia Petraea on the South, on the North with the Sandy hills of
the wilderness of Judaea, on the West with the steepy mountains of Arabia
deserta, and on the East with the Plains of Jericho. How comes it to pass
therefore that the fresh running flood of Jordan falling evermore into this
bounded Sea, that the Lake it self never diminishes nor increases, but
always stands at one fullness, neither has it any issuing forth, nor
reboundeth backwards on the Planes of Jericho, which is one of the greatest
wonders in the world? Wherefore (as I have said) it must needs exhale into the
clouds, or else run down into hell: For if it ran under the Rocks, and so burst
out in the Deserts, it would soon be known; but in all the bounds of Arabia
deserta which between this Lake and the Red Sea, extend to three hundred miles,
there is no such matter as Brook or Strand, much less a River, neither has it
any Intercourse with the Ocean. It breeds nor reserveth no kind of fishes,
and if by the swelling of Jordan any fishes fall into it, they immediately die.
And although Josephus says that in his time, there were apples grew upon the
banks thereof, like unto the color of gold, and within were rotten, and would
consume to powder, if touched; yet I affirm now the contrary, for there is not
such a thing (whatsoever has been in his days) as either trees or bushes grow
near to Sodom by many miles; Such is the consummation of that pestiferous Gulf;
Diverse Authors have reported that nothing will sink into it of any reasonable
weight, as dead men, or Carcasses of Beasts. But by experience I affirm the
contrary, for it bears nothing above at all; yea not the weight of a feather:
the water it self is of a blackish color, and at some times in the year there
are terrible shapes and shows of Terror in it, as I was informed at Jericho,
which is the nearest Town that bordereth thereupon, and that is fifteen miles
distance. The Bitumen is gathered on the water, and hardened in the air; the
medicinal uses of it are; It discusseth Tumors and Swellings, and mollifieth
the hardness Tumors, Swellings, Hardness
of them, and keeps them from Inflammations, and is of singular use for the
rising of the Mother, and for the Falling Sickness, Rising of the Mother,
Falling Sickness.
to be burnt, and the fumes thereof, which are strong, smelled unto; it
brings down women's courses taken in wine with a little Castoreum; It helps
the bitings of Serpents, the pains in the sides and hips, Women's Courses,
bitings of Serpents, pains Hips.
and dissolveth congealed blood, in the stomach and body.

Oil of Peter, Petroleum sive Oleum Petrae.
THis I have known miraculously to cure the Sciatica, yet it is scarce taken
notice of, what it is, or whence it comes.

Oil of Peter is a thin reddish liquor, almost as thin as water, and is
accounted to be a liquid Bitumen, and thought to be the Naphta of Dioscorides,
by Mathiolus, because it is so apt to take fire, even by the air thereof; and
is gotten in sundry places of Italy, distilling it self out of a Mine in the
earth; and in Hungary also in a certain place; where issuing forth in a Well
together with the water, the Owner of the place thought to have the chinks
stopped up with mortar, which could not be done without light; the Workman
therefore taking a close Lanthorn with a light in it, went about it, and being
gone down into the Well to stop it, very suddenly the Peter-oyl taking fire,
flew round about the sides of the Well, and with a hideous noise and smoke,
like the crack of a great piece of Ordnance shot off; It not only cast'd forth
the Workman dead, but blew up the cover of the Well into the air: and set on
fire also some Bottles of the oil that stood by the Well, and many persons that
stood thereby were scorched with the flame.

Virtues.] This oil of Peter is a special Ingredient to make Wildfire, and is
of a very hot and piercing scent and quality. It is used for all cold Aches,
Cramps, and Gouts, and to heal any green wound or Cut suddenly, a little
thereof being put into the oil of St. John's Wort and used.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of all the Herbs, Plants, Drugs, in the Suppliment to
Mr. Nich. Culpeppers English Physician; as also what Planet governs every one
of them.
A.
Acatia, it is under the dominion of Saturn. page 1. Aconitum. page 2. Agnus
Castus, the chaste Tree, it is under Mars. page 2. Almond-tree, it is under
Venus. page 3. Ammoniacum, it is under Mars. page 3. Amber, it is under Mars.
page 5. Ambergreese, it is under the Sun. page 6. Amomum, it is under Sol. page
7. Annise, it is under Jupiter. page 7. Anagyris, or Arbor Inda, it is under
Saturn. page 8. Aloe or Aloes, it is under Mars. page 9. Assa Foetida, it is
under Saturn. page 10.
B.
Balsome-tree, or the tree Balsome, a solar Plant. page 12. Bdellium, it is
under Mars. page 14. Buck-wheat, it is under Venus. page 15. Bane-wort, it is
under Mars. page 16. Spanish Broom, it is under Mars. page 16. Base Broom, it
is under Mars. page 17. Behen or Been Album, it is under Saturn. page 17. Black
Bind-weed, it is under Mercury. page 18. Rough Bindweed, it is under Mars. page
18. Bombace-tree, it is under Venus. page 19. Box-tree, it is under Saturn.
page 19. Prickly Box, it is under Mercury. page 20
C.
Comin, it is under Sol. page 20. Capers, it is under Mars. page 21. Soldonella,
it is under Mars. page 22. Carob-tree, it is under Saturn. page 23. Cassia
Fistula, it is under Venus. page 23. Carrot wild, it is under Mercury. page 24.
Cedar-tree, it is under the Sun. page 25. Cistus, it is under Jupiter. page 26.
Cockle, it is under Saturn. page 28. Corn-flower, it is under the Moon. page
28. Coriander, it is under Saturn. page 29. Coloquintida, it is under Mars.
page 29. Cornel-tree, it is under Saturn. page 30. Cucumber wild, it is under
Mars. page 31. Cypress-tree, it is under Saturn. page 32. Coral, it is under
the Sun. page 34. Cardamoms, it is under Jupiter. page 34. Cloves, it is under
the Sun. page 35. Cluna-Root, it is under Jupiter. page 36. Cinnamon and Cassia
Lignea, it is under Jupiter. page 36. Cocculus Indus. page 37. Costus. page 38.
Cubebs. 38. Currants red, white, and black, it is under Venus. 39. Caranha. page
40. Ceterach, it is under Mars. page 40. Cokar-nut-tree, it is under the Sun.
41. Chocolate. page. 42. Coffee. page 45. Camphire, it is under Mercury. page
46. Cambugio, it is under Mars. page 46.
D.
Daffodyl white, it is under Venus. page 47. Daffodyl yellow, it is under Mars.
page 48. Date-tree, it is under Mars. page 49. Dictamnum of Candy, it is under
Venus. page 50. Dictamnum false, it is under Venus. page 52. Dittander, it is
under Mars. page 53. Double-tongue, it is under Venus. page 53. Garden-dragons,
Dragon-wort, and Water-Dragons; it is under Mars. page 54. Dunch-down, it is
under the Moon. page 56. Dwarf-Plane-tree, it is under Saturn. page 57.
E.
Elder and its kinds. page 57, 58, 59, 60. Eglantine, it is under Venus. page
71. Ellebore white, t^s under Mars. 71. Ellebore wild white or Neese-wort. page
73. Erisimon, it is under Mercury. page 73. Euphorbium, it is under Mars. 74.
F.
Fenugreek, it is under Mercury. 76. Fig Tree, it is under Jupiter. 77,
Fistick-nuts, it is under Jupiter. 79. Flax, it is under Venus. 79. Flea-bane,
it is under Saturn. 80. Fir Tree, it is under Mars, 82.
G.
Galangall, it is under Mars. page 83. Galbanum, it is under Jupiter. 83.
Stock-Gillow-flowers, it is under Mercury. 85. The Wall or yellow-Gilliflower,
it is under the Sun. 86. The Gall-Oak, it is under Saturn. page 87. Sweet-Gaul,
it is under Saturn. page 88. Ginger, it is under the Sun. page 88. Guiacum, it
is under Mars. page 89. Gum-Arabick, it is under Saturn. 91. Gum-Tragacanth;
Its under Venus. 92. Gum-Elemni. 93. Gum-Taamahacca, it is under Mercury. 93.
H.
Herb-Robert, it is under Mars. page 94. Hermo-Dactyls, it is under the Sun.
94. Hone-wort, it is under Mercury. 95.
I.
Jack by the Hedge, it is under Mars. page 96. Jessamine or Jesmine, it is
under Sol. 96. John the Infants herb. 97. Jujube-tree, it belongs to Venus. 98.
The white Jujube-tree with thorns and without, it is under Venus. 99.
K.
Kali, it is under Mars. 100.
L.
Lacca or Gum-lack, it is under Jupiter. page 101. Larch-tree, it is under
Venus. 102. Spurge-Laurell, it is under Mars. 104. Indian-leaf it is under Sol.
105. Lentils, it is under Saturn. 106. Lentisk or Mastich-tree, it is under
Jupiter. 107. Lemon-tree or Lemons, it is under Sol. 109. Line or Linden-tree,
it is under Venus. 111. Liquid Amber, it is under Jupiter. 112. Lung-flower or
Autumn-Gentian, it is under Mars. 112. Lupines, it is under Mars. page 116.
M.
Madder great and small, it is under Mars. page 117. Small or little Madder.
119. May-weed, it is under Mars. 120. Jews-Mallow, it is under Venus. 121.
Mandrake, it is under Saturn. 123. Manna, it is under Venus. 125. The greater
Maple-tree, it is under Jupiter. 126. Mechoacan Jalap, it is under Mars. 129.
Millet. 130. Myrtle, it is under Mercury. 131. Myrobolans, it is under Sol.
134. Mushrooms. 137. Myrrh, it is under Sol. 138.
N.
Nutmeg-tree and Mace. 139. Navelwort of Mathiolus, it is under Mars. 140.
Apples-bearing Nightshade, it is under Saturn. p. 141. Thorny Apple-bearing
Nightshades, it is under Mars. 143. Nipplewort. These are under Venus. 144. The
Indian Hazel-nut. These are under Venus. 145.
O.
The Olive Tree, it is under Venus. 145. Orange-tree, it is under Jupiter. 149.
Yellow Oranges of Malabar. 151.
P.
Pepper, it is under Mars. page 152. Guinny-Pepper, it is under Mars. 153.
Pines, it is under Venus. 159. The Pine Tree, it is under Saturn. 161.
Pitch-tree, it is under Sol. 163. Pitch and Tarr. 164 Sea-Plantane. 165.
Pomegranate-tree. 167. Pomcitron-tree, it is under Mercury. 171.
Q.
Sea-spiked Quick-grass. 173.
R.
Rattle red and yellow. page 174. Sweet or Aromatical Reed. 175. Sweet Rush, it
is under Venus. 178. Rhubarb, it is under Jupiter. 179. Rosemary, it is under
the Sun. 184. Roses, it is under Venus. 187. Rice, it is under the Sun. 193.
S.
Spanish-Saffron. page 193. Sarsaparilla, it is under Mars. 195. Saracens
Consound, it is under Mars. 198. Sassafras or Ague-tree, it is under Sol. 199.
Saunders, it is under Sol. 200. Scamony, it is a Martial Plant. 201. Scarlet
Grain, it is under Sol. 204. Sebesten or the Assyrian Plum. 205. The wild
Sebesten Sebesten Sylvestris, it is under Ven. 205. Sena or purging Seen, it is
under Mercury. 206. Seasamum, it is under Mars. 208. Sycomore-tree, it is under
Venus. 209. Spikenard, it is under Venus. 210. Squinant, it is under Jupiter.
211. Stoechas, it is under Jupiter. 212. The Storax-tree, it is under the Sun.
213. Sumach, it is under Saturn. 214. Swallow-wort, it is under the Sun. 215.
T.
Tobacco, it is under Saturn. 217. Gum-Taramahaca. 219. Sealed Earth, Terra
sigillata. 219. Turbith. 220. The true Turpentine-tree, it is under the Sun.
220. Turn-sole, it is a Solar Plant. 222.
V.
The Vine. page 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231.
W.
Indian Wheat, Maiz, frumentum Indicum, vel Turcicum vulgar. It is under
Saturn. 231. Wormwood is a Martial Plant. 233. Yucca or Jucca. 234. Zedoaria.
235. Bitumen, dry Pitch. 235. Oil of Peter, Petroleum, sive Oleum Petra. 237.
A Table of the Diseases, treated in this Supplement to Mr. Nich. Culpepper's
English Physician.
A.
ASthma or shortness of breath: see breath short. Aged persons, to comfort and
strengthen. 7. Agues. 11. 13. 24. 36. 39. 49. 63. 99. 115. 136. 213. St.
Anthonies fire. 29. 33. 81. 107. 133. 147. Appetite to stir up. 39. 108. 112,
115, 116. 121, 135, 147. 158. 228. Aches. 40. 63. 69. 81. 104. 121. 129. 135,
136. 152. 200. Aposthumes. 61. Apoplex. 67. 75.
B.
Blood to dispell if clotted, and to increase. 78. 230. Blood to cleanse. 207.
Blood to stop. p. 10. 34. 33. 87. 166. 231. Blood spit. 4. 9. 20. 33. 108. 133.
Breath short. 4, 5. 13. 31. 74. 79. 90. 99. 104. 122. 129. 139. 164. Breath to
sweeten. p. 8. 10. 37. 108. 133. 171. 186. 234. Breast cleanse. 5. 8. 11. 19.
28. 76. The Breast pained 38. 195. The Breasts and Nipples. 145. Brain. 7. 11.
13. 60. 108. 112. Barrenness proceeding from a cold Cause. 7. 13. 158.
Barrenness proceeding from a hot Cause. 125. Belching. 8. 135. Bloody Flux. 8.
17. 20. 27. 33. 81. 112. 122. 133. 215. Belly to open. 9. 18. 23. 30. Belly to
bind and strengthen. 39. 100. 128. Bruises and stripes. 11. 22. 35. 78. 115.
123. Bowels. 13. Brain. 13. 104. 136. Beauty to preserve. 14. 46. 139. Bursten
or Ruptures. 15. 36. 81. 104. 123. 177. Bodies lean to help. 42. 60. Back. 46.
158. 160. Burnings and Scaldings. 48. 91. 112. Boiles. 78. 84. Broken bones.
108. 133.
C.
Chastity to help. 3. 46. Cods and Stone to help swelled. 3. 20. 63. 74.
Child-dead to expel. 5. 72. 86. 101. 115, 116. 139. Coughs old and new. 6. 8.
14. 19, 20. 25. 39. 55. 63. 74. 78. 121. 152. Coughs. 174. 214. Chin-Cough.
123. Colds. 63. Consumptions. 6. 13, 36. 80. 104. 230. Children that be in
danger of the Falling Sickness. p. 8. Children newborn what to do to them. 65.
Choler or cold phlegmatic humors. p. 9. 104. 126. 135. 207. Cramp. 11. 13.
56. 75. 84. 90. 115. 177. 179. 237. Carbuncles. 12. 33. 158. Corns. 12.
Convulsions. 13. 56. Catharts. 19. 67. 89. 97. 133. Choler and Phlegm. 25. 30.
39. 60. 81. 126. Cholick. 37. 61. 105. Conception in Women how hindered. 41.
Catharrs. 55. Cankars. 50. 107. 116. Chin-cough. 123. Costive how remedied.
128.
D.
Drunkenness, to preserve from. 4. 171. Dogs mad. 4. 11. 60. 115. Dropsy. 8.
22. 31. 60. 78. 101, 102. 135. 168. 176. 218. 222. Dreaming. 8. Dead bodies to
preserve from Corruption. 26. Drowsiness to hinder. 75. For Digestion. 93. 96.
Drowsiness. 186.
E.
Eyes bloud-shotten. 62. Eyes. 1. 10, 11. 13. 15. 20. 26. 28. 31. 34. 56. 60.
72. 86. 101. 107. 115. 136. 141. 147. 151. 158. 174. 188. 209. Web in the Eyes
or dimness. 5. Eyes. 13. 20. 26, 27. 32. 49. 56. 68. 80, 81. 84. 147. 209. Eyes
troubled with kernels. 131.
F.
Flux of the belly. 4. 11. 23. 108. Falling Sickness. 4. 7. 11. 34. 35. 66. 84.
111. 112. 207. Phlegm to ripen and carry away. 5. 11. 31. 39. 78. 89. 97. 103.
135. 151. Fundament. 10. 63. 87. 108. 122, 133. 148. Fistulae. 60. 72. French
Pox. 19. 36. 41. 63. 75. 90. 129. Fevers. 34. 69. 80, 81. 100. 131, 171.
Freckles in the Face. 80. 84. 110. 158. 209. Face troubled with spots pimples.
37. 77. 103. 116. Faintings or swooning. 39. 69. Flux of seed in men or women
to stay. 46. Fleas and Flies to kill. 63. 72. 81. 117. Frenzies. 72. Falls, see
Bruises. Fistula. 164. 174. 220. 227.
G.
Guts sore. 4. Griping Guts. 21. 25. 112. Gout. 4. 7. 19. 32. 82. 103. Gout
Running. 6. Gout. 24. 60. 61. 63. 93. 103. 183. Griping guts. 7, 8. 30. 35. 81.
Griefs. 13. Gums. 20. 34. 78. 108. Hip gout. 53.
H.
Head-baldness. 75. Head-giddiness. 104. Headache. 4. 8. 10. 19. 50. 54. 61,
62. 75. 81. 93. Giddiness Head. 30. Huckle-bone. 4. Hiccop. 8. 183. Hearing or
Deafness, to procure. 8. 78. Humors to dry up and carry off. p. 9. 47. 56. 76.
78. 93. Humors of a slimy nature. 72. Hair from falling off. p. 10.
Hemorrhoids. 11. Hoarsness. 11. 78. 126. Heels kybed. 12. 49. 57. Hogs to
fatten quickly. 15. The Hair to color black. 33. 60. 215. Heart. 35. 37. 135.
Hoarsness. 68.
I.
Joints swelled or pained. 5. 40. 108. Joint Aches. 6. Inflammations and
Imposthumes. 7. 32. 122. 125. 172. Jaundise. 9. 24. 36. 40. 74. 99. 102. 118.
136. 182. 195. 233. Imposthumes or hard Swellings. 12. 24. 48. 74. 76. 78. 80.
177. 232. Issues of blood to stop. 27. 29. 71. 215. Itch. 76. 101. 108. 110.
Jaws. 78.
K.
King's Evil. p. 11. 19. 29. 78. 115. 182. 211. 218. Kidneys and bladder. 82.
Kernels in any part of the body. 152. 224.
L.
Lasks. 1. 8. 20. 27. 29. 31. 71. 81. 106. 136. 182. Liver stopped. 3, 4. 7, 8.
13. 22. 73. 79. 127. 209. Lungs. 4. 76. 78, 79. 101. Of Lust how it may be
stirred. page 8. Lips chopped. 20. Lice to kill. 27. 110. 218. Looseness in the
body to stay. 37. 50. Leprosy. 72. 75. 78. 101. 149. Lethargy. 75. Legs
troubled with Ulcers. 96
M.
Mother. 1. 7. 12. 15. 27. 38. 54. 83, 84. 87. 108. 112. 122. 158. 237. Matrix.
1. 27. 54. 76. 80. 86. 133. Members dead. 3. Memory to help. 6, 7. 13. 38. 90.
93. 104. 230. Mouth. 10. 68. 83. 86. 111. 231. Milk to increase. 16. Moths. 27.
88. 149. 171. Manginess. 32. Melancholy. 34. 36. 41. 118. 135. 217. Moles to
kill. 62. Measles. 7, 8. Matter corrupt to purge from the head and brain. 105.
179.
N. (O.)
Nerves and sinews. 7. 40. Nostrils. 12. 33. 46. Navel. 12. 81. Nose-bleeding.
21. 97. Nose defective in smelling. 68. 78. Nails. 80. 133. 148. 182. 231.
P.
Pimples or spots in the Face. 4. 203. Pains to assuage. 5. 131. Pissing by
drops. 6. 40. Plurisie. p. 11. 209. Pestilence. 13. 75. 78. 110. 115. 139. 150.
170. 216. Palsy. 13. 22. 36. 62. 67. 118. 158. Poison to dissolve. 19. 34. 78.
148. Plague. 46. Piles or Emrods. 62, 63. 105. 115. 133. 135.
Q.
Quinsie. 63. 152. 164.
R.
Running of the Reins. 6. 34. 41. 103. 108. 188. Reins. 13. 24, 91. 99. Rheums.
19. 36. 40. 89. 108. 235.
S.
Burning sores. 79. Sores old. 80. 86. 116. 162. 218. 230. Spleen. 129. 172.
Stone. 144. 172. 227. Stomach to comfort and the inward parts. 106. 112. 130.
151. Stomach to comfort. p. 9. 22. 29. 31. 35. 37, 38, 39. 93. 102. Spleen. 3,
4, 5. 13, 14. 18, 19. 22. 34. 40, 41. 50. 52. 76. 84. Stone and Gravel. 4. 8.
13, 14. 24. 34. 47. 40, 41. 61. 86. 96. 102, 103. 108. 136. Sciatica. 4. 11.
14. 17. 22. 35. 53. 63. 72. 93. 183. Strength to recover. 7. Sleep to procure.
7, 8. 62. 124. 140. 188. Squinancy or swellings of the Throat. 8. 11. 31.
Swellings to dissolve. 18. Sinews. 11. 38. 48. 84. 207. 227. Spotted Fever.
13. Spirits to cherrish. 13. 150. Stiches in the sides. 14, 15. 97. Strangury.
17. 24. 26. 33. 40. 52. 54. 71. 81. Seed to increase. 19. Scabs. 20. 35. 53.
101. 110. Scurfs. 27. 32. 75, 76. 97. 104. 148. Scars of wounds. 27. 53. 78.
Spots. 32. 48. 56. 97. Secret members. 33. Skin to keep its color. 38. 78.
101. 141. 199. Skin to keep from roughness. 72. Swellings to dissolve. 49. 74.
76. 95. 127. Splinters to draw. 51. Scurvy. 56. Scalding by fire or water. 57.
61. Sneezing. 72. Speech lost. p. 75. Small Pox. 78. 116. 171. Sweat. 86.
Sprains. 103. Spiders. 149. Sun-burned. 209.
T.
Teeth to make white and firm. 89. Teeth loose. 127. Tumors hot. 1. 19. 24. 29.
78. 93. 112. 121. Terms to provoke. 3. 14. 22. 24. 38. 60. 209. 237. Teeth to
stop. 20, 21. 37. 78, 79. Toothach. 6. 11. 18. 22. 26. 32. 40. 72. 108. 122.
148. 182. 230. Terms to provoke. 6. 11. 26. 83. Thirst to stanch. 8. 39. 81.
126. Tongue. 10. Throat. 14. 24. 54. 62. 68. 78. 87. 121. 126. 164. Tetters and
Ringworms. 32. 78. 97. 149. 228. Temples. 40. 93. Tympany. 61. Tissick. 79. 84.
90. Thorn and Splinters to draw forth. 80. 84. The Taste to help. 115. Trochis.
210.
V.
Ulcers. 141. 160. 213. Urine to provoke. 158. 160. 211. Urine sharp. 206.
Venomous beasts. 3. 8. 11. 13. 14. 18. 20. 50. 56. 73, 74. 85. 104. 171. Ulcers
in the Matrix. 3. Ulcers in general. 10. 20. 48. 54. 56. 62. 94. 103. 107. 123.
133. 136. Urine to provoke. 5, 6. 8, 11. 13, 14. 22, 23, 24. 34. 60. 71. 83.
102. Venereous Exercises to excite. 7. 36. 38. 42. 119. The Uvula falling down.
11. Vomiting to stay. 29. 33. 39. 99. 169. 209. Vomiting to force. 47, 48, 49,
103. Voice to help. 42. 68. 195. 209. Vdders of Kyne how to help. 115.
W.
Wind to dissolve. 3. 8. 19. 21, 25. 38. 61. 89. 93. 129. Women's Courses, See
Terms. Women's delivery to be easy. 6. 34. 53. 84. 151. 224. Whites or Reds to
stop. 6. 8. 13. 34. 108. Women's milk to cause plenty. 8. 107. Women's flowers
and the Afterbirth. 9. 11. 13. 27. 52. 83. Warts. 11. 78. 224, Wounds. 13. 27.
50. 52. 82. 94. 107. 162. Worms. 22. 29. 38. 52. 70. 81. 104. 108. 115. 138
168. 172. 233. Wasps to kill. 72. Women subject to miscarry. 91. 204. Wens.
122. 168. 227. Women's Longing. 168. Wheasing. 206. 221.
X. Y.
Yard to help. 36.
A new Tract for the Cure of Wounds made by Gunshot or otherways, fitted for
the meanest Capacities, exceeding useful in times of War and Peace.
FIrst, How Wounds are to be ordered at the first dressing.

The first thing to be done in order to the curing of these wounds is to remove
whatsoever is within the wound offending it; as Linen, Paper, Bullets, and the
like, with instruments for that purpose; as Forceps, Crows-bills,
Catch-Bullets, etc. The next thing must be to stanch the flux of blood, which
is done either by filling the wound with dry Lint, or Powders of Bole-armonack,
Draggons blood, Aloes, Frankincense, the hairs of a Hare cut very small, and
such like, applied either with the white of an Egg, Ointment of Bole-armonack
and such like, or without, as you shall see cause. If the wound be large and
you think it will not join together by rolling, then you must stich it together
with needle, and silk, well waxed for that purpose; then at the next days
dressing, the Contusion or bruising of the part caused by the Gunshot must be
considered, to which end you are to use such like medicines as these that
follow. viz. Oleum Catellorum, i. e. Oil of whelps, or Oil of Turpintine,
called Oleum Terebinthinae, or Arceus his Lineament etc. The next dressing,
proceed as before, unless you suspect a Gangreene, then mix with the former
medicines, some Aegyptiacum-oyntment, more or less as you shall find cause;
then the wound with these remedies being come past danger of gangreene, with
good flesh and matter, then you must seek to supply the part with good flesh if
there be any wanting, which may be done with Vnguentum Basilicon, Vnguentum
Aureum, i. e. golden ointment: And at last, wholly to skin it firmly over, use
desiccativum rubrum, the red drying or shining ointment.

All this while you must have regard to such other Symptoms as oftentimes are
known to follow and accompany these wounds. And first for pain, which being
commonly joined with Inflammation or great heat, is to be assuaged and mitigated
with these medicines following, Vnguentum album, i. e. the white ointment,
Vnguentum nutritum, oil of Roses, Vnguentum Populeum, Id est, Ointment of
Poplar-buds, and oil of Lillies, Elder, Earthworms, Camomile.

If the Patient shall chance to faint through pain or loss of blood, or any
other ways, administer to him one dram of Confectio Alkermes, with the smaller
sort of Cinamon-water.

If a Convulsion happen to the part, you are to anoint it with oil of Bays,
called Oleum Laurinum, Spike, and Castor, etc. The ointment of Aragon and
Agrippa are likewise very good: or anoint the part and all the Backbone with
this. Take oil of Turpentine half an ounce, oil of Cloves six drops, the pulp
of Bryonie as much as suffices to make an ointment: But this following is
excellent.

Take salt Butter and old rusty Bacon, of each four ounces, the gums of
Bdellium and Ammoniacum, of each one ounce, Myrrh and Castor of each two
drams, the flowers of Lavender Cotton and Rosemary-flowers, of each a pugil,
(which is as much as you can take up between your thumb and two fingers)
Nutmegs and Cloves, of each one dram, a young Kitlen the skin being pulled off
and the guts being taken out and bruised, and cut in small pieces: put all
these into the belly of a fat Goose, sew them up, and so roast the Goose upon a
spit, the first juice or Liquor that drops from it being waterish may be thrown
away, but when the fat dripping comes, let that be taken in a Pan half full of
vinegar, and with this anoint the part troubled with convulsion, and all the
Backbone. After anointing, keep a Fox or Cats-skin to the part: If he be full
bodyed he may bleed and purge, with a dram of Pillulae Cochiae, to which add
three grains of Castor, if he will not bleed apply Cupping-glasses with
scarification to the neck and shoulders, if the Arm be troubled; but to the
hips and loins if the thigh be affected.

Sometimes a Palsy happens to the wounded through several causes, as a cold
and moist distemper, cutting of the Nerves etc. For which you must Purge the
Patient every fourth or fifth day, or once a week, as you find the strength and
Constitution of your Patient, with these Pills following, Take Pillulae
foetidae, and Pillulae Corticae the lesser, of each half a dram, Trochise,
Alhandal four grains, make them into six Pills, let them be taken in the
morning keeping warm, afterward let him use the decoction of Lignum vitae, and
the Bark thereof for his ordinary drink till he be well.

If he chance to be burnt with Gunpowder, then presently take common salt half
an ounce, Juice of onyons four ounces, mix them together and anoint the Patient
therewith: but where the skin is burnt off, then use this following ointment.
Take two pound of Linseed oil, one pound and a half of oil of Roses,
Violet-leaves, Mallows, Water Lillies, of the Bark of the green Alder-tree,
House-leek, each one handful; Porks greese first well washed in waters of Roses
and Nightshade as much as is sufficient. Infuse all these for the space of six
days, then boil them over a gentle fire, till the virtue of the herbs be drawn
out; then strain them, and add thereunto white wax, as much as is sufficient to
make them into an ointment, and if in the boiling you put in one pound of
Shoomakers piece greese, it will be the better.

But if the eyes chance to be burnt apply this Remedy, red Rose Water four
ounces, Women's milk if to be had two ounces, two whites of eggs and a little
Sugar Candy, mix them together apply it to the eye, or anoint the Eyelids with
this excellent ointment, Take four ounces of Oil of Roses, one ounce of Cerus,
washed in red Rose Water, two whites of Eggs, one ounce of white wax, one dram
of Camphire, mix them for use. But beware in any case you apply not Soap or any
such like medicines to any part where the skin is off: and if there follow any
swelling, then apply this Pultis following, made of two handfuls of Mallows and
two handfuls of Violet-leaves, Camomile-flowers, and Rose-leaves; of each one
handful, boil these in new milk or Barley-water, till they be soft, then stamp
them in a Mortar, and add thereto the ointment of Roses and Unguentum Populeum
or ointment of Poplar-buds, of each one ounce and a half, two yolks of Eggs,
two ounces of Barley-meal, the roots of Marshmallows, and the seeds of
Flea-bane, of each half an ounce: sometimes you may put in the pulps of these,
of each two ounces, and half an ounce of oil of Roses, with the Crumbs of white
bread.

You are in the mean time to have regard the Patients body be in good order
either naturally or by Art; if not naturally, administer this Glyster, or the
like, as often as you see occasion. Take of Mallows Violet-leaves, Pellitory,
Beets, and Mercury, Camomile-flowers, of each, one handful; half an ounce of
sweet Fennel-seeds, two drams of Linseed, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
common water to a pint, in which dissolve one ounce or six drams or half an
ounce according to the nature of your Patient, of Diaphenicon or lenitive
Electuary, or Diacatholicon, with butter or oils, with about a dram of common
salt. Bloodletting is not to be forgotten: you may likewise make the Patient a
drink after this manner, taking of Egrimony, Mugwort, Angelica, St. John's wort,
Mouse-ears, of each two handful, Wormwood half a handful, Southernwood,
Bettony, Buglos, Comfrey the greater and lesser roots, and all her Avens, both
sorts of Plantane, Sanacle, Tormentil, with the roots; the buds of Barbery and
Oak, of each a handful: take of all these herbs mixed together three handful,
boil them in two quarts of water, and a quart of white wind gently, till the
third part or one half be consumed, strain it, and add one pound of Honey being
scummed, and let the Patient drink of it, or you may sweeten it to make it
pleasant, with boiling Reasons of the Sun, stoned, pruans, or the like, with
Sugar.

Now when you meet with any wounded in the head, apply a plaster of the white
of an Egg, Bolarmonack, and Aloes, next day dress it with Arceus his Lineament,
and lay upon it Emplastrum de Janua, or else de Gratia Dei, which will
perfectly heal the wound. But if it be deep you may apply either the
abovementioned or this medicin following, which will bring the wound to run
with good matter, which is made with Venus Turpentine, the yolk of an egg, oil
of Roses, and a little Saffron, afterward you must add honey of Roses, and
Barley-flower to the former medicine, till the wound be perfectly cured. But if
you find the former medicines not to answer your expectation, then make use of
this that follows, viz. Take two ounces of Venice Turpentine, one ounce of
Syrrup of Roses, Powder of Myrrh and Mastich, of each half a dram, mix them
together for your use; Lastly, wholly to close and dry up the wound, use this
following powder which is made of Burnt Alum and the rindes of Pomgranates
burnt, of each one dram; mix them: apply it either alone, or mixed with
Unguentum desiccativum rubrum. But if the wound be very large, stich it up,
first washing the wound with some warm wine, then dressing it with Venice
Turpentine mixed with a little Aqua vitae, dissolving therein some sanguis
Draconis, i. e. Dragons-bloud, Mastich, and Aloes: let not your stiches be too
straight or close together, for fear of pain and Inflammations, (which may
happen till the wound comes to maturity or suppuration) but only to keep out
the air; and put somewhat a broad-like tent into the lowest part of the wound,
that the Matter may have passage forth; then apply this following Cataplasm
above the other dressing. Take Barley and Bean-meal of each six ounces, oil of
Roses three drams, as much vinegar as will serve to make it a Pultis, which
does cool, dry, repel, or drive back, and mitigate and assuage pain and
inflammation, and stays bleeding.

If you suspect or fear, that the Patient have a fever, let blood forthwith,
according to the strength and ability of your Patient; daily administering
cooling glysters made of Barley-water, wherein may be boiled Violet-leaves,
Mallows, and Mercury, and such like; dissolving syrrup of Violets and Roses,
pulp of Cassia, and such like therein; or you may give him a gentle Purge of
Electuarium Diacatholicon, Electuarium lenitivum, or the like; an ounce more or
less for a Dose; according to the strength of your Patient: or if he like Pills
rather, give him Pillulae Cochiae, and Pillulae Ruffi, of each half a dram,
mixed well together: let the Patient take three over night, and three the next
morning: if he have a foul body and you see need, you may continue them every
other day for a week or more, as you see cause; likewise you may administer
suppositories made of honey boiled to a due hardness with common salt. But if
you meet with only a bruised head without a wound, then the head is to be
shaved; applying this following; Oil of Myrtle, and the powder of the same, of
each one ounce, the white of an Egg, mix it and apply it. Or this Pultis
instead thereof, consisting of flower of Barley and Beans, with vinegar and oil
of Roses; Dress it twice a day till the part comes to its former temperature;
if you were not at the beginning, then first anointing it with oil of wax, lay
on Emplastrum Cuminum, or the plaster of Cummin-seed: But if after all this
there remain a tumor, or swelling apply Emplastrum de Betonica, or plaster of
Betony, or de Minio or the Red-lead Plaster, or take two ounces of Emplastrum
de Mucilaginibus, or Emplaister of the Muscilages, Oxicroceum, Emplastrum
Meleloti, or the Melilot plaster, of each one ounce, oil of Camomile and Dill
of each two ounces, of these make a Cerat or Cerecloath, as they call it; Or
this, Three pintes of red-wine commonly such as loches, are washed with a
quart; twenty cypress nuts and Myrtle-berries, both bruised, one ounce of red
rose leaves, Wormwood, Sage-leaves, Sweet Mariorum, Camomile and
Melilot-flowers, of each half a handful, make a water of them, being boiled
together, dipping flannel clothes in it, wrung hot out and applied, then apply
one of the plasters above. The Melilot plaster alone has been found of
admirable effect in Contusions or bruisings. If these remove not the tumor,
then you must see to ripen it as^oon as you can, which may be done by this
medicine, made of two parts of water, one of oil, with as much wheat flour as
will make it to a Pultis of a good body, adding thereto the yolk of an egg: Now
having brought it to matter, it must be opened in the most declining part; then
if the skul be found, dress it with this, Syrup of dried Roses and Wormwood, of
each an ounce, half an ounce of Turpentine, Orrice-roots, Aloes, Myrrh,
Mastich, and Bean-flower, of each one dram, mix them according to art: If the
skul be foul, then smooth it with an Instrument called a Raspatory made for
that purpose; and apply this powder thereto. Take of Orrice-root, Gentian,
round Birthwort, Dittany, Barley-flower, of each half an ounce, Aloes, Draggons
blood, Myrrh, Mastich, Sarcocol. of each two drams; make a powder for your
use. After the bone is scaled, cure it as ordinary wounds: if from a Bruise or
Contusion a gangreen should follow which you may know by the hardness of the
part and when it looks black, then you are to Scarrifie or cut the flesh with
your Incision-knife or Rasor, and apply Cupping-glasses, dressing it with
Aegyptiacum, Spirit of wine, and such like, till you have secured it from going
further; then cure it as in other wounds.

If a wound happen upon the muscles of the Temple, either by pricking or
thrusting, over thwart ways, or long ways, the two first if deep are dangerous,
being accompanied with vomi ing, convulsion and deep sleeping: if it be by a
thrust, the hair being shaven away, dress it with oil of St. John's wort
compound and oil, and Earthworms, and upon that apply Paracelsus plaster: if
over thwart ways stich it, dressing it with Arceus his Liniament, upon that
Paracelsus plaster: if the wound be long ways, stay the blood and stich it,
and apply the foresaid Lineament of Arceus with plaster of Paracelsus. If the
membranes of the brain be hurt with the brain, (which seldom falls out) without
the skul be broken, the first Membran being wounded, called Piamater the blood
flows with much pain, the next to that called Dura matter, cleavs close to the
brain which is under it; that they always suffer together, There follows
foaming at the mouth, darkness of sight, loss of Reason, and Palsy, and flux
of blood. To stay bleeding use the powders before mentioned, and to swage pain
use Oil of Roses warm till matter be procured, after use equal parts of honey
of Roses and Spirit of wine, or oil of Roses, till it be digested; then to
procure new flesh use Syrrup of dried Roses: if there happen an Inflammation
joined with the swelling then open a vein, use slender diet, and bathe the part
with the decoction of Marsh mallows, Linseed, Fenugreek, Violet leaves, and
such like; after, apply oil of Roses, Myrtles, or Quinces: if the tumor
increase, open the passage wider in the skul, if it come to be fully ripe then
open it warily that you touch not the brain; after, apply honey of Roses, and
Syrrup of dry Roses, if this swelling come from a bruise then use oil of Roses,
Honey of Roses or oil of eggs with Aqua vitae and powder of Orrice root,
Gentian, round Birthwort, and the like; if congealed blood be the cause, use
this, Aqua vitae two ounces and a half, Saffron in powder one scruple, Honey of
Roses two ounces and a half, Sarcocol. three drams, mix them over a gentle fire
and so use it till blackness be gone; if from improper medicines applied, cure
it as in a Bruise; if from Putrefaction or rottenness which is known by the ill
scent of the matter, use this medicine, Take an ounce and half of Aqua vitae,
Syrrup of Wormwood, and honey of Roses of each two drams, ointment of
Aegyptiacum one dram and half, Sarcocol, myrrh, and Alloes of each one dram,
White wine one ounce and half, boil all together gently, strain them and keep
them for your use, or take Plantane water one ounce and a half, Egyptian
ointment one dram and a half, Mercury precipitated one scruple, mix them and
apply it warm.

If you shall imagine that the skul of any Patient is broken, not touching the
membrane of the brain, which you shall gather either by sense or reason, the
first is found out either by the finger of Probe, by both which you will feel
it rugged; only have a care that the Sutures in the head do not deceive you.
The rational signs are taken diversely, as if he fell from on high, the person
strong, or the weapon great that caused the wound, its probable the skul is
broken if they bleed at nose ears or mouth, if they swoon or vomit, if he often
touch the wound, if he raves or falter in his speech, be dull, weak of judgment
and understanding, all these are signs of a broken skul; If a Fever happen to
the Patient before the thirteenth day in Winter, and seventh in Summer, it will
go ill with him. If the skul be blackish, most commonly deadly; but if the
flesh be red the membran called dura matter be of its right color, and he move
well his neck and jaws, there is hope of his Recovery. If the Patient be old,
if the fracture be upon the fore part of the head called Sinciput, or the
Temples or Sutures, then the case is doubtful. Then the first thing you are to
do (having prepared your Patients body by blood-letting, Suppositers glysters
and gentle Purges, as you shall see cause and your judgment shall direct you) is
to shave the head an Incision being made after the manner of a cross, or letter
X, take up all to the skul either with a Chisel or your fingers, but make not
your Incision on the Temporal muscles, that done keep it open with pledgets,
armed with the astringent powders, then roll it up, the next day if a flux of
blood be not feared, or upon the skul, about the fourth day after wounding, if
ill symptoms hinder not, then upon the seventh or ninth; some think it may be
prolonged till the fourteenth day, but the sooner the better. The Instruments
for this purpose first are Raspatories, the next is the Trepan or Trasin, in
the use of which when you are come to the second table take out the Pin, and
moisten the Trafine with oil and cold water, then wipe away the blood, to see
if it be cut equal; when it begins to shake lift it up with a levatory, then
smooth it with a Scalper, the Gimlet or Terebra serves to raise the depressed
part, first making way in the skul with the pin of the Trafin, after screw it
in and draw up the depression; the Head-sawe is used either to give vent in
fractures, or to take off some ragged piece of the skul: While you are using
the Trafine you are to stop the Patients ear close with cottons, having a good
fire by you all the while, his head being held firmly. After you have done your
work apply a piece of Sarsenet or Taffety dipped in honey of Roses, or oil of
Roses, and Spirit of wine, conveying it betwixt the membrane called dura matter
and the skul; then fill the whole wound with Arceus his Liniment, or else with
this medicine, Take one ounce of Turpentine washed in Sage or Betony-water, one
ounce and half of oil of Roses, two ounces of the oil of yolks of eggs,
Gum-elemy and Mastich, (dissolved over a gentle fire in the aforesaid oils) of
each half an ounce, Saffron in powder one scruple, the yolks of two eggs, make
of them an ointment, upon them apply Emplast. de Janua Gratia Dei, or the
Betony-plaister, you may use the honey of Roses and Spirit of wine till the
seventh day, after dressing anoint the parts adjoining with oil of Roses, and
in the neck where the veins of the throat are; whereby pain is assuaged and
heat of blood mitigated; if there happen flux of blood in applying the Trafin,
use some of the astringent powders beforementioned.

If you have a simple fracture called a fissure, if it be apparent it is either
to or through the second table, which are to be enlarged or widened as far as
they will go with a Raspatory, leaving a way for the matter and blood in the
depending part. That which is not apparent if you cannot find it by the
Patients holding his breath or a multiplying glass, apply Ink to the respective
part; if it leave any print, the next day being made clean, then, follow it as
far as it goes with the abovenamed Instrument, afterward dress it as after
Trafining.

If you meet with a fracture in the skul called Seeds or seat, which is when
the weapon so falls upon the skul that the fracture retaining the print
thereof, is neither stretched forth nor contracted thereby; if this pass
through both the tables and the membrans not hurt by any splinter, the matter
may be made to be discharged dressing it as before will suffice But if the
membran called dura matter, be offended or the passage be too narrow to
discharge the matter, remove what offends and enlarge the other with the
Raspatory.

For a Contusion or Bruise on the skul, if it shall be so great that the skin
be separated from the skul, you shall make Incision whereby the blood may be
emptied, and so by depressing of the part and drying medicines with Emplastrum
Opodoldock may be perfectly cured.

The Fracture called depression has the shivers either quite separated or
cleaving to the rest or both, if the last happen remove the loose shivers, and
with a levatory raise the rest; after dress it with honey of Roses and Spirit
of wine, and if the levatory fail you, use the Trafine as near the fracture as
you can.

When you shall happen to see the skul pulled upward leaving a cavity beneath
like a vault, if it go only to the second table, smooth the skul, and cure the
wound as before according to art; if it pass through the second table, open the
skul with the Trafine in the depending part, then cure it according to art.

When the part of the skul wounded is altogether separated from the whole which
is double, First, when the first table is parted from the second, and cleaves
to the Masculous skin, then take it away and cure the wound, either by
medicines that close the lips of the wounds and bring them to perfect union,
such as before mentioned; or the powders of the roots of Lung-wort, Tormentil
Cinquefoyl, leaves of hounds tongue, Karrow, Vervin, Mouse-ear, Sanicle,
Scabious, Myrrh, Frankincense, Aloes, etc. Or such medicines which procure the
generation of flesh wanting in any wound, such as Frankincense, Turpentine,
Pitch, Aloes, myrrh, Burnt Lead, Cerus, which may be most fit; remember you
must use no unctuous or oily medicines to the bones. The second is when a
portion of the whole skul is divided, so that the dura matter is seen, this is
to be put in its proper place and there kept; by bringing the brims of the
wound together, with as many strong and deep stitches as suffice; first washing
the wound well with wine, or Spirit of wine. Sometimes the skul is broken in
the part near or opposite to that which received the blow; as if the right side
be struck the left is cloven; if it be nigh the wound, the sides of the wound
near the fracture will not cicatrize, although the other does: there will slow
a thin waterish matter more than the wound can seem to afford; the flesh near
to the part is spongy, you may find the skin separated from the skul with your
Probe, and you will perceive some swelling above the fracture: if it be
opposite, it is either in the opposite part, or when the second table being
broken the other is whole. These are hard to find, but by conjecture or these
signs. If the Patient vomit choler, have a Fever, with other symptoms
belonging to a fracture, the Patient will put his hands to it often, if there
appear a Swelling there is assuredly a fracture, if no swelling appear in the
opposite part shave it and apply this; viz. Take Ship-puchand wax, of each
three ounces, one ounce of Turpentine, Mastick and Powder of Orrice-root of
each two drams, make a Plaster of them, spread it upon leather, and being
applied let it lie twenty four hours; if after you have taken it away, the
flesh appear in any place more moist soft and swelled then the rest, its
probable the fracture is there. In these fractures the skul must be opened with
the Trafine, and cured according to art; if such Patients die, the Surgeon
is not to be blamed.

The skul being broken without a wound if in children, having shaven the head,
apply oil of Roses, the white of an egg, and a little vinegar; apply it cold in
Summer, but warm in winter, with a cloth four double; let it lie for twenty
four hours, afterward till the eleventh day apply this. Take of red Roses and
Myrtle berries of each two ounces, Barley and Bean-flower of each one ounce,
Wormwood and Bettony of each half an ounce, two drams of Commin-seeds powdered,
Boil them all in a pint of Red-wine to the thickness of a Pultis according to
art, then add oil of Roses and Oil of Camomile, of each one ounce, and two
ounces of honey being mixed, it is to be applied morning and evening; or
Paracelsus plaster has been applied with good success; but from the eleventh
to the twentieth day apply this following plaster. Take twelve ounces of fresh
Porks greese, of sweet oil and red lead of each twenty ounces, Calcit is burnt,
but not till it be red burnt; Alum of each two ounces, four ounces of
Deer-suet, Mastich and Olibanum finely powdered of each two ounces; of these
make a plaster according to art, before you use it you must moisten it with
oil of Lillies, then make use of Paracelsus, his stiptik-plaister moistened in
Oil of Camomile to the end of the cure.

If there be a wound with the fracture in children dress it with a feather dipped
in Arceus his Linement, not taking away any part of the skul, unles there be
either a fever, Convulsion, a vomiting or a Palsy, then open as before and
dress it according to art; In older persons if in Summer make a Pultis, called
a Cataplasm of Barley-meal, vinegar and water, apply it: If it be in winter
make it with wine, adding thereto powder of Roses, Mastich, Myrtle-berries, and
oil of Roses; administering to the Patient this purge. Take of the Electuary
called Cariocostinum, and of the Electuary of the juice of Roses, of each one
dram; Syrrup of Chichory with Rhubarb one ounce, with three ounces of the
distilled water of Endive, make thereof a Potion, letting him blood before, and
as often afterward as you shall see it necessary; and having given him a
glyster or glysters or Suppositories as you thought good, drop some Oil of
sweet Almonds into his ears and nose; about the fourth day make him some
Gargarisms, made of the flowers of Rosemary and Roses, Violets, Cinnamon and the
like boiled in Barley-water, to which you must add honey of Roses, or honey and
White-wine-vinegar and water boiled together, called Oxymel simplex, the
seventh day use the same plaster you applied to children, from the eleventh to
the twentieth day, moistened with oil of Roses, but if you see any appearance of
dangerous symptoms after the seventh day, open the skul and cure it according
to art.

For wounds of the brain and the other Membrans prevent what possible you can
the entrance of the air: for the first seven days, use oil of Roses and
Turpentine, Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, Aqua-vitae two ounces; but honey
of Roses and Spirit of wine are to be compared to none, upon all which apply
Paracelsus plaster.

When there is a moving of the brain from its natural place, by reason of
violent and external causes, such as blows, falls from a high place, and the
Patient be astonished, vomit, and at length fall a Raving; sometimes it is more
gentle wherein no vessels are broken, sometimes more violent wherein the
vessels are broken and the brains shaken; then follows speechlesness, bleeding
at the nose and ears, vomiting, the matter putrefying a fever follows; First
begin the Cure in letting the Patient blood in the arm, or the veinunder the
tongue, give him often cooling glysters such as before were mentioned; if
occasion be, gently purge him; then shave the head and anoint it twice a day
with oil of Roses, after apply this Pultis warm. Take of Barley-meal three
ounces, powder of Bettony and Roses of each half an ounce, Boil them with the
decoction of Bettony and a little Rose Water, to the form of a Pultis, adding
toward the end half an ounce of oil of Roses, yolks of two eggs, mix them and
so apply it; if there be a wound, use this following Ointment, Take new wax and
Collollony, of each one ounce, Gum-Elemie, Venus Turpentine, of each half an
ounce, Oil of Earthworms, Sweet Almonds, and the yolks of eggs and of Roses,
of each two drams, Saffron one dram, mix it and therewith make an Ointment; if
with two ounces of this you shall mix the yolk of one egg, it will afford more
ease to the Patient.

If there shall happen to grow a Tumor, called a Mushroom from its likeness to
the thing so called, which is sometimes hard without blood, almost senseless,
sometimes it will be soft and tender, and it will smell noisome, being narrow
beneath, and broad above, sometimes increased to the bigness of a Hens egg,
caused from a thick melancholy blood springing from the broken vessels as
before; and will partake of the nature of the part to which it grows; which
will prove dangerous if it happens from the flowing of vicious humors from the
brain. In the beginning of the cure use such glysters as this, every day;
afterward every third day, take the roots and leaves of Marshmallows,
Mallows, the herb Mercury, flowers of Camomile, Myrtle-flowers, and leaves of
Bettony, of each half a handful, Linseed and Fenugreek, Anniseeds, of each
half an ounce; Boil them in Spring or running-water, till the third part be
boiled away. Strain it, to one pint of the straining, add Benedict, laxativum
and Hiera picra compound, of each three drams, the yolk of one egg, oil of
Camomile two ounces, common salt one dram, mix them and make a glyster: use the
following fomentation twice a day. Take of the leaves and flowers of Bettony,
Sage, Camomile, Mellilot, Roses, tops of Sweet Margerum and Rosemary, of each
one handful, Anniseeds and Fenugreek of each one ounce, cut them and bruise
them, then take as many of them as will fill a Bag, which may cover almost half
the head, let it be quilted, then boil it in equal parts, of Red wine and
water, and apply it hot. Then cleanse the head with hot Linen, which done, be
sprinkle the Mushroom or fungus, and the wound with this following powder. Take
of the root of Avens, Angelica, sweet smelling or Aromatical Reed, of each half
a dram, of the root of round Birthwort, Orrice and Lignum-vitae, of each two
drams, flowers of Sage, tops of Sweet margerum, and Rosemary, of each one
pugil, i. e. as much as you can take up betwixt your thumb and the two
forefingers, make all of them into a powder, and use it as is before directed;
upon which apply the Basilick plaster, the Receipt is as follows. Take four
ounces of the Bettony-plaister, Gum-elemy dissolved in one ounce of Oil of
Roses, Powder of Red Roses and Myrtles, of each one dram, Mastick,
Sweet Smelling or Aromatical Reed, Angelica, Avens or Herb-Bennet, of each half
a dram; as much wax as will serve to make it into a plaster. But if it be
grown to such a bigness as a Hens egg, bind it with silk (...) ^he root very
fast, and when it is fallen off, use the former powders: for a Swelling coming
from wind use the same method.

Wounds of the eyelids if they be made overthwart-ways, are to be stitched up,
and this following powder strewed upon them; which has a virtue to heal them
speedily. Take of Bolearmonack and sealed earth, called terra sigillata, of
each two drams; of Dragons blood called sanguis Draconis and Sarcocol, of each
one dram, mix them for your use, or else use Arceus's Liniment or artificial
Balsom; Purging and bleeding must not be forgot if the wound be great; wounds
of the eyes are carefully to be handled, if the eye and eyelid be both
wounded, keep them from growing together, and apply defensatives to the
forehead and temples, to hinder Inflammations and pain; and so dress it with oil
of St. John's wort, compound Arceus's Liniment and the like with Paracelsus his
plaster over the eyelids; But to cleanse the eyes from any filth, use this
medicine following. Take Syrrup of dried Roses one ounce, the waters of Fennel
and Rue of each two drams, Aloes washed, Olibanum the gum of each half an
ounce, mix them for your use; or this, Take one ounce of Barley-water, three
drams of clarified honey, Aloes well washed in Plantane-water, and Sugar Candy,
of each half an ounce, mix them for use; also this ensuing is good, Take of the
pulp called Muscilages of Olibanum, Gum-Arabick, Gum-dragant, and Sarcocol, of
each three drams, (the pulp or muscilages must be drawn in Barley-water) one
dram of Aloes being thrice washed in Rose Water, Cerus washed, and prepared
Tutty, of each half a dram, mix them for your use; you may if you find
occasion, make use of Rhasis his white troches, (called Trochisci albi Rhasis,
cum vel sine Opio) being made with or without Opium; likewise at any time you
may use those Troches dissolved in Plantane or Barly-water, instead of
Breast-milk.

Wounds in the Ears if altogether cut off, are cured by applying the Powders of
Gentian, Orrice, Dittany, Aloes, myrrh, Mastich, Barley-flower, Sarcocol, of
each equal quantities, and the ointment of red Lead, laying over them
Paracelsus plaster; if they be divided and must be stitched, take hold of the
skin only and dress them with Arceus his Linement; if the division be but
small, then you may use the dry stitch to keep them joined together, the dry
stitch is when pieces of cloth are dipped in such and the like glutinating
ointments; Take Mastich, Myrrh, Dragons blood, powder of Red Roses,
Gum-Dragon, of each two drams, powder them all very finely; that done, put to
them the white of an egg, and as much Rose Water as will make them of a glewy
substance; standing so all night. The next day if the medicine be too thick,
put more Rose Water and Plantane-water to make it of a fit thickness, the
pieces of cloth are to be indented and applied on each side the wound; four
hours before you stitch them: this is done without pain, and therefore may be
used wherever you can without stitching or needles

Wounds in the nose if in the soft part only, may be cured by dry stitch as
before, observing the same method; if in the hard part it is either the bone,
or gristle otherwise called Cartilage; if in the former, broken restore it, by
putting up some Instrument or fit stick wrapped about with a soft linen rag,
then with Pledgets dipped in this astringent medicine made of the white of an
egg. Boll Armanack and Dragons blood applied to the sides of the nose; you
shall endeavor to confirm the restored bones; then put up small Pipes into the
nostrils not exactly round but something flattish, put them not up too high; so
fasten them with strings to a Cap lest they fall out; by this means the bones
will be kept in their place, and you will make a passage both for the matter
and breathing. Remember, the wound is to be brought together, either by dry
stitch, or needle, and Bol Armanack, Mastich, Dragons blood, Burnt-Allum mixed
with the white of an egg is to be applied, using convenient binding which may
not press the bones too much, lest the nose become flat. If in the gristle or
Cartilage, in stitching take hold only of the skin, and to prevent the growing
of proud flesh within, use tents according to art.

In wounds of the Cheeks use the dry stitch with the aforesaid medicines, The
other manner of using the dry stitch is thus, having spread the glutinative
ointment or Plaster set down before in wounds of the ears upon pieces of
strong cloth, or the cloth dipped in the glutinating ointment, apply on each
side of the wound one piece of the same; a singers breadth distance asunder, or
so let it ly on till it be well dried to the skin: then draw the edges of the
clothes together with your needle and thread and the flesh will follow, and so
come to join together. If the wound be large use two or three needles as, in
manner of curing the Hair-lip, shall presently be shown; which you may fortify
with the dry stitch, i. e. use the dry stitch upon the other.

Wounds of the lips are to be cured as other common wounds, if they pierce not
through, but if they do, they are to be cured as in the hair lip, which is done
by piercing through the lips of the wound with a needle or two if occasion be,
putting a thin piece of lead on both sides; Lastly, snip off the ends of the
needle and cast the silk about the ends thereof, as Tailors do when they fasten
them to the skirt or sleeves, this must be done in the middle, but at the ends
an ordinary stitch will serve; especially in children: the wound is to be
dressed with Arceus his Linement; if the inward part of the lips be wounded, as
happens by falls and the like, then use within, Honey of Roses, Syrrup of dried
Roses, etc.

Wounds of the tongue happen several manner of ways, as by falls, when it is
bitten by the teeth, etc. If the wound of the tongue be great and deep, then
you must stitch it deep to hold it the stronger and surer; cutting the thread
close to the knot. Then make use of this gargle called a Gargarism, following.
Take of the leaves and flowers of Privet, Plantane-leaves, and red-Rose leaves,
of each one handful, of the rindes and flowers of Pomgranates, of each half an
ounce, boil them in a quart of Smiths water, or water wherein Gads of Steel
have been often quenched, let them boil till the third part thereof be
consumed; then strain them, and dissolve in the liquor two drams of Acacia, or
the juice of Sloes, and two ounces of the syrrup of dried Roses, with which let
the Patients often wash their tongues. Moreover you must have and hold
constantly almost in your mouth, either Marmolet of Quinces, preserved
Cherries, Rasberries, or the syrrup of dried Roses, or syrrup of Quinces. The
Patient is to feed on liquid things, as broth, Almond-milks, etc. Or a
Poatch'd egg at most etc. Now the manner of stitching up wounds of the tongue,
whether long-ways or athwart, when any happens to come under your hands is
this; Let the Mate, Assistant, or some other body, hold the tongue very firmly
in his hand with a soft Linen cloth, (lest it should slip from between his
fingers) whilst the other stitch it together; which when he has done, let him
cut off the thread as near the knot as he can, lest it be tangled by the teeth
as he eats, or otherwise, and so put the Patient to pain, by pulling and
tearing the stitches wherewith the part was sewed.

The parts of the neck which happen to be wounded, are the Windpipe and
Gullet, veins of the throat called the jugular veins, sleepy arteries, called
also the soporal arteries, and the recurrent Nerves. A transverse or overthwart
wound of the Trachea Arteria, called the Windpipe is dangerous, by reason of a
fever, Gangreen, or often following thereon; If the wound be between the rings
it is cureable; if holding a Candle before it whilst the Patient speaks, it be
either blown out, or moved, then it is wounded quite through; if not, stitch it
up as neatly as you can, dressing it with Arceus's Linement, and Oil of St.
John's wort compound, and let not the Patient swallow any hard solid thing, but
liquid broaths, Gellies, and such like; when you shall have occasion to use
Gargarismes, then this and the following may be used with profit to the
Patient. Take a handful of French barley, a pugil of Rosemary flowers, Raisins
of the Sun stoned, Jujubes, of each half an ounce, one ounce of Liquorice, let
them be boiled all together, adding thereto when you have strained them honey
of Roses, and Julep of Roses, of each two ounces. The other is this, take three
spoonfuls of French barley, one pugil of the flowers of red Roses, Sumach,
Pomgranate-flowers, of each, two drams, Raisins of the Sun stoned and Jujubes,
of each half an ounce, one ounce of Liquorice, boil these together according to
art, in three pintes of running water to the consumption of half, strain them,
to which add honey of Roses, and syrrup of myrtles, of each two ounces, for a
Gargarism: either of these moisten the mouth and throat, will mitigate the
harshness of the part, assuage pain, cleanse and agglutinate, and cause a more
free and easy breathing.

If the veins of the throat or Jugular veins, sleepy or soporal arteries, be
deeply wounded, it is mortal: if not, first stanch the blood; which is done by
several means, as with Pledgets, dipped in a medicine made of the white of an
egg, vinegar and water being well mixed together and applied; or by astringent
powders, whereof you have had choice often before, which you may apply thus.
Touch the vessels with your finger, then wipe away the blood with lint or a
sponge dipped in red wine, then put some powder with your fingers to the vessel,
after that apply the same medicine upon Pledgets to the place where your
fingers were; and keeping them close down fill the wound with pledgets armed
with the same, and last of all, a four-doubled cloth wet in Red wine or some
astringent liquor; as of the decoction of the roots of Lungwort, Ciniquefoil,
the leaves of Knot-grass, Burnet, Hors-tail, Plantane, and the like, either
boiled in water, or red wine and water, or red wine alone. In other places
where you may use rolling, you must roll below the wound upward, and when you
come to the wound roll three or four times about: but if you cannot make use of
rolling the part, then if you can come at the mouth of the vessel with your
finger or thumb, press it so long till the blood shall be so thick as a clot
about it, and so stop its passage; or use this powder following, Take two drams
of Frankincense, Aloes, Dragons blood, Cobwebs, Mastich, Sarcocol. Vmber, of
each one dram, and make them into a fine powder; if this prevail not, notnigh a
noble part, some add sublimate and auripigmentum, of each half a dram, to two
drams of these powders: If you fear an Aneurisma, known by the beating of the
Artery, apply this following. Take of the leaves of Nightshade, Henbane,
Mandrakes bruised, of each one handful, as much Barley-flower as will serve to
make it a Poultis, without boiling, if it be deep, To incarn, use this, Take of
oil of St. John's wort four ounces, three ounces of Gum-elemy, half a pound of
Venus Turpentine, melt them all together, and strain them, when they begin to
be cold add to it Boll Armanack, and Dragons blood, of each one ounce,
Orrice-roots, Aloes, Myrrh, Mastich, of each one dram, with two ounces of Aqua
vitae, mix them and apply them warm, and over them a Diapalma-Plaister moistened
with Oil of Roses, to hinder Inflammation, so dressing till the end of the cure
as in other wounds.

If the Gullet be wounded and wholly divided, or over-thwart, it is then
incureable, if not it is to be stitched, leaving a passage in the lowermost
part, and cure as in the Cure of the Windpipe aforesaid, using the Gargarisms
as aforesaid; outwardly use this, Take half an ounce of the Syrrup of dried
Roses, one dram of Bolarmanack, Gum Mastich and Dragons blood, of each one
scruple, half the yolk of an egg, with as much Cyprus Turpentine as is
sufficient; incorporate them: if wounds do not pierce to the Windpipe, veins
of the throat, soporal Arteries, and be not very deep, they are to be cured
after the manner of ordinary wounds.

If the recurrent Nerves be wounded without hurt of any other notable vessel,
it is easily cured, dressing it with a sufficient quantity of Venus Turpentine,
with Boll Armanack or the Balsome mentioned in the cure of wounds of the veins
and arteries, In wounds of the nerves to hinder pain and Inflammation, Bleeding
and purging, are to be used or suppositories and glysters; outwardly Embrocate
with oil of earthworms, Dill and Roses: to the wound it self apply with Lint,
Wax, Colophony, of each one ounce, Gum-Elemy and Venus Turpentine, of each half
an ounce, Oil of Earthworms, Oil of sweet Almonds, and the oil of the yolks of
eggs, oil of Roses, of each two drams, with one dram of Saffron, make therewith
an ointment according to art; If you take the yolk of one egg and put two
ounces of this unguent, it will be the more anodyne, i. e. ease pain the
better; and if to the aforesaid ointment you shall add of each a dram of myrrh
and Sarcocol. it will be a good sarcotick medicine, i. e. procure good flesh to
grow in the wound. If you have occasion to use tents take heed they touch not
the Nerve: if you see it necessary and convenient lay this Poultis or Cataplasm
upon the part, Take half an ounce of Marsh-mallow roots, Camomile-flowers,
Melilot and Bettony, of each one ounce, of the powder of Linseed and Fenugreek,
of each one ounce and a half, Bean-flower one ounce, boil them in Lixivium, i.
e. Washing-lee, or water and salt, then put to them Oil of Earthworms and
Roses, of each one ounce, two scruples of Saffron in powder, two yolks of eggs,
mix them and make a Poultis: or else this following, Barley and Bean-flower of
each two ounces, Camomile and Melilot-flowers of each two pugils, one pint of
common washing-lee, Elder-vinegar four ounces, boil them to the thickness of a
Poultis, to which add ointment of Poplar-buds, called Unguentum Populeum, Oil
of Roses and Myrtles, of each one ounce, mix them, and when you use them apply
it warm, having first as you see need, anointed the part with this Linement
following. Take an ounce of oil of Roses, Oil of Earthworms, Oil of sweet
Almonds, Oil of the yolks of Eggs, Man's greese, of each half an ounce, with a
scruple of Saffron finely powdered, mix them together, and anoint the part
therewith; If the Nerve be only pricked which happens sometimes, pour in oil of
Turpentine, and a little Aquavitae upon the part, apply Linen clothes three or
four double dipped in water and vinegar. If the Patient continue in pain, make
cross Incision into the skin, and apply this hot, which is made of Oil of
Turpentine, Earthworms, the yolk of an Egg, of each three drams, or some other
artificial Balsome. If the Nerve be cut, then it is either long-ways or
overthwart; if the first, use ointments for asswaging pain as before, and upon
them Diapalma-plaister moistened with oil of worms; if the latter, it is wholly
divided, and then sense and motion are quite taken away, and the Patient feels
no pain; or in part only, and then there follows great pain and the symptoms,
as when the Nerve is pricked: for cure of which, use the method and medicines
as before, which if they prove not successful, then divide the nerve and dress
it with ointments before mentioned that have an anodine virtue, that is, to
assuage pain, and so bind it up.

If the nerve be bruised; Use only Oil of Rue and Camomile if strainned, at
first apply that plaster laid down in the cure of wounds of the eye and
eyelids; afterward Paracelsus plaster, or this following may be profitable.
Take three ounces of Gum-galbanum being dissolved in vinegar, Melilot and
Diachylon plasters, both simple, of each one ounce and half, one ounce of
yellow wax, half an ounce of Turpentine, with three drams of Saffron, make a
plaster according to art, and if there be any hardness, if this do not soften
and dissolve it, apply this. Take two ounces of the plaster of Hemlock, an
ounce of oil of Lillies, two drams of liquid storax, mix them together for use.
Here note that wounds of the nerves are to be considered several ways in the
manner of cure; for those medicines which you apply to the nerves that are
pricked only, and not wholly laid open to view, ought to be more sharp and
drying; (yet without biting,) than those which are bare from the flesh and
joining parts, which require medicines only drying.

If wounds of the Backbone pierce not to the Marrow, but are only in the
Muscles, dress them as fleshy wounds, if in the bones dress them as in wounds
of the head, if it be in part divided, then first pouring in this medicine warm
which is made of the oils of St. John's Wort compound, and the oil of the yolks
of eggs of each one ounce; oil of Turpentine half an ounce, with a scruple of
Saffron finely powdered and mixed together, then let the whole backbone be
anointed with this following, Take of the oil of Swallows, Oil of Foxes,
Earthworms, of each one ounce, Oil of Mastich and Castor of each half an ounce,
mix them for your use: and embrocate the head with an ounce of Oil of Camomile,
and half an ounce of oil of Earthworms, and such like. always applying them
warm: If the part be much bruised; then take of Barley and Bean-flower of each
one ounce, Fenugreek half an ounce, Camomile-flowers, Wormwood, and Cummin, of
each two drams, the roots of the greater and lesser Comfrey, of each one ounce
and a half, boiling the roots first till they be soft, then beat them into fine
pulp, afterward put them to the other things, and so make a Poultis according
to art.

Wounds of the breast either pierce into the cavity and so wound some of the
parts within the same, as the heart, lungs, midriff, and the vessels, as the
vena cava, i. e. the hollow vein, and the ascending Artery, etc. or not: if
they pierce which is known if you hold a Candle to the part stopping the
Patients mouth and nose, his breath will come forth with a noise and the flame
of Candle will be moved; as in a small wind, and sometimes quite blown out: and
if other parts be wounded in piercing, they are known by their proper signs; as
if there gush out much blood, there follow a general trembling over the whole
body, swooning and cold sweats, a very weak and small pulse, and if the limbs
grow cold, the heart is wounded and death is not far off. If blood issue out
foamie and froathy, the Patient be troubled with a Cough, and has a great
difficulty in breathing, and a pain in his side which he had not before; if he
feel a pain on the wounded side, yet lies more at ease when he lies upon that
side; and sometimes lying so he speaks in more ease and freedom, but turn to
the contrary side, he presently cannot speak or with great pain and difficulty;
all these are signs that the lungs are wounded, and they are very difficult to
be cured. If the Patient be taken with raving, called delirium, Cough and sharp
pain, with difficulty of breathing and a Fever trouble the Patient, and at
some times through vehemence of breathing the stomach and guts are drawn
through the wound into the Cavity of the breast, all these are signs that the
Midriff is deadly wounded; If you perceive or understand blood to be poured
forth into the Cavity or hollowness of the breast, and breathing difficult,
Fever increasing through difficulty of breathing, Vomiting blood at the mouth,
and afterward the breath stinks, and fainting, as also the Patient cannot lie
upon his back, and has des^re to vomit, and now and then to rise and sit up,
and thereupon often falls into a sound, all these show that the vessels are
wounded, and death will ensue.

Now to assist your Patient as much as you can by art in these wounds of the
breast, lay your Patient naked in Bed with the wound downwards, that the matter
may be discharged by his coughing, and holding his breath, if he feel no weight
in the lower part of his breast or be not troubled with spitting of blood, use
no tents, but drop in Arceus his Linement with Oil of St. John's wort compound,
or some artificial Balsome; and upon them apply the Diapalma-plaister. But if
there was much blood in the cavity, and if it be cast out, then use a Flamula
dipped in the white of an Egg, the greater part hanging out of the wound,
afterward use this Injection. Take four ounces of Tisan or Barley-water or
Plantane-water, wherein you are to dissolve two ounces of brown sugar, and an
ounce of Honey of Roses, mix them and inject them warm with a Syringe; if you
see symptoms continue, you may put in a leaden Pipe; till the wound runs little
and good matter, then take it out and cure it up; the manner of dressing such
Patients is this, having warmed your medicine as before, cast it in with a
syringe, which done, let your Patient betake himself to that posture that it
may all come forth again, after put the Pipe into the wound, and lay a sponge
dipped in Aqua vitae on it, which will keep forth the air, and draw out the
matter contained in the wound; Instead of the Sponge you may make use of this.
Take half a pound of the clear, and best Rozin, and two ounces of Gum-elemy,
melt them over a gentle fire till they be well mixed together, then add to them
Oil of Bays and common Turpentine, of each one ounce, boil them a little, then
strain them through a thick linen cloth, which spread upon leather, lay it
upon the Pipe which will powerfully draw matter out of the wound; Renew it once
a day if in winter, and twice a day in Summer: remembering always to snip your
plaster in the middle, that the matter may have passage to flow out. With this
and Artificial Balsom may wounds be cured which are piercing. Forget not if you
see occasion to bleed first on the contrary side of the wound, and if need be
and strength permit, afterward in the other arm: To dissolve clotted blood
give this medicine inwardly, made of half a dram of Rhubarb, Madder, and Mummy,
of each one scruple, half a scruple of Sealed earth, Scabious and Buglos-water
and the juice of Lemmons, of each one ounce. To help difficulty of breathing
and ease pain, let the Patient take a quarter of a pint of this Decoction
following; Four ounces of French barley, three ounces of Raisins of the Sun
stoned, three handfulls of Buglos roots, two ounces of Liquorice scraped and
bruised, twenty Jujubes, fifteen pruans, and a handful of Parsley-roots; Boil
all these in seven quarts of rain, or running water, to the consumption of the
third part; and to make it palate-able and pleasant for taste, Boil two or
three drams of Cynamon: in the straining dissolve three ounces of Pennids,
Syrup of Roses, and Comfrey, and of the two opening roots made without vinegar,
of each two ounces, four ounces of Sugar Candy, this nourishes so much, that
he need no other food for three days, unless he drink Tisan, wherein you may
boil Fennel and Parsley-roots. If the Patient find ease by spitting, help him
by the using of Vinegar, water and sugar: for his cough, administer this; Take
Sugar Candy and Pennids, of each one ounce, two ounces of Diatragacanthum
frigidum, syrup of Violets and Juiubs, of each as much as is sufficient to make
a Linctus or Lohoc, which he is to use often with a Liquorish-stick; if he
spits thick matter, then use syrup of Coltsfoot with Oxymel simplex, or simple;
which is thus made. Take four pound of the best honey; clear water and
white wind vinegar, of each one quart; boil the water and honey into a syrup,
afterward add the Vinegar, then boil it to the consistance of a syrup,
scumming it with a wooden scummer: But when the matter is coming to
suppuration; let the patient drink half a pint of this following in the
morning, which he may sleep after, and the like quantity at four of the Clock
in the afternoon. Take Eupatorie, Scabies, Sanicle, Clove-gilliflower, Privets,
and Coltsfoot, of each one handful; of the root of the greater Comfrey and
Burridg, of each one ounce: boil the roots first, then the herbs, according to
Art, in five quarts of water till one half be consumed, afterward put to it
Sugar and Honey, of each four ounces, which being clarified with the whites of
two eggs keep it for use, which you may also use for an Injection if you
please, endeavoring to get out all again, for what remains will be of a sharp
quality, and so may increase, if not beget, Symptoms.

A wound made in the lungs, if it be on the skirts and without inflammation,
etc. then giving your Patient things to hinder his coughing much and great
breathing, may be cured: while the patient takes those Linctus's or others
before described; he is to lie on his back, for so the medicine will fall by
little and little upon the windpipe, otherwise if they should fall down
hastily, or in great quantity, it might cause the Patient to Cough: Cows Asses
or Goats-milk, if they may be had, with a little Honey that they corrupt not in
the stomach, are very good in these wounds, or the mulcians of Almonds, which
is made by bruising the Almonds (being first blanched) in a stone-morter, and
pouring Barley-water upon them, and stir them well, and strain through a cloth;
doing this often, and it will look like milk; Sugar of Roses likewise is
excellent in this case, because it is of a cleansing and strengthening quality;
but when you shall think it time to close up the wound, after you have cleansed
it with the medicines before spoken of, The Patient must use in Broths or
Linctuses some sealed Earth, Boll-Armonack, Plantan, Knot-grass, Shumack,
Acasia, or the Juice of Sloes, and such like sharp and binding medicines, which
being mixed with Honey of Roses, may carry away that filth which may hinder the
closing up of the wound.

Wounds happen to diverse parts of the Belly, some whereof are piercing, as you
will see the Guts and Caul sometime come forth: if the great Guts come out,
put them up again presently into the Belly: But if they have been a good while
out, and so the cold. Air has injured them, and they be full of wind and the
like, then they must be fomented with medicines, that will discuss the wind,
such as is made of Thyme and Calemint, Camomil, Mellilot, Penni-royal,
Origanum, Wormwood, and the like, or else prick them with needles; if after all
this you cannot make it go up, there is no other way but to enlarge the wound.
But if the Gut it self be wounded, which you will know by perceiving the
excrements come forth at the wound, if it be wounded longwayes and little, it
is easily cured, if overthwartways and great, it is difficultly cured; if black
it is deadly; then it must be sowed up, so as Glovers use to stitch in making
Gloves. Then put upon it powder of Mastick, Mirrhe, Boll Armonack, and the
like; after you have stitched it up, you must not put up the Gut into its place
all at once, but by little and little, the patient lying on the side opposite
to the wound; as if the wound be on the right side, the patient shall lie on
his left, by which means you may more easily restore the Gut fallen down; if
the lower part of the guts being wounded, fall through the wound, then the
Patient shall lie low, with his head down and his buttocks raised higher,
putting a pillow under him.

If the Cawl fall out of the wound, it is to be put into his place as soon as
may be, because it is subject to putrefie; but if it be putrified before it can
be restored to its place, which is when it looks black and is cold, then bind
it near the warm and sound parts, and cut off that which is corrupt, leaving
the string hanging out: if the color of it be not altered, and it be warm, put
it in, and stitch up the wound after this manner, putting your needle first
through the skin and muscles to the Peritoneum, not touching it on that side,
and then putting the needle from within, outward, on the other-side, thrust
through all, and after tie it an inch further, make another stitch contrary to
the former, and remember that you leave an Orifice for a Tent; For more
security you may strengthen it, if you please with a dry stitch; to the wound
it self use Arceus his Liniment with oil of St. John's wort compound, or some
artificial Balsom, and the like before often prescribed. In summer lay over all
the Diapalma plaster moystned in oil of Roses; in the winter Paracelsus,
anointing the part if it be painful with this following; Oil of Roses and
Mirtles, of each half an ounce, oil of Lillies and Earthworms, of each one
ounce, oil of Cammomil and Dill, of each six ounces, ointment of Marshmallows
and poplar buds, of each three drams; mix them and make a Liniment according to
Art: Those wounds which pierce into the Belly, only require to be joined
together, and so to be cured as simple wounds.

If the stomach be wounded there follows vomiting of Choler and Hickets;
sometimes meat and drink comes forth as it is taken. If the wound be quite
through the stomach, or near the mouth of the stomach, or if in the bottom of
the stomach, and very great, then no hopes: if not, if the Patient be full
bodyed, then let him be let blood, making him wound-drinks, as before
prescribed; if the wound be large, stitch it up, leaving only a place in the
depending part, for a tent to be applied with Balsomes; of which you have
several laid down before in the cure of wounds; let the Region of the stomach
be anointed with the oils of Mint, Mirtles, Roses and Quinces, giving them
first cleansing glisters, afterward nourishing ones; likewise Broths wherein
wound-herbs have been boiled.

You may know the Liver is wounded if the wound be on the right side, and there
has followed a flux of blood, sometimes he vomits Choler, sometimes casting
forth blood by stool and urine, and his face grow pale and wan.

If the wounds of this part be not very great, having not bled much but little,
they are curable as one says, if a piece be cut off: For cure inwardly, Take
Troches of spodium or burnt Ivory in Plantaine water, or the decoction of Red
Rose leaves; To which add syrup of dried Roses and Mirtles, two scruples of the
powder of red Roses is very good; if blood fall down into the cavity of the
Belly, and clots, dissolve it by medicines before mentioned in wounds of the
Breasts; if you perceive that Nature has a mind to cast out the matter by
urine, assist it by boiling Smallidg, Parsley, Fennel, and Radish in his Drinks
or Broths.

If the wound be on the left side, and blackish blood issues out there, and he
be very thirsty, then the Spleen is wounded: if the wound be small it is
Cureable, if deep deadly, and it is Cured as in wounds of the Liver.

If the small Guts be wounded, there ensues Vomiting of Choler; pain joined
with a Fever, and meat and drink and Chile comes forth, the flanks will swell
and be hard, and the patient will be troubled with Hickets and ringing pains in
the Belly, apt to have some cold-sweats, and the outward-parts wax cold.

These wounds are very difficultly Cured, especially if in the Gut called
Jejunum, in English, the empty Gut, by reason many vessels which run to it are
in danger, and it self is of a Nervy substance: they are to be stitcht with a
Glovers stitch; after put them up, fomenting them first with red Wine, then
upon them apply this powder: Mastick, Sarcocol, of each one dram, Borax and
Myrrh, of each half a dram, make a powder of them for use, then stitch up the
outward parts. For inward means you have several medicines prescribed before,
Mastick is good to be taken in all things, especially in the wounds of the
stomach.

Difficulty of making water or it is altogether stopped, in those that are
wounded in the Kidneys, pissing blood with his urine, pain stretched about the
groines, if the wound be but slight and superficial, and in the fleshy part,
then much blood flows and his water is stopped; if it pass to the cavity or
hollowness of the Kidneys, then blood passes with the urine.

If Urine be stopped, anoint the Pecten with the oil of Scorpions and bitter
Almonds, apply a pultis made of Pellitory, Mallows, and Saxifrage; for
Injections use Trochisces of Amber, called Trochisci de Carabe dissolved in
Horsetailer Plantain-water.

When the bladder is wounded there comes but little urine, and that bloody, if
the wound be in the bottom of the bladder, the urine will fall in the lower part
of the Belly and as if there were a seeming dropsy, pain will reach as far as
the Groin, and Stones in men; For help, let him use this following inwardly:
Shumack, Mirtle-berries, of each three ounces, red-Rose leaves dried, one
pugil, Pomgranate-flowers, half an ounce; boil them in six quarts of Rain,
running, or fountain water, strain it, and therein dissolve syrup of dried
Roses, and honey of Roses, of each six ounces, syrup of Myrtles three ounces,
gum dragon half an ounce; drink of this decoction ten days, if you cut in four
Quinces it will be the better: outwardly use some Ano^ine unguent as before, or
else Turpentine with oil of St. John's Wort with the yolk of an egg, and a
little Saffron powdered, mixed together and applied, inebricating the part with
oil of Roses, Lillies and Scorpions.

Wounds of the Limbs, as Arms, Thighs, Legs, if they pierce the great Ves^els
within-side sometimes cause death, or else are very difficult to cure, if they
pierce not the vessels they are to be cured as other ordinary wounds; For the
wounds of the long Tendon, which goes near the Heel, suffer not your Patient to
go except with Crutches, for it is very requisite that he rest as much as
possible may be, for fear if he go too much upon it before the Cicatrize and
Scar of the wound be drawn very hard, the wound break out again. Likewise you
are to take notice, that great and deep wounds in the Limbs require often
bleeding and purging, especially if it be near the joints, and then you are to
apply fit and convenient Bolsters for the purpose.

The most Material wounds of the Joints, are those of the Shoulder, Elbow and
Knee, in any of which places the Cure is difficult, because those parts are
subject to receive fluxions; and by reason of the productions and Insertions of
the Nervs and Tendons, by which they are bound together; so that these parts
being naturally more sensible of the lest pain, than other parts; they being
wounded, there follows oftentimes bad symptoms especially if the wound be in
the bending of the Arm or Armpits the inward part of the Wrist or the Ham,
there must n^eds follow great flux of bl^od, great pain, and other
Inflammations, and other symptoms by reason of the Veins, Arteries and Nervs,
about those parts; all which Symptoms must be resisted according as their
nature and condition requires, as fluxes of blood must be stayed with medicines
for that purpose, which are set down oftentimes before; Likewise pains must be
assuaged with Anodines or things against pain, as is often repeated before; if
the wound be large and wide it is to be joined together by stiches, leaving an
orifice in the lower-part by which the matter or qui^ture may come forth: This
following powder is to be strowed upon the stitch or Suture, Take Frankincense,
Draggons blood, Boll-Armonack, Sea led-earth, of each two drams, Aloes and
Mastick, of each one dram, make them into a fine powder and use them. Then you
must wrap about the joint this following medicine, made of the whites of Eggs,
Boll Armonack, Mastick, and Barley-flower, with a little of the oil of Roses:
if you are necessitated to use a tent, let it be short and thick, lest it cause
pain, and let it be armed with this Medicine made of the yolk of an egg,
Turpentine washed in Plantain-water oil of Roses, and a little Saffron. But if
the wound be so narrow that the matter has not free passage, you are to make
it wider, the part must be sure to be kept quiet in rest and ease, and you must
not use any cold moistning mollifying or unctuous medicines to it unless it be
upon necessity to assuage pain. But on the contrary you must apply to the part
those Medicines that are of a binding and drying quality, such as those
poultises mentioned in the Cure of wounds of the Nerves and Tendons; or this
following Poultis, Take of Barley or Bean-flower, of each four ounces, Camomil
and Mellilot-flowers, of each half an handful, three ounces of Turpentine, two
ounces of common-honey, an ounce of oil of mirtles, with as much Oxymel-simple,
or Oxycrate, that is water and vinegar, or common washing-lee, as much as will
suffice to make it up to the form of a Poultis; or you may make a Poultis of
the Lees of wine, Turpentine, Ciprus-nuts, Gauls, the powder of the Bark of an
Oak, and wheaten-bran, that are of a binding strengthening quality, and so are
good to assuage pain, and to hinder destruction of Humors to the parts; This
following Medicine is likewise binding and agglutinating, Take two ounces of
Venice Turpentine, the powders of Mastich, Allaways, Mirrhe, Boll Armoniack of
each two Scruples, and a little Aquavitae; Now seeing these wounds are apt
chiefly to cast forth mucous excrements, and such as are like to the white an
egg: sometimes thin and watery, which preceeds from the old distemper of the
part; therefore to correct that you must apply things actually hot, such as
discussing decoctions put into bladders filled half-full, and the like;
moreover there must be special care had of the figure of the wounded part,
which if not well regarded, there follows oftentimes numness incurable,
contraction and the like, though the wound it self be cured up; to avoid which
danger observe these following Rules.

If the forepart of the shoulder be wounded, the Patient must car^y his arm in
a scarf, and you must put great bolster under his arm-pit; if the lower-part be
wounded, when flesh begins to grow in the wound, and the lips thereof come
together, then let the Patient often stir his Arms every way, lest after it is
cured it become more stiff, and l^ss pliable to move any manner of way, or for
fear of quite losing its motion.

If the wound be upon the joint of the Elbow, then the Arm is to be rolled so,
that it be not too strait-howed, not held out too stiffly, for otherways after
it is Cured, there will be some difficulty in stretching out and pulling in his
Arm.

When the wrist or joint of the fingers be wounded, either in the outward or
inward part you must keep his hand half shut, moving a Ball therein, for if the
fingers be kept stretched too much out, they cannot take up or hold any thing,
after they are cured.

If the Joints of the Hip be wounded, you must place the Patient so that the
thigh bone go not out of the hollowness of the huckle-bone, which may be done
with Artificial-rollings, and linen bolsters; and the Patient lying upon his
back: when the wound begins to cure up, the Patient shall move his thigh every
way, so that the head of the thigh bone may not stick to the cavity of the
Huckle-bone, so that he cannot move or make use of it.

When the Knee is wounded, that the Patient may not be lame, the Leg must be
placed and kept strait out.

The joint of the Feet and Toes being wounded, the Patient shall bend these
parts neither in nor out, for if he does otherways he will not be able to go.

If any of the Limbs of the Body should be so mortified, that it must be cut
off, which falls out, when if you cut the part you find it senseless, black and
flaggy-flesh, being cold, smelling like a dead Carcass, and if you suppurat the
skin from the flesh, there flows from it a Green blackish matter: The manner of
cutting off such mortifyed member is this, Draw up the Muscles and flesh very
hard, then bind the part two inches above the place which is to be cut off,
with a strong fillet; that done, with a sharp Razer, or a dismembring-knife,
made for that purpose, being somewhat crooked, cut the flesh round to the very
bone; if this be to be done below the Elbow, or in the Leg, then you must with
your Incision-knife devide the flesh betwixt the Forsiles, then with the back
of it take away the film or membrane which covers the bone, which is called the
Periostium; then with your Saw take away the bone, as near the flesh as you
can. If the Patient be strong and full of blood, you may let it bleed a little,
afterward you must stay the flux of blood by Cauterising-irons, made for that
purpose, by which a^^er you have cleansed and wiped away the clotted blood from
the mouths of the Vessels, you must fear them, by applying thereto the
Cauterising irons once or twice at the most: some stay the flux of blood by
such powders as this, and the like; Take six ounces of Tarin, Volatile
Dragons-blood and Frankincense, of each one ounce; Boll Armonack, sealed-earth,
of each half an ounce. Gypsum one ounce and a half, two ounces of prepared
frogs, one ounce of the moss of a dead man's skull, two drams of the Hairs of a
Hare cut very small, the white of an egg dried in the Sun, finely powdered, and
sponge being dried or burnt and powdered, of each one ounce; mix them all
finely powdered together, Arm four great Buttons made of Tow, and moistened in
Vinegar and Water with these powders, and apply them to the great Vessels, upon
which apply presently a thick bed made of Tow, fit for the dismembered part,
covered over with the Restrictive: then upon that lay on another made after the
same manner, but made as much larger as will reach an inch or two over round on
every side: over all these you must draw a bladder, binding it near the top
with a Ligature an inch broad; lay a double linen cloth over all these,
remembering always to have buttons ready to apply to the places where blood
appears, especially if you do not use the bladder; then bind up the member
with Rowllers, by which means the flux of blood will be stayed; some, after
they have loosed the Ligature above the Incision, apply only the beds first
dipped in water and vinegar, after in the whites of Eggs, then strowing them over
very thick with powder; after all apply this Desensative, Take Bolarmonack
Dragons-blood, Mastick, Gypsum, of each one ounce, oil of Roses and Myrtles, of
each 1 ounce and a half, the whites of two Eggs mix all together in a mortar
with as much Vinegar, as will serve to make it into an Ointment; if the leg be
to cut off, apply it above knee; if the hand then apply it to the Elbow; you
must remember that your Rollers be all wet in water and Vinegar, they must not
be stirred unless to renew the defensative, till the second or third day

The second dressing, moysten the dressings which were applied before, with
stuphs of white wine, that they may be removed with more ease: then besprinkle
the Vessels with restrictive powders, laying upon them three or four pledgets
dipped in the whites of Eggs, armed with the powder; then use to the rest of the
wound, this digestive unguent, Take an ounce and half of wax, gum Elemie and
Turpentine, of each one ounce, half an ounce of Colophony, oil of sweet
almonds, oil of Roses, oil of the yolks of Eggs, of each one ounce: dissolve
them all over a gentle fire, and strain them; to the straining add a dram of
Saffron finely powdered, mix the yolk of an Egg with one ounce of this, and as
much oil of Roses as will serve to moysten it for your use: This is also good
in all wounds made by Gunshot especially; as also in all wounds whether
bruised or cut: or else make use of this following, Take three ounces of
Turpentine washed in Plantain-water, oil of Roses, and oil of sweet Almonds, of
each one ounce, half an ounce of Gum Elemy, dissolved in the foresaid oils and
strained, a scruple of Saffron finely powdered, mix them well together, to
which add the yolk of one Egg for your use; you must observe that you are not
to dress it until the third day, unless pain be much, then you must remove your
dressings gently; if the bed next to the wound stick, let it alone to the third
dressing, you may remove the defensitive every day and anoint the whole part
with oil of Roses or Mirtles, using the former ointments till there be perfect
digestion by sprinkling the Vessels to prevent bleeding, with the restrictive
powders; after it is deiested, cleanse it with this, Take three ounces of
Turpentine washed in white wind, powder of the root of round Birth-wort,
Orrace-root, Barley-flower, of each half an ounce, one ounce of the honey of
Roses, half an ounce of Aquavitae, with two drams of Treacle, mix them up for
your use; You may every dressing endeavor to draw by degrees the skin and
muscles together, by usesing the dry-stitch, that so the bone may be covered;
sometimes the plaster is loosened by the much flowing of the matter; for
which, use this remedy following, Take the roots of round Birthwort,
hog-fennel, and Orrace-root, the bark of the Pine Tree, and the bark of Lignum
vitae, of each half an ounce, being all finely powdered, mix them together,
strowing it upon the wound once or twice a day as you see occasion; This will
also cause the bone to scale within thirty or forty days: if there grow proud
flesh, either use this following Medicine made of two drams of burnt Allom,
Lapis Calaminaris, burnt-Lead, Sereus, of each one dram, with half a dram of
Calcined Viteral, make a powder of them: or else apply Vnguentum Aegyptiacum
hot, lay another pledget upon it and dress it up, use only dry lint the next
dressing, by which means the sensibleness of the wound will be taken away also;
afterward siccatrize or skin the wound with red deficcative ointment, called
Vnguentum desiccativum rubrum, or Diapompholeges, or the like; if the Fingers
and Toes are to be taken away, it is best done with Chisels or cutting mullets,
so cure them up as before according to Art.

OF FRACTURES; AND Broken-bones.
THus much for wounds may suffice. Now I think it convenient to say something
of Fractures or Broken-bones, the which are known by comparing the parts
together, you finding them unequal, and the Patient cannot move in the Members,
in handling the part you will hear a noise: there sometimes happens that they
are broken overthwart, which you may know by the distance between the ends of
the broken-bone, and where they are broken you may perceive a hollowness more
then ordinary; sometimes the bones are shattered into many pieces, then there
follows a pricking pain, and in handling of it you will hear as it were a
crackling, but if the part be very much thicker than ordinary, then the bone is
broken length-wayes; Lastly, sometimes it is broken obliquely; in curing of all
which, the first thing you are to do is to restore the bone as exactly as you
can to its natural form, which may be performed if the bone be broken but
little by the Surgeon himself, otherwise there will be need of two for
extending the member, which must be done by little and little, with as little
pain as possibly can be, so reducing it to its natural place, the Mate or
Assistant extending the member, the Surgeon with his fingers shall put the
broken bones in its right place; which being done, lay a plaster upon the
place about six inches, or so broad as will cover more then the Fracture three
fingers breadth both above and below; afterward apply your Splints being well
armed with Linen or Tow, so near one another as may be the space of a Splint
between every one, which must not be too long, lest it gaul the joints, then
you are to tie the splints on gently with tape not too hard, which besides the
Patients complaint, may produce sad accidents, as Gangreens; and not too slack,
for then the broken bones will not well join together; upon your splints use
your junkes made either of straw or bents, which are to be tied on with
filletting, putting bolsters into the hollow places: All which being done, you
are to lay the member in a soft place, letting it lie reasonable high to keep
humors from flowing; see the Patient have every day a stool either by Nature
or Art: open not your first dressing till after six or seven days, unless pain
or other symptoms force you to it; then you are to open it, to give ease and
hinder other accidents, and so to bind it up again as before till fourteen
days, then you may renew your plaster; and when in applying your plasters
you find a hard fleshy substance called a Callus to increase too much, and
bunch out, you are to keep it down by straight rowlling, and a plate of lead
laid to the part; if you shall perceive that the bones will not naturally
join-together, for want of the said Callus, to confirm and agglutinate them,
then you must use artificial means to procure the Callus; such as, every three
or four days to foment the member with hot water, keeping a plaster of ^itch
to the broken part.

If there be a wound with the fracture, you must so order your business that
you leave a way to dress the wound, and not unbind the member, but keep it firm
and steady; which may be done after this manner; Taking strong clothes that may
but little more then come round the part, being three or four double, the edges
of which are to over-meet at the wound, then with filtring in convenient
places, tie on your splints, which are to be made of such as they make
sword-scabbards of; then dress the wound either with Liniment of Arceus mixed
with oil of St. John's wort compound; or else with this unguent following, If
the bone be fowl, made of syrrup of dried Roses and Turpentine, of each two
ounces, powder of the Orrice root, Aloes, Mastick, and Barley-flower, of each
half a dram, incorporate them into an unguent; the Thigh being broken commonly
knits in forty or fifty days; the Arm requires not above thirty or forty;
the broken member being subject to slip aside by turnings and the like, you are
to view it often, which you may know by the Patients complaining a fresh of
pain, and the unevenness of the part.

The accidents which may happen to broken bones, and which you are to consider
of, and seek to remove them; are first, pain, which if it proceed from too hard
binding, which will cause a swelling and the like, then you are to slacken the
binding; if it come from a flux of humors, cure it as an inflammation: if it
come from a pricking of the bones, which the Patient will resolve you, if you
gentle touch the part; then you must either put them into their places, or take
them quite away; but if it come from the placing the part ill at ease, you must
needs remedy that, by putting it into a better and more easy posture; after
which you are to overcome by blood-letting, cooling Juleps, or such like, made
of common water boyld, or Barley water sweetened with Sugar, and the juice or
syrrup of Lemmons, boiling in the water a little Cinnamon.

Sometimes there happens an inflammation, sometimes a Gangreen, for both which
you have had choice of remedies before: sometimes itching and gaulings happen,
which are caused from the flowing of the matter; for the which after having
first dried the part clear, apply, spread upon Paper, the white ointment, with
Camphire, unguentum tripharmacum; ointment of Roses and the like. Lastly, if
the member fall away, which may happen either by too spare a diet, or too long
binding of the part; you are to help the Patient in both these, by using good
nourishing diet, and comfortable things, to draw it to the part, by fomenting
it with warm water, and the like, anointing the part with unguentum
resumptivum, emplaster of Oxycroceum and the like; where note that in fractures
it is a good sign if the Ligatures or binding be loose on the third or fourth
day. And if you see the broken stand forth, your are to roll it streighter with
bolsters and splints; and when on the seventh or eighth day the Symptoms shall
be past, you may venture to bind the part streighter; Lastly, remember and
consider that the Thigh being broken requires great care, in as much as may be,
that it be kept in its proper posture, by reason the bone of it self is
naturally bowing; and that which has been said in general may serve for
Fractures in the Arms and Legs.

We have before spoken of the Fractures of the Scull and Nose; now when the
Jaw-bones are broken, you must restore them by putting your finger into the
Patients mouth; and on the outside, with the finger, close them smoothly
together: if the Teeth be shaken and loose, put them to the right places, tying
them with a thread to the sound Teeth: if you see occasion you must devide your
splints at the chine, and these to be made of Leather such as they sole shoes
wi^h; your Ligatures must have four ends, and be made two fingers broad Two of
the ends of the Ligatures must be fastened to the crown of your Cap, the other
two ends must be fastened to the hinder part of the Cap, to the nape of the
neck; you may know when it is well set, when the teeth are in order; when these
bones are broken, you will have occasion to administer purges to your Patient,
by reason of the flux of Humors, unless there happen inflammation, the bones
join or knit together within twenty days, you are to feed the Patient with
water-grewel and liquid things, for he must have nothing hard to chew.

If the Coller-bone be broken athwart it is more easily put into its place,
than if it were broken longwaies. In putting these bones or any other into
their place, have always a care that the bones lie not one over another; then
drawing the shoulder forward, and the arm backward, you may that way put the
bones into their places; or else put a bottom of yarn under their Armpits, so
forcing the arm down to the Ribbs, you may restore them; or else lay a Tray
with the bottom upwards under the shoulder, having a Rugg or Blanket or some
such thing over it, or a pillow stuffed hard, so pressing down the shoulder
till you see the bones fly out; then you may restore the broken bone, or else
setting the Patient on the ground, cause your mate or Assistant to set his knee
behind over against the broken place, and he putting the shoulder to him, you
may put the bones in the right place. Here you must take notice, that if there
be any splints to cause pain or difficulty of breathing as they will do if the
Ribs be splintred, then you must open the skin, if you cannot well restore
them, cut off the sharp points, or else cut them quite off if there be many
Splinters; after you have restored them, try to knit them together with a
medicine made of Wheat Flour, Dragons-blood Bol-armonack and Frankincense, all
made into powder; mixed with the white of Eggs, and there apply it, putting
splints thereupon covered with soft linen rags armed with the same Medicine,
and then lay a bolster dipped in the same upon each side, and one thicker then
the other upon the place that is broken and bunches out, to keep it so; then
roll the part with the roller of a hands breadth, and two else and a half long,
cross ways, filling his Armpits, especially that next to the broken-bone; In
rolling, drawing his arm somewhat backwards, and do not unroll until the
seventh day, unless necessity urge.

The Shoulder Blade may be broken either in the ridge thereof, which may be
perceived by an unequality, being compared to the other sound part, or else may
be broken on each side, and then there is a Cavity or Hollowness to be
perceived, or else it may be broken in that part where the shoulder is knit,
and joined together to it; here if the splints or fragments stick to the bone,
and do not prick the flesh, they are to be restored to their former state and
place, and so kept with the glutinating Medicines, and such as beget the
substance called a Callus, as has been before mentioned, and rollers and
bolsters fit for the purpose. But if the fragments do not stick fast to the
bone, and prick the fleshy parts about them, and so cause ill symptoms, then
cut open the flesh, and with your Forceps, or Crows-beak, or such like
instrument, and so take them out; yet they are not to be taken out, though you
may move them up and down, if they stick fast to the membran: Concerning the
bone called Periostium, and the Ligaments; prick not the Muscles, so cause not
pain, for it may come to pass that they may grow to the bones adjoining. But if
they be wholly parted, and stick not to the Periostium, then they must be
plucked away unless you conceive that Nature will be strong enough to drive
them forth of it self: those fractures that happen in the neck of the
shoulder blade, or joining of it to the shoulder, are seldom recoverable, by
reason of the many large Vessels; as the Axillary-vein, and Artery and Nerves
about this place, which are subject to Inflammation and putrefaction, whence
grievous symptoms, and oftentimes death it self insues by reason of the
neerness and communication of the heart, and other principal parts; these bones
usually knit together within four and twenty days space.

The Breast Bone is sometimes broken, sometimes prest-in only, without being
broken: if you perceive an inequality by your feeling the bones crackling at
the thrust of the finger, it shows the bone is broken; but a manifest
hollowness in the part, as spitting of blood, Cough, difficulty of breathing
argue the depression of the bone only, sometimes both; for restoring, of this
Bone, whether it be broken or depressed or thrust in only, without being
broken, you must order such Patient after the same manner, as in fractures of
the Coller-bone, pressing the Ribs on both sides, and so set the bone with your
hand to the part: apply formerly described fitting Medicines, to assuage pain,
with bolsters fastened thereto, with a Ligature made cross-waies above the
shoulder, being not too straight, lest it hinder the Patient from breathing.

The Ribs may be broken either inwardly or outwardly: the first is deadly, the
latter is discerned as well by uneveness of the part as noise in touching; to
restore which, those which are inward; let the Patient lie upon his sound-side,
apply this following plaster to the broken part, Take one ounce of
wheat flour, half an ounce of Ising-glass, being dissolved in Scabies and
Poppy-water, powder of Mastick, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, Gypsum, and Farena
Volatile, as much as will serve to make a plaster being boiled to a good
substance, in Red-poppy-water, apply this hot, spread upon a strong cloth, with
two strings fastened in the middle, pull it off quickly and with great force,
after it has laid on a good while, so that the Rib with your plucking may come
to its former place; this is to be done so often till he find himself better,
and breathe freely and with more ease; then anointing with oil of Roses, apply
that Pultis till the eighth day, spoken of at the beginning of the cure of
Fractures; if there happen a swelling it must not be neglected, but resolved
with such fit Medicines as this and the like, Take Barley and Bean-flower, of
each two ounces, the flower of Cammomil, Mellilot, Elder, of each one ounce,
boil them in sufficient quantity of water; when they are boiled enough, put to
them oil of Cammomil and Roses, of each one ounce; if the swelling cannot be
made to vannish with this or the like medicine, but it shall come to
apostumate, then it must be speedily opened lest the matter contained within
the Aposthume rot the bone; afterward cure it according to art. But if the
pricking continue and so cause pain and inflammation, cut open the flesh as
before, and take out the fragments, and cure up the wound as you have heard
often before.

The Back-bones are sometimes broken, sometimes bruised or strained on the
inside, whence it comes to pass that the membrans which encompass the marrow of
the Backbone, and sometime the marrow it self being oppressed, there follow
many malign symptoms; as Palsy, numness of the Arms, Legs, Fundament, and
bladder, which quite take away or else diminish the faculty of feeling or
moving, so that their urine and excrements come from them without their
knowledge or will, or else they are wholly stopped; which when it happens
because the marrow of the Backbone is hurt, you may foreknow that death is at
hand. After you have so prognosticated you may cut open the flesh to take out
the splinters of the rack bones of the back, which if you cannot do you shall
at leastwise apply such medicines as are sit for asswaging pain and hindering
Inflammation, then put the broken bones into their places and so keep them by
applying two pieces of wood of four fingers long and one fingers thickness more
or less, wrapped in linen clothes, one on each side of the broken rack bones of
the back, and so with your hands press them against the broken bones till you
put them again into their proper places; if the processes or bunchings out of
the rack-bone of the Back be only broken, you shall put the fragments into
their places unless they be quite parted from their periostium or membran that
covers them: If they be, open the skin and take them forth, then heal the wound
according to art. After the same manner are fractures of the Os sacrum or holy
bone to be ordered.

Fractures of the Rump-bones are to be put in their places by putting your
finger into the Patients Fundament, and so thrust it to the fracture place,
thus having your other hand lying ready at his back, you may thrust the
fragment forth and restore and fit it to the rest of the bones; but that it may
be the sooner and firmlier healed, the Patient is all the time of the Cure to
keep his bed; but if he must needs rise out of his bed he must set in a hollow
or perforated Chair, that nothing may offend the broken part, applying fit
remedies for broken bones as you shall see occasion.

If the Hip-bone be broke there will be perceived depressed Cavity, and
inequality, pain, numness of the Leg on the same side; if the splinters of the
bone be quite broken, as they must at the first be taken away by making
Incision as before, in doing of which you must have a care that you hurt not
the heads of the muscles or any vessels, but if the fragments be not quite
broken or separated from their Periostium, set them in order smoothly with your
fingers, and perform the rest of the Cure as before directed according to art.

The whirl-bone of the knee is oftener bruised than broken, but it may happen to
be broken in two or three pieces; sometimes long-ways, sometimes athwart,
sometimes it is shivered into many splinters, sometimes broken in the midst;
and all these ways may be either with or without a wound. The signs are, Cavity
or hollowness in the broken part with a sensible separation of the fragments,
the crackling under your fingers: if it be broken long-ways, the Cure will be
easier, but if athwart more difficult and not without lameness; that it may be
restored let the Patient stretch forth his leg, then shall the Surgeon set
the fragments as nigh as may be in the right places, and keep them so by
extending the leg all the while until it be knit; filling up the hollowness of
the Ham with a Boulster, lest he should bend his Leg unawares; and so by
bending the knee the fragments of the whirl-bone that were before joined
together, would part asunder; these bones usually knit in forty days. Bones of
the hands and feet being broken, they are not so dangerous as others; those of
the hand are to be reduced by the Patients laying his hand upon an even table,
then the Mate or Assistant stretching forth the broken bones, let the
Surgeon restore them; being so extended to their proper seats. Being
restored they are to be kept in their places by such medicines as are used in
other fractures, as Cerates, Compresses, Linen clothes, and Splints; using
Anodines to mitigate and assuage pain; Now the broken fingers are to be bound
to those that are whole, that so they may the better continue in that posture
the Surgeon left them: After all this let the Patient keep a Tennis-ball in
the palm of his hand. The bones of the toes being broken are to be kept
straight, lest or going or standing be hindered, and the Patient is to keep his
bed till they be knit.

Here follow certain Directions for the Cure of several Diseases accompanying
Seamen, viz. The Scurvy, Calentures etc.
AS for the Scurvy it is an ill disposition of the body, proceeding from burnt
blood and Melancholy humors corrupted in the Body, having signs proper to it
self from other diseases; as Redness, Itch, and putrefaction of the gums, often
gushing out of blood, which do sometimes seize upon the jaws and Pallet and
teeth, making them loose and look black; thighs and legs at the beginning full
of red spots, afterward they become purple livid and black, they will be
sometimes in the neck and face, back and Arms, very broad; and the Party
troubled with difficulty of breathing, windy swellings of the sides, also the
Midriff and Sweetbread, as also with a lazy disposition and dullness of the
whole body; their urine is various, sometimes there will be a thick settling
like the powder of Tiles, and without any manifest cause; it will be thick and
troubled to day, to morrow thin and watery; one day look pale, and another day,
yellow like gold: The Pulses sometimes so weak and unequal, that one would
almost think it strange that the Patient should live with such a Pulse; then
again it will be great and hard without any Inflammation, and if you will
observe it in faintings and great oppressions which often happen, the Pulse is
stronger than at other times; diverse Parts of the body are afflicted with pain,
sometimes with a dull pain in the thighs, sometimes in the heel, and about the
Instep, and the very soles of the feet, sometimes the hands and the fingers
ends, sometimes the hip and knee, sometimes much troubled with pain in the
belly: those pains which seize upon their arms thighs or legs, are very like
those of the French Pox; only the difference is, that in those pains where
there is the French Pox, there is often hard knots and bunches; and moreover,
if it be morbus gallicus there will be running of the Reins and swelling of the
groins, sometimes they will have a pain in their sides, sometimes in their
loins; sometimes they will have a pain seize upon them in their head being more
than ordinary all over the body, which vanishes by sweat in the morning: they
are troubled with great pains in their teeth, which are not fixed, but run up
and down from one tooth to another; sometimes they will have pains in their
sides as if it were a Plurisie, but only they have no fever which makes the
difference, and their pain does not continue but comes by fits, or their
breathing is not much hurt, neither do they cough or spit much. As for the pain
in the joints that wanders from one joint to another, and has often a kind of a
Palsy accompanying it, for the motion of the body that is diverse ways out of
order, one day being scarce able to stir one foot, the next day it may be able
to walk a little, the day after not at all. With these pains of the joints
there is a trembling and Convulsion seizes upon them, sometimes as it were the
Falling Sickness all over the body. Sometimes the parts are so drawn together
they cannot be moved, sometimes the knees only, sometimes his Gullet so
straight, that he swallows his meat with great difficulty and he thinks himself
ready to be choked, which is caused from the thick vapors that do contract
it. Sometimes he is troubled with flux of the belly, either with or without
blood, stinking smell of the mouth, which all those people that are troubled
with the Scurvy, are troubled with: sometimes they have a kind of an
intermitting fever, in the beginning of the fits they are as it were pinched
in diverse parts, as if the flesh were torn, especially the thighs; if the
disease continue long, sometimes the Patient is wasted to skin and bones: Now
to conclude all, you must not think to find all these symptoms in one person,
and at one time.

The Cure of this disease in Seamen or others is chiefly or almost the very
same used to those troubled with Hypochondriack melancholy; so that you are
first to begin the Cure with general evacuations, as Bloodletting, Purging,
and suitable to the nature of the disease, strength, and constitution of the
Patient; for Bloodletting, you must do it in the Liver-vein little and often,
that you cool not the body too much at once; the next thing to be looked after
is good diet, which because often wanting at Sea, in long Voyages they are to
carry with them some such comfortable things as may be useful; as Wine, Sugar
etc. Then you are to administer Glisters, or Suppositories, such as formerly
has been spoken of in the Cure of Wounds; and afterward such a Bolus or Morsel
as this following, Take of Diacatholicon and lenitive Electuary of each half an
ounce, Cream of Tartar half a dram, with three or four drops of Spirit of
Viteral, make a Bolus to be taken in the morning fasting, you may if you see
the Patient weak, open the Hemrod-veins with Leeches; you may repeat
Bloodletting in the Arm if you see occasion, the gentle purges are the best
often given, such as common Pills of Ruffus, called Pillulae Ruffi communes,
Pillulae Macri Mercurii dulcis one scruple, two scruples or a dram are enough
for a dose; Barley-water is good, the juice or syrrup of Lemmons, to which you
may if you will, add some few drops of Cinnamon Water, or Oil of Viteral and
Sugar: then you may make use of specifical medicines, which are such as have a
peculiar faculty against the Scurvy, such as Dutch or Sea-scurvy-grass,
Brook-lime, and Watercresses, Wormwood, Fumitory, Turnips, Lemmons, juice, or
syrrup of Oranges, Limes, Tamarinds: those which have not so great force
against the Scurvy are these that follow, viz. Agrimony, Maidenhair, Betony,
Borrage, Bugloss, Ceterach, Elecampane, Germander, Hysop, Polypody of the Oak,
the Bark of Ash, Capers and Tamarisk, the flowers of Alder, dodder of Time and
Tamarisks; but always observe that if the Patient be feverish, or inclining
to a Fever, you must be sparing of the hotter things and give them in a
smaller quantity; adding to them Endive, Succory, Sorrel, etc. with some few
drops of Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriol: Of all which you may make several sorts
of medicines, as Decoctions, Apozems, Syrrups etc. Or else this following, Take
the juice of Scurvey-grass and Brook-lime, of each three pound, two pound of
powdered Sugar, boil them together till they come to the consistence of a
Syrrup.

Or thus, Take two pound of the juice of Scurvy Grass, one pound and three
quarters of the juice of Lemons, and three-quarters of a pint of the spirit of
Wine or Brandy; to which adding a sufficient quantity of Sugar, is made a
syrup; of which you may take three or four spoonfulls, fasting two hours after:
To your juice of Lemmons alone you may add a spoonful of Aquavitae; As much
spirit of Vitriol as will sharpen a cup of Beer, water, or wine, is very good;
also Diatrium piperium, taken from a scruple to half a dram, in some convenient
liquor, as Wine, Beer or Ale, first and last, is good; Theriaca Diatessaron,
from half a dram to two; and Theriaca Londinensis two drams, taken in the
morning, are good: so are conserve of Roses, Conserve of Wormwood, with a few
drops of the spirit of Viteral; Likewise green Ginger, Rosa-Solis and Wormwood
water: also it will not be amiss to sweat after purging, which, you may do by
giving him a dram of Venice Treacle or Mithridate, or half a dram of Antimonium
diafreticum, more or less as you find the constitution of your Patient.

There is commonly accompanying the Scurvy, swellings and putrefaction of the
gums, for which you may take Bistert and Tormentil-roots, boiled in a
sufficient quantity of water, to the consumption of half, to which add some
drops of Vitriol to make it sharp, or else take this following, of Roman or
white Viteral two ounces, one pint of water and two spoonfuls of Honey, being
boiled to the consumption of the third part: add to it half an ounce of
Sal^prunella for your use: To conclude, when you come to any place on shore,
you may make use of these following Receipts, Take a pint of the decoction of
Barley, four ounces, of white wind; Horse-raddish root, but thin and bruised
two ounces; three handfuls of Scurvy Grass leaves, strain them through a Cloth,
mingle them, and take a spoonful of this, morning and evening.

Or else, take of Wormwood and Juniper Berries bruised, of each one handful;
Goats-milk if to be had, or in want of it Cows-milk or Sheeps-milk two quarts,
Boil them till the third part be consumed, strain them, and to the straining
put one dram of Saffron in powder, let them boil a walm or two, then strain it
again; give of this, morning, noon, and evening.

Or, Take three pints of white wind, a quart of small Ale, four ounces of the
juice of Scabies, Brook-lime and Watercresses, of each two ounces, half a
handful of Rosa solis, boil them to the Consumption of one pint, to which add
half a pint of the juice of Scurvy Grass, let them boil a little in a pint of
this, steep three spoonfuls of Horse-dung; let them stand all night, strain
them in the morning, and let the Patient take half a pint thereof being
sweetened with Sugar Candy.

For a Beer to drink constantly of, Take a pound of Scurvy Grass, a little
dried Brooklime and Watercresses, of each four handfuls, a handful of Sage, an
ounce of Saxifrage, six ounces of Sarsaparilla, six drams of Nutmegs, Let the
Herbs, Roots, and Spice be bruised a part, then mix them, hang them in a bag in
four gallons of beer; after it has stood nine days the Patient may drink
thereof.

Half a pint of this following-drink, every morning for fourteen days, has
been often tried and approved, and has cured diverse: Take Scurvy Grass, stamp
it, and strain it with posset drink made of thin skim-milk, turned with just as
much white wind Vinegar as will serve to turn it: during all the time of your
cure you must forbear salt meat, strong-drink, fruits and old Cheese; drinking
whey at your Meals if you can get it, if not, instead thereof small Ale; and
you must chew Brook-lime for three mornings together if your teeth be loose.

In Voyages at Sea there happen to Seamen the disease Called the Callenture,
It is a kind of contagious Fever, sometimes with fits, sometimes without, the
Patients being often possessed with a Frenzy, for they often think the Sea to be
a Meddow, and so make an offer to go into it; on some the fits are very
violent, which are hot; and cold, in some; This Disease happens through great
obstructions, caused by ill diet, and intemperature of the Climate, which air
being somewhat Contagious, causes an ill habit of the Body. For the Cure of
this Distemper you are first to begin with Cordials, which strengthen and
defend the faculties from the venomous quality of the Disease, and so may
either be said to Preserve or Cure, therefore you are to adminster them before
evacuating Medicines for a Cordial, take this for an example, made of one
scruple of Mithridate, half a dram of London-Treacle, or that called
Diatessaron, one ounce of Syrup of Lemons, three ounces Of Plantane or
Rose Water, and six drops of Spirit of Vi^riol for one dose, about three hours
after give an other dose: Or, this following, Take of Confectio Alchermes,
burnt Hartshorn, of each two scruples; syrup of Lemons one ounce, as much
spirit of Vitriol as will give it a sharp taste; after this, first administer a
Suppositer or Glister, of which you have several examples before; then after
they have done working, let him blood plentifully, if he be of a strong and
gross body as you see occasion; his diet is to be but thin broth, water-grewel,
ponadoes, or such like, two or three days together; for purges give him about
a scruple of Mercurius dulcis, or else this, Take six drams or an ounce of
Lenitive Electuary, two scruples of the Cream of Tarter, and one scruple of
Confectio Alchermes with Sugar, make it into a boll for a dose: if it should be
convenient to give them a Vomit, then give him six drams, one ounce, or ten
drams more or less, as you see occasion, of the infusion of Crocus: Metallorum
if sweating be to be procured, give him from a scruple to half a dram of
Antimonium Di afreticum in a little London or Venice Treacle, or Mithridate; if
he want rest give him from two grains to four of Laudanum Opiatum, or else
Syrup of wild Poppy, six drams of Frogs-spawn and poppy-water, of each one
ounce and a half, with three drams of Treacle, make a potion, and give the
Patient at night to cause him to rest; let his ordinary drink be either a
decoction of Barley with Liquorish; or else this following, Take three quarts
of fountain water, put an ounce of Hartshorn burnt and prepared into it, let
it boil to the consumption of the third part, then take it from the fire and
put to it four ounces of Rose Water, two ounces of syrup of Lemons, as much
Sugar as will serve to sweeten it, and as much spirit of Vitriol as will make
it sharp; this is an excellent drink in all feavors, and for all sorts of
persons; Remember, too much purging, bleeding, and thin diet is dangerous in
all diseases at Sea, and will bring your Patient into the Scurvy, which is
usually the end of most diseases at Sea, and then if your Patient be too much
weakened, the Scurvy discharging it self by a flux, is often mortal.

If you shall have occasion to be concerned with Armies by Land or in
Garrisons, there will sometimes a continual, malign and contagious Fever,
called the Camp-Disease, seize upon the Soldiers; which will be seconded by a
great pain in the head, and his stomach will be clogged with many foul humors;
sometimes there will follow swooning and often faintings, the Patient grows
very weak without manifest cause, his pulse will be sometimes weak but quick,
and sometimes strong; there will appear oftentimes many large spots of several
colors, he complains of a pain in his stomach and joints, little or no
appetite, oft-times troubled with vomiting, and sometimes difficulty of
breathing and singing in the ears; all which proceeds from putrefaction or
corruption of the humors in the veins, or from contagion; the corruption or
putrefaction of the humors comes from ill diet; ill vapors arising from the
earth, corrupted naughty air, dirty foul apparel, and such like; for the cure,
if there be an inclination to vomit, which you may perceive by pain and fullness
of the stomach, then provoke it with this, made of six drams of the infusion of
the glass of Antimony, two ounces of Barly-water, Oxymel of squils, and syrup
of the 5 opening-Roots, of each six drams; mix it and give the Patient. The
manner of infusing your Antimony is this, Take two drams of the glass of
Antimony, put it into a pint of white wind, Cloves and Ginger, of each one
dram; infuse all these together, when you have occasion, administer it, from
two drams to an ounce; after that you have used all the wine, you may put more
to the ingredients, adding to them the same quantity of fresh ingredients as
before: after you may bleed if the Patient be not very weak, or if you see your
Patient of a strong constitution, you may begin with blood-letting; not
forgetting glysters or suppositories with cordials made of the Carduus
benedictus, Scabious, Sorrel, Angelica-waters, with Venice or London* Treacle
and burnt Hartshorn, Mithridate, Dioscordium confection of Alchermes, bezoar
root of contrayervae; as for example, Take of the wild Poppies and
Sorrel-water, of each one ounce and a half, London Treacle, and burnt
Hartshorn, of each two scruples; one scruple of Mithridate, one dram of
Dioscordium; and three drams of Treacle-water with some syrup of Lemons, and as
many drops of the spirit of Vitriol as will give it a sharp taste, make a
potion and give it at one dose; or take two scruples of Dioscordium and one
scruple of burnt Hartshorn, mix them and dissolve them in Mace-ale, a little
Sack or in Beer and Ale, wherein Hartshorn and Marigold flowers have been
boiled; to cause him to sleep, Take syrup of Dioscordium, and syrup of
wild-poppies, of each half an ounce; of Angelica and wild-poppy-water, of each
one ounce and an half, and a dram of Diascordium, mix them and give it going to
sleep: Take notice that Cordials are to be given often. For purges, they must
be somewhat strong, as one dram of Pulvis astrictionis, one ounce of syrup of
Roses solutive, Diaphrenicon Electuarii three drams, dissolve all in three
ounces of Endive-water; For bleeding in this Disease if the veins be full and
stretching out, and be burthensom to nature, let it then be plentiful, for the
blood is corrupted; and in all putrid Fevers it is very safe to let blood,
which may be done til the fourth day, and if your occasion require till the
seventh day, though spots appear: As for vomiting, that removes nauseousness,
pain, bitterness and sadness, by freeing the stomach from the abundance of
naughty humors; Vesicatories or blisters may be good, applied to the wrists any
time but on a Critical day; The form of a blister-plaister may be this: Take
half an ounce of Cantharides, called Spanish-flies, two drams of Turpentine,
Olibanum, Myrrh, Mastick and Camphire, of each half a dram, oil of Roses and
Beeswax, as much as will be sufficient to make it to the consistence of a
Plaster; The Patient is to keep a spare diet and not to eat any flesh, but
brothes wherein is boiled the shavings of Hartshorn, the opening roots with
Sorrel and Borrage, and Panadoes, water-grewel, etc. And posset drink with
Hartshorn boyld in it, dropping a little spirit of Vitriol into it, and burnt
Hartshorn boild, in the Calenture is good: to which you may add the syrup of
the juice of Citrons. For preservative you may drink Wormwood-beer, or a small
quantity of the former Cordials; or eat mince and sage with bread and butter,
and smell to the herbs, or you may steep those herbs with Wormwood in
white wind Vinegar, which is excellent good in the Plague-time also.

Seamen and Soldiers are often troubled with Fluxes, therefore it will not here
be amiss to lay down some convenient remedies for the Cure of the same; but
being there are several kinds of Fluxes, I shall begin first with that which is
called Lientery, which is when the food received into the body is cast forth in
the same substance color and smell as it was received. This proceeds from a
weakness of the retaining faculty of the stomach, when it cannot keep the meat
long enough therein till it be concocted; likewise from a cold distemper of the
stomach and liver, begetting cold and raw humors which fill up the wrinkles of
the stomach, that it cannot keep the food it receives, or else from ^harp
humors pricking, and twitching the parts, by which the stomach and guts are
provoked to send forth their meat too soon; If this comes from a cold cause,
you may know it from the sour belching that follows, and phlegmatic excrements
that are voided: If the humors come from the head the excrements are frothy and
after sleep the flux is greater; if it come by provocation caused by sharp and
pricking humors he will have a great thirst, heat in his flanks, gnawing in his
stomach, voiding sharp and chollerick excrements. If this disease come from
tough phlegmatic humors covering the wrinkles of the stomach, you must cut
them with honey of Roses, Oxymel simplex, and Oxymel-squils, and the like. Then
you must give him gentle Purges, for which purpose Pills are the best, because
they stay longest in the stomach, of which you may take these for an example.
Take of Pillulae Cochiae and Pill. Ruffi of each half a dram, mix them and make
them into six Pills, of which let him take three at night going to bed, and the
other three the next morning or night according as you see occasion; or else
Pills of Hiera with Agrick or Pillulae Alephenginae, the same Dose of either a
part for Glisters: they are here of no great force except the flux be violent,
and then they must be binding, such as shall be spoken of hereafter. In a
Bloudy-flux after you have purged the humors offending, you must then
strengthen the stomach wi^h cooling Syrrups and Julips, if it come from a hot
cause; mixing therewith some few drops of the Spirit of Viteral or Sulphur:
also some Marmalet of Quinces will be good, or this following, Take of the
Conserve of Sorrel and Wormwood of each one ounce, Conserve of Roses Suckery
and, Buglas, of each half an ounce, Diamargariton frigidum and Diarrhodon
Abbatis, of each one dram, one scruple of Troches of Spodium, with as much
Syrrup of Lemmons as will serve to make them up to the form of an Electuary:
mix them and let the Patient take the quantity of a Chestnut, morning noon and
night; or this following, Take six ounces of old Conserve of Roses, six drams
of London or Venice Treakle, with as much Marmalet of Quinces as will make it
into an Electuary, mix them and let the Patient take about the quantity of half
an ounce in the morning, drinking nothing after for the space of three or four
hours: if from a cold cause let the Patient boil some Guaiacum or Sassafras in
his drink, of which take this for a pattern. Take of guaiacum Sassafras,
Sarsaparilla, of each two ounces, English Liquorice and Cinnamon of each one
ounce, Coriander-seed an ounce: Infuse them in four quarts of spring or
running-water, twenty four hours afterward boil it gently to the consumption
of half of this. Let the Patient drink half a pint at a time, about the
quantity of a quart in a day: here Mithridate, Nutmeg, Diatessaron, and
Diatrion pipirion is good; if he wants rest and the flux continue, give him
three grains of Laudanum Opiatum, where note in the taking of all which things,
if the Flux heing stayed break out again, it is a sign ill humors are to be
purged away, to which purpose Rubarb prepared, Infused often in Indiff-water,
is very excellent.

The next sort of Fluxes is called Diarrhaea, which is a Flux in which
excremental choleric or phlegmatic humors are cast forth, without either
blood or food; and these come either from the whole body, or from the brain or
stomach, Guts, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery; and if in women, from the womb and the
like. If the Patient has had, or have at present a fever, or be dropsical, or
of an ill habit of body, or have eaten excessively and not digested his food;
it is a sign that it comes from the whole body. If the excrements be frothy and
he void more by night than day, and he have some manifest disease in his head
as a Catarrh, Lethargy, Deafness etc. then it proceeds from the head. If the
fault be in the stomach, the Patient has eaten food apt to corrupt; and there
appear signs that the concoction is injured, either from a hot or cold cause:
if from the first, the humors will be sharp, choleric, stinking, and nature
labors to throw it out; if from the last, then the excrements will be crude
and phlegmatic: If the Flux proceed from the Liver the excrements are
choleric, and you will perceive some distemper of the Liver, if from the
Spleen they will be blackish, and you have signs of a distempered Spleen; If
from the Dysentery, you will have an extension of the humors, but they come
from the Liver and Spleen; if from the Guts, there is worms; if from the womb,
there has been obstructions of the Courses, and now some symptom that vexes
and increases the Flux at that time the Courses are wont to flow; For to help
this Disease, first of all open a vein if the body be full of blood, and if it
be not it is good to let blood if the Patient has a fever, then purge with
such things as leave a binding quality behind them; such as Rubarb dried and
given in Plantane-water, with syrrup of Quinces, or take a dram of Rubarb, and
half a dram of the yellow Mirobolans, and half a scruple of yellow Saunders,
infuse them in Plantane-water, strain it, and to the straining add half a dram
of Rubarb in powder, and one ounce of Syrrup of Roses; a potion for one dose,
or you may add the lenitive Electuary or Catholicon, according to the strength
and condition of the Patient and humors; vomiting is good if the body be
strong: before and after purging give this or the like glyster; Take Wheat-bran
and red Rose leaves of each one pugil, whole Barley two pugils, Liquorice
sliced and Raisins of the Sun, of each one ounce, boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water till they come to a pint, in the straining dissolve one
ounce of white sugar, and the yolks of two eggs, for a glyster: After the body
is sufficiently emptied, then give binding Glysters, such as you shall find
next in the cure of the Bloudy-flux: and at the mouth likewise you shall there
be directed. If the Patient have not a fever, boil new milk if you can get it,
and scum off the foam, then quench red hot steel in it often, drink it warm; it
is a present remedy. Unripe Blackberries and Mulberries dried and powdered is
good to stay this Flux; likewise this Opiat is excellent, Take of the juice of
Quinces, Conserve of Roses, of each one ounce, Dragons blood, sealed-earth, and
fine Bolearmonack, of each one dram, Bloud-stone and the Troches of Amber, of
each half a dram, with syrrup of comphry, make an Opiat, take a little often.
Or take one ounce of the powder of Rheubarb, two drams of the Troches of
Sanders, mix them and give the Patient two drams thereof twice a day; this
purges away the ill humors and strengthens the bowels. Or this, Take half
an ounce of the old Conserve of Roses, one dram of Marmalet of Quinces, a
scruple of Tormentil-root in fine powder, half a scruple of fine Bolearmonack
with sugar, make a bole for one dose which is to be given often; if the Flux
continue long and strength much decay, give Laudanum a grain or two amongst
your other medicines; you may for ordinary drink use one made of three pintes
of water, wherein two drams of Mastich has been boiled; Plantane boiled in
broth is good, and for fear it turn to a Bloudy-flux, give an Emulsion of
Barley-water and the four cold seeds.

The last of the Fluxes of the belly is called Dysenteria or the Bloudy-flux,
which is known by the Patients voiding of blood with tormenting pains; from the
ulceration of the guts; by sharp and salt phlegmatic and choleric humors,
which is cured by removing those sharp humors; asswaging pain, cleansing and
consolidating the ulcer and stopping the Flux. To evacuate the humors you must
purge with Rubarb every second third or fourth day, according to the strength
of your Patient, season of the year, and the like; the Dose from half a dram to
two drams, being dried as before, or made into a Potion thus. Take Liquorice
scraped and sliced, Raisins of the Sun, of each three drams, Tamarinds and
yellow myrobolans, of each two drams, boil them in Barley and Plantane-water to
three ounces, in the straining infuse a dram of Rubarb thin-sliced, then add an
ounce of the syrrup of Roses solutive, and make a potion. This following is
excellent in desperate fluxes; Take two ounces of the bark of Guiacum bruised
and beaten, boil it in a sufficient quantity of water til half be wasted, then
add red Rose leaves, Pomgranate-flowers and Plantane-seed, of each two drams,
let them boil an hour, then to the straining add a dram of Rubarb in powder,
and three drams of Catholicon for a Potion; Mechoacan with Cinnamon is good. If
with the Dysentery there be a seaver and inflammation of the bowels, let the
Patient blood according to strength; sometimes vomiting is profitable to
intercept those sharp salt humors that fall from the stomach to the Guts, omit
it not if you see a loathing and perceive the stomach stuffed full of humors:
your vomiting may be this, Take from half a dram to a dram of salt of Vitriol,
syrrup of Quinces and Bettony-water, of each one ounce, with ten drams of
Cinnamon Water, give it for one Dose; In the mean time you must give mild and
cleansing Glysters first, as this made of the roots of Marshmallows and
Butter-burr, of each one handful, one pugil of Camomile-flowers, Fleabane-seed,
and Flux-seed, of each two drams, Boil them in Barley-water, or milk, or water
wherein steel or Iron has often been quenched, or mutton, or
sheeps-head-broath, to a pint; strain it and dissolve therein the yolks of
four eggs well beaten, oil of Roses and syrrup of Quinces of each one ounce and
make a glyster. At Sea instead of milk use the decoction of Bran boiling in it
such of these following herbs as have virtue to cleanse the ulcer, such as
Centory, Wormwood, St. John's wort, to the straining of which add Turpentine
dissolved in the yolk of an Egg, and the chemical oil of wax, of each one dram,
for excoriations or fretting of the guts a glyster of the decoction of bran
with Deer-suet; the yolk of an egg if to be had, is good; you may add some
Anniseed, Fennel-seeds, Comin-seeds, and Dill-seeds: when there is need of more
binding, then make a Glyster thus. Take of the Roots of Comfrey, Tormentil, and
Bistort, of each one ounce, Plantane, Shepherd-Purse, Knot-grass, and
Mouse-ear, of each one handful, Pumpranet-flowers, Acorn-cups, Cyprus-nuts, of
each one dram; parched Rice, French Barley, and red Roses, of each one pugil;
boil them in Smiths water, or water wherein Iron has often been quenched. To a
pint of the straining add of the juice of Plantane and Yarrow of each one
ounce, and the yolks of two roasted eggs; Or instead of the juices you may use
the muscilage of Gum Draganth, made with Rose or Plantane-water, and Goats or
Deer-suet of each one dram. All this while you must not forget internal
remedies; to stay the flux nutmegs are excellent, if desperate, dried and burnt
to powder, Rice pottage, or this, Take of sealed-Earth, Hartshorn prepared
with Plantane and Knot-grass-water, prepared Corral, Crocus Martis of each one
dram, mix them, the Dose is from a scruple to one dram, in Knot-grass or
Plantane-water, one dram of crude Alum given in the said waters does in a
manner charm the flux. Or take a pint of syrrup of Prunes without Sugar, a
spoonful and half of Tormentil-root in powder, boil them a little together, and
drink a quarter of a pint first and last. Lastly the Body being well cleansed
before* make this binding Decoction to complete the Cure. Take the roots of
Bistort, Comfrey, and Tormentil, the leaves of Plantane, Tarrow, Shepherds
purse, Horse-tail, Mouse-ear, and Agrimony, of each one handful; Seeds of
Sorrel, Grape-stones, and Sumach, of each one ounce, boil them in four quarts
of water till half be consumed; then strain it and sweeten it with syrrup of
Comfrey, Quinces, Mirtles, dried Roses, and Corral: or else make use of this
following Opiat, Take of Conserve of Quinces, and Conserve of old Roses, of
each one ounce, half an ounce of the Conserves of Comfrey-roots, prepared
Corral, Dragons-bloud, Bolarmenick, sealed-earth, Conserve of Slowes, Acatia,
of each one dram; Spodium, burnt Ivory, of each one scruple; with as much of
any of the Syrrups aforesaid as will make it to an Opiat. Give thereof the
quantity of a Chestnut morning, noon, and night; Narcoticks do wonders,
especially if they be mixed with Strengtheners and Binders, as this, Take of
the old Conserves of Roses and Services, of each one dram; half a scruple of
Confectio Alkermes, three granes of Laudanum, make thereof a Bolus; four ounces
of the juice of Plantane given alone is excellent.

Now to conclude, I thought it convenient to give you a Catalogue of the most
necessary Instruments and Medicines, both simple and compound, which a young
Surgeon ought to carry with him to Sea, or have in readiness by Land.

First, a case of good Lancets for his plaister-box, that must be furnished
with these Instruments following, a pair of Scissars, a Spatula, with a Capital
Instrument, and two small Probes, a pair of Forceps, a Director, an
Incision-knife, stiching quils, with three or four Chirurgions Needles, or as
many as you will; a Fleme, a small Rasier, a Levatory; Uvula spoon and Spatula
Linguae.

Next, for his Salvatory, it must always have these Unguents in it, Arceus his
Liniment, Basilicon, Vnguentum Aureum or the golden ointment, Vnguentum
Apostolorum or ointment of the Apostles, Vnguenttum de minio, or ointment of
Red-Lead, Desiccativum Rubrum, or the red drying and skinning ointment.

Then besides these Instruments and Unguents, in his Plaister-box, and
Salvatory, he must have always in readiness by him these medicines and
Instruments following. Viz* for Emplaisters Diapalma de minio, and the
Diachilon-simple, plasters of one of which he is to put some ready spread upon
cloth or paper, into his Plaister-box, Paracelsus-plaister, Oxycrotium,
Diachilon with gums, and the Mellilotplaister.

For Unguents Aegyptia cum, Vnguentum Albium or the white ointment, Vnguentum
La^^inum or common oil of Bays, Vnguentum Nicotianae Peti or Ointment of
Tobacco, Vnguentum Nutritum, Vnguentum Opthalmicum or Ointment for Inflammation
of the Eyes, Vnguentum Populion.

For Oils, Take Oleum Catulorum, oil of Camomil, Lillies, oil of Exeter, oil
of Saint John wort compound, of Foxes, Turpentine, Roses, Earthworms,
Elder-Flowers, Linseed, Vitriol, and Sulphur.

Likewise you must have these distilled waters with you, water of Mint,
Plantain, Burridg, Bugloss, Suckery, Endif, Lettice, Purslane, Poppy, Roses,
Carduus Benedictus or the holy thistle, these for simple waters; Then for
Compound, you must have Anniseed, Cinnamon, Aqua-Coelestis or the
heavenly-water, Doctor Stephens water, Aqua-mirabilis, Aquae-Menthe, or
Mint-water, Treacle-water, Spirit of wine, Brandy or Aquavitae, Wormwood-water;
Likewise you must have with you strong Lee, white wind Vinegar, Vinegar of
Roses.

For Syrups, you must have syrup of Wormwood; Vinegar Simple or Compound, of
Lemons, Sloes, Diamoron, or syrup of Mulberries, Violets, honey of Roses,
Oximel Simplex; Simple or Compound, Oximel Scilliticum, or Oximel of Squils.

Then for Conserves, etc. Electuaries, the Conserve of Red-Roses, Barberries,
Quinces, Wood Sorrel and Slowes, London and Venice-Treacle, Diascordium,
Mithridate, Confectio Alchermes: for Purging Electuaries, the Lenitive
Diacatholicon, Confectio Hamet, Diaprunes Solutive.

For Pills, you must have Pil-Ruffi Communes, Pil-Choche, Pil-Hiera,
Comagarico, Extractum Rudii, Pil-Alofangine.

For Loho^ks, you must have Lohoch de farfara, or Lohoch of Coltsfoot, Lohoch
of Poppies, Lohoch of Pine-nuts, Lohoch of Pursley, Lohoch of Fox-Lungs, and
Lohoch Sanum and expertum.

For Troches, you must have Trochisci Albi Rhacis, with and without Trochischi
Gordonii, Trochischi Alchakengi, or Troches of Winter-Cherries, Pectoral Rolls,
white and black, Troches of Barberies, Troches of Camphire, Troches of Saunders
and Rubarb, Troches de terra Lemnia or earth of Lemons.

For powders, you must have always in readiness powder to stay flux of blood,
and eat away proud-flesh, of which you had receipts before, Aromaticum Rosarum,
Diamagaritum Frigidum, diapenidion, Diarodon Abbatis, Diatragacanthum Frigidum,
Diatrion Santalon, Pulvis Haly; for purging Powders you must have Diacenne,
Pulvis Sanctus or the holy powder.

For Simples, you must have these roots following, Birthwort long and round,
Aron-root, Smallidg, Bistort, China, Turmarick, Dittany, Elecampane, Gentian,
Liquorish, Heirodactils, Orrace, Lillies, Polypodie, Rubarb, and Monks Rubarb,
Madder and Sarsaparilla, Squils, Turmentile, Turbith, Ginger, Jollap, Guiacum,
Liquorish.

For Herbs, Wormwood, Mallows, Mu^sh-mallows, Beers, Bettony, Carduus
Benedictus, Centory, ^notgrass, Fumitory, Broom, St. John's Wort, Hyssop,
Baulin, Mint, Plantine, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Elder-leaves, and buds, Savery,
Senna, Stechas, Coltsfoot, Golden-rod.

For flowers, Rosemary-flowers, Orange, Pomgranat, Camomil, Marigold, Bean,
Broom, Cowslip, Mellilot, Baume, white, black, and red Poppies, Roses, white,
damask, and red, Elder, Violet, Saffron.

For Fruits; Winter-Cherries, Almonds bitter and sweet, Barberries, Figs,
Cassia fistularis, Chestnuts, Quinces, Dates, Jujubes, Ivy, Juniper and
Bay Berries, Lemons, Oranges, Cytrons, Sebestins, Cubebs, Medlers, Mulberries;
all the Mirabolans, Mirtle-berries, Olives, Nutmegs, Peaches, Apricocks,
Mellons, Damask-pruens, Capers, Cloves and Mace, Cherries black and red, Sloes,
Pears, Damosens, Services, Pine-nuts, Raisins of the Sun and Currants,
Tamerins, Elder-berries, Sebestines.

For Seeds; Annis; Cowcumbers, Cumin, Fenegreek, Lettis, Grumuel, Lupines,
Pursley, French-barley, Linseed, Fennel, Coriander, Carua, Beanmeal,
Barly-meal, wheat flour, wheat-Bran, Mil-dust and White-starch.

For Gums, etc. Aloes, Sugar, Camphire, Balsom, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Arabicum,
Trachanthum; Manna, Mastick, Myrrh, Olibanum, Opium, Pitch, Rosin, Turpentine,
Dragons-Blood, Scammony, Frankincense, Storax, oil of Olives, new and old,
Agarick, Jews-ears, Cantharides or Spanish-flies, Goose, Duks, Geese, Dogs,
Cats, Man's, Fox, Badgers, Bears-grease, Deer and Goats-Suet, Album-Graecum,
Virgins-wax white and black, Hartshorn, Ising-glass, the marrow of an Ox,
Deer, Calf and Lamb, Roman and Virgin-honey, Musk and Mummy, the Hairs of a
Hare, Spermaceti, Alum.

For Metals and Minerals you must have Verdigreese, Alum, Litharg of gold and
silver, Quicksilver, all kinds of Arsenicks, Bolarmanack, Limestones, Vitriol,
white Roman, and green Sinclere, Choke, Redlead, Terra lemnia, Brimstone, and
flower of Brimstone, Troches of red-Lead praecipitat.

For Instruments, let these be allways in readiness, Crows-bills, Catch-bullets
strait and crooked, and the Terra bellum, a dismembring-knife, and sharp
dismembring-saw, Cauterizing-Iron, head-saw, and Trafine, Speculum-Oris, and
Speculum forceps, and a punch for Teeth, small wax-candles, syringes Catheter,
cupping-glasses, glister-pot, dyet-pot, mortar and pestle, spatulas, spl nters,
spunges, juncks, clouts, rollers, thread and needle, tape, to^ weights and
scales, serces and strainers, and blood-poringers.

FINIS.

