THE BIRTH-PRIVILEDGE: OR, Covenant-Holinesse of Believers and their Issue in
the time of the Gospel. TOGETHER With the Right of Infants to Baptism. By
Thomas Blake Mr of Arts.

PSALM. 127.3. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord.

ISAIAH 49.22. Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms: and thy
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

ACTS 11.17. Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us,
who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ: what was I that I could withstand God?

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Tho. Underhill at the Sign of the Bible in great
Wood-street. 1644.

To his dearly affected and beloved the Bailiffes and Burgesses of the ancient
Borrough of Tamworth in the Counties of Stafford and Warwick together with all
the Inhabitants of the said Parish.
LOud and piercing are the cries and groans under the burden of those
pressures which the hand of God has brought upon his people: The yoke of their
transgression is bound by his hand, they are wreathed, and come upon their
neck: These need not to be presented to your eyes or ears. The frequent
changes which you have seen, and visits of men skillful to destroy, have given
you abundant and woeful experience: yet I account it among one of Gods mighty
works that your sorrows, by his overruling providence, are so stinted, that
the rage of men has not brought them to a greater height: While you have
tasted of Justice, you are not shut out from mercy and compassion: when I might
not speak to you, I have held it my duty to speak for you: In the midst of
all, Ier. 18.20.
this must be our rest, That the Lord of hosts is with us, Psalm. 46.11.
the God of Jacob is our refuge. Having a Covenant of Grace to plead, we may
say as Israel of old, See we beseech thee, we are all thy people. Isai. 64.9.
And as posterity is not the least of our care, to seek a right way, Ezra 8.21.
as for our selves, so for our little ones, that a generation to come, Psalm.
102.18.
a people that shall be created may praise the Lord: So it is of the greatest
of our comforts, that posterity, our little ones, and those that shall be
born, are bound up of God in the same promise, And that, in one and the same
plea, we may seek to the Throne of Grace, for more then one age at once. When
God had spoke to David of his house for a great while to come, revealing it to
him, that he would build him an house; 2 Samuel 7.19, 27.
Therefore has thy servant (says he) found in his heart to pray this prayer
to thee. The promise was the ground, on which his prayer was bottomed. Take off
the promise of God to your houses for time to come, and the foundation of your
prayers for posterity is shaken. This was the endeavor of some among you, who
are of those that lie in wait to deceive, scattering in the dark such doctrines
that will not bear the light; which occasioned these present meditations,
which you once heard delivered in your ears, and now are presented with some
advantage (for more full consideration) to your eyes: I had encouragements to
make them public, especially by the fruit, with which (through Gods mercy) I
have understood, they were crowned in a way, that I least expected, and being
of right your due, as a free will offering then tendered I could seek no other,
nor greater Patron. I am more ambitious of your happiness, then the favor of
those that are placed highest. I have served you for Christ a double
apprentiship of years almost complete; which time has seemed to some to have
added more then a third to the years of the days of my pilgrimage; This is to
me the strongest engagement of affections, and shall so remain. If there have
been but one new born, or so much as a cubite added to the stature of any
toward the measure of the fullness of Christ, I have sufficient; And having
not another Legacy, I must commend to you, or rather you unto the Word of Gods
Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified; still praying that the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting testament, make you perfect in all good
works, to do his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

And remaining yours in all bowels of affection, Thomas Blake.

TO THE Christian impartial Reader.
OUR Respect to Infants in our tender of them to Christ has been challenged as
over-large: The first that appeared on that part to deny their access were
his own Disciples: The first that stood up for vindication of their right was
Christ himself: An error then suppressed, as soon as conceived, I would we
could make like speed with such heterogeneall fancies, that they might prove
such untimely births. Reforming-times have ever been found this way unhappily
fruitful; In which Satan acts the first part, endeavoring evil in an equal
measure to that good which he suspects is coming to a Nation. The pride of man
follows close after: Every one thinks he must be doing, and bring one stone
at least to the work, which if it be not polished in some new way the workman
is at loss of all his honor; And the lower he is in place and seems in
parts, the more is his renown heightened in so great achievements. This makes
way for an argument of an immediate call, and some what like at least to divine
Enthusiasmes: Amos 7.14, 15.
which not a few now do challenge; who being demanded by what authority they
enter upon the work of the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, they straight hold
forth the Apostles for their Presidents, but the signs of such Apostles we
want in them. When Paul had not a calling from man, Gal. 1.1.
he could produce it from Jesus Christ, and when he received it not from men,
nor was taught it, he could instance in the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Gal.
1.18.
Which way soever it comes to pass, the work is much retarded, and the way of
truth ill spoken off. 2 Pet. 2.2.
But there is one rule to which we must appeal: The Law and the Testimony.
Isa. 8.20.
This trial those of immediate and Divine Call did not decline, Acts 17.11.
yea Christ himself did desire. Ioh. 5.39. 2 Pet. 1.19.
And Peter when he had a voice from heaven to give in, yet he esteemed a word
of Prophecy as more sure for his people. And when we give this honor of
Covenant-holinesse and Covenant-seals to Infants, there is all reason that we
give the world an account of our practice, especially suffering that Affront,
which those in the Gospel met with in their tender of Infants. Here is somewhat
produced to that end, and left to thy Judicious censure. The Author has
spared all invective language, and entreats like dealing from any that differs
in opinion. Some will complain of a naked Margin, to which much might be said,
The Author was with books, when it was compiled for the Pulpit, but taken from
them when it was fitted for the Press. So that use of Marginall References
must have put him upon the borrowed copies of others, and a new pains for
quotation of Chapter and Page. Besides the quotations desired must either have
been friends, and so their Evidence would be challenged; or else Adversaries,
which perhaps might provoke some personal offenses and distaste, which the
Author studiously professes to avoid. We all must stand or fall to our
Master, Romans 14 4.
and this dispute must stand or fall according to his sentence which is the
Voice of Scriptures. John 12.48.
If this put no end to the difference, the dispute will be everlasting.
Witnesses from the dead are in vain mustered, Luke 16.31. Ephesians. 3.20.
when Moses and the Prophets, Prophets and Apostles cannot be heard. If by this
candle from thence lighted thou see any thing, to make more clear this title,
to thy self and posterity, let God have the praise, and the Author thy
prayers.

THE BIRTH-PRIVILEDGE.
GAL. 2.15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.


THis Chapter contains a twofold Narration of the Apostle, The Introduction.
1. Of his journey to Jerusalem, with the several occurrents which happened
there: brought in by him for the vindication of his Apostleship, from the first
to the eleventh verse. 2. Of his dealing with Peter at Antioch, which Narration
some say is continued to the end of the Chapter, others that it is broke off at
the seventeenth verse, and in the verses that follow the Apostle does not
relate what he said to Peter, but directs his words to the Galathians to whom
he writes, which difference I intend not now to examine. My text is within this
last Narration or report of the Apostle.

In which observe, 1. The occasion given by Peter: Before that certain came
from James he did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come he withdrew,
Verse 12.
and separated himself. 2. The Issue which followed upon this carriage of his,
Verse 13.
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation. 3. The Arguments brought for
co^viction of Peter of this error, which are two,


First, Verse 14.
in the fourteenth verse, If thou, being a Jew, live after the manner of the
Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as
do the Jews? Thus the Argument runs, It is unreasonable to draw others into a
practice, that thou thy self purposely forbearest: But thou thy self keep
not the Jewish Rites and Ordinances; And therefore it is an unreasonable, and a
blameworthy practice, by thy example to compel other-to their observation:
yea, thou being a Jew take thy self to have freedom, unreasonably then do
thou draw on others, who were never under any such obligation.

The second Argument is in the fifteenth and sixteenth Verses, Verses 15, 16.
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, Knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the says of Jesus Christ,
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith
of Christ, and not by the works of the Law: for by the works of the Law shall
no flesh be justified: which is thus enforced: In that way wherein we who are
Jews, with all our birth-priviledges, cannot attain to righteousness; we may
not teach the Gentiles to attain to it: But we who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, cannot this way attain to righteousness: We know that
a man is justified by faith, we are compelled to quit the Law, and to cleave to
faith without works for justification.

The words of the text contain, First, Division.
the Privilege of Peter, Paul, Barnabas, with the rest of the Jews. Secondly,
The Character of the Gentiles, in opposition to the Jews.
As to the full purpose, for which the words are brought by the Apostle, they
have (for the sense of them) their dependence on the words that follow; but so
far as they contain the privilege of the Jews, in opposition to, and above
the Gentiles, so far they are full of themselves, showing first positively,
what himself and Peter were: Jews by nature: Secondly, Negatively, what they
were not; sinners of the Gentiles.

For some explication: Explication.
Nature is here taken, not in the proper, but vulgar acceptance, for birth or
descent from Ancestors: As usually, in our common phrase of speech, we say men
are naturally Dutch, French, Spanish, Irish, when they are such born and bred,
this Scripture therefore Camero cites for one, in which the Apostle speaks
after the vulgar manner: we have a Scripture parallel with this Romans 11.24.
where Nature, and natural is only by birth and offspring: Peter, Paul,
Barnabas were all naturally Jews, born of Jewish parents and bred up in the
way and Religion of the Jews: such only Christ chose for Apostles, being
himself a Minister of the Circumcision: Romans 15.8. Act. 22.3. Phil. 3.5. Act.
4.36. Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. Romans 3.1. Psalm. 147.20.
Peter therefore being one of the twelve, must necessarily be such, Paul was
such, as we know from his own mouth, a Jew, and of the tribe of Benjamin,
Barnabas was such of the tribe of Levi. And being such, they enjoyed a
privilege which the Gentiles wanted, they were by birth and offspring of a
Nation that is holy: No Nation was so great as they who had God so nigh unto
them, who had Statutes and Judgments so righteous. The Jew had every way
Prerogatives and advantages, but chiefly the Oracles of Gods God had not dealt
so with every Nation: when other Nations were without God, they had God nigh
unto them, when others were unclean, they were holy: This great privilege of
birth Gentiles wanted, and so were by offspring sinners, as birth renders all
so they remain, unholy and unclean among the unholy and unclean without any
such title to the Covenant of God that thereby they might obtain any other
denomination, they are dogs while the people in Covenant are children. And by
this means the seeming opposition which is between this text and that of the
Apostle Ephesians. 2.3. is easily reconciled; Here the Apostle makes an opposition
in nature between Jews and Gentiles; Jews by nature had a privilege above
Gentiles; there he makes Jew and Gentile in nature equal: We (says he) were
by nature children of wrath as well as others, as well as heathens that have no
birth-priviledge; Nature in that text is not the same as Nature in this: Nature
there is taken for the qualification of nature, which is equally defiled in
Jews as Gentiles, which is there evidenced in the conversation of the Jews
being (before conversion by grace) the very same with the Gentiles: Among whom
also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh,
Ephesians. 2.3.
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others. Nature here is taken for a birth-priviledge,
and so the Jews (though in themselves sinners) are reputed an holy people, a
people by Covenant holy to the Lord: Nature simply considered is stained, and
renders Jews and Gentiles equally sinners and obnoxious to Gods wrath, of
which Justification by faith is an acknowledgement as the Apostle here shows,
verse. 17. But birth of Jewish ancestors, of the stock of Israel, puts them
into a select condition, into the number of a people holy to the Lord; Neither
is this any contradiction; Common things dedicated for holy service and use are
holy, A people by nature sinners, dedicated to the Lord, are for holy service
and use, for the service of the Lord, when others are for service of Idols;
Therefore Jerusalem, a City none of the holiest for any transcendent manners of
the Inhabitants thereof, is yet called by the Evangelist the Holy city, Mat.
4.5.
by reason of the temple and worship there that were holy, and from hence this
observation follows;

A people that enjoy Gods Ordinances convey to their Issue a privilege to be
reputed of a society that is holy, to be numbered amongst, not unclean,
Observation.
but holy persons.

For proof, see the Covenant of God made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to
thy seed after thee. God is one party in this Covenant, Abraham and his
posterity make the other; these in their succeeding generations are the people
of God, and so by nature (that is birth privilege) holy. And the Apostle
speaking of the Israelites in his time, says, To them pertains the adoption,
and the glory, Romans 9.4.
and the Covenants, the giving of the Law, and the service, and the promises.
They were a people in Covenant, having the holy oracles of God they were the
servants of the great God, and therefore the glory above others was theirs.
Hence is it that the Name of God is called upon them age after age, Ier. 14.9.
Isa. 63.19.
and not upon any others that join not themselves to them. The land of their
habitation where they dwelt, and enjoyed this peculiar privilege is ordinarily
styled the holy land, Isa 8.8. Isa. 19.18. Deuteronomy 14.1, 2. Isa 64.18. Romans 11.16,
17.
being the land of Immanuel. And the language which they there spoke the holy
language being a mark to discern the people of God: The distinguishing and
discriminating Epithet given to them was still holy: Even all of this root
who were branches of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, all of this lump whereof Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob were the first fruits, they peculiarly had this honor to receive
in their flesh the sign and seal of this Covenant, and that in infancy,
almost as soon as borne, being eight days old, which was their distinction
from all others: Genesis 17.13.
Jew and Circumcision, Jew and the people of God were still the same.

To add some more strength to this observation, Enlargements.
take notice of these enlargements.

1. loose life in a parent, who by birth privilege is of the people of God,
does not divest his issue of this privilege, to be of the people of God, but
they are, with a non obstante, (notwithstanding any such vicious ways of the
parent) to be enrolled in this number: For proof of this, look upon that act
of Joshua: when the people were got out of the wilderness and were brought
into the land of Canaan; Josh. 5.6, 7.
The children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the
people, that were men of War, which came out of Egypt, were consumed,
because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: And the children which he raised
up in their stead, them Joshuah circumcised, for they were uncircumcised, they
had not circumcised them in the way: you see what the fathers were, yet the
children Ioshuah ordered to be circumcised: concerning their conversation, the
parents were enemies, but as touching the election, the choice made of God, the
Issue is to be numbered among the beloved: Who had a worse father then Josiah,
yet where was there a better son, a circumcised man, 2 Chro. 34.3.
who in youth began to seek the God of his father David?

2. Misbeliefe in a parent, divests not the Issue of this birth-priviledge,
though the father err in the faith yet the child is not to be shut out of the
number of believers: We have, in this particular, our Apostle for a president:
Had misbeliefe in the parent, denuded the child of this privilege, St Paul,
had not been a Jew by nature, but an heretic or sectary by nature, being
before conversion a Pharisee, Acts 23.6. Acts 20.5. Mat. 16.6, 11.
and the son of a Pharisee: Scribe was a name of office, but Pharisee the
name of a sect: and therefore Christ warnes to beware of the leaven, that is,
of the doctrine of the Pharisees, as of the Sadduces; such was Paul's parentage,
and yet by descent and offspring he is of the people of the Jews.

3. Aposlasie from the faith in an immediate parent, who himself by descent
was of the people of God, does not debar the Issue of this privilege. Ahaz
was such, 2 Chro. 28.2, 3, 4.
yet his posterity were of the Jews, and not sinners of the Gentiles. Thou
have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have borne unto me, Eze.
16.28, 21.
and these have thou sacrificed unto them. Is this of thy whoredoms a small
matter, that thou have slain my children, and delivered them, to cause them to
pass through the fire for them? These men of spiritual whoredom, worshippers
of the Idol Moloch, bring forth children to God, they make themselves, sinners
of the Gentiles, by their going a whoring from God, and yet their children are
by nature Jews, their children God does own, and calls his children. While
the parents live within the pale of the Church, that the seed may enjoy saving
Ordinances, they are to be so accounted.

4. Illegitimation of birth, adulterous copulation in the parents, David had
never in that manner sought in fasting and prayer his child's life, had he
believed that he must not have been of the seed of the Jews, but the
uncircumcised heathen. Genesis 38.29.
Pharez was of such a birth, yet who bare a greater name and glory in Israel
then he? and his family? even where the illegitimation of his birth is noted,
there the glory of his Race is magnified, which is yet further honored, Ruth.
4.18.
in that Christ, according to the flesh, was made of his seed, That seed of
Abraham per Eminentiam was out of his loins. Iephtah, was indeed driven out by
his brethren, but not because that he was not of the seed of the Jews and
people of God, Judge. 11.2.
but because they would not have him to share of the inheritance among them.

1. The maine ground of this, is the great Charter of Heaven, personal
privilege, as to keep his great Seal, to be Lord Treasurer, this privilege
dies with him, his posterity has nothing to do with the Seal or Exchequer,
unless the Prince finding them qualified, makes a second choice of them, which
does not often happen. But in case the privilege be perpetual and successive,
and not terminated in the person, but the words of the grant rune to them and
their heirs, then the privilege remains to posterity. Noblemen with us, have
their honors, not for themselves only, but their Issue; and some men have
Offices, which they call Offices of inheritance: And all English subjects, have
diverse Immunities and freedoms. Now the great Charter of Heaven, Genesis 17.7.
Acts 2.38.
runs in the largest words, to them and their seed after them, in all
generations.

2. This is of the nature of those things, Religion which is of God, we have
here found it, and all other Religions do lay claim to it.

There are those things indeed, which are personally inherent in men, and
proper to them, so that they cannot convey them to their issue, there is no
deriving of them to others by succession, as 1. Individual accidents of the
body, wounds, scarres or singular comeliness of feature, these are so in the
parent, that they are not conveyed to their children. 2. Habits or proper
gifts, whether acquired by pains, or infused. The son of a learned man
inherits not his fathers gifts. The son of an Artificer is no such Artist.
The son of a Prophet has not by virtue of birth the gift of pophecy, nor is
the son of a regenerate man, endowed with saving grace for that reason.


There are on the contrary, those things that pass from parent to child, which
the parent by nature or special privilege, has power to convey, as 1. The
essential or integrall parts of a species, with the natural properties, that
do accompany it, so one bruit beast brings forth another, one bird brings
forth another, and man brings forth one of mankind. 2. The privileges or
burdens, which in Family or Nation are hereditary, they are conveyed from
parents to posterity, from Ancestors to their Issue: As is the father, so is
the child, as respecting these particulars: The child of a Freeman with St
Paul is free borne: Acts 22.28.
The child of a Noble man is noble; The child of a bondman (where servants
were wholly their Masters to dispose) is a bondman likewise. Exodus 21.4.
So the child, of a Turk is a Turk; The child of a Pagan is a Pagan; The
child of a Jew is a Jew; The child of a Christian is a Christian: As by virtue
of the grand Charter of Heaven among the people of God, this privilege does
descend: So it is of the nature of those things that are descendable. 3. Jew or
Christian would not long hold in any family, among any people, if this truth
(that there is a generation, according to the flesh, which have this privilege
to be accounted of the people of God) may not be yielded, but as it is in
trades, the father is of one, the son of another, so we should see it in
religions: But God provideth for a continuance in succession, from age to age,
from generation to generation; he keeps them still within Covenant, though many
do degenerate.


But some say, Exception.
all this is blown away at one breath: That the Jews had this privilege
cannot be denied. But this was a privilege peculiar to the seed of Abraham's
flesh, and not to the seed of his says: Believing Jews had this
birthright-priviledge, Believing Christians have not, they must make profession
of their faith before they be accounted among them that be holy.

I answer, Satisfaction, 1. In the Negative, the Charter not reverst.
Such a grant God did once vouchsafe by free Charter to his people: How can it
be made appear that ever it was reverst, or any such limit put unto it? The
Church of God has held it in Fee by virtue of this grant from Abraham to this
very hour, and there is no word of God to challenge them for usurpation; They
that will out us of so long possession, must make their plea punctual for our
eviction.

Secondly, Heb. 8.6.
Christians can produce new Covenant-advancing Scriptures, that Christ's coming
put them into a better and more comfortable condition then were believers in
former ages: I would feign have them to produce any one new Covenant-depressing
Scripture, to show that we in any case are in a worse or more uncomfortable
condition then our fathers.

If it be said that though this Birth-priviledge be taken away, Object.
yet we are not in a worse condition having it in other more desirable things
enlarged.

Let these then show when, Answ.
and where this was taken away, and what was given in lieu and recompense of
this want, and greatest discomfort that can come to a parent, as a parent, to
have his Issue expunged out of the number of Gods people who are holy: Let them
produce those Scriptures, which so difference the old and new Covenant made
with believers, that the one should be perpetual, the other personal; That
the Covenant with the Jew shall transcend the Covenant with Christians, as an
Inheritance for ever exceeds a Grant for term of life: Let them give us an
hint of any Reason why this privilege should belong to the hears of Abraham's
body, and not to the heirs of his faith. That reason held forth by some, that
Christ should come out of his loins is of no force, it excludes all the tribes
out of that privilege but Judah, when every tribe of Israel in this were
equal with Judah, every family of Judah's tribe but David's; And most of all,
Genesis 17.12, 13
it would have excluded the seed of the Proselites, that according to the flesh
were strangers to Israel, when yet in this privilege they were equal. Exo.
12.48, 49 2. In the Affirmative. The privilege continued. Six Arguments.


But not to rest in Negatives, and Generals, (though the first grant being
presupposed, this might abundantly satisfy) but to come to some Positive
proofs, particularly evincing this privilege of Christians.

1. The Apostle in time of the new Testament, when the Spirit was actually
given, propounds this Covenant in as full a latitude, and ample extent, as ever
it was made to Abraham, or belonged to the Jews, yea in the like words, as
under the old Covenant it was delivered: Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, Act. 2.38, 39.
and to your children, and to all that are asarre off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. I do not now dispute the end, why this Covenant is there
urged, it is enough for the present purpose, that such a Covenant yet remains,
and so concludes the promise still to stand in its ancient latitude and extent.
Had God in these last days put this limit to it, then the Apostle (now the
prophecy of the last days was fulfilled) would not have put this latitude upon
it.

2. The Believers of the Gentiles succeed the Jews in the Covenant, Jews were
broken off that Gentiles might be graffed in; Romans 11.16, 17.
and Jews being broken off Gentiles were graffed in for them: And beside
Scripture-silence of any abridgement of privilege to the successor enjoyed by
the predecessor, which is a good ground of claim to the same, we have further
Evidence in the same place, that it is divolved upon Gentiles in as large a way
as ever it was enjoyed by Jews: We are now branches of that root by virtue of
this insition; and if the root be holy the branches are holy, is the Apostles
argument, and if the first fruits be holy, the lump is holy.

Will it be said, that this proposition is brought by the Apostle, Object.
to prove a remaining holiness in the people of the Jews, that they are not
so cast off but that they shall be again received, but intends no proof of
Holiness in succession to the Gentiles.

To this I answer, first, Answ. 1.
That a proposition universally true may be applied to all particulars; This
position is such, and being by the Apostle confessedly applied to the Jews, is
of equal truth being applied to the Gentiles.

Secondly, I say, if the holiness of the Root ( Abraham, Isaac, Answ. 2.
and Jacob receiving the promises) be an argument of weight to prove that the
whole body of the people of the Jews (were it not for their present actual
unbelief) were all holy, with a federall holiness, and that this their
unbelief shall yet be done away that they may be again (as before) holiness
to the Lord; Then it much more proves that the Gentiles remaining in the Root,
and continuing in the faith are universally Root and branch holy.

But this with the Apostle is an argument of weight, as plainly appears in the
Chapter: See verse. 28. and 29. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for
your sakes: but as touching the election they are beloved for the fathers
sakes. They were enemies to the Gospel for the Gentiles sake, that they might
be received, but beloved for their sakes out of whose loins they issued, and
that they shall therefore be again received is there also demonstrated, seeing
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

Will it be further said, Object.
that the Branches, actually by faith engraffed, are holy, but it does not
follow that these, as a Root, transmit any such holiness to their Issue.

To this I answer, Ancestors are the Root of posterity, being made an holy
branch; in reference to their issue they now become an holy Root: Iesse was a
branch of Abraham's stock, Isai. 11.1.
yet he was the Root of David and of Christ: A subordinate Magistrate is a
subject, in reference to his superior, yet a man of authority and command in
respect of his inferiors: Each man is his fathers child, but his child's
father: So it is here, a branch of those that went before, is the root of those
that follow after.

Secondly, personal holiness, but with an holiness derivative and of
succession, the personal holiness mentioned in the objection, and maintained
by the adversaries of this Doctrine, is qualitative and inherent, derived from
no other Root then Christ; this here, is from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
receiving the promises: Either no holiness at all comes this way to Believers,
as from Abraham's stock, or else it is such as Abraham by virtue of the Covenant
does communicate to posterity.

3. Grand Birth-priviledge, by the Jews enjoyed, is to be an holy Nation;
Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Isai. 63.18.^ 1 Pet. 2.9.
to have the whole body of their people, as distinguished from others,
accounted holy to the Lord: This was peculiarly their honor from age to age,
from generation to generation; But this honor to be a chosen generation, an
holy Nation, a people peculiar (Phrases as high as ever were given the Jews)
is given to believing Christians: Christians therefore in this Birth-priviledge
equal the Nation of the Jews.

Neither will this be avoided, Object.
by affirming that the text in Peter, is meant of the Church invisible, the
living and lively members of Christ, who are all holy by an inherent
qualitative holiness of sanctification; So that here is not any equalizing of
the body of Christians with the Nation of the Jews, but only an allusion to
the titles, given the Jews to advance the Excellency of regenerate
Christians, called according to Gods purpose.

The contrary to this in the text is clear: Answ.
First, by looking back to the words that there precede; It is meant of all
those who do not professedly, with the unbeleeving Jews, reject Christ Jesus,
which will yet more fully appear by comparing the words of St Paul, Romans 9.32,
33. But all that do not professedly reject Christ Jesus, are not men called
and qualified as before, Simon Magus had enough to make him one of this number:
Secondly, by looking forward, to that which follows in the Character which the
Apostle (before he ends his description) adds: Hos. 2.23.
Which in times past were not a people, but now are the people of God; A speech
taken from the Prophet, to set out the case of the Gentiles, as it is also by
St Paul interpreted, Romans 9.26. But the Gentiles, thus called, and of no people
made a people, have all a Covenant-holinesse, and not always holiness
inherent. The Gentiles are called from not-covenant, into covenant; from
non-federation, into federation; This is that call, and therefore a call into
Covenant: The Call of those who are not a people; to be a people of God; is the
call of Nations into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 10.19. I will move them to
jealousy, Deuteronomy. 32.28. Romans 10.19.
with those that are not a people, I will provoke them to anger, with a foolish
Nation: But this in the text is such a Call, and therefore it is the call of a
people into Covenant.

4. If there yet remain in the bosom of the Church, born after the flesh, so
that the distinction of births as applied to Abraham's seed, still has place
among believing Christians, And that which fully answers to Circumcision of the
flesh remains among Christians likewise, then it must needs follow, that
there is in the Church, that privilege of birth-holinesse still continuing:
The consequence is evident, seeing the birth of the flesh, where this
birth-priviledge is denied, gives no Church-interest or title at all; neither
does Circumcision of the flesh, or that which is parallel with it, evidence any
such Interest or Title: All such are excluded according to this Tenent, who are
of carnal descent only, and can claim no other Interest.

This must needs be of force with them who affirm, that Infants (who formerly
were members by virtue of birth-priviledge) then were deprived and cast out,
when the Jews Church and State was abrogated, by the coming of Christ, and
planting other Churches, far different from that of the Jews in many
respects, That, constituted upon nature (they say) and the natural seed of
Abraham. This, upon grace, and the spiritual seed of Abraham; That, therefore
termed Israel according to the flesh, and circumcision of the flesh; This,
Israel according to the Spirit, and circumcision of the heart: If then there
yet remain, those that are so styled; infants of Christians by their own
argument, are not rejected, and no such difference between Jew and Christian,
between the State of the Church then, and the State of the Church now, is to be
admitted.

But there yet remains in the bosom of the Church of Christians those that
have no other title or interest then by virtue of birth after the flesh: This
distinction of births, which they say is abrogated, is of the same force and
use now, as it was when Abraham was alive, and that which is full parallel with
circumcision of the flesh still remains: The former, namely distinction of
births, we have from St Paul: But as then he that was born after the flesh,
Gal. 4.29.
persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit, even so it is now. How is
there truth in this assertion of the Apostle, that so it is now, if this
distinction of births, be now abrogated and abolished? if there be not in the
Church of Christians those that have the same title, and no other, or more
noble then had Ishmael? of whom the Apostle is there to be understood.

I see the exception that will be taken by some at the phrase [born of the
flesh] which some will interpret not by natural descent, but corruption of
nature. Object.
But this can be the exception but of a few of those who are herein
adversaries, seeing they believe no such corruption of birth in Ishmael, nor
any other; Neither indeed were Abraham's children ever so distinguished, by a
birth in corruption, and a birth in grace, being all borne in corruption. Birth
of the flesh here is the same as kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. and
children of the flesh, Romans 9.8. But there no birth in corruption, but a birth
of nature, and natural descent is only understood: Men of no other then a
carnal title persecuted then, men that are thus, and no otherwise entitled to
the number of the people of God take the same ways now: Both branches of the
distinction are therefore still with Christians.

For the latter, namely that which fully answers to the circumcision of the
flesh we have from St Peter, who speaking of salvation by Baptism puts by way
of parenthesis this distinction, 1 Pet. 3.21.
Not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God: where, putting away the filth of the flesh is the same
with the Circumcision of the flesh, and the answer of a good conscien e toward
Gods, is the same with the circumcision of the heart. This distinction is
therefore ill applied, when that which is outward and of the flesh is only
applied to Jews; and that which is inward, and of the heart only unto
Christians. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ier. 9.26.
The Jews had that which was inward, and of the heart, as well as we; and we
have that which is outward and of the flesh as well as they: Such doctrine will
conclude the whole body of the Jews without exception under condemnation, as
having no holiness inward or spiritual; and all Christians in a like
generality in the state of salvation, as being all inwardly holy and
spiritual: we shall have neither high way rocky nor thorny ground, but only
good ground, good and honest hearts among us, if it be circumcision of the
heart, and Israel according to the Spirit that alone denominates us Christians.

5. the people of God who are relatively and soederally holy, as were Jews; or
else out of the number, and under the second head of unholy and out of
Covenant, as were sinners of the Gentiles; a third cannot be assigned; the
Apostles distribution may not be challenged. If it be under the first head that
they are looked upon, we have what we contend for; If under the second, then the
heavy doom of sinners, Ephesians. 2.12.
Gentiles, Aliens is theirs; they are then without Christ, without hope,
without God in the world, which will be heavy and unwelcome tidings to tender
parents, that they bring not forth children (as the Jews did) to God, but to
the god of this world; that God does not say of them (but Satan may) my
children, leaving them in no better condition, then the seed of the Heathen,
Pagans, Turks, Infidels, as is freely confessed by some. And what condition
that is, we may learn from the Prophets David and Jeremy. Power out thy fury
upon the heathen that know thee not, Ier 10.25. Psalm. 79.6.
and the families that call not upon thy name. The whole of their flock, for
ought in Scripture appears, have no other portion.

6. birthright privilege of Covenant-holinesse still appertains to the seed
of believers, where either of the parents are believing; The unbeleeving
husband is sanctified in the wife, 1 Co. 7.14.
and the unbeleeving wise is sanctified in the husband, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy. The whole seed therefore is to be accounted in
the number of those that are holy (which in the text is the condition of the
Jews) and not among unclean, which here the Apostle calls, sinners of the
Gentiles. A birth-priviledge of holiness therefore still remains.

Here it is replied that by holiness in this place is meant legitimation,
Object.
by uncleanenesse is understood bastardy: so that the meaning of the Apostle
is, else were your children spurious, of a bastard birth, but now they are
legitimate, as borne in wedlock; The marriage is sanctified in respect of
Issue, not for covenant holiness, so as to put them into the number of an holy
people, but to legitimize them, and to take the infamy of bastardy away from
them.

By way of answer I would make these demands; First, Quaeres.
Whether they will give the like interpretation of this text in hand, which is
every way parallel, we that are by birth legitimate, and not bastards of the
Gentiles; Phrases thus parallel from one pen, will hardly admit interpretations
so different.

Secondly, Whether ever they read in Scripture, unclean and holy, in such a
sense or meaning; that holy should be legitimate, and unclean spurious or
bastardy: In such births uncleanenesse is indeed the parents sin, but I never
read or heard that it was the child's Epithet: Singular opinions put men upon
singular interpretations.

Thirdly, Whether it had been a bastard birth,

But to give more particular satisfaction, as in the negative, that it is not
meant of legitimation; so also in the affirmative that it is to be understood
of a Covenant-holinesse of the children of believers.

For the negative, 1. A result or fruit of faith in the parent, cannot be the
legitimation of the Issue: Answ. 1. Negative, Not legitimation.
faith and legitimation of Issue being of distinct kinds. An unbeleever may
have issue legitimate; and men professing the faith, with Judah, Gilead, David,
may have issue illegitimate. But holiness in the text, is a fruit or result of
faith in the parent; The unbeleeving, whether husband or wife, contributes
nothing to this holiness; all that they do is that (being married to a
believer) they are no impediment: They are sanctified, they do not sanctify,
The sanctifying power, to the producing of the holiness of the Issue, is made
proper to the believing party. The unbeleever is sanctified, so that both
together make an holy root to produce an holy branch.

It will be said that believing is not in the text, the words are, that the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified in the husband, not in the believing wise, nor in the believing
husband, so that the text makes it not any result or fruit of faith.

This weak objection has an easy answer, It is the wife of an unbeleeving
husband, the husband of an unbeleeving wife, when the marriage is between a
believer, and an unbeleever.

Secondly, One parent is not to be preferred before another, as to be alone, in
giving that honor to the issue in which both are equal: But here one parent
is preferred before another, in giving this honor of holiness to the issue:
Therefore it cannot be legitimation of the issue, in which either of both,
whether believing or unbeleeving are equal: A Nobleman marrying a mean woman
the Issue has honor from one, legitimation alike from both; The wise is
honored, but does not honor. So it is here, An infidel marrying a believer
is sanctified, does not sanctify; the issue has this honor of holiness from
the parent of honor, but legitimation (as all confess) equally from either;
something else therefore then legitimation must needs be the meaning.

For the affirmative, 2. In the Affirmative but Covenant-holinesse.
that it is meant of Covenant-holinesse, That interpretation which here
directly answers, that which in all reason was the Quesitum or scruple wherein
the Corinthians in their letter to the Apostle desired resolution, That exactly
answers each branch of the text, and runs full parallel with other places of
Scripture, that must needs be taken for the interpretation. But this
interpretation of Covenant-holinesse is such that answers their scruple,
exactly agrees with each branch of the text, and runs full parallel with other
places of Scripture. This therefore cannot be denied to be the genuine and full
interpretation of the place.

For the first; It was their scruple.
making it their scruple whether they might continue their marriage society
with one out of the Covenant of God, they could not but scruple what should
become of their Issue; whether they were to be accounted as they themselves, of
the number of the people of God, or to be excluded from them with their
unbeleeving parent; especially seeing in Ezraes time, Ezra 10.3. Nehe. 13.24.
those that married strange wives were enjoined to put them away, and such as
were borne of them; and in Nehemiah's time the Issue is branded as of a mixed
and mongrell kind that were so descended: which is also further strengthened by
the Priests answer to the several cases of conscience, by Gods appointment
propounded by Haggai the Prophet, If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his
garment, Hag. 2.12.
and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat,
shall it be holy? And the Priest answered and said; No. The touch of an
unclean thing by a clean, does not sanctify it, as the case is there
resolved: Verse. 13.
Again, If one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these shall it be
unclean? And the Priest answered and said; it shall be unclean. The touch of
a clean thing by an unclean does pollute it, as is there resolved likewise:
This might justly occasion the Corinthians fear, that they and their issue
might be polluted by society with this unclean party, and that the unclean
party or their issue, could not by them be sanctified. And the Apostle
returning answer to both (not only to their continuance in marriage-fellowship,
but also to that which concerns their issue,) evidently manifests that their
scruple was alike in both.

For the second; It answers the text.
that it fully agrees with the circumstances of the text a Here is a couple
joined in marriage, one of them holy, of the people of God; the other unclean,
a sinner of the Gentiles, and a stranger to them; the Issue must take after the
one, and the answer (as concerning the Issue) is fitted to both; To the
unbeleeving negatively, through sanctification in the believing party they are
not unclean; to the believer assirmatively, they are holy.

For the last: that it runs parallel with other places of Scripture, Its
parallel to other Scriptures. 1 Pet. 2.9. Deuteronomy. 54.1, 2. Isai. 68.18. Matthew.
15.16.
this text is an abundant witness: The people of God are still thus honored
for an holy nation, an holy people, a people of holiness: Men out of Covenant
still branded, as unclean, dogs, sinners, and the like appellations: This
Scripture holds therefore firm for proof of the assertion, That Christians
have their Birthright Privilege, that they transmit a Covenant-Holinesse to
their Issue, even to their whole posterity.

Neither is it to purpose to object, Object.
that contradictions here are joined to produce one and the same effect, An
holy and unholy person to bring forth holy Issue: This was the doubt which the
Corinthians objected, Answ.
and the Apostle solves; seeing the unbeleever, whether husband or wife, is
sanctified; so that they jointly make one Root for to bring forth an holy
branch.

And thus it was (though the contrary be objected) in the time of the Law,
Object. Answ.
one parent being within the Covenant, the child was circumcised; And
therefore Paul circumcising Timothy, whose father was a Greek, the reason
given is, that his Mother was a Iewesse: Acts 16.1.
And the Example of putting away of those that were borne of strange wives from
Ezra 10. is strangely by some here objected, seeing the wives themselves were
there put away, and here the Apostle (they know) orders otherwise: If they see
that St Paul's rule accords not in the one, how is there a necessity that it
should accord in the other? Something there was in that Example special and
extraordinary, as there was in Mordecai's not bowing the knee to Haman: whether
it were that now they were anew (as it were) to form their Church, upon their
return from Babylon; and were not willing to admit such a mixture, especially
so many offending, as to make a considerable party: or whether the Nations
with whom they had joined themselves were of those particularly forbidden them,
Deuteronomy. 7. or under any special curse as Amalek was, which some conceive was the
reason that Mordecai refused to give that honor to Haman an Amalekite: Certain
it is that it agrees not with other presidents; we have examples of Marriages
not a few with Heathens, which though it was their sin, yet there is no
sentence of nullitie passed, nor were the wives or Issue rejected: And the
Corinthians case was yet fairer, their Marriage was without sin, seeing they
had not elsewhere to join themselves in marriage, being then both parties
heathens, and one party being converted, the marriage by the Apostles sentence
still holds, and the Issue to be reckoned with the believing parent.

Neither is here that which is proper to regeneration, Object.
given (as some object) to natural generation:

1. It was so with the Jews, as is confessed, Answ.
they had this Birth-priviledge of Covenant-Holinsse, and yet that which was
proper to Regeneration, was not then given to natural generation, either of
both births have from God, and among the people of God their proper right.

2. The Holiness which we here maintain is no fruit of Nature, (so it could
not have been proper to the Jew, but common to the Gentile) but from the
Covenant of free grace, to all in the faith and their seed: Regeneration works
gration qualifications, 1 John 5.4. This birthright only entitles to outward
privileges: Regeneration therefore is not at all here wronged, nor natural
generation over-highly advanced: let those that frame the objection take heed
lest themselves run upon this Rock, denying all corruption of nature, or
birth-sin, they make Regeneration of no use. If all were right in the first
birth there needed not another to follow, as the Apostle speaks of Covenants,
Heb. 8.7.
so I may say of births: If the first had been faultlesse, there should no
place have been sought for the second.

Hence it necessarily follows by way of Consectary, Consectary.
that the infants of Christian parents are debarred of their right, tendered
and admitted unto the Ordinance of Baptism: Of Infants Baptism by necessary
inference.
They are God's, and we must render them to God: Christ has interest in them,
they must therefore be dedicated to him: They are of the number of those that
are holy, and therefore they are to be received and enrolled in the number:
Baptism is a distinguishing note between the people of God, and those who are
strangers from him; They are His, and they must therefore be thus
distinguished: The force of this consequence the adversaries do no less then
acknowledge, forcing the Scriptures which evidently evince this
Covenant-Holinesse, unto strained interpretations, on purpose to avoid it: Upon
this ground infants under the law were circumcised, and upon the same infants
now are to be baptized: so that it is not barely the Analogy between
Circumcision and Baptism, by which we enforce the baptism of infants, but the
grounds of both Circumcision and Baptism: What is objected against one
concludes against both: Col. 1.11, 12.
Circumcision and Baptism are therefore by the Apostle promiscuously taken;
there being the same principal and maine end of both. What can Baptism sign
and seal but the righteousness of faith? This, circumcision did sign and
seal to Abraham and his posterity. Romans 4.11.
Read that which the Apostle observes of Abraham's circumcision, and compare it
with the history of the Eunuchs Baptism, and see where you can find them
differ. Faith was reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness: How was it reckoned
(says the Apostle) in circumcision or in uncircumcision; Romans 4 9, 10, 11
not in circumcision but in uncircum-saith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised. The Eunuch on his journey with Philip, coming to a certain
water says, See here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Act. 8.36,
37, 38.
And Philip said, If thou beleevest with all thine heart thou may. And he
answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And he
commanded the chariot to stand still, and they went down both into the water,
and he baptized him. May we not make the same observation of this Baptism, as
the Apostle does on Abraham's circumcision? He received the sign of Baptism, a
seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had being yet unbaptized; So
that the main end and use is the same in both: All appertaining to this faith
were circumcised, and their seed. All appertaining to this faith are to be
baptized, and their seed. Strengthened by Scriptures.
Hence it is that St Peter on this ground of the Promise made to believers and
their seed, encourages his Converts unto Baptism, Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the holy Ghost, Acts 2.38, 39.
for the promise is made to you and your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord your God shall call. Whence I reason, in the same
latitude as the promise is laid down, the encouragement is also urged, to
receive the sign and seal of it. But the promise is laid down in that
latitude, to comprehend Converts and their seed, Converts therefore and their
seed are to be baptized. Can there be any reason given, why the seed should be
mentioned in the Motive or Encouragement to receive Baptism, Acts 16.15.
if they were to be excluded from Baptism? Accordingly when an householder was
baptized, all the household were baptized, Verse. 33.
He and all his, Acts 16.15. ver. 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. Object.


Will it be said that this promise in this latitude is there tendered only to
the Jews?

To this I reply. First, Answ.
that then Jews receiving Christ (as these now did and were here encouraged)
still enjoy this birth-priviledge, which being yielded to them cannot be denied
to the Gentiles receiving the faith, without a singular schism between Jew and
Gentile. They that murmured that their widows were neglected, Acts 6.1.
would soon have murmured when their seed had been excluded. And secondly, I
affirm that the Gentiles are equally there included with the Jews in the
promise, as concerning the seed, as the Copulative particle (and) fully
evinceth, it couples not one piece only but the whole of the promise.

There is yet an objection that seems to take with more color; Object.
That this promise had reference to the gift of the holy Ghost, promised by
Joel the Prophet, here by the Apostle, ver. 17. etc. mentioned, and the Apostle
here speaking of the promise to his Converts and their children, only makes
good what he had said, that they should receive the holy Ghost, and that by
authoririe of the Prophet. Joel promises that their sons and their daughters
shall prophecy, and this is that promise which is here tendered by the Apostle
to them and their children.

I answer: First, Answ.
the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost in this visible way, cannot be the
promise here by St Peter mentioned, seeing it is enlarged to all that are
afar off, even to as many as the Lord shall call. But all these have not the
holy Ghost in that way extraordinary, nor any promise of it: That is a Baptism
proper to those primitive Saints, Matt. 3.11.
that Baptism with the holy Ghost and with fire, wherewith they were told that
they should be baptized not many days after. Acts 1.5.


Secondly, however the promise be interpreted so as to belong to all that are
believers, and call on the Name of the Lord, as there follows; yet that
promise is on condition of their Baptism. The means are to be used in
reference to the end: Baptism is the means, receiving of the holy Ghost,
(there specified) is the end: And the Apostle confirming them in the promise of
the end, does likewise encourage them to the use of the means, in Baptism to
expect the gift of the Spirit; and so (according to this interpretation) that
place is an encouragement to Baptism; The promise is the fittest encouragement
to the sign and seal of the promise: Baptism is the sign and seal to which
they are here encouraged, and in that latitude, as they had formerly known the
command of Circumcision.

And the Evasion is too weak to say that children here are the same with
sons and daughters mentioned from the Prophet, Object.
and therefore to be meant of none but such that are of growth, and capable of
the gift of prophecy.

The Apostle urges the promise in the way as in the Scriptures it is
delivered, Answ.
which is to men and their posterity, to them and theirs; so God promises to be
a God in Covenant to His, and their seed, which people in Covenant have a
promise also from him of the Spirit, and this the Apostle holds out to draw
them on to this seal of the Covenant, to accept Baptism on the same terms
that Abraham did circumcision.

Secondly, it is without reason to believe that the Apostle should instance in
one piece of the distribution of the Prophet there, and to leave out the rest,
to put in alone sons and daughters, when we have in the text young men, old
men, servants and handmaids.

Thirdly, Children here are mentioned under a promise to the parents, To you
and your children is the promise made, but not so in Joel, nor in the quotation
of the Apostle: That Scripture has only an Enumeration of the several sorts
and conditions of people in any nation, on all which the Spirit is promised,
without any address made to the parents of those sons and daughters, more
then to the Masters of those servants and handmaids: not the sons and
daughters of their flesh, but the sons and daughters of the Nation, a
language usual in our ordinary expressions, speaking of men of any sort or
condition, as your Lawyers, your Merchants, etc. so here your sons, your
daughters, your old men, your young men, etc.

For further confirmation: Christ receives the Church may not refuse; Matthew.
19.4. Matthew. 19.14. Mar. 10.14. Luke 18.16.
The Church consists of those that visibly appear to be Christ's. But Christ
admits children, little children, in their infancy, such that he takes into his
arms, Suffer little children to come to me and forbid them not; who dare be so
rigid when Christ is thus candid?

The Kingdom of Heaven receives them, the Church therefore may not exclude
them: The Church receives those whom glory receives, There were daily added to
the Church such as should be saved: Acts 2.47.
But the Kingdom of Heaven receives little children, Of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Let none say that the Kingdom of Heaven is of such (that is) of those that
are graced with such qualities, Object.
that are humble and meek as little children: That may be elsewhere Christ's
way of instruction, it cannot be here his argumentation.

First, there is no manner of consequence in the argument thus pressed: Let
little ones in infancy come to me, for though not they, yet such as they,
others qualified like them, in some select properties resembling them shall go
to Heaven.

Secondly, Upon the same ground, Sheep, Doves, Vine-branches, might have been
brought to him, for such as resemble them, in like select properties, shall be
received into the kingdom of Heaven: And Christ might have drawn as apt a
similitude from them.

Thirdly, that which the Disciples took to be an impediment of force to hinder
infants, and a just ground of rebuke of those that brought them, is that which
Christ understands in this reproof of the Disciples, and admission of their
infants. But it was their want of growth, their littleness which the Disciples
took to be a just impediment and which occasioned their reproof; So that the
particle (such) has direct reference to the quantity (as I may say) not to the
quality of these infants, to their infant stature, not to their meekeesse or
humility: And so it is referred elsewhere expressly by our Savior himself,
Who so shall receive one such little child; Mat. 18.5.
The word is the same here and there, it respects littleness therefore and not
meekness: The whole text may be thus fitly paraphrased, Trouble not our
Master with such as these (say the Disciples) there is no use of their coming,
they need not his cure, and they are not capable of his instruction; They have
no infirmity to be healed, no capacity to be taught, It is fit for men of abler
parts, not for Infants to make their address to him: Let them come (says our
Savior) and let not their infant-age exclude them, how little soever they are
capeable of the kingdom of Heaven.

Having the substance and thing signified in baptism they may not be denied
the sign: This is the Apostles way of dispute, Acts 10.47. By Argument.
Christ is the thing signified in baptism as in all other Sacraments, Gal.
3.27, etc. And denying them Christ, you either exclude them from salvation with
the Papists, or else exempt them from Original sin with the Pelagians: The
Anabaptists of the present age are well aware that the consequence can be no
other; they well see that all that join in this Tenent, sail between those
rocks, either to affirm, that infants die in their pollution and perish in
their birth-sin; or else to deny this original pollution or any birth-sin at
all; the latter of the two they therefore generally choose; judging it more
fair to deny infants sin, then to affirm their condemnation; joining hands
with Pelagians, an heresy of old and forepast days, rather then with Papists
the present yoke and scourge of Christians: And taking with these, to deny
original sin, they straight fall upon universal grace, freedom of will in
things spiritual: The free election of God they overthrow, leaving it in our
power to make choice of Christ, and not Christ to make choice of us; And so
Popery is no sooner left, but it is again found, they join hands with it as
soon as they have left it: And all such who have not yet waded so deep, but
now begin to set this way, I wish them to weigh with themselves what other way
they can find to make children uncapeable of Baptism; unless they also make
good such original purity that they stand not in need of Christ, or else be
content to yield that they perish in their sin without Christ: withal sadly
taking to heart whether the Genius of this doctrine leads, plunging almost all
that give it entertainment into so many damnable and pernicious errors; such
as themselves upon the first entry abominate: If they think that they can make
it good in this more innocent way, keeping their judgments without taint of
the errors mentioned, they see more then all the Orthodox Churches, whom in
this they have left, and the whole body of those to whom they begin to join
themselves: The Churches whom they have left, will be afraid to own them, and
the Sect to whom in this they are joined will much more abominate and reject
them; The denial of birth-sinne is the readiest way to the denial of birth
holiness; and no other way to be taken, but by prejudging the salvation of
them that dye as soon as borne, that dye before years of ability to make
profession of the faith of Christ Jesus. But as the Apostle pressing the
dangerous and odious consequences that follow upon the denial of the
resurrection of Christ (which was his Medium to assert the Resurrection of the
dead) takes off all with this affirmation that Christ is risen from the dead; 1
Cor. 15.10.
So we pressing the danger of denial Infants part and portion in Christ, (our
Medium to prove their interest in baptism) may take off all with the like
affirmation, That Infants have their portion in Christ. Infancy excludes not
from their right to him and interest in him, so that we need to run neither of
these straits, to exempt them from pollution, or exclude them from salvation:
which easily may be made good: They are accepted and highly honored of God, as
we see in the text recited, and further in our Saviors words, Mat. 18.5, 6.
But it is in the beloved, in Christ, Ephesians. 5.1, 6. Mat. 3.17.
that we are accepted: The voice from Heaven witnesses that in him God is well
pleased: Deny infants Christ, and God is alike pleased with them as with the
brood of Cockatrices, and the seed of Serpents. Much sure is in those words of
our Savior Christ, Who so shall receive one such little child in my name, Mat.
18.5.
receives me: How do we receive Christ in receiving them, if they belong not
to Christ, if they be not members of, if they have no interest in Christ: For
such as say that they would baptize an infant, if any could make it good that
he were in Christ Jesus, they might as well say in the same manner to Christ,
that they would receive that little one or such a little one, in case it could
be made good that they were of his members, and elect ones.

Nor let it be objected; Object.
That Infants then are not to be denied the Lords Supper, but are to be
received to his table, seeing Christ is the thing signified in that Sacrament,
as in Baptism.

The difference (as all may see) is wide: Answ.
In this Sacrament Infants are passive, and so capeable of this honor, to be
taken in; In the other we are active, and Infants for that reason are
incapeable: They are not in capacity to perform so much as that which is
outwardly sacramental: They cannot, according to the Institution take and eat,
much less can they do it in remembrance of Christ: The very phrase
(circumcised, baptized) is enough to difference from eating with bitter herbs,
etc. as at the Passover, from communicating as at the Lords table, Infants are
fit subjects for the one, men of growth are only fit subjects for the other:
One to press on this objection furnishes us with a similitude, Suppose (says
he) a King for some special service wherein the honor of himself and safety
of his kingdom is much concerned, should by Commission ordain or command a
Sheriff upon pain of death, to raise for his service ten thousand men, the
most able in his County; and this Sheriff, finding the said number of children
about six months old, should present them to the King at the very instant of
battle, as though he had thereby performed the Kings command: Would this be
taken for a sufficient performance of his duty?

But suppose that the King should appoint all his freeborn subjects to be
enrolled, and a list taken of their Names, who in time might act in their
places for his honor, and enjoy Immunities as his subjects, might not Infants
then go in the number? So it is here, Baptism is the initiating ordinance,
The subjects of Heaven are here enrolled, their names may therefore be taken as
subjects, though they cannot yet act as soldiers: They are here entitled to
all the Immunities of this kingdom, yet orderly as they shall be of capacity
and fitness to make use of them.

But their want of faith is challenged as an impediment to Baptism: Object.
When the Eunuch desired Baptism, we know the answer that he had: If thou
beleevest with all thine heart thou may: And Calvinists denying actual faith
to be found in Infants, their Adversaries the Lutherans come in with their
argument ad hominem, making against us (say they) though not against the thing
it self: Every Sacrament without faith in him that uses it is a vain
Ceremony; But the Baptism of Infants is a Sacrament without the faith of him
that uses it.

A speech directed to a man of years and without any title to the Covenant
(other then his actual faith did confer upon him) is ill applied to Infants
within Covenant that otherwise have title to it. Answ. 1.


This exception carries equal strength against Infants circumcision: Answ. 2.
There is no more faith in the Infauts of Jews then there is in the Infants of
Christians; And faith is no less necessary in the circumcised then in the
baptized: There was an equal necessity of the ingrediency of faith in every
one in that age, as in this; yea in the ages more ancient then that of
circumcision, as appears by the Apostles argument, Heb. 11.6.

Their capacity to receive the sign, answers their capacity to receive the
thing signified, they are passive in the receiving of Christ and any interest
in him: and so also they are, (and circumcised Infants were) in taking the
sign. And so the Lutheran proposition being understood of any thing wherein we
are active is a truth, but applied to Infants incapable of action in the
Sacrament where they are only passive, it is to be denied.

If Infants have the like gift intitling to, and interesting in the privilege
of baptism with believers, then they withstand God who deny their baptism:
This is the Apostles argument brought for his own defense, Acts 11.17.
which I wish were more seriously considered: And let it not be objected that
the gift there specified is a gift extraordinary, peculiar to those times: It
is enough to make the argument of force, that it is alike in them with that
which now intitles grown believers: Now the want of those gifts extraordinary,
does not disable grown believers: The want of these does not then disable
Infants.

And that they have the like gift, intitling to, and interesting in the
Sacrament of baptism is plain: A Covenant-holinesse unquestionable: Inherent
qualitative holiness hopeful, is a like gift to that which grown believers
are able to produce: But Infants have Covenant-holinesse unquestionable,
inherent qualitative holiness hopeful; A believer by the profession of his
faith is able to make good his title to the outward Covenant, and so can the
believing parent the title of his Infant: A believer can make good such a title
to the inward Covenant, that none can say thou have no part or portion in this
thing: And because it cannot be denied (though absolutely and infallibly it be
not affirmed) it is to be presumed: This a believing parent can make good in
the behalf of his Infant, and this is sufficient, this is a like.

But it will yet be said, Object.
An institution is wanting, we have no precept, we have no president of the
baptizing of Infants: The institution is, Go teach all nations, Mar. 28.19.
baptizing them, etc. We must baptize those whom by teaching we have discipled:
to the word signifies.

I answer, First, That which has been said does conclude that they are within
the verge of an institution, being such that have so full title: I have heard
one of the most learned and reverend that ever I knew or heard of that was of
that way more then once profess with no small solemnity, that if he knew an
Infant to be sanctified as he acknowledged John Baptist was, such a one he
would baptize: And that the particular infants whom Christ was seen for to
bless might have been baptized: Those then that are thus entitled, through
want of an institution are not to be excluded, and how far and fully Infants
of believing parents are entitled we have heard.

2. The place quoted has not in it the Institution of that Sacrament: Baptism
was appointed of God before those words were uttered; He that spoke them was
himself before baptized; Mat 3.16. Ioh 4.6. Mat. 10.5.
They to whom they were spoken had baptized others; It is only an enlargement
of their Commission for the exercise of their Ministry, being before confined
unto one Nation, now it is enlarged to all Nations.

3. The words there comprize infants, they are no more excluded then men of
years, serving to make up a Nation as well as parents: The Infants of Niniveh
did make a considerable party of the City of Niniveh; The Infants of any Nation
make up a part of the Nation; and the Nation where they came was to be
discipled, And that Infants are here comprehended further appears by this
argument.

This argument has strength from that of the Apostle, Act. 3.25 As it was with
the kindred of Abraham in respect of covenant holiness, so it is with all
kindreds of the earth, they jointly make one party in the Covenant. But infants
of Abraham's kindred were in the Covenant, and of the nation in respect of
Covenant-Blessednesse Ergo, etc.
In the same sense and latitude as Nation was taken in respect of the Covenant
of God, when the Covenant, and Covenant-initiating-Sacrament was restrained to
that one only Nation, where their Commission was first limited: In the same
sense it is to be taken (unless the text express the contrary) now the
Commission is enlarged.

This cannot be denied of any that will have the Apostles to be able to know
Christ's meaning by his words in this enlarged Commission.

But Nation, then as is confessed did comprehend all in the Nation in respect
of the Covenant, and nothing is expressed in the text to the contrary,
therefore it is to be taken in that latitude, to comprehend Infants.

Object.
Will it be said that an exception of Infants is implied, in that all of the
Nation must be discipled before they be baptized, but Infants are not capable
of being discipled, and so they are made incapable of Baptism.

I answer, 1. Here is rather employed that they are of capacity to be
Disciples, Answ. 1.
in that Christ sends to disciple Nations, and they serve to make up the nation.

2. It is the way of the Scripture, Answ. 2.
speaking of an universality of a people in a land, expressly to except
infants, in case they be to be excepted: As we see in the judgment that befell
Israel in the wilderness to the cutting off of those that came out of the land
of Egypt. Numb. 14.31.
And in the Covenant entered by the body of the Nation of all degrees and sexes
at their return from Babylon, Nehem. 10.28.
and an exception could be no where more useful and necessary then here, to
let us know that it is otherwise with Gentiles in this particular then it was
with the Jews, that the Nations where their Commission is thus enlarged were
herein differenced from the Nation to which their Ministry was first limited.

3. Let that text of the Prophet be well weighed, where speaking by the spirit
of prophecy of the rejection of the Jews, and the glorious call of the
Gentiles in their stead, in that ample way as it is there set out has these
words, Behold, I will lift up mine band to the Gentiles, Isai. 49.22.
and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their
arms: and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. If there were
but such an hint as that by way of prophesy to have left them behind, we should
from some have heard of it with a noise.

4. In the Lord Christ's Dialect, who is best able to express his own meaning,
they are Disciples, To belong to Christ is to be a Disciple of Christ, This is
plain from our Saviors own mouth, comparing his words recorded in Matthew
and Mark, Matthew. 10.42 Mar. 9.41.
To give a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, it is in the
one; To give a cup of water to drink in my Name, because ye belong to me, it is
in the other: To belong to Christ, to be a Disciple of Christ, and to bear the
Name of Christ is one and the same thing with our Savior. Now that Infants are
of the number of those who as Disciples in Christ's account do belong unto him,
and bear his Name, is yet further plain by another text of St Matthew, where
Christ setting a little child in the midst of his hearers says, Who so
shall receive one such little child in my Name, Matthew. 18.5.
receives me. By all which it appears, that which is done to Infants is done
to Disciples, has a glorious reward as done to Disciples; Infants therefore are
Disciples of Christ, are of those that do belong unto him, and bear his Name:
who then is not afraid to refuse them who will receive Christ? who will not
baptize them that is willing to baptize Disciples in the Name of Christ?

For Examples, which they say we want of the Baptism of Infants:

1. I answer, first, we walk by Rule rather then President, the Rule has
been examined.

2. Examples are often very rare, where the rule is unquestionable, and
undeniable, we have no Example of any trial of the suspect wise by the water
of jealousy; For women's right to the Lords Supper we have no particular
institution; no particular President more then for this of Infants Baptism.

3. We have Examples not to be contemned of the Baptism of whole households,
and whether Infants were there or no, as it is not certain (though probable)
so it is not material: The President is an Household, he that follows the
President must baptize households. It appears not that any wife was there, yet
he that follows the President in baptizing of households, must baptize wives,
and so (I may say) servants, if they be of the household.

Objections are yet brought from humane authority, Object.
which I have reserved to the last, as accounting them the least: And if this
dispute might this way be determined, that plurality of votes might carry it:
the adversaries know how it would fare with them in it.

Origin is vouched calling it a ceremony or tradition of the Church: Hom. 8.
in Levit. in Epist. ad Romans lib. 5. Gregory also in decret. distinct. de conse

One of those traditions which the Apostle charged the Thessalonians to keep,
Answ.
2 Thessalonians. 2.15. which I speak not by guess, but we have it in the same Epistle
( cap. 6.) from his own mouth, The Church (says he) received Baptism of
Infants from the Apostles: The greatest points of Faith (as is well known) are
ordinarily called by the name of traditions by the Ancients. Traditions being
only such things that are delivered from one to another, they are as well
written as unwritten; And we have cause willingly to embrace this testimony;
Origin lived 226. years after Christ, in the beginning of the third Century,
Alsted. Chronol.
he calls it a tradition of the Church, it was therefore delivered over to the
Church in his time, and of ancient use before him.

Austin calls it a custom of the Church: de Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap.
23. And so do I also call it, Answ.
and the observing of the first day of the week, the imposition of hands on
Church Officers, the giving of the Lords Supper to men of growth is a custom
of the Church likewise.

Erasmus says they are not to be condemned that doubt whether the Baptism of
Infants were ordained by the Apostles: Lib. 4. de ratione Concio.

His words evidently imply that it was their error, Answ.
and it seems his thoughts were other of those who openly did oppose it, and
refuse it.

Papists openly profess that the Baptism of Infants is grounded upon
tradition, and not upon Scripture: for which Eckius and Bellarmine are brought
in.

This they do not really and cordially but for their own advantage, Answ.
to make good unwritten traditions against Protestant adversaries; They know
that we maintain Baptism of Infants, and disclaim these traditions, and if
Baptism of infants do appear to be one, then they have us building what we
have destroyed. Bellar. indeed (in his book de Verbo Dei) standing for
unwritten traditions as a part of the Word of God will have Baptism of infants
to be one, but when he disputes for Baptism of Infants against Anabaptists,
then he can heap up texts of Scripture, de sacra Baptis. cap. 8. So also cap.
9. in the entrance of it, Satis aperte colligitur ex Scripturis, the Baptism
of Infants is evidently enough gathered from Scriptures: The like fetch of his
I could show in other particulars.

It appears to be forced on the people by authority of Councels, out of the
Council of Milevitanum, this Canon is urged, It is also our will that those
that will not that children be baptized that are newborn from their mothers
womb, be excommunicate.

So in the Nicene Council it was decreed that we should believe that there is
one God Maker of all things visible and invisible; Answ.
The greatest points of faith (we know) under Anathema's are decreed in
Councels. This Council was in the fifth Century, 200 years after Origin, who
styles Baptism of Infants (as we have heard) a tradition of the Church in his
days. And Austin who was not only present, but (as is said) President of that
Council, returning answer to those that desire divine authority for the
Baptism of Infants, for satisfaction first produces that rule, Quod universa
tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime creditur. That which the whole
Church holds, and was not ordained by any Councels, but has ever been held,
that is rightly believed to be by Apostolical authority. This he takes to be
sufficient, yet for more full satisfaction, he goes on to dispute for it from
the Scriptures, whence we see what himself means by the custom of the
Church; And by what authority that Council did appoint the Baptism of
Infants. Augustinus de Bapt. contra Donatist. lib. 40. cap. 24. ad initium.

By all this that has been said it more fully appears what regard is to be
given to that which is cited out of Luther and Cassander, concerning the time
that Baptism of Infants was brought into the Church: Luther (as it is said)
affirms that it came into the Church a thousand years before his time, which
must be one hundred years after Austin, and three hundred years after Origin.
Cassander affirms that it was brought in three hundred years after Christ and
his Apostles, which must be an hundred years after Origin at least. If this
had been true, these fathers must have said as St Paul of contentions, 1 Cor.
11, 16.
We have no such custom, neither the Church of God, and could not have said
that it was a custom or tradition of the Church, Origin then had never known
it, and Austin might have called it an innovation.

Those conjectures of Tuicencis and Johannes Bohemius concerning the occasion
of the first inlet of Infants Baptism into the Church falls to the ground
likewise, when men hear of a beginning they will be bold to assign some
reason of it, If my conjecture may be heeded, I suppose it was in some dis-use
with many not long after the Apostles times, and that by reason of the
superstitious conceit that too soon prevailed of the opus operatum in Baptism,
that it cleanses all sins that are past whether original or actual. And
therefore many that were converted at ripe years deferred their Baptism as
near the hour of death as might be, to have all their sins cleansed by that
water, against which custom Bellarmine at large disputes by reason of the
absolute necessity of Baptism, though both his grounds and theirs are on a
false bottom: May we not then believe that parents upon the same ground did
put off the Baptism of their children, and after did reassume it upon the
necessity of it. And this is that which the author produced, viz. Johannes
Behemius speaks of.

But Mr Daniel Rogers above all is stood upon, in his Treatise of the
Sacraments he has these words, I take the Baptism of Infants to be one of the
most reverend, general, and uncontrolled traditions which the Church has, and
which I would no less doubt of then the Creed to be Apostolical, although I
confess my self yet unconvinced by demonstration of Scripture for it.

I wish the Reader to consider what the adversary gains by this testimony,
Answ.
It is general uncontrolled, he says, and so he knows unwritten traditions
never were, Orthodox Divines ancient and modern have ever opposed them; In
gaining a piece of a witness such an one that has his reasons to believe
Baptism of Infants to be Apostolical, they have the Church unanimously in all
successive ages their adversatie.

And as the Infants of believing parents are to be received to Baptism; The
consectarie enlarged.
so no Infants that descend from those that make Profession of the faith of
Christ are to be refused: Any solid reason which will lie against any (for
ought can be said) may be a ground of the challenge of all: The promise made to
those that profess Christ and their seed, takes in the seed of all that make
profession. Some that do not withstand, but maintain and practice the
Baptism of Infants have found a middle way, as between rigid Brownists and
Presbyterians, so between Anabaptists and (as I may say) Paedo-baptists; All
Infants they will not have to be refused, confessing them to be within the
verge of the promise, yet they will not have all promiscuously received: The
parents by solemn Covenant must first be made members of some particular
congregation, and so their Issue is to be admitted, their children baptized,
otherwise both parents and children are to be accounted as without, by nature
unholy; and only the Godly regenerate (so far as men can judge) no one of
loose life to be admitted.

But this middle way (under correction) I cannot but take to be a step out of
the way, I will here dispute it no further then as it concerns this particular.

Either the vicious and scandalous life of such a parent, or his non admission
into Covenant in a Congregationall way is the bar of the Infant that he is
not admitted unto Baptism, but neither of these may be a bar.

First not the vicious life of his parent.

If the ground of a child's admission to baptism be not the faith of his
immediate parent, but the promise made to Ancestors in the faith, whose seed he
is though at the greater distance; Then the loose life of an immediate parent
can be no bar to his baptism: This is plain, if Josiah have no right from
his father Ammon, yet he is not to be shut out, in case he have right from his
father David or his father Abraham: And though the immediate parent were not
wronged when his child is so shut out and denied, yet such Ancestor in distance
is wronged out of whose loins the Infant is descended: If Phinehas were not
wronged in case Ichabod had been debarred, yet Eli yea Aaron had suffered. But
the ground of a child's admission is the promise to Ancestors, whether at nearer
or greater distance, The promise is to believers and their seed: Now Josiah was
the seed of David, Christ was the seed of David: An Ancestor at distance, and
not alone immediate (where the race within the Church, may be derived in a
continued succession) gives right of admission therefore unto baptism.

2. There is nothing that can exclude the seed of him that is a believer, as
believer is opposed to an Infidel, the seed of one that is of a dogmaticall or
historical faith: This we have before made good, and from 1 Cor. 7.14. may be
further cleared, He that is no Infidel is there a believer whose seed is holy.
But a man of a vicious life is in that sense a believer, Simon Magus, Acts
8.13. Luke 8.13.
the hearers compared to the rocky ground were believers, therefore a loose
life will not exclude the Issue.

His seed who is a member of a particular Church society must be admitted unto
baptism, a Church member and all that are his must have their privileges: But
it often falls out that men of loose lives are members as the Church of Corinth
yields many proofs, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21, etc.
Therefore vicious life excludes not the Issue.

Secondly, The non-admission into Covenant is no bar in the parent.

1. It was no bar when themselves who now are members were admitted in their
infancy, their parents for the most part being no members in such a way:
Therefore now it is no bar though the parent be no member, but out of such
Church Covenant.

2. They who have themselves title to baptism, they have power to entitle
their Infants likewise, this can be denied by none that deny not Infants
baptism; But men never entering any such Church Covenant in a Congregationall
way were baptized upon just title; The Converts of Peter, the Eunuch, the
Iaylor, etc. No one that we read was first made a member and then baptized,
but were by Baptism made members, not respectively of any one particular
Congregation, but of the Church of Christ in general.

3. It would then be in the power of man, of three or four (whom they say make
a bottom Church) to keep an Infant at their pleasure out of Gods Covenant, to
be reputed at their courtesy, either of the dogs or of the children. This may
not be denied, These or the greater number of them have power of admission of
members at pleasure. And some singularly eminent that way have affirmed that it
is not enough that a man have grace to render him capable of being admitted,
but he must have expressions: A fathers slow tongue shall now exclude his seed
from this glory of admittance into the fellowship of the Saints. And when those
are not judged worthy of fellowship who are not of abilities to sit in
judgment with the Congregation to admit members, to pass sentence upon
delinquents, to judge of doctrines, not only to elect but ordain Pastors and
Church Officers, we may easily guess how many they exclude as without, whom
Christ receives: Such a way had it been taken had deprived the Church of an
Hezekiah, Josiah and many others in their age renowned. How great a provocation
to such children when once of growth to join with them, with whom the Church
ranks them? and to oppose with the uttermost of fury such that (after the
revolution of so many generations inheriting that privilege) now do debar
them? And how great an encouragement to join with such in all holiness with
whom they were honored with these privileges?

Some there be that subscribe these truths yet will have some caution used: The
children of parents of loose life, yea of excommunicate persons, children of
illegitimate birth they say are to be baptized; but with condition that the
education of such be undertaken by men pious and godly, two reasons one gives.

1. Distinctio aliqua inter puros and impuros debet in sacris omnibus
observavari, ad bonorum consolationem, correctionem malorum, and omnium
aedisicationem, that is, Some difference ought to be put in all divine
ordinances between the clean and unclean, for the comfort of the godly, the
censure of the wicked, and the edification of all.

To which I answer, The personal impurity of the father is nor transmitted to
the child, and therefore the distinction of clean and unclean, which holds
between the parents falls to the ground when it is applied to the Issue; Both
of them have a Covenant-holinesse from their parents, neither of both have
holiness qualitative and inherent, and the children standing equally
interested in the promises, we have no rule that the child should bear the
fathers sin.

2. Instituta Dei non possunt aliter ab omni pollutione conservari, The
ordinances of God can no other way be kept from blot and pollution.

I answer, Our care in the preservation of any ordinance of God may not exceed
the care of God himself, least under that color we make our wisdom to
correct Gods wisdom, and when he admits without such limits; why should we
then put bars? A raise about the Communion table for that which is taken
away, one has well motioned, such a one that would not nourish superstition
but keep back the profane: But I know not any use of such a one about the
Font-stone in a Nation professedly Christian, and enjoying ordinances that are
saving, where Infants (for ought that the Church is able to discern) are all
equal: all equally holy, all equally impure: Christians in name transmit a
Covenant-holinesse; Christians in truth cannot transmit holiness inherent: If
these thus borne have no right at all, I suppose they should not be admitted
with any caution whatsoever. If they have any such birthright-priviledge
(notwithstanding their sad discomfort in such parents) why should it be thus
suspended on the courtesy of such undertakers; I would more care were taken for
education of youth (of which more anon) but this I only say, that I see not how
the Infants right should be deteyned, their birth-priviledge denied, till such
caution be given: I conclude then that right of baptism is as large as in any
good sense the name Christian, The right of Infants is as large as is the name
of Christian in the parents.

A vain dispute there has been among Schoolmen, how the child is saved or
justified by the faith of the parent; whether by the habit of the parents
faith, or the act of believing applied by the parent to the Infant at the time,
and in the instant of baptism? And whether it must be a faith formed (as they
speak) with charity, or whether a faith informed, a dead faith would serve to
the justification and salvation of the seed? whether a parent in mortal sin
may apply faith to his child to salvation? And I would know whether there be
not some such thing now agitated, when such enquiry is made into the personal
qualification of the parent before the child may have admittance. But all these
are mere niceties. The faith of the parent availes not directly to
justification or salvation of the Infant, neither is it considered as applied
to this or that child in baptism; the parent may be dead before the child be
baptized; But it is considered only as accepting the Covenant of Gods free
grant for him and his posterity, which entitles posterity to saving ordinances,
but does not necessarily qualify for salvation. A subject accepts a Patent of
honor from his Prince for himself and posterity, this Grant of the Prince,
and acceptance in the subject entitles to Nobility, And the like we say of
Christianity; which evident truth takes off all difficulties, and prevents all
absurdities which follow upon these Quaeres:

It yet further here follows that the seed of believers thus by
birth-right-priviledge baptized, 2. Consectary, Title to all Ordinances.
have a large and full right to all the Ordinances of God and privileges of
the Church appertaining to members, as they shall be capable of their use,
wheresoever by the providence of God they are cast; only so far excepted as
the just censures of the Church upon their personal defects and misdemeanors
shall disable them, and give Church Officers just cause to refuse them: The
consequence is evident: They now visibly belong to Christ, they through him are
dedicated to God, they have therefore title to all his visible ordinances: They
are now of the household of God, and of the Citizens of the Saints orderly
admitted: Scripture knows no other admission then Baptism: No sooner do we
hear of a convert, but we presently hear of his baptism, no Church Covenant
intervening: They have right to all the immunities of this house, to all the
privileges of this city of God: There is some time after baptism in infancy
before they have capacity to be hearers, but as soon as they can hear to
profit so soon they must be received, not as strangers but as children, not as
Infidels but Christians: They must be hearers, and that with some good
proficiency before they can be communicants: But to deny a person entitled and
qualified as before, because not in Church Fellowship in a Congregationall way,
offering himself and desiring it, is to debar him of that right, of which by
the gracious dispensation of God he stands possessed: He belongs to Christ, he
must therefore partake of that which is of Christ: He is of the household, he
must therefore have of the food of the household: The stewards of the mysteries
of God must be accountable in case they do deny it.

To come to some practique observations, 3. Consectary, Holy conversation.
All possible engagements and obligations unto holiness of conversation
necessarily follow from this royal privilege and high advancement of
birth-holinesse We blame those of noble and generous birth that betake
themselves to sordid and ignoble ways: Those thus degenerating are a blot to
their families, a disgrace and reproach to their race: No birth equal in
honor to that of Christians: Theodesius worthily esteemed it a greater honor
that he was a Christian then that he was an Emperor: None degenerate so
foulely and blame-worthily as they when their conversation is unchristian.
Ways of sin are for sinners of the Gentiles, a way proper for Turks and
Pagans: let the holy seed be holy, their demeanor suited to their honor:
Sardanapalus the King may with less in-infamy spinne among women (a work
far below his throne) then a Christian may sin with heathen: The Martyrs in
the primitive times being moved to swear by the fortune of Coesar, thought
that the answer was full and fair to say they were Christians; Such answer
should he have that would tempt to ungodliness: Nebe. 6.11.
Should such a one as I fly says Nehemiah, his honor would not suffer him to
be so base: Should such a man as a Christian (the least of whom is greater then
Nehemiah's better) be for sin, not a sinner by birth, Mat. 11.11.
be for sin in his life: Baptism is the greatest honor: Such bear Christ's
name and wear his livery, Iamos 1.1. Jude 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.1. 1 Timothy 2.19.
They have that title in which Jude, James and other of the Apostles gloried? A
Servant of Jesus Christ: Baptism is the greatest engagement: Let every one
that names Christ depart from iniquity To talk of baptism and live in sin is
to wear the Colors of one and plot and fight for another, to wear Christ's
colors and sight for Satan: Baptism renders a sinner up to the heaviest
punishment: Amos 3.2.
The high favors showed the Jews made a Jew to fare worse in the ways of
sin then an heathen: Heb. 2.3.
The high favors showed to Christians, make Christians to fare worse in
sinful ways then heathens: Let me priest it in the Apostles words though the
providence of God keeps me out of his condition, Ephesians. 4.1. 1 Pet. 1.15. 1
These 4.7. Ephesians. 2.19. Mat. 25.31. Romans 1.2. Ephesians. 1.13. Heb 9.8. 4.
Consectary, Holy education.
I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called. All in a Christians calling bespeaks this
holiness; He by whom he is called; The work to which he is called; The
company unto which he is joined; The Attendants by whom he is guarded; The Rule
whereby he is guided; The Seal by which he is confirmed, and the place whither
he makes and tends, all are holy.

Let the Parents of such seed now see what education is expected; Breeding must
answer Birth and Descent: A Christian is of the noblest birth: The Apostle
calls upon parents to bring up their children in nurture and admonition of the
Lord: God may call on them thus to bring up his children; In nature theirs: in
Covenant Gods: Every Christian parent has a child of God committed to his care
and tuition: How great a solecisme is it that parents should dedicate children
so soon as borne unto Christ, professing to the world that they belong to him,
and that with Hannah (concerning Samuel) they intend them for him, when nothing
appears in their lives, but that they might be given to Moloch; somewhat worse
then the mongrell seed that spoke half in the language of Canaan, and half of
Ashdod: Scarce a word can be heard out of their mouths for to argue that they
are Christians; lisping out oaths as soon as words, put to learn trades, and
little regard had that they may know Christ Jesus: And how much is it to be
desired that authority (who I trust will make good that we have a Christian
Nation) would take order for more careful catechisticall teaching of youth in
the ways of Christian Religion, that God may not complain of England is of
Israel; My people perish for want of knowledge. Hosea 4.^.
A people of God and a people ignorant to perdition and destruction: England is
highly honored of God by this gracious call, with Capernaum listed up to
Heaven: Enegland would highly honor God if care might be taken that all might
know God from the highest to the lowest: We shall never be a Gospel-like people
till we be a knowing people, till we take care that as we are jews by nature,
so we may be Jews in qualification, so borne, so bred, that as our youth is
descended so also they may be trained.

Those may see whom they oppose that stand in opposition of a people thus
interested, a people so ingratiated to God in Covenant that there is not the
least infant in whom God has not his title and right of challenge. 5.
Consectary, The danger of persecution. Psalm. 79 1, 2, 3.
The aggravation of the Psalmists complaint is, that the heathens are come into
thine inheritance, the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat
unto the fowls of the Heaven, the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the
earth: The whole body of such a people stand in relation to God, as the
Inheritance, the servants, and Saints of God; Such inscriptions we sind in St
Paul's Epistles, not one of the whole body is excluded, but they are such by
Covenant, and such by calling: Psalm. 127 3. Mat 18.5. Psalm. 137.9.
Enough has been said to make it to appear, that the denomination reaches
even infants, who are the Lords heritage, and Christ's name is upon them: As it
is accounted an happy work to dash the little ones of Babylon against the wall,
because of the hostlity of that Nation against God and his people: So it is a
like execration to intermedele with the little ones of Sion, by reason of the
holiness of such a people, 2 King 8.12.
their Covenant-relations in which they stand interested. Much is spoken in
Scripture against the enemies of the righteous, the haters of them shall be
destroyed, he that offends against them shall not be innocent: God observes
every carriage of the adversary toward them in misery; they speak not a word,
but God has it against them; when Ammonites, Eze. 26.2.36.2. Obad. 12. Ibid.
Psalm. 137.7. Obad. 13.14. Deuteronomy. 25.17.
Tyrians cry Aha against the people of the Lord they are twitted with it, and
threatened for it. Not a proud word that they utter, but it is brought in to
fill up the charge against them: yea, every eye that is cast with approbation
of the adversary, every encouraging word they speak, and every act they do
against such a people, yea injuries of elder times are kept in the deck and
laid to them; And all because that they stand in this relation to God, as His
in Covenant, which you cannot limit only to the personally righteous, but all
that are of a society and fellowship that is such, that are interested in a
righteous cause. The holy anointing oil did make sacred, when yet too often
the man was wicked, and therefore David looked upon Saul as the Lords anointed.
It holds in analogy and proportion unto all that have any Unction from God, as
all the called of God have, When they were but a few in number, Psalm. 105.12,
13, 14, 15.
yea very few, and strangers -- When they went from one Nation to another, from
one kingdom to another people, He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed: All the people
of God have that anointing from God, that none may dare to intermeddle to their
harm. God promises his people that dwell in Sion that the burden of Assyria
shall be taken away from off their shoulder, and his yoke from off their neck,
and that the yoke shall be destroyed, because of the Anointing. Isa 10.27.


Object.
Some will say, as this is carried, The danger of intermedling with any is with
us alike: Even Papists and the worst of men that are called Protestants are
thus of a people that are called Gods people, and go by the name of Christians.

For answer: I shall not enter upon that controversy, Answ.
what there is of the being of a Church under the Papacy: The Papacy itself is
none of it, but only a botch bred in it, and cleaving to it. Only this I say,
That he that shall oppose a Papist under the notion of a Christian, shall bear
his sin, and that upon the grounds that have been given: Though a Papists
damnable errors in the faith shut him out from the happiness of Christians,
yet such an adversaries persecution renders him guilty of opposing the faith of
Christ Jesus. And he that follows with injuries a carnal Protestant, because
of Profession of the sincerity of Religion, in opposition to
Antichristianisme, is formally guilty of persecution. The hearers resembled to
the rocky ground suffer persecution for the Word, as does the good ground that
brings forth fruit with patience. But to come home with more clear
satisfaction.

A people of a fouly-polluted Ordinance standing in opposition to a people of a
pure and untainted way, are as a people void of Ordinances, are as a people
without God in comparison. The opposition of the purity of his service God
accounts as the opposition of his great Name, though it be by a people that go
under that name of His people: And therefore though Elijah take so much to
heart the pulling down of Altars set up by Jeroboam as Gods Altars, 3 Kings
19.10.
when it was done by Israel apostatizing and turned to Baal, and (in opposition
to the worship of Baal) makes that way of worship at Dan and Bethel a following
of God. 1 Kings 18.21.
(Those two opinions that the ten Tribes halted between were the worship of the
false god Baal, and the false way of worship set up by Jeroboam; which
corruption of worship (being now to draw them from Baalisme) he is for the
present contented to wave:) Yet we well know the brand that lies on Jeroboam in
bringing in that worship of his, 1 Kings 15.9.
scarce the like on any man in Scripture (the man of sin only excepted) the
high phrases also in which this worship of his is set out, making Priests for
the high places, 2 Chro. 11.15.
and devils, with the height of guilt to which he rose in casting the Levites
out from executing the Priests office; Verse. 14.
And howsoever God often calls that people of the ten tribes by the name of his
people as having Ordinances, Hos. 4.6.
though miserably polluted, yet in opposition to Judah, where more pure
Ordinances were enjoyed, they are said to be without God, without a teaching
Priest, and without the Law: And sighting against Judah who could reckon up the
particulars of the Ordinances of God in their purity, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
they are charged to sight against the Lord God of their fathers: 2 Chronicles.
13.12.
To come nearer home in an Instance: If the Turkish power should fall upon a
Popish State under the name and notion of Christians, they were guilty with
Saul of persecuting the Lord Jesus: If this Popish State fall upon a reformed
nation, they are much more guilty. A fouler sin for a people of God in name
and title, to persecute his people in truth, then for a people strangers to
God, to persecute a people only in name and title: Scripture prayers against
heathens we may fitly apply in our sufferings under the hands of Papists.
Pilate might have been guilty in persecution of a Pharisee as a Jew; yet that
nation was much more guilty (being Jews by nature,) in delivering Christ Jesus
into Pilate's hands, Ioh. 18.35.
though Christ had been no greater then one of his Disciples: A Papist
persecuting a formal carnal Protestant, under the notion of a man protesting
against idolatrous ways, is a man blaspheming the faith; This man thus
persecuted, persecuting another for the power of Godliness, professing the
same truth is equally, yea more guilty. The very sin of Cain against his
brother, 1 Ioh. 2.12.
Their Religions were both one, but Cain's in form, and Abel's in power. The
result of the whole is to let us see what it is to oppose a people under any
notion of Gods people, under any notion of belonging to him. A man may have his
reward giving in the name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10.4.
though he to whom he gives be such as God will never own for a Disciple. And
answerably may incur vengeance in opposition of one under such a name, though
with those on the rocky ground he be nothing less in deed and truth.

Abundance of sweet consolations yet flow from this birth-priviledge, 6.
Consectary of consolation.
and that in several streams.

1. In regard of Nations. 2. In regard of Persons.
1. In regard of Nations, They have a royal transcendencie above all others,
To Nations
as only worthy the name of a people, Enjoying the Light, Nigh unto God, A
people of hope, and expectation; when others are darkness, without hope, and
without God in the world. The Psalmist reckons up many sweet blessings of a
nation, That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, Psalm.
144.12, 13, 14.
that our daughters may be as corner stones polished after the fimilitude of a
palace, That our garners may be full affording all manner of store, that our
sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets; That our oxen
may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor going out, that
there be no complaining in our streets: All these are singular national
favors, but only serving to make up, not an absolute, but comparative
blessedness; This one rises higher and makes it complete, Verse 15.
Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. See what is said of Jerusalem by
the Psalmist: Lo, the Kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw
it, and so they marvelled, Psalm. 48.4, 5.
they were troubled and hasted away, Fear took hold on them, and pain as on
a woman in travel, and we find the reason given is, Verse 3.
God is known in her palaces for a refuge, they have God nigh in all that they
call upon him for; as Moses has it, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
No people can so bottom their prayers against Adversaries as the people of
Gods Holiness.

This mercy is a birth-mercie to a people (to hold allusion to my text) Jews
by nature, 2 Timothy 1.5.
whose parents with Timothy's from one to another have been believers: And
while national provocations break not forth (which only with God have a
separating and deasning power) his ear is ready to hear, Isai. 59.1. Numb.
23.22.
and his hand to help: While he sees not iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness
in Israel (which must be understood of national out-breaches from God, which
after by Baalams counsel followed) so long God is among them as the shout of a
King, and there is no sorcerie or divination against them: Verse. 23.
2 Chronicles. 15.2.
A nation fast to God has God fast to them.

2. In regard of persons, for Themselves. To persons.
Posterity.


For themselves, It is much to be able with the Psalmist to say, For themselves.
Thou art he that took me out of the womb, Psalm. 22.9, 10.
Thou did make me to hope when I was upon my mothers breasts: I was cast
upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly. This puts upon
confidence in prayer (as an argument drawn from long continued acquaintance) as
there follows: Be not far from me, for trouble is near. Verse. 11.
Such have timely knowledge of God, sucking in somewhat of him while they suck
milk from the breasts: An expression of height setting out this
Birth-happinesse, that has sure more in it then can be applied to sinners of
the Gentiles: See how the Psalmist yet further pleads it with God: Psalm.
116.16. Exodus 21.4. Levit. 25.16.
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant and the son of thine
handmaid. An allusion to the Law of servants, who were the inheritance of the
Master in whose house they were borne. I am such says the Psalmist (thy
servant, thy servant) with all earnestness of affection. I am of thine
inheritance, I am one of thine house-borne servants, my mother was thine
hand-maide. The same relation he pleades also, and in the same words, Psalm.
86.16. This Isaiah in like manner takes notice of, Isai. 4^, 1.
The Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he
made mention of my Name. The Apostle will have the Ephesians to remember that
past time when they were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.^2.
being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant
of promise, having no hope, without God in the world. There never was a time in
which these of this Birth privilege were in that condition; From the womb
they were Gods heritage, and with Timothy (some in greater some in lesser
measure) from children have the knowledge of the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. Luke
1.15.
if not with John Baptist full of the holy Ghost from the womb: which
doubtless is the happiness of not few among Christians, who are eminent in
sanctification, whose growth in Grace is seen, and yet the beginnings not
known. Howsoever they are nigh, when others are afar off, at the pooles
brimme waiting the Angels moving of it. Ioh. 4.22. James 1.21. Luke 19.9. In
respect of posterity.
Salvation is of the Jews, says our Savior; They are under the joyful sound
of that Word which is able to save the soul: Salvation is of his house who is
the son of Abraham.

As it is full of Consolation to Believers in respect of themselves, so also in
reference to posterity: Their children are Gods children: They being of the
Lords Inheritance, their children are his heritage in like manner: These bring
forth children to God, Ezekiel. 16.20.
their seed be ownes and challenges for His: An infinite love in God, an
unspeakable comfort to a parent, when the Infant, who by corruption of nature
is in Satan's jaws, in no less danger of Hell, then Moses was of the water;
and not so much as sensible of it; God pleases to look upon him in this
condition and to make it the time of love, and to find out ways of freedom.
What the Apostle speaks from the Prophet of Gods care of the Gentiles, is
certainly true being applied to Infants. I was found of them that sought me
not, and made manifest to them that enquired not after me. Romans 10.10.
Had we that hopeless opinion of our children as Papists of theirs that dye
without Baptism; what a wretched case were it (with David) to part with an
Infant out of the world? How could such mourn in any other way then those that
are without hope? parting with an Infant without part in Christ, and in no
better posture toward God then the seed of the sinners of the Gentiles. But
we find God more rich in mercy, Christ himself embracing them in their
infancy, and taking them into his special love as those that bear his name:
And though death prevent their Baptism, He that has appointed Ordinances is
not tied to them, but can save without them. Bellarmine confesses that the
desire of Baptism in one of the Catechumeni, (that is, one instructed in the
Principles of Christ and not baptized) does save; though the text, John 3.5.
understood with their Coment be in the Letter against it, why then should not
that Grace? which when the person is of capacity would show it self in
desires qualify for Salvation in like manner? Finding this love in God, these
bowels in Christ, we may safely conclude, that Children have bliss, Parents
have comfort, and let God have the Glory.

FINIS.

