portrait of King James II JACOBUS IIds. D. G. Angliae: Scotiae: Fran: et
Hiber: REX. Fidei Defensor. etc.
DIEU ET MON DROIT

F. H. van. Hove. Sculp:


THE Present State Of His Majesty's Isles and Territories IN AMERICA, VIZ.
Iamaica, Barbados, S. Christophers, Mevis, Antego, S. Vincent, Dominica,
New-Iersey, Pensilvania, Monserat, Anguilla, Bermudas, Carolina, Virginia,
New England, Tobago. New Foundland. Maryland, New York.


With New Maps of every Place.

Together with Astronomical TABLES, Which will serve as a constant Diary or
Calendar, for the use of the English Inhabitants in those Islands; from the
Year 1686, to 1700.

Also a Table by which, at any time of the Day or Night here in England, you
may know what Hour it is in any of those parts. And how to make Sun-Dials
fitting for all those places.

Licensed, July 20. 1686. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultrey, 1687.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY JAMES II. King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
etc.
Dread Sovereign,
THIS Treatise, or Description, of Your Majesty's Dominions and Territories in
America, humbly presents itself unto Your Royal Patronage, by the hands of

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject and Servant, Richard Blome.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Discourse contains an Account of the Present State of His
Majesty's Dominions, on the Coast of America; wherein thou will find a
considerable Discovery of the growing Greatness of those distant Colonies,
which, by the most clement and wise Administration of the Monarchs of Great
Britan, have already arrived to a Figure so Considerable, as may attract the
Emulation of the Neighboring Potentates; the Golden Peru hardly affording so
great a Treasure to the Catholic Crown, as these most Flourishing Plantations
produce to the Crown of England. The vast Returns which the Merchants of
London, and other Parts of His Majesty's Dominions, make from those Parts, are
a sufficient Encouragement for any one that would study the Improvement of his
Fortunes, to look into the advantages of that Extensive Traffic which those
Regions produce. And since our Neighbors have not been wanting (in the most
Remote Courts) to represent their Foreign Plantations as vast and mighty
Accessions to their Government, and to make their State look the more
Considerable in the Eyes of distant Monarchs: Why may not an Essay toward the
Delineation of the English Territories in Foreign Parts (at least in some
measure) contribute to raise in them an Esteem and Dread of the Mighty Power of
the British Crown. Little more need be said to recommend the usefulness of the
ensuing Discourse, but that the natural result of Discoveries, is the Promotion
of Improvement, and the Considerate know how to make their Advantages thereof.

There was intended to be added to this Volume, a Summary of the several Laws
in Force in each Plantation, but that being a work which will swell to a larger
Bulk than this, is reserved for a particular Treatise by it self.

I have one thing more to advertise thee, That the Printer has neglected to
fix the Running-Title on the top of every Page; therefore thou may find that
part of the Discourse which relates to them in the following Table.

Farewell.
The Contents.
JAmaica Page 1 Barbados Page 30 St. Christophers Page 45 Mevis Page 53 Antego
Page 60 St. Vincent Page 65 Dominica Page 73 New Jersey Page 78 Pensilvania
Page 88 Montserat Page 134 Anguilla Page 137 Barbada, or Bermuda Page 141
Bermudas, or the Summer-Islands Page 146 Carolina Page 150 Virginia Page 182
Maryland Page 195 New York Page 201 New England Page 210 New Foundland Page
239 Tobago Page 247 Directions for the Improvement of the Island of Tobago Page
253 Proposals lately made by Captain John Poyntz, for Himself and Company, to
all such People as are minded to Transport or Concern themselves in the Island
of Tobago Page 259 Proposals for further Improvement Page 261
Astronomical Tables, showing the Rising and Setting of the Sun, with the
Length of the Days and Nights in all the Principal English Plantations in the
West Indies Also Tables of the New and Full Moons in every Month, from the Year
1686, to 1700, in the Meridian of London, and from thence referred to the
Meridians of the Principal Plantations abovesaid. The which Tables will serve
as a constant Diary or Calendar, for the Use of the English Inhabitants in
those Islands. Also a Table by which, at any time of the Day or Night here in
England, you may know what Hour it is in any of those Islands. And how to make
Sun-Dials fitting for all those Remote Parts.

map of Jamaica A New and Exact Mapp of ye. Isle of IAMAICA as it was lately
Surveyed by order of S. Thomas Mediford Bar. late Goverr divided into Precincts
or Parishes, with its Ports, Bays, etc.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

Leiutenant (...) Doyloy late O^^^^der in Chief of all ye English Army by Land
and (...) in America and first ^ow of ye Isle, for his (...)

(...) Thomas Lord Win^^^ (...) (...) of (...) Shi^^^ and (...) Island

S. Thomas Modifor ^^n third Governor of ye Isle,

^^ Thomas Lyn^^ knight, pro^^^ Governor of ye Isle

The Arms of the Island. ^^

LONDON Printed for Richard Blome Ao 1671



map of Western America The North West Part of AMERICA
by Robt. Morden


THE Present State OF HIS MAJESTY's Isles and Territories IN AMERICA.
Of JAMAICA,
THE Island of JAMAICA is situate between the Tropicks seventeen or eighteen
degrees North-Latitude, Its Situation.
upon the Sea usually known by the Name of Mare del Nort, being about an
hundred and forty Leagues North of the Main Continent of America; fifteen
Leagues South from the great Island of Cuba, and twenty Leagues Westward from
Hispaniola, from Porto Bello, Northwards an hundred and sixty; and from
Carthagena an hundred and forty Leagues.

It Is somewhat of an Oval Form, and has a continued Ridge of lofty Mountains
running from East to West, which extend themselves from one end of it to the
other, and being full of fresh Springs, furnishes the Island with great plenty
of pleasant and useful Rivers, to the great refreshment of the Inhabitants, and
accommodation of Trade.

It is exceeding fruitful, being for the most part a rich fat soil, Its
Fertility.
the Earth blackish, and mixed with clay, except in the South-west parts, where
it is generally of a more red and loose Earth; but every where wonderful
fertile, and incomparably apt to answer the Cultivator's expectation, and
recompense his pains and expense in planting; for it enjoys a perpetual Sp^ing,
and its Plants and Trees are never disrobed of their Summer Livery, but every
Month is to them like April or May to us.

It is in length about 170 Miles, and about 70 in breadth, Its Form aad Extent.
containing between four or five Millions of Acres, nine hundred thousand
whereof were planted in the Year 1675. There are intermixed with the Woods and
Mountains, many Savanaes or Plains, which are supposed to have formerly been
Fields of Indian Maiz or Wheat; but the Spaniards when they made themselves
Masters of the Isle, and had destroyed all the Natives, to the number of about
sixty thousand Persons, converted them to Pasture for the feeding of Horses,
Cows, Hogs, and other Cattle which they brought with them for Breed; which they
did so fast, that there are now great Herds of Horses and other Cattle running
wild in the Woods. These Savanaes are accounted the most barren parts of the
Island, in regard they have lain so long without Tillage; which notwithstanding
does produce such vast quantities of Grass, that the Planters are oftentimes
constrained to burn it up.

The Air is there very serene and clear, Its Temperature.
and more temperate than in any other Islands in those parts; and in reference
to Heat, is as mild as in any place that lies between the Tropicks, in regard
it is continually fanned and cooled by fresh Breezes, which continually blow
Eastwardly; beside which, it is refreshed with frequent Showers of Rain, and
great Dews which fall in the night, and conduce very much to the quickening the
growth of what is planted; so that it may truly be called temperate and
healthful; and its continual Verdure commends it as one of the most delightful
Places in the World to live in, especially the South part of the Isle; the East
and West parts being somewhat more subject to Rains and Winds, and in regard
the Mountainous and Woody renders the Air less wholesome and agreeable than it is
in the North; but especially the Southern, which gave the occasion to the
English to build Port Royal there; it being thought convenient that the chief
Port and Capital City be upon the best Spot they could find out in the Island.
However no part of this Island is in the least subject to those violent and
injurious Storms called Hurricans, wherewith the Caribbies and some other
places in those parts are sometimes pestered; which with a sudden fury drive
their Ships from Harbor, cast them on shore, blow down their Houses, tear up
their Canes, and hurry all into confusion. And had not this Island afforded
Relief to many of the wracked Inhabitants when they had been thus distressed,
they must in all probability have perished. Nor does any part of this Island
unavoidably necessitate any of its new Inhabitants to any particular Distemper,
as Virginia and other places do; but if those who go thither, will upon their
Arrival, but forbear excess of eating and drinking, use moderate exercise, and
make choice of such places for their settlement, as lie not too low in Valleys,
where there comes but little Air; or too near Rivers, where they may
peradventure be incommoded with too much moisture, or at the Foot of Mountains
or Morasses, where probably you may have more Rain than you will desire; nor by
the Sea side, or upon Bays, where besides the inconvenience of its Sandiness,
it will occasion your want of good Water, you will be mightily afflicted with
the violent Reflections of the Sun's Beams, which are much fiercer here than in
other parts of the Isle.

It has been observed by some who have lived in the Island, that the Mountains
which run along through the midst of the Isle from one extreme point to the
other, are much cooler than the other parts; insomuch that sometimes in the
Morning early there are small white Frosts.

As for the Weather, it is less certain in Jamaica than in the rest of the
Caribby Islands; The Air.
but wet Seasons are most expected in May and November. The Winds blow
constantly from the East without the least variation, which they call Briezes:
They usually rise about Nine in the Morning, and blow fresher as the Sun mounts
higher; so that Travel and Labor are tolerable at Midday. These Easterly
Winds commonly blow till about six or seven in the Afternoon, and then they
change to the West; which the Islanders call Land-Briezes, because they blow
off the Shore, and carry their Ships and Vessels out of their Harbors.

There is no apparent Winter, only they have somewhat more Rain and Thunder in
the Winter-Months than at other times; nor does the length of the Days and
Nights vary much, but they continue almost all the year round of an equal
length, (viz.) about fifteen hours day: And that which seems much stranger, is,
the Seas having seldom been observed to ebb or flow above a foot or
thereabouts; nor has any Pilot ever yet been able to give a certain account of
the Currents of those Seas, in regard they are so various and uncertain; nor
could any ever give a reason why the Hurricans and Earthquakes should never
reach Jamaica, although they have so grievously afflicted the adjacent Islands.

The Rivers of this Island are none of them fair or navigable up into the
Country, Its Road and Harbors.
in regard the Island is very mountainous, and their original is for the most
part in those Hills that run through its Center; which running East and West,
the Rivers that rise in them disembogue themselves North and South, and falling
out of those high Mountains, are very fierce and rapid in their motion; being
likewise in regard of the great Rains, subject to great and sudden Inundations;
at which times they fall with such fury, that great Stone-Rocks and large
pieces of Timber are born down, and carried along by the violence of the
Torrent, which makes their usual passage so foul and troublesome, that they are
thereby rendered altogether unpassable by Boats and other small Vessels. Besides
which, there are diverse of them which at some times have not one drop of Water
in them, but are wholly dried up, which renders them likewise useless for
Navigation; as particularly that of Minoa, that runs through Clarendon, which
sometimes has not a drop of Water, and yet at other Seasons has as much as
the River of Thames at high water: But although the Rivers are thus useless,
yet toward the Sea the Island abounds with great plenty of very good Bays,
Roads and Harbors; the principal whereof are,

1. Port Royal, Port Royal.
which at it first settling by the English, soon after they took the Island from
the Spaniards, received the Name of Cagway, but when the Town began to
increase, and draw toward its perfection, it obtained in Sir Charles
Littleton's time the Name of Port Royal, in regard of the excellency of its
Harbor. It is situated on the extreme end of that long point of Land that
makes the Harbor, running about twelve Miles from the Main Westerly, having
the Sea on its South, and the Harbor on the North; which Harbor is so
exceeding safe and commodious for Shipping, that they are secure in all
Weathers, and can unlade themselves afloat at the Merchants-Key; being likewise
during their Riding there, secured from any Attempts that might be made on them
by an Enemy, by one of the strongest and most considerable Castles that His
Majesty has in all Amemerica, which is well garrisonn'd with Soldiers, and
has above sixty Pieces of Cannon mounted in it. Besides which, it is
Land-lock'd by a Point of Land that runs Twelve Miles South-East from the Main
of the Island, and has the great River which runs by Los-Angelos and St. Jago
(where Ships that trade to Jamaica, commonly water, and provide themselves with
what Wood they want for their Voyage back) falling into it. The Harbor is
about three Leagues broad in most places, and is so deep, that a Ship of a
Thousand Tun may lay her sides to the Shore of the Point, and load and unload
at pleasure; nor does there want good Anchorage in any part of it. This Harbor
being so exceeding safe and commodious, is the reason why it is frequented both
by Merchants Ships and Men of War more than any other Port in that Island.

The Point of Land whereon the Town is built, is exceeding narrow, and nothing
but a loose Sand, so that it affords neither Grass, Stone, fresh Water, Trees,
nor any thing else which could encourage the building a Town upon it, besides
the goodness of the Harbor. It was at first began by building a few
Warehouses, but is now grown exceeding large and populous; for it contains
above fifteen hundred Houses, and extends itself about twelve or thirteen Miles
in length, being inhabited by Merchants, Store-house-keepers, Handicraftsmen,
Vintners, Victuallers, and the like: And being so very populous, and so much
frequented by Strangers, as well as the Planters in the Negotiation of their
Affairs, it being, as it were, the Scale of Trade in that Island, the Houses
are as dear rented as in well Traded Streets in London, and Provisions are
dearer than in any other place in that Island.

In the time of the Earl of Carlisle's Government, there was a stately Church
built, partly by Liberal Subscriptions of diverse well disposed Gentlemen
inhabiting the Isle, and partly by an Assessment laid upon the Inhabitants of
the Port. There is likewise a House belonging to the King, though it is not
very spacious. This Town of Port Royal lies about twelve Miles from the
Metropolitan Town of this Island, called St. Jago de la Vega, or the Spanish
Town.

Old Harbor, Old Harbor.
about seven miles Westward from St. Jago, is generally accounted next to
Port Royal, the best Harbor on the South Side; notwithstanding which, it is
not so much frequented as it was when the Spaniards enjoyed the Isle; so that
there are not above thirty Houses there, which are chiefly for the Uses of
those Vessels and Mariners that come thither, and for Storehouses for Planters
Goods.

Port Morant, Port Morant.
in the Eastern Point, is a very fair, capacious, and secure Harbor, where
Ships do with great convenience Wood, Water, and Ride fafe from the Winds, in
which Place, and the Parts adjacent, a large and potent Colony of English
People have seated themselves.

Negril in the extreme Westerly Point, Point Negril.
is a good Harbor very convenient and sufficiently secure to the Windwards. In
this Harbor Men of War do often ply when they look for the return of the
Spanish Ships, and not far from thence, a little to the North-West, was seated
the old Town of Melila, founded by Columbus as he had suffered Shipwreck there;
which was the first place the Spaniards settled at, but they afterward deserted
it again.

Port Antonio Port Antonio.
is accounted the next best Port, being indeed a very safe Land-lock'd Harbor;
only the coming in is somewhat difficult, in regard the Channel is a little
narrowed by a small Island that lies off the Mouth of the Port. The Earl of
Carlisle took up this Place, and the adjacent Country to plant upon. These
Harbors are all of them secured either by Castles, strong Forts, or
Breast-works cast up, and Guns planted on them for the Defense of the Port.

But there are diverse other good Bays and Harbors along the Coast of this
Island, Other Harbors.
which are not altogether so much frequented; as, Michael's Hole, Mucary Bay,
Allegator Point, Point Pedro, Palate Bay, Lewana Bay, Blewfield's Bay,
Cabarita's Bay: These are on the South Side, and are all very good and
commodious Harbors for Ships. On the North-side, there is Porto Maria, Ora
Cabessa, Cold Harbor, Rio Nova, Montega Bay, Orange Bay, and diverse more both
on this and the South Side; at all which there are some Houses.

There is likewise at a Place called Withy-Wood, on the South Side, about forty
or fifty Houses built for the convenience and accommodation of Vessels, many
Ships frequenting that Road, in regard there is very good Land, many
considerable Settlements, and a pleasant Country all about it.

This Island does not very much abound with Towns; Their Towns.
there being but three in the whole Island, that are of any considerable note;
the Chief whereof is,

St. Jago St. Jago.
de la Vega, situated six miles within the Land North-West, upon a large Plain,
by the side of a River called Pro de Cabre, from a certain Metal which the
Spaniards found, and called by that Name, in the Mountains of Liguania, where
this River has its original Spring. This Place was when the Spaniards were
Masters of the Isle, a large City, containing about two thousand Houses, two
Churches, four Chapels, and an Abbey for Divine Worship, which were upon the
taking the Island by the English, all destroyed, except about fifteen hundred
Houses, and its Churches and Chapels reduced to a smaller number; nor did
those which remained, altogether escape, but were sufficiently harassed and
spoiled. But since the English have begun to settle there, and in the Country
about it, it begins to be again a place of considerable account, and grows
apace toward its former splendour and beauty. It Is the Metropolis of the
Island, where the Governor himself resides, and where all the chief Courts of
Judicature are kept; which occasions its being well inhabited, and a place of
very great resort; so that most of its Ruinous Houses are now repaired, and it
is in a fair way of extending itself to a far greater largeness than when it
was enjoyed by the Spaniards; for the Town is very well situated, the Houses
fair and convenient, and the Inhabitants live in as much pleasure as their
hearts can wish, having their Havana, to which the better sort repair every
Evening to take the Air, and recreate themselves, as the Gentry at London do in
Hide-Park.

The second Town of Note is Port Royal; which has been already described; and
the third is known by the Name of

Passage, Passage.
situated on the Mouth of the River, six miles distant from St. Jago by Land,
and about two Leagues from Port Royal by Sea. It Is the greatest Passage in the
whole Island, from whence it took its Name; and those who go from Port Royal to
St. Jago, land here. The whole Town does not contain above Thirty or Forty
Houses; some whereof are for Storage, and the rest are inhabited by
Alehouse-keepers, and those who keep Horses and Hackney-Coaches for the
convenience of such as go from thence to St. Jago, or any Plantation
thereabouts.

When the Spaniards enjoyed the Place, there were diverse other Towns Other
Towns.
which are now of no account; the Chief whereof, are,

Sevilla, Sevilla.
situated on the North-part of the Island, and beautified with a Collegiate
Church; the chief Governor whereof bore the Title of Abbot.

Mellila Mellila.
already mentioned.

Orista, Orista.
situated upon the South-Seas, in which Seas there are many Rocks, amongst
their Banks some Isles; as, Servavilla, Quitosvena, and Serrana, where Augustine
Pedro Serrana lost his Vessel, and saved only himself; and here in a lonesom
and solitary condition spent three years without any company; after which,
another Mariner, who was likewise shipwrackt upon that Coast, and saved none
but himself, bore him company for four years longer.

But although there areas yet no more Towns in Jamaica, yet there are diverse
Villages or Parishes which are well inhabited by the Englsh, in every one
whereof, they have very good Plantations well-situated, and furnished with all
things necessary; especially all the Southern part, from Point Morant in the
East, to Point Negrillo in the West, and so far as the Ridge or Chain of
Mountains that runs along the middle of the Isle. Nor are its Northern parts,
especially near the Sea, without Inhabitants, who have seated themselves in
good Plantations; and although they are not here so thick as on the South Side,
yet they do of late very much increase and augment the number both of Persons
and Plantations.

The whole Island is divided into fourteen Parishes, Its Division and Number of
Inhabitants.
Divisions, or Precincts; which are, for the satisfaction of the Reader, all
set forth in the Map, and the several Places throughout the whole Island where
the English have made any Settlements, marked and distinguished by Ciphers.

The Names of the Parishes on the South Side, are as follow;

Port Royal, St. Katherines, St. John's, St. Andrew's, St. David's, St. Thomas,
Clarendon; in which seven Parishes, there are according to the best
computation, about five thousand Families, and about forty five thousand
Inhabitants.

On the North-side are,

St. George's, St. Mary's, St. Annes, and St. James'.

On the East Side, is

St. Elizabeth, and two Parishes more near adjoining to it, the one on the
East, and the other on the North of it; all which likewise begin to grow very
populous, and are supposed to contain near six thousand Inhabitants: And the
great Encouragement of gaining Riches, does every year cause abundance of
People to quit their Concerns at Barbados, and other of our American
Plantations, to come and inhabit here; so that in a little time it will, in all
probability, within a few years become the richest, and the most populous, and
potent Plantation in all the West Indies.

But besides these Inhabitants of the fourteen Precincts, there are reckoned to
belong to Jamaica four thousand Privateers, Sloop and Boat-men, that ply up and
down about the Isle, who are all stout, resolute, fighting Men; which they have
sufficiently demonstrated in their late Exploits, and desperate Attempts upon
the Spaniards in Panama, and other Parts in the South-Seas.

This Isle abounds with many excellent Commodities; as, Its Product.


SVGARS, which are so good, that they outsell those that are made in Barbados
five shillings per Cent. There are near an hundred of these Sugar-Works, which
produced every year above two hundred thousand weight of Sugar: These
Sugar-Works are likewise continually increasing every year, and new are always
going up.

CACAO, whereof we make Chocolate, is, by reason of the natural aptness of the
Ground to produce and bear it, the most beneficial and staple Commodity of the
Island; there being near an hundred Cacao-Walks, besides abundance of young
ones newly planted and growing up, and others that are still planting; so that
it will in time become the most noted place for that Commodity in the World;
which will redound to the great advantage of the Planters, in regard it is so
much used by us and other neighboring Nations, especially the Spaniards, who
use such vast quantities of it, they alone are enough to take off all that the
Island produces; so that there is no fear that it will ever prove a Drug, and
lie upon their hands.

INDICO, which the Isle produces in great abundance, and very good, there being
already above eighty Indico-Works, which produce above sixty thousand weight of
Indico per annum; which Works do likewise very much increase every year.

COTTON is another of their Products, which is very fine, and is therefore
preferred by all that deal in that Commodity, before that which grows in any of
the Caribby Islands.

TOBACCO, which is here indifferent good, being accounted much better than that
which grows at Barbados, but other Commodities proving more beneficial to the
Islanders, there is not much of it planted, only what serves for their own
spending.

TORTOISE-SHELLS, which are in so much esteem with us in England for several
curious Works, and therefore find as ready a vent as any Commodity whatsoever
that is brought us from beyond the Seas. There are abundance of them taken on
this Coast, there being a further end in the taking them, besides the
Merchandising of the Shells, for their Flesh are excellent Meat.

HIDES, great quantities, whereof have been yearly made there, and are found to
be very large and good.

WOODS for the use of Dyers, whereof there are great variety, as Fustick,
Red-Wood, etc. Here is likewise Cedar, Mathogency, Brasilletto, Lignum Vitae,
Ebony, Granadilla, and diverse other excellent sweet smelling and curious Woods,
fit for the choicest Works, whose Names are yet unknown, and so indeed are
their excellencies; however, great quantities of 'em are continually exported
thence, and great profit made of them.

SALT is another of the Products of this Island, which might be made here in
great quantities, there being already three very large Salt-Ponds, containing
near Four thousand Acres of ground, and there was made, in one Year, about Ten
thousand Bushels; and the manager of it, Captain John Noye, affirmed, That he
could as well have made so many Tun, if they had had vent for it. But, at
present, they make little more than what is spent in the Island. Nor is it
altogether void of other Salts, there having been good quantities of Nitre
found in diverse places in the Isle.

GINGER, grows better there, than it does in many other of the Caribby Islands,
which has occasioned the planting great quantities of it.

COD-PEPPER likewise, which is a Spice very much used in all the West Indies,
grows in great plenty there; and so does

PIEMENTO, or a certain Spice which is better known by name of Jamaica-Pepper,
very aromatical, and of a curious flavor, having the exact taste both of
Cinnamon and Cloves, with a complicated mixtute of diverse other sweet and
curious Spices. This Spice the Island does naturally produce; for it grows wild
upon the mountainous parts of it; some whereof are plantable, and others so
stony, that are unplantable; but both are generally covered with excellent
Timber and great abundancy of Fruit and Spice-trees. The Spaniards, when they
enjoyed the place, set a high value upon this Spice, and exported it as a very
choice Commodity, as indeed it is; and the English finding so good a vent for
it, intend to imitate them therein, and begin now to bring it into their
Plantations, which will in time turn them to great account.

DRVGS, which this Island produces in great abundance, as, Guiacum,
China-roots, Sarsaparilla, Cassia-Fistula, Tamerinds, Vinello's and Achiots or
Anetto, which is like to prove a good Commodity. There are also diverse sorts of

GVMS and Roots wherewith experienced Planters cure diverse Wounds, Ulcers and
other Maladies; as, Aloes, Benjamin, and the like: And by the report of an
intelligent Physician, who made it his business to enquire and search after
such things, there is likewise Cyperas, Contrayerva, Adjunctum nigrum, Cucumis
agrestis, Sumach, Acacia, Misleto, with many other Drugs, Balsams and Gums,
whose Names and Virtues are not known or remembered. However the Planters begin
every year to be better and better acquainted with their Nature and Use, and
endeavor to increase them, in order to their supplying England with them.

COCHANEIL is likewise produced by a Plant that grows in this Isle; but the
English, being as yet not very well skilled in husbanding of it, and the
East-winds, and many other things being enemies to its growth, its product is
not very considerable.

These, and the like Commodities are the Product of this Island, which the
English have already, and will in a little time improve to that degree, that it
will quickly become the best and the richest Plantation that they ever were or
are like to be Masters of; especially if they should find out the Copper Mines,
which the Spaniards say to be in this Island, with some whereof they affirm the
Bells that hung in the great Church at St. Jago to be cast. And the Silver
Mines, which may probably be here as well as in Cuba and the Main Continent,
since the Spaniards affirm they found one behind the Mountains, on the West of
Cagway.

But before I pass from this Discourse, of the Product of Jamaica, I shall give
you an account of the manner of managing a Cacao Walk, in regard it is the
Chief Commodity of the Island, with a particular calculation of the change in
Planting, and the profits that arise from it, as it was lately estimated by a
very judicious and understanding person, and one who has given great
encouragement to diverse of the Planters there.

When a person, who intends to settle at Jamaica, arrives, Of a Cocao Walk.
after he has taken a view of the Country, his first work must be to take up
Six hundred Acres of Land, which must be chosen in a good place, that so the
Land may be proper to produce the Nut; which Grant, for the Patent and
Surveying, will cost Ten Pounds. Having taken up his Land, he must provide
himself of three Negro Men, and as many Women; which, at Twenty Pounds per
head, will come to an Hundred and twenty Pounds; with four White Servants,
which, with their Passage and Diet for a Year, will cost him about Eighty
Pounds; with Twenty Axes, and the like number of Bills and Hoes, which will
cost him about Five Pounds; and with an Overseer, to look after his Servants
and keep them to their work, whose Wages and Diet, at Forty Shillings a Month,
will cost him Twenty four Pounds: All which, with Eighteen Pounds, which the
Provisions for his Six Negro Servants, will, at Four Pence per day, each of
them cost him for the first six Months, till his own Plantation is capable of
maintaining them, is Two hundred fifty seven Pounds, Five Shillings.

When this is done, his next business is to set his Servants to work, whose
first employment must be to cut down the Wood, and clear a convenient place,
whereon to build fitting Houses for their Lodging; which, if they begin with
March, they will have effected by the middle of that Month: After which, he
must set them to felling the Timber, grubbing up the Roots, and clearing a
piece of Ground, of four Acres, whereon to plant Potatoes; all which planting,
and all, with the help of his Servants, will be easily effected by the middle
of April. And then his best way is to set them to prepare more Ground, which he
may plant with Plantane-Trees, and other things, (which he thinks he shall
first want, for the enabling his Plantation to subsist of its self) till the
beginning of February, which compleats the Year. In which time they may, with
ease, prepare and plant about one or two and twenty Acres, and the Plantation
will be able to live of its self, for they will now be full of Potatoes and
Corn, and within two Months of the new Year with Plantanes, which, together
with his stock of Hoggs and Fowls will sufficiently furnish him with Provisions
for his Servants.

To improve this Ground, and plant the Cacao-Walk, he must, about the beginning
of the next March, provide himself with five Negro men more, and as many Women,
which will come to Two hundred pounds more: And that Month he must employ all
the hands he has in planting Cacao-Trees between all the Rows of Plantanes,
which, by this time are grown to be six foot high, and, by the beginning of
June, he will have, besides much other work done, the whole twenty one Acres,
which were planted the year before with Cacao-Trees, which, in less than four
years, will begin to bear Cods, and, in five years, produce complete Crops,
each Acre affording yearly to the Planter a Thousand Weight of Cacao-Nuts,
which is there worth about four Pounds per cent. so that the twenty one Acres,
which are already planted and come to perfection, are worth Eight hundred and
forty Pounds per Annum. And the whole Expense, together with Forty two Pounds
fifteen Shillings more, allowed for gathering and housing them, amounts but to
Five hundred Pounds, so that the profit will be very considerable.

All the Work, already mentioned, will be performed in fifteen Months, and the
remaining time, till the Cacaoes come to perfection, which will be somewhat
better than four year, he may employ in increasing the Walk, building
convenient Houses, and making of Gardens for pleasure: Or, if the smalness of
his Stock will not permit him to forbear his Money till the Cacaoes come to
bear completely, he may fall to planting Ginger, Indico, or some such kind of
Commodity for present profit.

And according to this Calculation the planting of a smaller or a larger Walk
may be effected.

There is in this Island a greater plenty of Cattle Their Cattle.
than in most of the English Plantations in America. Horses so much abound
there, that one of the better sort may be bought for six or seven Pounds. Their
Cows are very large, and so numerous, that notwithstanding there have been
great numbers of them killed every year, yet the number of them seems not to be
lessened. Asnegroes and Mules, both wild and tame, in great abundance, which
are found to be very serviceable to the Inhabitants. Their Sheep are likewise
very large and tall, the Flesh whereof is very good, but the Wool long, hairy,
and little worth. They have great plenty of Goats, which thrive and increase
there exceedingly, the Country being found very fit for them. Hoggs they have
likewise in exceeding great plenty, as well wild in the Mountains, as tame in
the Plantations; the Flesh whereof is far better tasted, more nourishing, and
much easier to be digested, than those of Europe; which is the reason why it is
so much eaten in this, and indeed in all the other Islands throughout all the
West Indies. They have also plenty of Rabbits, but no Hare nor Deer in all the
Island.

Jamaica very much abounds both in its Rivers, Their Fish.
Bays, Roads, and Creeks, with great variety of excellent Fish, the great
abundance whereof very much contributes to the feeding of the Inhabitants, and
others who frequent the Island. It Is true, indeed, they have none of those
sorts common to us, but such vast variety of those appropriated to the Indies,
that it would be too tedious to repeat their Names, were they known or
remembered.

The principal sort of those Fish, is the Tortoise, which are taken in such
plenty about twenty or thirty Leagues to the Leeward of Port Nigril, near the
Isles of Camavos, that great store of Ships from diverse of the Caribby Islands
resort thither to victual and load therewith, its Flesh being reputed the
wholsomest and best Provision in all the West Indies.

There are in Jamaica great store of tame Hens, Turkies, some ^eese and Ducks,
but of Wild Fowl Their Fowl.
such plenty, that it is almost incredible, viz. Ducks, Teal, Wigeon, Geese,
Turkies, Pigeons, Guinea Hens, Plover, Flemingo's, Snipes, Parots, Paracheto's,
with abundance more, whose Names are not yet known.

There are in Jamaica very few obnoxious Beasts, and scarce any venomous
things, either Animal or Vegetable. Animals and Vegetables.
The most considerable of all the obnoxious Creatures which infest this Isle,
is the Alligator, a very voracious Creature, which in many of their Rivers and
Land-Ponds, lives by preying upon such Beasts and Fowls as come thither to
drink, which they catch and kill with the more ease and facility, by lying
stretched forth upon the brinks of the Rivers, like a piece of dry Wood, which
in that posture they very much resemble, so that the innocent creatures
approach the fatal place without the least dread of so cruel an entertainment
as they meet withal from that remorsless adversary. They are ten, fifteen, and
some twenty foot long, having four Feet, or rather Fins, wherewith they both
walk and swim; they move forward with great swiftness and strength, but are not
able to turn without much tediousness and trouble; their Back and Sides are so
covered with Scales, that they are impenetrable and scarcely to be killed,
unless the weapon pierce their Eye or Belly, notwithstanding which they are
rarely known to set upon a Man. They breed like a Fowl, by Eggs no bigger than
those of a Turk^y, which, having laid in the Sand, not far from the Water, she
leaves the Sunbeams to hatch, without ever looking after them more: And the
young ones, so soon as ever they have broke the shell, naturally creep into the
water, and shift for themselves, by preying upon such things as they are able
to master.

But though the Alligator be so hurtful a creature whilst living, yet at his
death he makes a retaliation, and in some measure repairs the damages of his
life; for, besides their Fat, which is a sovereign Balm for internal Aches and
Pains in the Joints and Bones, they have in them Musk-Cods, stronger sented
than those of the East Indies; by which strong sent they are discovered and
avoided, and, it is supposed, that the Cattle, by an instinct of nature, are
likewise sensible of it, and do by that means often shun them.

There is likewise the Manchon^le, a kind of Crab, common to all the Caribby
Islands; And Snakes and Guiana's, but they have no poisonous quality observed
in them. There are also in some parts of the Isle Muskettoes, and Merry-wings,
but they are seldom found in any of the English Plantations.

It is confirmed by a long experience, Their Diseases.
that there is no such antipathy betwixt our Britanick Temper and the Climate
of Jamaic^, as to necessitate them to any Distemper upon their arrival there,
or occasion Diseases to prove mortal or contagious more than in other parts.
The Dropsy, Calentures, Fevers and Agues, are the Maladies most incident to
the Inhabitants, which are generally procured by Surfeits, Slothfulness, or
excessive drinking; and although they are found to be more acute there, than
with us, yet they seldom prove mortal: And the only reason that can be given
for the great Mortality in the Army upon their first Arrival there, is, their
want of Provisions, and their discontent, together with their unwillingness to
labor and exercise themselves.

The Gardens Their Gardens.
adjoining to the Planters Houses, are besides great variety of curious and
delightful Flowers, and wholesome Medicinal Herbs proper to the Island,
sufficiently stored with all manner of Summer-Garden-Herbs and Roots common to
us in England; as, Pease, Beans, Cabbage, Carrots, Turnips, Radishes, Onions,
Lettuce, Pursley, Colli-flowers, Cucumbers, Melons, Parsley, and other
Pot Herbs.

The Laws Their Laws.
of Jamaica are as near as the different Circumstances of the Places will admit
assimilated to those of England; and they have their several Courts,
Magistrates and Officers, for executing their Laws, hearing and determinating
all Causes and Controversies between party and party.

Having now given a short and brief Description of this Island of Jamaica, and
of whatsoever is worth observation in it, I shall next acquaint you with the
State of it in the Spaniards time, and shut up my Discourse about it, with some
Considerations relating to our English Affairs in America, together with some
Reasons to justify the first Design in taking it, and why His Majesty should
keep and support it.

Columbus, Its first Discovery.
having in the Year 1492. discovered the Lucca's Islands, Hispaniola and Cuba,
soon after returned for Spain, to give that King an account of his Discoveries,
and provide himself with Conveniences for a second Voyage; which he undertook
so soon as all things were ready: And in this Voyage endeavoring to sail round
Cuba, the better to satisfy himself whether it were an Island, or a part of
the Continent, he discovered the Island of Jamaica; where he made some short
stay, and gave it the Name of St. Jago.

In his third Voyage, he was shipwrack'd on this Coast, Columbus shipwrack'd
and and driven to that extremity, that he was compelled to run his Ships on
ground in a Port on the North-side of this Isle, to which he gave the Name of
Sancta Gloria; where, having lashed them together, he lodged himself and his
men on the Decks, not daring to Land, in regard the Inhabitants were numerous;
and there had like to have ended his Life and his Discoveries together; the
ungrateful Spaniard, especially the malicious Governor of St. Domingo, who
hated him extremely for his fortunate Success, refused to send him any Relief,
with a Design that he should perish in that sad and disconsolate condition; but
having after two Months lying in that deplorable condition, obtained the good
opinion of the Natives, he Landed, and finding the Ground fertile, and the
Natives more Civil and Ingenious than what he had met withal in any of the
other Islands, he resolved to fall to Planting: In order whereunto, the Town
called Metilla, was presently begun by the Spaniards; but before it was far
advanced, they deserted it again, and settled ten Leagues further West; where
they met with a better Bay, whereunto they gave the Name of St. Annes; which it
still retains.

Near this Place they built a handsome large Town, called Sevil, which has been
already described: But finding in time that the South Side was more fruitful
and pleasant, about the Year 1590. the Spaniards forsook this likewise, and
removed thither; where they built St. Jago; St. Jago built.
which they enjoyed without any trouble or molestation, till it was about 1638.
surprised and taken by one Jackson Taken by Jackson.
with a Fleet of English Privateers; but having no Design but Pillage, when he
had plundered the Town, he surrendered it up again to the Spaniards for a
thousand Beavers.

More fatal to the Spaniard was the next Attempt made on this Island; for
Cromwell Cromwell 's Pre-
having turned out the Rump, usurped the Title of Protector, and made peace
with the Hollander, found himself at leisure to try his Fortune in the Indies,
and endeavor by a strange kind of a sudden and unexpected Enterprise against
the Spaniards (with whom he was about this time highly offended, for giving
entertainment to his injured Sovereign) to make his Name as terrible in those
remoter parts of the Earth, as his Treason and Usurpation had rendered it in
Europe. In order whereunto, having with great hurry and silence got ready a
great Fleet, he sent it under Penn, who was General at Sea, and Venables, who
had the Command of the Landforces.

Having after their leaving the English Coast, touched at Barbados, they sailed
from thence directly toward Hispaniola, without making any Declaration of War
against the Spanish King, and had certainly surprised and taken Domingo, and
consequently the whole Island, had not his being ruled by some strange Councils
of his own, or (as some report) by his Wife, ruined the whole Design, and
frustrated the Usurper of his Golden Expectations: For so terrified were the
Spaniards at the sudden approach of this mighty Fleet, and the Fame of
Cromwell's constant Success in all he undertook, that in great amazement and
fear they forsook the Town, and left it as a prey to those new invaders, had
they been speedy enough in taking possession: But seeing Venables land his
Soldiers at so great a distance as 12 leagues to the westward of it, they
reassumed their courage, and betook themselves again to the defense of it.

The English finding no opposition at their Landing, thought themselves Lords
of the Indies, and began in their own thoughts to share the Golden Mines among
themselves; which they had peradventure effected, had not Venables's covetous
humor, and an insatiable desire to appropriate all to himself, by forbidding
the Soldiers by Proclamation made at the Head of the Army to meddle with any
of that rich Booty, or presume to kill any Cattle without leave, together with
their tedious and disconsolate March through thick Woods, and deep scalding
Sands, ready to die with Thirst, so damped their Spirits, and lost their wonted
Courage, that they became an easy prey to the wary Spaniard, who taking them
at that advantage, and setting upon them at unawares, The English disappointed
and beaten.
destroyed them without resistance, even till they were weary of killing, and
Major Genesis Haines and between six or seven hundred more left both their Lives
and their expected Booty behind them to pay for Venables's Folly, besides near
as many more which were killed in straggling Parties; the whole Execution being
performed with the loss of sixty persons on the Spaniards side.

Having thus frustrated their Expectations by their unadvised Landing, and lost
all hope of winning that Town, they resolve however not to lose the whole
Voyage without gaining something from the Spaniard, and therefore next directed
their Course to Jamaica, wherein was at that time but one only Town (viz.) St.
Jago, within which Place dwelt all the Spaniards that were in the Isle, who
kept their Slaves at several little Plantations in the Country, from whence
they were continually supplied with store of Fruits and Provisions, which they
luxuriously spent in their Houses, that being a lazy People, who are naturally
so proud, that they think it below them to take pains; designing nothing more
but only to live in ease and plenty, their whole number, Slaves and all, not
exceeding three Thousand.

Upon the Landing of the English Army, They take Jamaica.
the Inhabitants of St Jago forsook the Town, and betook themselves to the
Mountains; but after diverse Skirmishes and Surprisals on both sides, seeing but
little hopes of regaining the Island, several of the most considerable among
them got into Cuba, but were soon after commanded back again by the Viceroy of
Alexico, with promises of a speedy supply to be sent after them. The Viceroy's
Promise was long before it was performed; and when the Succor came, it was but
five hundred men, who refused to join with them, in regard they were so few in
number, and by this time grown very sickly, but fortified themselves at a place
called St. Chereras, expecting to receive more Recruits; but the English
finding them out before they came, marched immediately against them, and
defeated them, and so they did about thirty Companies of Spanish Soldiers that
arrived soon after; which bad Success made the Spaniards despair of ever
regaining the Island. Whereupon the English began now to form themselves into a
Body or Colony; some settling themselves in Plantations, and others venturing to
Sea as Privateers, the better to secure themselves against the Spaniards, and
force them to consent to a Peace, by their frequent annoying them, and seizing
such of their Ships as they met withal; in which they proved so very
successful, that Jamaica began to be much talked of, and had in great esteem in
England, and fresh Supplies of Men, Ammunition, and other Necessaries were sent
them thence; and so by little and little it came to its present Potency,
wherein His Majesty will without doubt take care to preserve and support it,
upon the following Considerations:

1. Its being so large and capacious, that it is capable of entertaining a far
greater number of People than any other Island enjoyed by the English in that
part of the World.

2. Its being so seated in the heart of the Spanish Territories in America,
that their Ships, as they come thither, and pass from Port to Port, make this
Isle, or may be easily met with by those Ships that ply upon the Coast; for all
the Plate-Fleet, in their return from Carthagena, steer directly from St.
Domingo, and pass by one of the ends of this Isle, to recover Havana, which is
the common Rendezvous of the Spanish Armado, before they sail home through the
Gulf of Florida. Nor indeed is there any other way; for the Voyage would be
too unreasonable long should they turn it to the Windward of Hispaniola; by
which means, besides the great difficulty of its performance, they would lose
the benefit of uniting the Fleets from Mexicos Nombre de Dios, and other
places, at their common Rendezvous at Havana, wherein their greatest Security
lies; for from thence they sail all home in company together.

3. In regard Jamaica exceeds all the rest of our Plantations in America for
the goodness of those Commodities proper to their several Colonies; and is
besides its being so profitable in furnishing us with excellent Commodities, it
likewise takes off abundance of our Manufactures, both of the product of this
Kingdom, and such as are brought us from Parts beyond the Seas.

4. Because it appears to be a place considerable enough to deserve His
Majesty's Care for its preservation, not only by its subsisting of its self
when first taken; but likewise by its increasing its Potency and Grandeur, so
that it will in all probability become in a little time very profitable both to
the King and Kingdom, and bring into His Majesty's Treasury several hundred
thousand Pounds per Annum.

5. This Island being (when settled) of its self able to carry on a War against
the Spaniards, when the Affairs of England shall require it.

6. The considerable progress already made in the Settlement of this Isle; nor
can its distance be any real disadvantage, since the greater number of Ships
are thereby employed, and consequently the more Saylors, Ship-wrights, and
other Tradesmen, whose Livelihood depends upon trade at Sea. Besides, if it lay
nearer, we could expect no such Commodities as we receive from thence, in
regard they are appropriated to that Clime. And it must certainly be a great
advantage to His Majesty to have such Merchandise within His own Dominions, as
are both valued and needed by His Subjects and Neighbors, as the Cacao is,
though it be at a distance.

7. The Coast of Virginia, and some of the Caribby-Islands are subject to such
Gusts of Wind, that Ships are often driven to put to Sea, and fly for shelter
to some or other of the Spanish Leeward Ports, where they were wont to be made
Prizes of; but Jamaica, since it has fallen into our hands, has proved a
convenient Harbor for such Ships or Vessels as are at any time thus
distressed; which is an Argument sufficient to persuade His Majesty to
undertake its Support and Defense.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of BARBADOS.
BARBADOS is the most considerable Colony which the English enjoy amongst all
that Fry of Isles usually called Caribbies, and lies in 13 degrees, Its
Situation.
20 minutes map of Barbados The Island of BARBADOS.
By Robert Morden.
Northern Latitude on this side the Equator; and though it be not above eight
Leagues in Length, and five in breadth, where it is broadest (being exactly of
an oval form) yet it is a place of great strength and potency; for besides it
being naturally strong, and fortified as it were to their hands, they are able
to raise ten thousand sighting men, and bid desiance to the stoutest Enemy; as
appears by the several vain attempts the Spaniard has made upon it: It is
notwithstanding the smalness of its Compass, so well peopled, that it contains
upwards of fifty thousand Inhabitants, besides Negro-Slaves, who are a far
greater number.

It was first discovered in the Reign of King James the First, Its first
Discovery.
by Sir William Curteen, who returning homewards from Fernambuck in Brazil, was
driven by a storm upon this Coast, and anchoring before the Isle, he went with
some of his Company ashore, to inform himself of the Nature of the Place; which
he found so exceedingly overgrown with Woods, that they could find no plain or
champaign ground sit to inhabit, nor any either Beasts but Swine, which the
Portugals, having formerly put on shore here, to furnish them with Provisions
in case they should be cast on that shore by foul weather, had by this time
multiplied abundantly, the Fruits and Roots that grew there serving them for
food; so that the Natives of the adjacent Islands (for there were none in this)
were used to come thither frequently to kill them.

Having made this Discovery, and informed himself as well as he could of the
Nature and Condition of the Island, he gave notice thereof to his Friends in
England; from whence diverse Ships were with all convenient speed dispatched
thither; who, upon their Arrival, applied themselves to the rendering the
Island sit for Habitation. In order to which, they cut down the Woods, and
planted Potatoes and Maiz; which, together with the Swine which they found
there, did but just keep Life and Soul together; for having as yet nothing to
trade withal, Ships from England visited them but slowly; so that they were
oft-times driven to great extremities: But having about the year 1627.
increased the number of its Inhabitants, and Tobacco, Indico, Cotton-wool,
Fustick-wood, and the like, begun to grow there, and afford great increase, the
Island began to gain more repute in England, and invited diverse Ships, in hope
of gain, to trade with them, exchanging diverse sorts of working-tools made of
Iron and Steel, together with Cloth, Shirts, Drawers, Hose, Shoes, Hats,
Servants, and other things which they needed, for Tobacco and other things
which the Island produced. After which, they grew and increased wonderfully
both in number and wealth; especially when their Sugarcanes were grown, and
they had learned the Art of making Sugar.

This Isle is very hot, especially for eight Months, Its Temperature.
and would be more insupportable, were it not for the cool Briezes of Wind,
which rise with the Sun, and blow fresher as the Sun mounteth higher. And these
Briezes blow always from the North-East, except it be in the time of the
Turnado, and then for an hour or two it chops into the South; but after returns
to the same Point again. And it is observed, that although the People do so
much sweat, yet they find not that faintness as with us in England in the
Months of July and August; neither are they so thirsty, unless overheated by
excess of Labor, or drinking of strong Liquors, which the People here are too
much addicted unto, to their great hurt; which, if moderately taken, would be
as a great preservative to comfort and refresh their inward parts, which are
left cold and faint through their sweating. Besides, our Bodies being
accustomed to colder Climates, our Spirits are not so vigorous without them in
a moderate manner.

This Isle is not over-plentifully watered with Rivers or fresh Springs, Its
Waters.
there being but one that can appropriate to itself that Name, or rather a Lake
which runs not far into the Land; yet notwithstanding, the Inhabitants are not
destitute thereof; for the Country lying low and level, there are several Pools
or Ponds; and besides they are supplied with Rainwater by having Wells and
Cisterns in their Houses.

Here is also a River which the Inhabitants call Tuigh-River, from the top of
whose water is gathered an Oil which serves them to burn in their Lamps.

This Isle is exceeding fertile, Its Fertility.
bearing Crops all the year long, and its Trees being always clothed in their
Summer-Livery, and the Fields and Woods in their verdure, renders it very
delightful to the Inhabitants. But the two principal seasons of the year for
planting, are in May and November, but the Sugarcanes are planted all the year
round, the making of which is not only very chargeable, but also as dangerous,
and subject to casualties, either in the Boyling-house, with the Coppers and
Furnaces, in the Filling-Room, in the Still-House, or in the Curing-House.

The Commodities this Island produces, Its Commodities.
are Sugars (which though not so white as those of Brazile, yet better when
refined, being of a fairer grain) Indico, Cotton-wool, Ginger, Logwood,
Fustick, and Lignum vitae; and these Commodities, especially Sugar, Indico,
Cotton and Ginger, here are in such great abundance, that about two hundred
Sail of Ships and Vessels, both great and small, have yearly their loading;
which, after imported in the several Ports of England and Ireland, is again in
great quantities exported to foreign parts, to our great enrichment; and the
rather, for that they are not permitted to trade with any other Nation but the
English, and such of His Majesty's Subjects in New England, Virginia and
Bermudas; and in exchange of those Commodities, they take such as are necessary
for the use of man, as well for the Back and Belly, as for their Houses and
Plantations; with many of which they are supplied from New England, Virginia,
and the Bermudas, together with Servants and Slaves, with several sorts of
Commodities and Provisions, as, Horses, Camels, Assinegroes, Cattle, also
salted Flesh, and Fish of several sorts; Butter and Cheese; but by reason of
the great heat of the weather, it will soon stink, and become unfit to eat; so
that instead of Butter, they make great use of Oil for their Sauces.

The Days and Nights are almost throughout the year of an equal length, the
Sun rising and setting at six, except about October, and then there is some
small difference.

The Air, The Air.
though hot, is very moist, which causes all Iron-Tools, as Knives, Swords,
Locks, Keys, etc. to rust; so that without constant usage, they will soon
become eaten up with Rust. And this great heat and moisture does cause the
Plants and Trees to grow so large and high.

Here are abundance of Fruits of all sorts; as, Dates, The Fruits.
Oranges two sorts, the one sweet, and the other sharp, Pomgranates, Citrons,
Limes, Limons, Macows, Grapes, Juniper-Apples, Papayers, Momins, Mombains,
Acajous, Icacos, Cherries, Raisins, Indian-Figs, Cocoes, Plantins, Bononoes,
Guavars, Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Custard-Apples, Melons, both Land and
Water, and Pine-Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies.

Here are great store of Fish in the Sea; as, Snappers, Crabs, Their Fish.
Lobsters, Terbums, Macquerels, Mullets, Cavalloes, Parrot-Fish, Cony-Fish, and
Green Turtles; which of all others, are the most delicious; with several other
sorts appropriated to this and the rest of the Caribby-Isles; but the Rivulets
or Ponds have few or no Fish in them.

Here are no Beasts or Cattle but what are tame, Their Cattle.
and brought them; as, Camels, Horses, Assinegroes, Oxen, Bulls, Cows, Sheep,
Goats and Hogs? which are here in great plenty in every Plantation, it being
their common Food; whose Flesh is esteemed very good and delicious; but as for
Beef and Mutton, it is very dear, as having but a small stock; but might be
soon increased, would they spare ground enough for Pasturage for them from
their other occasions.

Here grows diverse sorts of English Herbs and Roots; Their Herbs.
as, Rosemary, Lavender, Lavender-Cotton, Marjoram, Winter-Savoury, Time,
Parsley, Tanscy, Sage, Purslan, etc. And for Roots, Cabbages, Coleworts,
Colliflowers, Turnips, Potatoes, Onions, Garlic, Radishes, Lettice, Taragon,
Marigolds, etc.

Here are several sorts of Fowls, as, Their Fowls
Turkeys, Hens, Muscovy-Ducks, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, etc. And for small Birds,
great variety; as, Thrushes, Black-Birds, Sparrows, etc.

Here are several Animals Animals.
and Insects; as, Snakes a yard and half long, Scorpions as big as Rats, but no
way hurtful to Man or Beast; Lizards, which are exceeding harmless, much
frequenting the Houses, and loving the company of Men; Musketoes, Cockroches,
and Merriwings, which are very troublesome in the Night in stinging; also there
are Land-Crabs, which are found good to eat.

Here are great variety of Trees, Trees.
fit for several Uses; as, the Locust, Mastick, Red-wood, the Iron-wood-tree
and Cedar, which are fit for Building. Also the, Cassia-Fistula, Coloquintida,
Tamarind, Cassary, of which is made their Bread; the Poyson-Tree, and the
Physick-Nut, these have a Physical, and some a Poisonous Virtue in them. Also
here are these trees following, the Calibash, the shell of whose fruit serves
to carry liquid things in, being of the nature of Gourds; the Mangrass-tree,
which is of an exceeding greatness, the Roucou, of whose Bark is made Ropes; as
also Flax, which being spun, is employed to several uses, the Lignum Vitae, the
Palmeto, which is very large, and beautiful to behold; with several others.

In this Island are diverse Caves, some of which are very deep, and large enough
to hold five hundred men; and these Caves are often the Sanctuary of such
Negro-Slaves that run away; in which they lie a good while before they are
found out; seldom stirring in the daytime, although they are such unwholesome
places, by reason of the great damps that are found in them: And it is supposed
that these Caves were the Habitation of the Natives.

They have a Drink called Mobby, Their Drink.
made of Potatoes soaked in water; another named Prino, made of Cassavy-Root
and Water, which, though it is not so pleasant, yet is reckoned much better,
made by the Indians for their own drinking, which in it self is a strong
Poison, and this they cause their old Women, whose Breath and Teeth have been
tainted with diverse Poxes, to chew and spit out in the water, for the better
breaking and macerating the Root, and in a few hours this Juice will purge
itself of its poisonous qualities; for their poisonous Breath, and the poison
of the Cassary, being opposites, work with such vehemence, that they spend
their poisonous qualities in the conflict; they likewise drink Crippo,
Kill-Devil, Punch, Plum-Drink, Plantane-Drink, a strong Drink made of the
skimming of Sugar, Beveridge, made of Spring Water, Sugar, and the Juice of
Oranges, and Wine of Pines, which is only made of the Juice of the Fruit, which
is the best of all.

Their Meat Their Meats.
is generally Hogs-Flesh, salted Flesh or Fish, and when any of the Cattle die
by any distemper, or by accident, it is given to the Negroes, who feed like
Princes on it; but they are commonly contented from weeks end to weeks end,
with Potatoes, Loblolly made of Maize mixed with water; Cassader-Bread, common
in all the Indies, Bonariff, and such like Food that the Plantation affords;
as, Pompions as sweet as Melons, Plantanes, Sugarcanes, etc. They have also
Turkeys, Pullets, Muscovy Ducks, Their Fowls.
Turtle-Doves, Pigeons and Rabbits, with excellent Fish of diverse kinds, Their
Fish.
not known to us, as the Green Turtle, who come in with the Tide, lie upon the
Sand till the next return, and are easily taken in Lucaick Islands, though not
in this; but sent hither; for it is but turning them on their backs with
staves, and there they lie till they are fetched away: A large Turtle (as we
have mentioned) will have in her Body half a Bushel of Eggs, which she lays in
the Sands, where they hatch by the Sun, When you are to kill one of the Fishes,
you lay him on his Back on a Table, and when he sees you come with a knife in
you hand to kill him, he sends forth the most grievous sighs that ever were
heard, and sheds Tears in abundance; after he is opened, and his Heart taken
out, if you lay it in a Dish, it will stir and pant ten hours after the Fish is
dead, there is none more delicious in taste, nor more nourishing than he.

But as for the Master-planters, Merchants Factors, and Strangers, their Fare
is far otherwise, having their curious made Dishes; as, Custards, Cheese-Cakes,
Tansics, also, Sturgeon, Anchovies, Caveare, Botardo, Neats Tongues; besides
Poultrey, Fish, Fowl, Mutton, Beef, Kid, Pork, Beans, Pease, several Roots, and
other good Dishes. And besides the several sorts of Liquors already named,
Wines, Strong Waters, Brandy, and English Beer; so that they find no want, and
do not consider the condition of those poor wretches, their Servants and
Slaves, who are constrained to so hard a Labor.

This Island may be divided into Masters, Servants and Slaves; The Division of
the Island.
the Masters live in all affluence of Pleasure and Delight. The Apparel they
allow their Servants yearly, for the Men, are, six pair of Drawers, twelve pair
of Shoes, three Monmouth-Caps, six Shirts; and for the Women, four Smocks,
three Petticoats, four Coifs, and twelve pair of Shoes, besides a Rug-Gown to
each, to keep them warm in the night, and to put on them when they come
sweating from their labor. To the Negro-Men they allow but three pair of
Canvas Drawers, and to the Women, but three Petticoats.

But for themselves (especially the better sort) they are exceeding profuse and
costly.

The Lodging of these poor Wretches is worst of all; for having labored all
the day in so hot a Country, without any nourishing Diet, at night they must be
content to lie hard, on nothing but a Board, without any Coverlet, in their
Huts or rather Hog-sties; but Christian Servants are something better treated,
being allowed Hamocks.

Every Sunday (which is the only day of Rest, and should be set apart for the
Service of God) they employ either in the getting of the Bark of Trees, and
making Ropes with it, which they truck away for Shirts, Drawers, and the like;
or else spend the Day in Recreation, as Dancing and Wrestling, which they much
delight in, though they are no great Proficients in either; for in their
Dancing they use Antic Actions, their hands having more of motion than their
feet, and their head than either; nor do the men and women dance together, but
apart; the Music to which they dance being a sort of Kettle-Drums, one bigger
than another, which makes a strange and various noise, but whether harmonious I
leave to the Judgment of the Reader.

The Servants, after five years, become Freemen of the Island, and then employ
their time as may be most to their Advantage; but the Negro-Slaves and their
Children being in bondage for ever, are preserved with greater care, and used
with such severity, as occasioned a great conspiracy against their Masters some
years since; which was so closely carried, as no discovery was made till the
day before it was to be acted, and then one of them, either failing of his
Courage, or out of Love to his Master, discovered and prevented it; for which,
many of them were put to death, as a Terror to the rest; who being so numerous,
might prove dangerous, but that they are kept in such strict aw, and not
suffered to touch or handle a Weapon; so that nothing is more terrible to them
than Gunshot; and besides, being of different Countries, do not understand one
another Language; for in some of those places in Africa, where petty Kingdoms
are, who go to War against one another, the Prisoners that are taken on each
side, they sell unto and other European Nations that come to traffic with
them; yea, they sell their Subjects, and some poor men their Servants, and
sometimes their Wives, for such Traffic as our Merchants bring them; when they
are brought hither, the Planters buy them out of the Ship, where they find them
stark naked, and therefore cannot be deceived in any outward infirmity, choosing
them as men do Horses in a Fair, and according as they are handsome, lusty, well
shapen, and young; the youthfullest and most beautiful yield the greatest
price; the general rate for the better sort of Negro-Men is thirty pound
sterling, and five and twenty for a Woman, is usual; if they buy any that have
no Wives, they will come to their Masters and complain they cannot live
without, and he provides them one by the next Ships. Religion they have none,
yet seem to acknowledge a God, by looking up to Heaven for Revenge when they
are wronged: One Negro-Woman being brought abed of two Children, her Husband
provided a Cord to hang her, as false to him, but the Overseer prevented it, by
telling him, it was common with the English Women, and they liked them the
better; yet if he were resolved to hang her, he should be hanged himself by
her, the fear of which hindered him.

The Chief Towns Chief Towns.
of this Isle are St. Michael's, formerly called the Bridg-Town, or Indian
Bridge, Little Bristol, St. James' and Charlestown, with other Parishes of less
Note.

1. St. Michael's St. Michaels.
is situate at the bottom of Carlisle-Bay in the Leeward, or Southern part of
the Isle, which Bay is very capacious, deep and secure for Ships, being large
enough to entertain 500 Vessels at one time. The Town is long, containing
several Streets, and graced with abundance of well built Houses. It is very
populous, being the residence of the Governor, or his Deputy, the place of
Judicature, and the Scale of Trade, where most of the Merchants and Factors in
the Isle have their Storehouses for the negotiation of their Affairs; and from
these Storehouses or Shops, the Inhabitants are supplied with such Commodities
as they have occasion for, in exchange of theirs, which are the product of the
Isle. The Town is ill seated, the Ground being lower than the Banks of the Sea;
by which means the Spring-Tides do slow over, and there remaining, do make a
kind of a moorish Bogg, which does occasion it to be more unhealthful than the
other parts of the Isle. This Town for its Defense, and security of the Ships,
has two strong Forts opposite to each other, with a Platform in the midst,
which also commands the Road; all which are well fortified with great Guns,
etc. The principal of these Forts is called Charles Fort, being seated in
Nedham's Point.

2. Little Bristol, Little Bristol.
formerly Sprights Bay, situate about four Leagues Leeward from St. Michaels,
has a commodious Road for Ships, and is a place well frequented and traded
unto, and is strongly defended by two powerful Forts.

3. St. James, St. James.
formerly called the Hall, seated not far from Bristol, has the accommodation
of a good Road for Ships, and is a place of a considerable Trade, for its
defense, besides a large Platform, has fortified Breast-works, and in this
Town is kept for the Precinct, the Monthly Courts.

Charlestown, Charlestown.
seated wind-ward of St. Michaels, about two leagues, and an Oyster-Bay; it is
secured by two strong Forts, the one to the windward, and the other to the
Leeward of the Town and Road, with a Platform in the midst.

This Town has the accommodation of weekly Markets, and here is kept the
Monthly Courts for the Precinct.

The other Places of Name along the Seacoast of this Isle, beginning Easterly,
and so encompassing the Isle, are as follows,

Fowl-bay, Augustin's-bay, Maxwell's-bay, where there is a small Isle, Black
Rock, The Hole, Spikes-bay, Balises-bay, Long-bay, Clark's-bay, and
Constance-bay.

This Island is very strong, as well by Nature as Art, being sheltered with
Rocks and Shoals, and where Nature has not thus defended it, it is fortified
by Trenches and Ramperts, with Pallisado's, Curtains, and Counterscarps;
besides, round about the Isle, regarding the Sea, is standing-wood: here are
also for its further defense, three Forts, one for a Magazine for the
Ammunition and Powder to lie in, and the other two places for Retreats, as
occasion serves. They have also, for their further security, a standing
Militia, consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and five of Foot, which are
stout and well-disciplined Men, and always to be ready on beat of Drum.

The Government Government.
is by Laws agreeable to those in England, for which they have Courts of
Judicature, Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and the like. And
for the administration of Justice, here are yearly five Sessions. It is divided
into Eleven Precincts, wherein are fourteen Churches and Chapels; the whole so
filled with Houses, that it may almost seem one great Town. There is a Fish
called a Rock-fish taken near this Island, which is red, intermixed with several
other colors very delightful to the eye; And a great Fly, called by the
Indians, Cucuyos, which gives such a great light in the night, that it is
called the flying Torch of America, not only guiding the Traveller, by showing
his way in the night, but with the assistance of this light a man may easily
write and read the smallest Print; that the Indians, having these Flies
fastened to their hands and feet, go a hunting all night by the light of them,
which the famous Dubartus thus describes: New Spain's Cucuyo in his forehead
brings
Two burning Lamps, two underneath his wings,
Whose shining Rays serve often in darkest night
The Embroiderers hand in Royal-works to light;
The ingenious Turner with a wakeful eye
To pollish fair his purest Ivory;
The Usurer to count his glist'ring Treasure;
The learned Scribe to limn his golden Measure.


Those who are desirous to know more of the Nature of the Sugarcanes, the
manner of their planting, growth, cutting, grinding, boiling, together with the
manner of their conveying the Skimmings into their Cystern, where to distill it
for Spirits, how long it continues in the Curing-house before it become
Muscovado-Sugar, together with the manner of its refining and making into
Whites, may consult Mr. Richard Ligons description of this Isle, where they
will find sufficient satisfaction.

The present Governor of the Island of Barbado's is Sir Richard Dutton.

A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLAND of St. CHRISTOPHERS.
ST. CHRISTOPHERS, so named from Christopher Columbus, the first discover
thereof, who finding it very pleasant, gave it his own Name, which the shape of
the Mountains likewise inclined him to, for on its upper part it has as it
were upon one of its shoulders another lesser Mountain, as St. Christopher is
painted like a Giant, carrying our Savior upon his back, like as it were a
little Child. It is situated in the latitude of 17 degrees, Situation.
and 25 minutes on this side the Line; in circuit about 75 Miles: the Land lies
high in the midst, by reason of some very high Mountains, from which springs
several Rivers, which oftentimes, by reason of the Rains falling from the
Mountains, are overflown, to the detriment of the Inhabitants.

The Soil The Soil.
being light and sandy, is apt to produce all sorts of the Country-Fruits,
Provision and Commodities, as Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, etc.

This Isle by reason of its several great and steep Mountains, between which
are dreadful Rocks and Springs of hot and sulphurous Water, with horrid
Precipices and thick Woods, yea some Springs of Sulphur, which causes one of
them to be called the Sulphurous Mountain.

There is on the Seaside a Salt-Pit, called Guldesac; and not far from the
Salt-Pit there is a small Isthmus of Land, which reaches within a Mile and a
half of the Island of Nevis and Mevis.

The Island is placed exceeding delightful, and of a most delectable prospect
to the eye of the beholder, for it is divided into several stages, from the
uppermost whereof a man may take an exceeding pleasant prospect of all the
Plantations and Gardens, which gently descend to the Seaside, and in regard of
the general ascent of the Isle, the lower stage or story does not debar the eye
of the pleasant prospect of that which lies at a remoter distance; and that
which makes the prospect the more delectable in the several Plantatious (which
are bounded with Rows of Trees always in their verdure) are the fair Houses
covered with glazed Slate.

The whole Island is divided into four Quarters or Cantons; two whereof are
possessed by the English, and two by the French, but so separated, that People
cannot go from one Quarter to another without passing over the Lands of one of
the two Nations. The English have more little Rivers in their Division, the
French more of the plain Country fit for Tillage. The Engilsh exceed the
French in number, but the French have four Forts; of which, one has regular
Works like a Citadel; that of most note commands the Haven, and is called
Basse-Terre; and the English only two, one commanding the great Haven, and the
other a Descent not far from Point de Sable; and to prevent Differences
between the two Nations, each of them have a Guard upon the Frontiers of their
Division, which is renewed every day.

The English have erected five fair Churches, well furnished with Pulpits, and
Seats of excellent Joyners Work of precious Wood, the Ministers being sent
thither by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; one of the Churches is at
Sandy-Point, one at Palm Tree, another near the Great Rood, and two at the
Inlet of Cayoune, with many fair Structures.

The French and English Colonies had their beginning at the same time; for in
the Year 1625. Monsieur Desnambuck, a French, and Sir Thomas Warner an English
Gentleman, jointly took possession of Sir Christophers on the same day, in the
Names of the Kings of Great Britain and France, their Masters, that so they
might have a place of safe Retreat, and a good Haven for the Ships of both
Nations bound for America, as being well furnished with Provisions, and
therefore often visited by the Spaniards, who sometimes left the Sick there to
be looked to by the Caribeans, with whom they had made a Peace upon those Terms.

These two Gentlemen, having thus taken possession of the Island, for the
better establishment of these Colonies, returned to their respective Countries,
leaving some men in it to secure it; but suspecting some private Intelligence
between the Indians and Spaniards, for destroying all, both English and French,
in their absence, (to prevent which) they in one night rid their Hands of the
most factious of that Nation, and soon after forced all the rest, who were got
together in several Bodies, and stood upon their Guard, to retire to some other
Islands, and leave that to their Disposal. After this, they returned home,
where their Conquest and Proceeding being approved of by the Kings their
Masters, they returned with Recruits of Men, in the quality of Governors and
Lieutenants under the Kings of Great Britain and France; and having divided the
Island according to their first Agreement; and the English having plentiful
Provisions from London, prospered much more than the French, who wanted
necessary assistance.

The French, besides their several Habitations dispersed up and down in their
Quarters, have at Basse-Terre (near the Haven where Ships lie at Anchor) a Town
of a good bigness, whose Houses are well built, of Brick, Freestone and
Timber, where the Merchants have their Storehouses, and is well inhabited by
Tradesmen, and are well served with such Commodities both for the Back and
Belly, together with Utensils for their Houses and Plantations, as they have
occasion for, in exchange of such Commodities which are the Product of the
Island.

Here is a fair and large Church, as also a public Hall, for the
Administration of Justice. Here is also a very fair Hospital, built by the
General, for such People as cannot get Cure at their Houses; where they are
well maintained, and attended by Physicians for the recovery of their healths.
Here is also a stately Castle, being the Residence of the Governor, being most
pleasantly seated at the foot of a high Mountain, not far from the Sea, having
spacious Courts, delightful Walks and Gardens, which causes a curious Prospect.

In 16^9. a powerful Fleet from Spain under Don Frederick de Toledo, had
received Order from that King, that before he fell down the Havana, he should
touch at St. Christophers, and force from thence all the English and French,
who had some time before planted themselves there. This Navy consisted of
twenty four great Ships of Burden, and fifteen Frigots, who first seized some
English Ships that were lying at Anchor near the Isle of Mevis, and from thence
came and cast Anchor in the Road of St. Christophers, in the French Division,
and the Forts of both Colonies being not in a condition to stand out a Siege,
being unfurnished with Ammunition and Provisions, not being able to withstand
so great an Army if all the Forces of the Nations had been in conjunction,
which made it a very great discouragement to them; yet resolving the Enemy
should not boast they had compassed their designs without Blows, they made a
very vigorous opposition; but being overcome by number, the French forsook the
Island; Desnambuck embarking all his Men in certain Ships which happened to be
in the Haven. Upon this Intelligence, the Quarters of the English were put into
very great disorder, and in continual expectation that the Spaniards would fall
upon them; some endeavoring to escape by Sea, or hide themselves in the
Mountains; but others, being more courageous, sent Deputies to Don Frederick,
to propose an accommodation; but all the Answer they received, was an express
Command immediately to depart the Island, or to be treated with that rigor
which the Law of Arms allowed toward such as wrongfully possess that which
belongs not to them; and to speed their departure, he ordered those English
Ships should be restored to them that were taken at Mevis, wherein instantly
they should imbark for England; and because it was impossible those Vessels
should contain so great a number, he permitted the rest to continue in the Isle
till they had opportunity of Transportation.

Upon which, Don Frederick weighed Anchor; but as soon as the Fleet was
departed, those of the English that were left, began to rally, and took a
resolution to carry on the Settlement of their Colony; during which Transaction
at St. Christophers, the French, who went to Sea, having suffered many
Inconveniences, were forced to put in at the Islands of St. Martin and
Montserrat, but looking on them as Deserts in comparison of the Places they had
left, and being desirous to be informed of the condition of the Spaniards
there, sent one of their Ships to St. Christophers; who returning, gave them an
Account that the Enemy was gone, and the English courageously employed in
re-building, planting and repairing Desolations. This unexpected good News
revived their decayed hopes, and persuaded them to a speedy return; the English
Colony with constant supplies from London, for that time grew very powerful,
peopling not only this Place, but sending new Plantations from hence to
Barbuda, Montserrat, Antego, and Barbados which are grown very numerous and
famous for the Trade of the rich Commodities they are furnished with, as well
as this curious Island, whose chiefest Trade is Sugar, Their Commodities.
Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, with several other sorts of Fruits and Provisions

There is in this Isle a very pretty Animal, Animals.
called a Recquet, whose Skin is of the color of a withered Leaf, marked with
little yellow or bluish points, they go on four feet, their fore-feet being
highest, their Eyes lively and sparkling, they constantly hold up their heads,
and are so very active, that they leap up and down perpetually, like Birds when
they make no use of their Wings, their Tails are so turned up toward their
back, that they make a Circle and a half; they love to look upon men, and are
constantly staring on them; when they are pursued, they open their mouths, and
put out their tongues like little Hounds.

There is a large Bird in the Caribbies called the Engle of Orinoca, Their
Fowls.
much like an Eagle in shape, all his Feathers are of light Gray, marked with
black Spots, save that the end of his Wings and Tail are yellow, he has a
piercing sight, and feeds on other Birds, yet to show his Generosity, never
sets upon the weaker sort, but those that are armed with crooked Beaks and
sharp Talons like himself; nay, it is observable, he never seizes his Prey on
the Ground or a Tree, but stays till it has taken its slight, that he may
engage it in the open Air with equal advantage, upon whom he furiously fastens
his Talons, and having mastered them, tears them in pieces and devours them.
There is also a large Bird in this Isle called a Craw-Fowl, about the bigness
of a great Duck, the Feathers Ash color, and hideous to the Eye; it has a
long sl^t back, a great head, small eyes, deep set in his head, and a short
neck, under which hangs a Bag or Craw so big that it will contain two Gallons
of Water; they are commonly found on Trees by the Seaside, where, as soon as
they perceive a Fish at advantage, they seize it, and swallow it whole; they
are so attentive on their Fishing, fixing their Eye constantly on the Sea, that
they are easily shot, and become a prey to others: They have such an an
admirable Sight, that they will discover a Fish in the Sea at a very great
distance, and under Water above a fathom, yet they will not seize until they
come almost even with it; their Flesh is not to be eaten: Here are likewise
found a kind of Pheasants which are called Pintadoes, because they are as it
were painted with colors, and have about them small points, like so many Eyes
on a dark Ground.

To conclude with these Fowls, we shall give an account of the Colibry or
Humming-Bird, which is admirable for its Beauty, Bulk, sweet Sent, and manner
of Life; for being the least of all Birds, he gloriously confirms the Saying of
Pliny That Nature is ever greatest in its least productions: Some of these
Birds are no bigger bodied than the greater sorts of Flies, yet of such
beautiful Feathers, that the Neck, Wings and Back represent the Rainbow; there
are others that have such a bright red under their Neck, that at a distance one
would imagine it to be a Carbuncle, the Belly, and under the Wings as yellow as
Gold, the Thighs green like an Emerald, the Feet and Beak as black as polished
Ebony, the two little Eyes like two Diamonds set in an Oval, of the color of
burnished Steel, the Head is grass-green, which gives it such a luster that it
looks as if gilt; the Male has a little Tuft on the Head, in which may be seen
all the Colors which enamel this little Body, the Miracle of this feathered
Commonwealth is one of the rarest productions of Nature; he moves that little
Crown of Feathers at pleasure, and is more beautiful than the Female; as his
Bulk and Plumage is miraculous, so is the activity of his flight, making a
noise with his wings as if a little whirlwind were raised in the Air of a
sudden, which surprises them that hear him before they see him; he lives only
on the dew which he sucks from the flowers of Trees with his Tongue, which is
longer than his Beak, hollow as a Reed, and about the bigness of a small
Needle; it is pleasant to look on him in that posture; for spreading abroad his
little Crest, one would think he had on his head a Crown of Rubies and all
sorts of precious stones, animated, and flying in the Air: The Female commonly
lays but two Eggs, which are oval, about the bigness of a Pea or small Pearl;
and though he lose much of his Beauty when dead, yet there is so much left,
that some Ladies have worn them for Pendants, and imagined they became them
better than any other; its Smell is so odoriferous, that it is like the finest
Musk and Amber.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of MEVIS.
THE Island of Nevis or Mevis lies not far from St. Christophers, Its
Situation.
as I have before noted, and in the Latitude of 17 degrees and 19 minutes north
of the Line.

It is but small, being not above 18 Miles in Circuit; Its Circuit.
and in the midst of the Isle there is but one only Mountain, which is of a
great height, but of an easy access, and clothed with Trees up to the very
top; about which Mountains are the Plantations, which reach to the Sea-shoar.
Here are diverse Springs of fresh water, whereof some are strong enough to make
their way into the Sea; and one Spring is of a hot and mineral Water; not far
from whose Springhead are Baths made, found very beneficial for several
Diseases.

The English planted themselves in this Isle in 1628. Inhabitants.
and are still possessors thereof, being now about three or four thousand
Inhabitants, who live well and drive a very handsome Trade for such things as
they have occasion for, by exchanging such Commodities Commodities.
as the Isle produces, as, Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Tobacco, etc. which they
exchange for other Conveniences.

Of all the Caribby-Islands, none is so well governed as this; Their Government.
Justice being administered with that impartiality, and all Debauchery and
Immorality severely punished, by a Council of the most eminent and ancient
Inhabitants.

For the Service of God, there are three Churches Their Churches.
erected; and for its further security, and safety, it has a Fort, whereon are
mounted several great Guns, that command at a great distance, for the security
of the Ships in the Road or Harbor; which likewise secure their Storehouses,
into which all the Commodities imported for the use of the Inhabitants, are
disposed, and so distributed to them that have occasion for them.

It is indifferent fruitful, and it has great store of Deer, Its Fertility.
with with several other sorts of Game for hunting.

This Isle, as the rest of the Charibbies, is troubled with Muschetoes,
Chigoes, Murigoins, and there are Lizards five foot in length, and a foot
about, their Skins of diverse colors, according to the different Soil they are
bred in; several of them have such glittering Scales and Skins, that at a
distance off, look like Cloth of Gold and Silver; they have four feet, each
with five Claws, and very sharp Nails; they run exceeding fast, and climb trees
dexterously; and whether they love men, or are stupid, they stand still looking
on the Huntsmen, suffering them to put a Ginn with a running knot about their
necks, which is fastened to the end of a Pole, whereby they get them off the
trees where they rest themselves; they have wide Jaws, with exceeding sharp
Teeth, their Tongues thick, and whatsoever they catch with their Teeth they
hold very fast, which are not at all venomous; the Females lay Eggs about the
bigness of Woodcocks, the shell being soft, which they lay deep in the Sands of
the Sea-shoar to be hatched by the Sun; they are sometimes eaten, though not
very well liked by many.

The Annolis is another Creature very common in all the Plantations, about the
bigness of a Lizard, but the Head longer, the Skin yellowish; and they are
green on their backs, gray and blew streaks drawn from the very top of the Head
to the end of the Tail; they live in holes under ground, whence, in the night,
they make a very loud and important noise; in the day they are continually
wandering about Cottages for subsistence.

A Land-Pike is another strange Reptile, so called from its likeness to that
Fish; but instead of Fins, it has four Feet, which are so weak, that they only
crawl on the ground, and wind their Bodies like Pikes newly taken out of the
water; some of the longest are about fifteen inches, and proportionably big;
their Skin being covered with small scales, which shine extremely, and are of a
silver gray color; they make a very hideous noise in the night from under the
Rocks, and from the bottoms of hollow places where they are lodged; it is more
sharp and grating to the Ear than Frogs or Toads, and they change their Notes
according to the variety of the place where they lurk; they are seldom seen but
a little before night, and when met in the day, their strange motion on a
sudden, is apt to affright the Spectator.

There are in this Isle several Insects, Insects.
as the flying Tiger is very observable, whose body is chequered with spots of
several colors, as the Tyger's is, about the bigness of a horned Beetle, the
head sharp, with two great eyes, as sparkling and green as an Emerald, his
mouth being armed with two extremely hard and sharp hooks, by which he holds
fast his prey while he gets the substance, the whole body being covered with a
hard and swarthy crustiness, serves him for Armor; Under his Wings, which are
also of solid matter, are four less wings, as soft as silk; it has six Legs,
each whereof has three joints, and they are bristled with certain little
prickles; He is continually catching Flies in the day, with other small
Animals, and sits singing on the trees in the night. The Horn-fly is another,
which has two Snouts like an Elephant, one turning upward, and the other down,
about three Inches long, the Head is blew like a Grasshopper, the Eyes green;
the upper side of the Wings of a bright Violet, damaskt with Carnation,
heightened by a small natural thread of Silver, the Colors drawn with such
curiosity, that the most curious painting cannot reach it; insomuch as some at
first sight have thought it to be Artificial, because of its lively Carnation
color and string of Silver; but having taken it into their hand, they have
thought Nature to be in a gay kind of humor, and had a mind to divert herself
when she bestowed such sumptuous Robes on this small Queen of Insects.

There is likewise in this Island an Insect somewhat like a Snail, called a
Soldier, but have no shells proper to themselves; therefore, to secure their
weak bodies against the Air, and the assaults of other Creatures, they get
shelter in such shells as they find most convenient, which, for the most part,
is that of Perriwinkles, but as they grow bigger they shift their shells, and
go into bigger; their Foot, or Instrument, is like a Crab's-claw, wherewith
they close the entrance of their shells, for the security of their bodies: if
they be set near the fire, they forsake their Quarters, but if it be presented
to them, to get it again, they go in backward; when they design to change
quarters, which they are very subject to do, there happens a furious
Engagement, managed with their clasping Instrument, 'till the strongest gets
possession, which he enjoys very peaceably during his pleasure.

There is likewise found in these parts a monstrous Spider, which when she
spreads her legs, is so large, that she takes up above the breadth of a man's
hand, whose body consists of two parts, one round, and the other flat, lesser
at one end, like a Pigeons Egg, with a hole in the back, which is as it were
their Navel; it is armed with two sharp Tushes, which are very solid, black,
and shining; so that there are some that make use of them for Tooth-pickers,
being first set in Gold, which are counted to have a power of preserving from
corruption and pain, rubbing the places therewith; when they come to be old,
they are clothed with a swarthy Down, which is as soft as Velvet: they have
about ten Feet, each having four joints, and at the ends armed with a black,
hard Horn. They shift their old Skins every Year, and also their Tushes; they
feed on Flies, and such Vermin; and in some places it has been observed, that
their Webs are of such a strength, that small Birds can hardly get themselves
from it.

There is also a very lovely Animal, Animals.
called the Fly-catcher, it has four Legs, and is of a very small size, some
of them seeming to be covered with fine gold or silver Brocado, and several
with a mixture of Green, Gold, with other very delightful Colors; they are so
very familiar, that they will come boldly into Rooms, doing no mischief, but on
the contrary, clear them of Flies, and such kind of Vermin, which they perform
with such activity of flight, that the cunning of Huntsmen is not to be
compared to it, for he generally lies down where he expects the Fly to come,
keeping his eye always fixed thereon, putting his head into as many different
postures, as the Fly removes places, and standing upon his fore-feet, gapes
after it, his little mouth being half open, as if he had swallowed it in hope;
and if one come near him, and make never so great a noise, it will not disturb
him, and at last, having an opportunity, he goes direct on his prey, very
rarely missing of it. They are so extraordinary tame, that they will come at
Dinner time upon the very Table, and endeavor to catch Flies upon their Hands
or Clothes, being extraordinary neat and clean things: the Eggs they lay are as
big as Pease, which they leave to be hatched by the Sun, covering of it first
with Sand: they are no sooner killed, but all their beauty vanishes, and they
become pale. It may be counted a sort of Camelion, partaking of the color of
those things on which it makes its ordinary residence, for being about
Palm Trees, it is green, and about Orange Trees, yellow, and the like.

The Palm-Worm is remarkable from its infinite number of Feet, which are like
Bristles under his Body, which, if pursued, help him to creep with incredible
swiftness. It Is half a foot long, the upper part covered with swarthy Scales,
which are hard, and joynted one within another, like the Tiles of a House; but
the most danger in this Creature is, that he has a kind of Claw, both in Head
and Tail, wherewith he pierces so home, and poisons the wound he makes
therewith, that for the space of 24 hours the party feels great pain.

There was several years since brought from thence a Bird about the bigness and
shape of a Swallow, only two large Feathers on the Tail, a little shorter, and
the Beak turned down, like a Parrot, and its Feet like Ducks; its only black
under the Belly, something white, like our Swallows; in short, it is so very
like them, that it may be called the Swallow of America.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of ANTEGO.
Its Situation.
THE Island of Antego is seated in the Latitude of 16 Degrees, and 11 Minutes.

Extent.
It is in length about 6 or 7 Leagues, and much of the same breadth in several
places; The Access to it is very dangerous for Shipping, by reason of the Rocks
which incompass it: It was conceived heretofore, that it was not to be
inhabited, upon presumption that there was no fresh Water in it; but the
English, who have planted themselves in it, have met with some few Springs of
fresh Water; besides which, the Inhabitants, which are about 8 or 900 persons,
have made several Ponds and Cisterns for the preserving of Rainwater.

The Commodities Its Commodities.
of this Isle are Sugar, Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco, etc.

This Isle does abound with Fish of all sorts, Their Fish.
amongst which the Shark-fish deserves remark; it is a kind of Sea-Wolf, or
Sea-Dog, the most devouring of all Fishes, and the most greedy of Mans-flesh,
and therefore exceeding dangerous to those that swim; he lives altogether by
prey, and generally follows Ships, to feed on the filth cast out of them into
the Sea. These Monsters seem yellow in the water; some of them are of a vast
length and bigness, insomuch that they are able to cut a man in two at one
bite; their Skin so rough, that they pollish Wood with it, instead of Files;
their Heads are flat, and the opening of their Mouths is under their Snout, so
that they are forced to turn their Bellies almost upward when they seize their
prey; their Teeth are very sharp and broad, jagged like a Saw, some having
three or four ranks in each Jaw Bone, they lie within their Gums, but
sufficiently appear when there is occasion. These cruel Sea-Dogs are attended
by two or three small Fishes, and sometimes more, which go before them with
such swiftness and exactness, that they go either forward or stay as he does:
The Meat of him is not good, but the Brains are found to be good and profitable
against the Stone and Gravel.

There is likewise found another ravenous Sea Monster, called the Becune, a
dreadful enemy to Mankind, in shape like a Pike, being about seven or eight
foot long; he lives by prey, and furiously fastens, like a Blood-hound, on the
Men he perceives in the water. He carries away whatsoever he once fastens on,
and his Teeth are so venomous, that the least touch of them becomes mortal, if
some sovereign Antidote be not immediately applied, to divert and abate the
Poison.

There are another sort of Becunes, by some called Sea Wood-Cocks, their Beaks
being somewhat like a Wood-Cock's Bill, only the upper part much longer than
the lower, and moves both Jaws with like facility, some of them being four foot
long, and twelve inches broad near the Head, which is somewhat like a Swines,
with two large Eyes extremely shining; he has two Fins on the sides, and under
the Belly a large Plume, rising higher, like a Cock's Comb, reaching from Head
to Tail: Besides a long solid Beak, it has two sorts of Horns, hard and black,
and about a foot and a half in length, which hang down under his Throat, and
are particular to this kind of Fish, and these he can easily hide in a hollow
place under his Belly, which serves them for a sheath; it has no Scales, but a
rough, black Skin on the Back, and the Meat is eatable.

Another Fish, found about these Islands, is called the Sea Vrchin, or
Hedgehog, and rightly deserves that Name; it is round as a Ball, and full of
exceeding sharp Prickles, which makes it to be feared, and by several it is
called the Armed Fish; they are sent as Presents to those that are curious, to
hang in their Closets.

There is great plenty of most sorts of Wild Fowl, and not wanting in Venison
and Tame Cattle. The Commodities this Island affords are Sugar, Indico, Ginger,
and Tobacco, etc.

The Sea-Parrots are very admirable, having extraordinary sparkling and
beautiful Eyes, the Ball whereof being as clear as Cristal, enclosed within a
circle as green as an Emerald, of which color are the Scales on their Backs;
they have no Teeth, but Jaws above and below of a solid bone, very strong, of
the same color with their Scales, and divided into little compartiments, very
beautiful to the Eye; they live on Shellfish, and they crush, as between two
Milstones, with their hard Jaws, Oysters, Muscles, and other Shellfish, to get
out the Meat. They are an excellent sort of Fish to eat, and so great, that
some of them have weighed upward of twenty pound.

The Dorado, by some called the Sea-Bream, by others the Amber-fish, is also
common in these parts; so called, because in the water the Head seems to be of
a green guilt, and the rest of the Body as yellow as Gold. It takes great
pleasure and delight in following of Ships, but being so swift, is very hard to
take, being extraordinary well furnished for swimming, having the forepart of
the Head sharp; the Back bristles with prickles reaching to the Tail, which is
forked; two Fins on each side the Head, and as many under the Belly, and the
whole Body rather broad than big; all which give him a strange command of the
water: he is as good Meat as a Trout or Salmon; they are caught only with a
piece of white Linen tied to the Hook.

This Island also abounds with diverse sorts of Fowls and Birds; Fowls and Birds.
those of more than an ordinary kind are the Canades, which some count the most
beautiful Bird in the World, being under the Belly and Wings of a waving Aurora
color; the Back and one half of the Wings of a very bright Sky-colour; the
Tail and greater Feathers of Wings are mixed with a sparkling Carnation,
diversified with a Sky; upon the Back it is grass-green with shining black,
which very much adds to the Gold and Azure of the other Plumage; but the most
beautiful part is the Head covered with a kind of Murrey-down, chequered with
green, yellow, and a pale blew, which reaches waving down to his Back, the
Eyelids being white, and the Apple of the Eye of a most excellent yellow, and
red like a Ruby set in Gold; it has upon the Head a Tuft, or Cap of Feathers,
of a Vermilion red, sparkling like a lighted Coal, which is encompassed by
other smaller Feathers of a Pearl color. It is about the bigness of a
Pheasant, and exceeding kind and familiar with its friends, but as severe to
its enemies.

The Flamot is an exceeding large and beautiful Bird, about the bigness of a
wild Goose; his Beak is like a Spoon, his Legs and Neck very long, so that his
Body is three foot from the ground, their Feathers being white when they are
young, after Murrey, and when they come to be old, of a bright Carnation, being
rarely seen but in great companies; and their hearing and smelling is so
perfect, that they smell the Huntsmen and Firearms at a large distance, and
therefore, for fear of surprise, they make their abode in the midst of the
Fens, one of them being always Continel while they are searching about the
waters for a livelihood; as soon as he hears the least noise, or sees a man, he
takes his flight, and makes a great cry, for a signal to the rest to follow
him: when the Huntsmen take them, they get the wind of them, that they may not
smell the Powder, and covering themselves with an Ox-hide, creep on their hands
and feet 'till they get such an opportunity that they are sure of killing them.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of St. VINCENT.
THE Island of St. Vincent lies in the latitude of 16 degrees North from the
Line, and is about 24 Miles in length, and 18 in breadth, Situation.
wherein are several high Mountains, having between them exceeding fruitful
Plains, yielding good store of Sugar Canes, which grow naturally without
planting: It is well watered with Rivers, and has several convenient Harbors
and Bays for Shipping. The English have here some settlement, but are not very
powerful, it being more populous of Caribeans, than of any possessed by them,
who have here many fair Villages, where they dwell exceeding pleasant, without
the least disturbance; and though they are jealous of those Strangers that live
near them, and keep Guard when they come upon their Roads, yet they do not deny
Cassavy Bread, Water, Fruits, and other Provisions growing in their Country, to
them that want them, taking in exchange Wedges, Hooks, and other Implements of
Iron, which they much esteem. Their simplicity is very remarkable in several
things, as in admiring our Firearms, but especially Firelocks, to which they
see no fire put, as to Muskets, and therefore believe Maboya, or the Devil,
sets them on fire; they believe when the Moon is Eclipsed, the Devil eats her;
they dance all night, making a noise with Gourds, wherein are many pebble
stones; when they smell any evil scent, they cry, Maboya, or the Devil, is
here, let us be gone from him.

Some time since, most of the Caribeans were persuaded, that Gunpowder was the
Seed of some Herb, insomuch that some of them sowed it in their Gardens. They
never make use of Salt, accounting it very prejudicial to health, and when they
see Christians use it, cry, Compere, thou hastneth thy own death; but instead
thereof, they season all things with American Pepper: Neither do they eat
Swines-flesh, for this simple reason, least they should have small Eyes like
that Beast, which they judge the greatest deformity; nor Tortoise or Turtle,
lest they should participate of its laziness and stupidity. They have no notion
of a Deity, so that neither Prayers, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, or any Exercise or
Assembly whatsoever, is to be found amongst them; but say, the Earth is their
indulgent Mother, who furnishes them with all things necessary to Life. If any
discourse to them about God, and the Mysteries of our Religion, they hearken
attentively, but in the end, answer as it were in jest, Friend, thou art very
eloquent and subtle, I wish I could talk as well as thee. Nay, they sometimes
say, That if they should be persuaded by such Discourses, their Neighbors
would laugh at them. A certain Caribean being at work on a Sunday, Mounsieur
Montel said to him, Friend, He that made Heaven and Earth will be angry with
thee for working on this Day, for he has appointed this Day for his Service:
And I, replied the Savage very bluntly, am already very angry with him; for
thou say he is Master of the World and the Seasons, He it is therefore that
has forborne to send Rain in due time, and by reason of the great Drougth, has
caused my Manioc and my Potatoes to rot in the ground; now since he has
treated me so ill, I will work on every Sunday on purpose to vex him: A
pregnant Example of the Brutality of this wretched People.

They have a natural sentiment of some Divinity or Superior Power, that has
its Residence in Heaven, which they say is content to enjoy quietly the
delights of his own felicity, without being offended at the ill actions of Men;
and is endued with so great goodness, as not to take any Revenge, even of his
Enemies, from whence they render Heaven neither Honor nor Adoration,
interpreting its liberality and long-sufferance, an effect either of its
weakness or indifference toward Mankind, believing that there are a number of
Good and Evil Spirits, the Good being their Gods, and every one imagines he has
one particularly designed for his Conduct, yet will not acknowledge them
Creators of the World: And when the Christians tell them, we adore that God who
made Heaven and Earth, and causes the Earth to bring forth Fruits and Herbs
for our nourishment; they answer, It is true, thy God has made the Heaven and
Earth, of France, (or some other Country which they name) and causes the Wheat
to grow there; but our God has made our Country, and causes our Manioc to grow.
This Manioc is a Root of a small Tree or Shrub, whereof the Caribeans make
Bread. When they are recovered of some Disease, they set a little Table at the
end of their Hutts, and upon it their Offerings, but without the least
Adoration or Prayers; yet they invocate their False Gods, when they desire his
presence; but this is done by their Priests, and that upon four occasions. 1.
To Demand Revenge. 2. To be Healed of Diseases. 3. To know the Event of their
Wars. 4. To invocate them to carry away their Great Devil, or Maboya, for they
never pray to him: His Invocation is by Singing some words, and burning
Tobacco, the scent whereof is so pleasant, that it makes this little Devil
appear. And when their several Priests call upon their several Gods together,
as they speak, these Gods, or rather Devils, rail, quarrel, and seem to fight
with each other. These Demons shelter themselves sometimes in the Bones of
dead Men, taken out of the Graves, and wrapped in Cotton, and thereby give
Oracles, saying, it is the Soul of the deceased Person; they make use of them
to bewitch their Enemies, the Sorcerers wrapping up these Bones with something
that belongs to the Enemy.

These Devils do also sometimes enter into the Bodies of Women, and speak by
them, clearly answering all questions demanded: After the Boy or Priest is
retired, the Devil stirs the Vessels, and makes a noise with his Jaws, as if he
were eating and drinking the Presents prepared for him, but the next day they
find he has not meddled with any thing. These poor Wretches complain that
sometimes Maboya beats them severely, which though some impute to melancholy
Dreams, yet other Persons of Quality and exquisite Knowledge, who have lived
long in St. Vincent's Island, do affirm, that the Devils do effectually beat
them, and they often show on their Bodies the visible marks of the blows they
have received: Sometimes they make horrid complaint of his Cruelty, saying,
That of late he is mightily incensed against the Caribeans, accounting the
Europeans happy that their Maboya does not beat them. Those who have been very
conversant with them, and have likewi^e been at their Assemblies, say, That
notwithstanding their Ignorance and Irreligion, they fear, more than Death, the
Evil Spirit whom they call Maboya, for he does many times appear to them in
most dreadful and hideous Shapes, and what is more remarkable, is, that this
unmerciful and bloody Executioner, who is an insatiable Murderer from the
beginning of the World, most cruelly torments and wounds those miserable
People, when they are not so forward as he would have them to engage in War; so
that when they are reproached with Blood-thirstiness, their answer is, They are
forced thereto by Maboya against their Wills.

It is this most cruel and bloody Spirit that causes them to act such barbarous
Cruelty upon those they take in War, in relating which, I had need dip my Pen
in Blood, being to draw such a Picture which must needs raise horror in the
Beholder. In which there appears nothing but Inhumanity, Barbarism and Rage, to
see Rational Creatures devouring those of the same kind with them, and filling
themselves with their flesh and blood, a thing which Pagans heretofore thought
so full of Execration, that they imagined the Sun withdrew himself, because he
would not give light to such bloody Banquets. When these Cannibals, or Eastern
Men, (here their proper Names) have brought home a Prisoner of War of the
Arovagnes, he belongs of right to him who either seized him in Fight, or took
him running away; being brought to this Island, he keeps him safe in his House,
and after he has made him fast four or five days, produces him upon some Solemn
Day of Debauch, to serve for a Public Sacrifice, to the mortal hatred of his
Countrymen toward that Nation. If any of their Enemies die on the place of
Battle, they eat them there; they design only for Slavery the young Maids and
Women taken in War; they have tasted of all the Nations that frequent them, and
upon experience affirm, that the French are the most tender, and the Spaniards
the hardest of digestion; but now they feed on no Christians at all.

They abstain from several Cruelties formerly used before they killed their
Enemies, for now they think it enough to dispatch them at a blow or two with a
Club, and afterward cut them into pieces, and having boiled them, they devour
them: They heretofore put them to several torments before they gave them the
mortal blow, which deplorable Relation they themselves have given to those who
have been curious, from their own mouths. Those who have been so unfortunate in
the time of War, to fall as Prisoners into their Hands, are not ignorant of the
cruel torments they design against them, and therefore to arm themselves with
constancy, and to express how generous a People the Arovagues are, march very
cheerfully to the place of Execution, being neither bound nor dragged thereto,
but present themselves with a mild and steady countenance before the whole
Assembly, which they know desire nothing so much as their Death, and expecting
their abuses and bitter discourses, prevent them in these tetms I know well
enough upon what account you have brought me to this Place, I doubt not but you
are desirous to fill yourselves with my blood, and that you are impatient to
exercise your teeth upon my body; but you have not so much reason to triumph,
to see me in this condition, nor I much to be troubled, my Countrymen having
put your Predecessors to greater miseries than you are now able to invent
against me, and I have done my part with them in mangling, massacring and
devouring your People, your Friends, and your Fathers; besides this, I have
Relations who will not fail to revenge my quarrel with advantage upon you, and
upon your Children, for the most inhumane tortures you intend against me; what
torment soe-ever the most ingenious cruelty can dictate to you, for the taking
away of my life is nothing in comparison of those which my generous Nation
prepares for you in exchange; therefore delay not the utmost of your cruelty
any longer, and assure yourselves, I both slight and laugh at it. Somewhat of
this nature is that brave and bloody Bravado which we read of, a Brasilean
Prisoner, ready to be devoured by his Enemies, Come on boldly (said he to them)
and feast yourselves upon me, for at the same time you seed on your Fathers and
Grandfathers, who served for nourishment for my Body; these Muscles, this
Flesh, and these Veins, are yours; blind Fools as you are, you do not observe
that the substance of the Members of your Ancestors are yet to be seen in them,
taste them well, and you will find the taste of your own flesh.

The Great Soul of our Arovagues was not only in his Lips, but likewise showed
it also in the effects which follow his Bravado; for after the Company had a
while endured his arrogant defiance without out touching him, one amongst them
came and burnt his Sides with a flaming Brand, another cut great gobbets of
flesh out of him, and had cut bigger if the bones would have admitted it, and
then they cast Pepper into his wounds; others diverted themselves in shooting
Arrows at the poor Patient, and every one took pleasure in tormenting of him;
but he suffered with the same unconcerned countenance, and expressed not the
least sense of pain. After they had thus sported a long time with the poor
wretch, and growing weary of insulting and out-braving by his constancy, which
seemed still the same, one of them came, and with one blow dispatched him with
his Club. This is the Usage wherewith the Caribeans heretofore treated their
Prisoners of War, but now they think it enough to put them to a speedy death.
As soon as this unfortunate person is thus laid dead upon the place, the young
Men take the Body, and having washed it, cut it in pieces, and then boil some
part, and broyl some upon wooden Frames, made for that purpose, like a
Gridiron. When this detestable Dish is ready, and seasoned according to their
Palats, they divide it into so many parts as there are Persons present, and
joyfully devour it, thinking the World cannot afford equal therewith, so that
the Women lick the very sticks whereon the Fat dropped, not so much from the
deliciousness they find in that kind of sustenance, as from the excessive
pleasure they receive in being revenged in that manner on their chiefest
Enemies; and to heighten this rage and hatred against the A^ovagues, they save
the Fat that comes from it, and preserve it very carefully to put some few
drops thereof into their Sauces at their solemn Entertainments, so to
perpetuate, as much as lies in their power, the motive of Revenge.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of DOMINICA.
THE Island of Dominica is situated in the Latitude of 15 Degrees, Its
Situation.
30 Minutes, and about 12 Leagues in length, and 8 in breadth. On the West Side
is a very convenient Harbor for Ships. It is very mountainous in the midst,
which incompasses an inaccessable bottom, where, from the tops of certain
Rocks, may be seen an infinite number of Dragons, Vipers, and other most
venomous and dreadful creatures, whom none dares come near, yet there are many
Fertile Villages, producing several Commodities, but chiefly Tobacco, which is
planted by the English; but the Natives, which are Canibals, and very
barbarous, does much hinder the coming of the English to settle there; for the
Canribeans are very populous in it, and have a long time entertained those who
come to visit them with a story of a vast monstrous Serpent that frequented
that bottom; affirming, that there was on its Head a very sparkling Stone, like
a Carbuncle of inestimable price, which it commonly covered with a thin moving
skin, like a Man's eyelid, but when he drank or sported himself in that deep
bottom, it was fully and plainly discovered, the Rocks and all about the place
receiving a wonderful luster from the fire, issuing out of that precious Crown.

They are generally very friendly with the French, and upon the approach of any
of their Ships, several Canoes, with three or four Indians in each of them,
immediately meet them and conduct them to the Havens, where they may safely
Anchor. And having presented the Captain and others Officers with the choicest
of those Country-Fruits, they commonly bring them, they offer the rest in
exchange, for Fishing-hooks, and other such kind of trifles, which they account
precious. But to the English they have a great aversion, conceived, as is
reported, upon this occasion: Some evil-minded Englishmen, under the Flags of
other Nations, having, by pretended kindness and little gifts, gotten diverse of
them on board their Ships, and made them merry with Aqua Vitae and Brandy,
which they love extremely, they suddenly hoisted up sail, and carried away
those poor, innocent People, who expected no such Treachery, from such
pretended Friends. And although the English have endeavored to satisfy them,
yet so implacable is their temper, that they cannot be persuaded to forget or
forgive the injury; but, next to the Arovagues, a People on the Continent, they
hate the English as their worst Enemies: and to such an height of envy has
this Action exasperated them, that they hate the very Language, and cannot
endure to hear it spoken, and if a French man, or any other at peace with them,
happen, through forgetfulness, to make use of an English Expression, in
discoursing with them, he runs the hazard of contracting his envy for ever upon
himself. Nor do they fail, when they find opportunity, to make incursions into
Montserrat, Antego, and other of our English Settlements, plundering and
burning down their Houses, and carrying away such Men, Women and Children as
they can get into their hands by surprise, but do not eat them as they do the
Arovagues.

They cannot endure to be called Cannibals: they do eat the flesh of their
enemies, which they say is to gratify their revenge, and not out of any
delicacy they find in the meat. They are for the most part of a good tractable
disposition, and such enemies to severity, that those of them that fall into
the hands of the Europeans, or any other Nation, if their Masters treat them
with rigor, they die out of pure grief. They despise Riches, and often
reproach the Europeans for their avarice and excessive desire of Wealth, not
only for themselves, but those that come after them too, since the Earth will
find a sufficiency for all men, who will take pains to manure it; telling them,
that they never perplex and torture themselves with cares for those things
whereby their Lives are preserved; and yet, for any thing they can see to the
contrary, they are fatter in flesh and much happier in the whole course of
their Lives, than those that do always eat and drink of the best. And, to say
the truth, they are a People that live without ambition, vexation, or
disquieting themselves with a fruitless thoughtfulness about future Events;
having no desire of acquiring Wealth and Honor, slighting Gold and Silver as
things not worth the valuing, protesting they cannot but wonder we should
esteem, so much as we do, seeing we are so well furnished with things much more
valuable and beautifuller, as they esteem Glass, Cristal, and the like to be.
When they see any of the Christians are perplexed, they cry, Compeer, which
signifies Friend or Gossip, How miserable do thou make thy Life, by exposing
thy self to such long and dangerous Voyages, oppressing thy self with cares and
the inordinate desire of getting Wealth, which puts thee to all this trouble,
and is the occasion of the various inconveniences thou every day meetest
withal, from which we are wholly free. And that which yet seems to me much
stranger, is, your being no less disquieted about the Goods you have already
gotten, than you are about those you desire to obtain. Thou art always in fear
lest somebody should rob thee by Land or by Sea, or that thy Goods should
suffer Shipwreck, or thou should suffer damage by their coming too late for
the Market. And by this means thou growest old before thy time, thy Hair turns
gray, thy Body waxes lean thy Forehead wrinkled, a thousand inconveniences
attend thy Person, and as many afflictions surround thy Heart, and hurries thee
with the greater speed to thy Grave. What a strange thing it is, that thou can
not content thy self with what thy own Country produces, and contemn Riches,
as thou see us do. Or tell me, Does that Wealth which you Christians pursue
with so much eagerness, tend to your advancement in holiness? does it prevent
your dying, or can you carry any of it into that Eternity you sometimes talk of.

Sometimes they will upbraid the Europeans with manifest injustice, in invading
their Country; Having driven us from Mevis, Montserrat, Antego, etc. none of
all which did by any pretense of right belong to you, and threatening still to
take away what is left; What shall become of the poor Caribeans! Whither shall
we fly next for Habitations? would you have us go and dwell in the Sea with the
Fishes? Which kind of Discourses show them not to be so Savage as those of St.
Vincents.

They are great enemies to thieving, and live without distrust of each other,
frequently leaving their Houses and Plantations without any to look to them;
but if they chance to lose any thing, though but a little Knife, they will weep
and grieve a Week after; and if any Christians live near, they presently
suspect them, and say, Some Christian has been here. And in their Complaints
to any of the French Governors, this is commonly the first: Thy Mariners (for
so they call all strangers) have taken away a Knife (or some such small trifle)
out of my Cottage.

They are a People linked in one common intrest, and love each other extremely,
so that very rarely any difference arises amongst them; but if they are by
chance offended, though it be by one of their own People, they seldom ever
forget it, but study all imaginable ways of revenge, and when their Sorcerers
tell them such an one has done them the Mischief that happens to them, they
watch all opportunities to kill him, crying out, He has bewitched me, I will
be revenged on him.

They bear great respect to ancient people, the younger sort complying in all
things with their sentiments and wills. Their Youths have no conversation
either with their Maids or married Women, and are generally less amorous than
those of the Female Sex, though both are very chaste, a Virtue worthy admiration
in a barbarous People that go naked. But, by the pernicious Examples the
Christians have set them, they are now grown somewhat more loose. They are
great lovers of Neatness, which is not very usual among Savages, for if a man
should but ease himself in their Garden where their Potatoes grow, they will
forsake them.

A DESCRIPTION OF NEW JERSEY.
NEW JERSEY is part of the Province of New-Albion aforementioned, and is
subdivided into East and West-Jersey. East-Jersey lies between 39 and 41
Degrees of North-Latitude, Its Situation.
being about 12 Degrees more to the South than the City of London; it is
bounded on the South-East by the main Sea; East, by that vast Navigable Stream,
called Hudson's River; West, by a Line of Division, which separates it from
West-Jersey; and North, upon the main Land, and extends itself in length on the
Seacoasts, and along Hudson's River One hundred English Miles and upward.

The Proprietors Proprietors.
of this Province, who in 1682. were William Penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard,
Samuel Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, Ambrose Rigg, John
Heywood, Hugh Hartshorn, Clement Plumstead, and Thomas Cooper, have published
the following Account, for the information and encouragement of all Persons,
who are inclined to settle themselves, Families, and Servants, in that Country,
which may give sufficient satisfaction of the Situation, Conveniences, and
Product thereof.

The convenience of Situation, temperature of Air, and fertility of Soil is
such, that there is no less then seven considerable Towns, viz. Shrewsbury,
Chief Towns.
Middle-Town, Burgin, Newark, Elizabeth-Town, Woodbridge, and Piscataway: which
are all inhabited by a sober and industrious People, who have necessary
Provisions for themselves and Families, and for the comfortable Entertainment
of Strangers and Travelers. And this Colony is experimentally found generally
to agree well with English Constitutions.

For Navigation it has these advantages, Its Advantanges for Navigation.
not only to be situate along the Navigable part of Hudson's River, but lies
also fifty Miles on the main Sea. And near the midst of this Province is that
noted Bay for Ships, within Sand-Hook, very well known not to be inferior to
any in America, where Ships not only harbor in greatest storms, but ride safe
with all winds, and sail in and out thence, as well in Winter as Summer.

For Fishery, the Sea-banks there are very well stored with variety of Fish,
not only such as are profitable for Transsportation, but fit for Food there; As
Whales, Its Fish.
Cod-fish, Cole, and Hake-fish, large Mackarel, and many other sorts of flat
and small Fish. The Bay also, and Hudson's River, are plentifully stored with
Sturgeon, Great Basse, and other Scale-fish; Eels and Shellfish, as Oysters,
etc. in great plenty and easy to take.

This Counrry is plentifully supplied with lovely Springs, Waters.
Rivulets, Inland Rivers, and Creeks which fall into the Sea, and Hudson's
River, in which is much plenty and variety of fresh-Fish and Waterfowl.

There is also great plenty of Oak-Timber, Trees.
fit for Shipping, and Masts for Ships, and other variety of Wood, like the
adjacent Colonies; as, Chestnut, Walnut, Poplar, Cedar, Ash, Fir, etc. fit for
building, within the Country.

The Land or Soil (as in other places) varies in goodness and richness, Its
Fertility.
but generally fertile, and with much smaller labor than in England, produces
plentiful Crops of all sorts of English Grain, besides Indian Corn, which
English Planters find not only to be of vast increase, but very wholesome, and
good in use. It also produces good Flax and Hemp, which they now spin and
manufacture into Linen Cloth. There Is sufficient Meadow and Marish to their
Up-lands; and the very Barrens there (as they are called) are not like some in
England, but produce Grass fit for grazing Cattle in Summer season.

The Country is well stored with Wild Deer, Fruits and Fowls.
Conies, and wild Fowl of several sorts; as, Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges,
Plover, Quails, wild Swans, Geese, Ducks, etc. in great plenty. It produces
variety of good delicious Fruits; as, Grapes, Plums, Mulberries, Apricocks,
Peaches, Pears, Apples, Quinces, Water-Melons, etc. which are here in England
planted in Orchards and Gardens. These, as also many other Fruits which come to
perfection in England, are the more natural product of this Country.

There are already great store of Horses, Cows, Hogs, Cattle.
and some Sheep, which may be bought at reasonable prices, with English Money,
or English Commodities, or Man's Labor, where Moneys and Goods are wanting.
What sort of Mine or Minerals are in the Bowels of the Earth, aftertime must
produce, the Inhabitants not having yet employed themselves in search thereof.
But there is already a Melting-Furnace and Forge set up in this Colony, where
is made good Iron, which is of great benefit to the Country. It is exceedingly
well furnished with safe and convenient Harbors Harbors.
for Shipping; which is of great advantage to that Country, and affords
already for Exportation great plenty of Horses; and also Beef, Pork,
Pipe-staves, Boards, Bread, Flower, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Indian Corn, Butter and
Cheese, which they export for Barbados, Jamaica, Mevis, and other adjacent
Islands; as also to Portugal, Spain, the Canaries, etc. Their Whale-Oyl and
Whale-Fins, Bever, Monkey, Racoon and Martin-Skins (which this Country
produces) they transport for England.

The Situation and Soil of this Country may invite any who are inclined to
transport themselves into those parts of America: For 1. It being considerably
peopled, and situate on the Seacoast, with convenient Harbors, and so near
adjacent to the Province of New York and Long Island, being also well peopled
Colonies, may be proper for Merchants, Tradesmen and Navigators. 2. It is
likewise proper for such who are inclined to Fishery; the whole Coast and very
Harbours-mouths being fit for it; which has been no small Rise to New England
People, and may be here carried on also with great advantage. 3. For its Soil,
it is proper for all industrious Husbandmen, and such who by hard Labor, here
on Rack-Rents are scarce able to maintain themselves, much less to raise an
Estate for their Children, may, with God's Blessing on their Labors, there
live comfortably, and provide well for their Families. 4. For Carpenters,
Brick-layers, Masons, Smiths, Mill-wrights, Wheel-wrights, Bakers, Tanners,
Tailors, Weavers, Shoomakers, Hatters, and all or most Handicrafts, where their
Labor is much more valued than in these parts, and Provisions much cheaper. 5.
And chiefly for such of the abovementioned, or any other who upon solid
Grounds and weighty Considerations, are inclined in their minds to go into
those parts, without which, their going there cannot be comfortable, or answer
their expectation.

The Indian Natives are but few, The Inhabitants.
comparative to the neighboring Colonies; and those that are there, are so far
from being formidable or injurious to the Planters and Inhabitants, that they
are really serviceable and advantageous to the English; not only in hunting and
taking the Deer, and other wild Creatures, and catching of Fish and Fowl fit
for Food in their Seasons, but in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, and other Vermin and Poltry, whose Skins and Furs they bring the
English, and sell at a less price than the value of Time an Englishman must
spend to take them. As for the Constitutions of the Country, they were made in
the time of John Lord Barclay and Sir George Carteret, the late Proprietors
thereof; in which such provision was made for Liberty in Matters of Religion,
and Property in their Estates, that under the Forms thereof that Colony has
been considerably peopled, and that much, from the adjacent Countries, where
they have not only for many years enjoyed their Estates according to the
Concessions, but also to an interrupted exercise of their particular
Persuasions in Matters of Religion; and we the present Proprietors, so soon as
any persons here in England, or elsewhere, are willing to be engaged with us,
shall be ready and desirous to make such farther Additions and Supplements to
the said Constitutions, as shall be thought fit for the encouragement of all
Planters and Adventurers, and for the said Colony with a sober and industrious
People.

Having with all possible brevity given an account of the Country, we shall say
something as to the disposition of Lands there.

1. Our purpose is, with all convenient expedition, to erect and build our
principal Town; which by reason of Situation, must in all probability be the
most considerable for Merchandise, Trade, and Fishery, in those parts: It is
designed to be placed upon a Neck or Point of rich Land, called Ambo-Point,
lying on Raritor-River, and pointing to Sandy-Hook Bay, and near adjacent to
the place where Ships in that great Harbor commonly ride at Anchor; a Scheme
whereof is already drawn, and those who shall desire to be satisfied therewith,
may treat for a share thereof.

2. As for encouragement of Servants, etc. we allow the same Privileges as
were provided in the Concessions at first.

3. Such who are desirous to purchase any Lands in this Province, free from all
charge, and to pay down their Purchase Moneys here, for any quantities of
Acres; or that desire to take up Lands there, upon any small quit Rents to be
reserved, shall have Grants to them and their Heirs, on moderate and reasonable
terms.

4. Those who are desirous to Transport themselves into those parts before they
Purchase, if any thing there present to their satisfaction, we doubt not but
the Terms of Purchase will be so moderate, equal and encouraging, that may
engage them to settle in that Colony.

Our purpose being with all possible Expedition to dispatch Persons thither,
with whom they may Treat, and who shall have our full power in the Premises.
As for Passages to this Province, Ships are going hence the whole year about,
as well in Winter as Summer: Sand^y-hook-Bay being never Frozen, the usual
Price is 5 l. per Head, Passengers Prizes.
as well Master as Servant, who are above ten years of Age; and under ten years
(and not Children at the Breast) pay 50 s. Sucking Children pay nothing.
Carriage of Goods For Carriage of Goods.
is ususally 40 s. per Tun, and sometime less, as we can agree. The cheapest
and chiefest time of the year for Passage, is, from Midsummer, till the later
end of September, when many Virginia and Maryland Ships are going out of
England into those Parts; and such who take then their Voyage, arrive usually
in good time to Plant Corn-sufficient for next Summer.

The Goods to be carried there, are first for Peoples own use, all sorts of
Apparel and Housholdstuff, and also Utensils for Husbandry and Building; and
secondly, Linen and Woollen Clothes, and Stuffs sitting for Apparel, etc. which
are fit for Merchandise and Truck there in the Country, and that to good
advantage for the Importer. Lastly, Although this Country (by reason of its
being already considerably inhabited) may afford many Conveniences for
Strangers, of which Unpoepled Countries are destitute, as Lodging, Victualling,
etc. yet all Persons inclined unto those Parts, must know, that in their
Settlements there, they will find they must have their Winter as well as
Summer, they must Labor before they Reap, and till their Plantations be
cleared (in Summer time) they must expect (as in all those Countries) the
Musketo Flies, Gnats, and such like, may in hot and fair Weather give them some
disturbance, where people provide not against them, which as the Land is
cleared, are less troublesome.

The South and West Part of New Jersey lying on the Sea and Dela-ware River, is
called West-Jersey, West-Jersey.
of which Mr. Edward Billing is now Proprietor; it has all the Conveniences
and Excellencies of the other Part afore-mentioned, and may be made one of the
best Colonies in America, for the Situation, Air and Soil, the Ports, Creeks,
good Harbors and Havens, being not Inferior to any in that Part of the World,
having no less than thirty Navigable Creeks, ranking themselves at a convenient
distance upon the Sea, and that stately River of Dela-ware, the Shores thereof
are generally very deep and bold.

The English that are settled here, Buying of Lands.
buy the Lands of the Natives, and give them real satisfaction for the same,
whereby they are assured of their love and friendship for ever, and the poor
Creatures are never the worse, but much better, as themselves confess; being
now supplied, by way of Trade, with all they want or stand in need of, Hunting
and Fishing as they did before, except in enclosed or planted Ground, bring
home to the English seven or eight fat Bucks in a day.

There is a Town called Burlington, which will quickly be a place of great
Trade; their Orchards are so laden with Fruit, that the very Branches have been
torn away with the weight thereof; it is delightful to the eye, and most
delicious to the taste; Peaches in such plenty, that they bring them home in
Carts; they are very delicate Fruit, and hang almost like our Onions tied upon
Ropes: They receive forty Bushels of good English Wheat, for one Bushel sown.
Cherries they have in abundance, and Fowl and Fish great plenty, with several
that are unknown in England. There are likewise, Bears, Wolves, Foxes,
Rattle-Snakes, and several other Creatures, as I imagine, (says my Author)
because the Indians bring such Skins to sell; but I have traveled several
hundred of Miles to and fro, yet never, to my knowledge, saw one of them,
except two Rattle-Snakes, and killed them both; so that the fear of them is
more than the hurt: neither are we troubled with the Musk^to-fly in this place,
our Land lying generally high and healthy, and they being commonly in boggy
ground. With common and reasonable care there may in a few years be Horses,
Beef, Pork, Flour, Biscuit and Pease to spare; yea, this Country will produce
Honey, Wax, Silk, Hemp, Flax, Hops, Woad, Rapeseed, Madder, Pota-shes,
Anniseed, and Salt, Hides, raw or tanned; and there is a very large vast
Creature, called a Moose, of whose Skins are made excellent Buff; besides the
natural product of Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Turpentine, etc. As for Furs, they are
Beaver, black Fox, and Otter, with diverse other sorts. The Tobacco is excellent
upon the River Delaware. There may be very good fishing for Cod and Cush, as
several have found by experience, who have caught great plenty of well-grown
Fish. Upon the whole matter, this Province affords all that is either for the
Necessity, Convenience, Profit or Pleasure of Humane Life; and it may therefore
be reasonably expected, that this Country, with the rest of America, may in a
few Ages be thoroughly peopled with Christianity. And this shall suffice for New
Jersey.

A DESCRIPTION OF PENSYLVANIA.
IT is the Jus Gentium, or Law of Nations, that whatever waste or uncultivated
Country is the discovery of any Prince, it is the Right of that Prince who was
at the charge of that discovery: Now this Province is a Member of that part of
America which the King of England's Ancestors have been at the charge of
discovering, and which they and he have taken care to preserve and improve; and
his late Majesty, of happy Memory, upon the Petition of William Penn, Esquire
(wherein he set forth his Father's Service, his own Sufferings, and his Losses,
in relation to his Father's Estate; and lastly, his long and costly attendance
without success) was pleased, in right and consideration thereof, to make a
grant to the said William Pen, of all that Tract of Land in America, which is
expressed in the following Declaration to the Inhabitants and Planters of the
Province of Pensylvania.

CHARLES R.
WHereas His Majesty, in Consideration of the Great Merit and Faithful Services
of Sir William Penn, deceased, and for diverse other good Causes Him thereunto
moving, has been graciously pleased, by Letters Patents, bearing Date the
Fourth Day of March, last past, To give and grant unto William Penn, Esquire Son
and Heir of the said Sir William Penn, all that Tract of Land, called by the
Name of Pensylvania, as the same is bounded on the East by Delaware River, from
Twelve Miles distance Northward of New Castle Town, unto the three and fortieth
Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River does extend so far Northward,
then by the said River so far as it does extend: And from the Head of the said
River, the Eastern bounds to be determined by a Meridian-Line, to be drawn from
the head of the said River, unto the said three and fortieth Degree, the said
Province to extend Westward, five Degrees in Longitude, to be computed from the
said Eastern bounds; and to be bounded on the North by the beginning of the
three and fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude; and on the South, by a Circle
drawn at Twelve Miles distance from New Castle Northwards; and Westwards, unto
the beginning of the fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a strait
Line Westward to the Limit of Longitude abovementioned, together with all
Powers, Preheminences, Jurisdictions necessary for the Government of the said
Province, as by the said Letters Patents, reference being thereunto had, does
more at large appear.

His Majesty does therefore hereby publish and declare His Royal Will and
Pleasure, That all Persons settled or inhabited within the Limits of the said
Province, do yield all due Obedience to the said William Penn, his Heirs, and
Assigns, as Absolute Proprietors and Governors thereof; As also to the Deputy
or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants, lawfully Commissioned by him or them,
according to the Powers and Authorities granted by the said Letters Patents;
Wherewith His Majesty Expects and Requires a ready Compliance from all Persons
whom it may concern, as they tender His Majesty's Displeasure.

Given at our Court at White Hall, the Second Day of April, 1681. in the Three
and thirtieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, CONWAY.


The Description of the Province cannot better be given by any than by William
Penn himself, who sent the following Account from off the place, in a Letter
dated from Philadelphia, Aug. 16. 1683.

For this Province, the general Condition of it take as follows:
THE Country itself in its Soil, Air, Water, Seasons, and Product, both Natural
and Artificial, is not to be despised.

The Land contains diverse sorts of Earth; as Sand, yellow and black, Its Soil.
poor and rich: Also Gravel, both loomy and dusty; and in some places a fast,
fat Earth, like to our best Vales in England, especially by Inland-Brooks and
Rivers; God, in his wisdom, has ordered it so, that the Advantages of the
Country are divided, the Back-Lands being generally three to one richer than
those that lie by Navigable Waters; we have much of another Soil, and that is a
black, Hasle-Mould, upon a stony or rocky bottom.

The Air Its Air.
is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the South-Parts of France, rarely
over-cast, and as the Woods come by numbers of people to be more cleared, that
itself will refine.

The Waters Its Waters.
are generally good, for the Rivers and Brooks have mostly gravel and stony
bottoms, and in number hardly credible. We have also Mineral Waters, that
operate in the same manner with Barnet and North-hall, not two Miles from
Philadelphia.

For the Seasons of the Year, having, Its Climate.
by God's goodness, now lived over the coldest and hottest, that the oldest
liver in the Province can remember, I can say something to an English
understanding. First, Of the Fall, for then I came in: I found it from the 24th
of October, to the beginning of December, as we have it usually in September,
or rather like an English mild Spring. From December, to the beginning of the
Month called March, we had sharp, frosty weather; not foul, thick, black
weather, as our North-East Winds bring with them in England, but a Sky as clear
as in Summer, and the Air dry, cold, piercing, and hungry; yet I remember not,
that I wore more Clothes than in England. The reason of this cold is given from
the great Lakes that are fed by the Fountains of Canada. The Winter before was
as mild, scarce any Ice at all; while this for a few days froze up our great
River Delaware. From that Month, to the Month called June, we enjoyed a sweet
Spring, no Gusts, but gentle Showers and a fine Sky. Yet this I observe, that
the Winds here, as there, are most inconstant Spring and Fall, upon that turn
of Nature, than in Summer or Winter. From thence, to this present Month, which
ended the Summer, (commonly speaking) we have had extraordinary heats, yet
mitigated sometimes by cold Breezes. The Wind that rules the Summer-season, is
the South-West; but Spring, Fall, and Winter, it is rare to want the wholesome
North-Western seven days together; and whatever Mists, Fogs, or Vapors, foul
the Heavens by Easterly or Southerly Winds, in two hours time are blown away;
the one is always followed by the other. A Remedy that seems to be a peculiar
Providence in it to the Inhabitants; the multitude of Trees yet standing, being
liable to retain Mists and Vapors, and yet not one quarter so thick as I
expected.

The natural product of the Country of Vegetables, Vegetables.
is Trees, Fruits, Plants, Flowers; the Trees of most Note, are, the Black
Walnut, Cedar, Cyprus, Chestnut, Poplar, Gum-wood, Hickery, Sassafras, Ash,
Beech, and Oak of diverse sorts, as Red, White and Black; Spanish Chestnut and
Swamp, the most durable of all; of all which there is plenty for use of Man.

The Fruits Fruits.
that I find in the Woods, are, the white and black Mulberry, Chestnuts, Walnut,
Plums, Strawberries, Cranberries, Hurtleberries, and Grapes of diverse sorts,
the great red Grape, (now Ripe) called by ignorance, the Fox-Grape (because of
the relish it has with unskilful palates) is in it self an extraordinary
Grape, and by art doubtless may be cultivated to an excellent Wine, if not so
sweet, yet little inferior to the Frontiniack, as it is not much unlike in
taste, ruddiness set aside, which in such things, as well as Mankind, differs
the case much. There is a white kind of Muskadel, and a little black Grape,
like the cluster of Grapes in England, not yet so ripe as the other, but they
tell me when ripe, sweeter, and that they only want skilful Vinerons to make
good use of them; I intend to venture on it with my French- Man this Season,
who shows some knowledge in those things.

Here are also Peaches, very good, and in great quantities, not an Indian
Plantation without them; but whether naturally here at first, I know not,
however one may have them by Bushels for little; they make a pleasant Drink,
and I think not inferior to any Peach you have in England, except the true
Newington. It Is disputable with me, whether it be best to fall to Fining the
Fruits of the Country, especially the Grapes, by the care and skill of Art, or
send for Foreign Stems and Sets already good and approved; it seems most
reasonable to believe, that not only a thing grows best, where it naturally
grows; but will hardly be equaled by another's Species of the same kind, that
does not naturally grow there. But to resolve this doubt, I intend (if God give
me life) to try both, and hope the Consequences will be as good Wine as any
European Countries of the same Latitude do yield.

The artificial Product Its Product.
of the Country, is Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease, Beans, Squashes, Pumkins,
Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, and all Herbs and Roots that our Gardens in England
usually bring forth.

Of Living Creatures, Living Creatures.
as Fish, Fowl, and the Beast of the Woods, here are diverse sorts, some for
Food and Profit, and some for Profit only; for food as well as profit, the Elk,
as big as a small Ox, Deer bigger than ours, Beaver, Racoon, Rabbits,
Squirrils, and some eat young Bear, and commend it. Of Fowls of the Land, there
is the Turkey, (forty or fifty pound weight) which is very great; Pheasants,
Heath-Birds, Pigeons, and Patridges in abundance: Of the Water, the Swan,
Goose, white and gray, Ducks, Teal, also the Snipe and Curloe, and that in
great numbers; but the Duck and Teal excel, nor so good have I ever eat in
other Countries. Of Fish, there is the Sturgeon, Herring, Rock, Shad, Catshead,
Eel, Smelt, Perch, Roch; and in Inland Rivers, Trout, some say Salmon, above
the Falls. Of Shellfish, we have Oysters, Crabs, Cockles, Concks, Museta's;
some Oysters six Inches long,; and one sort of Cockles, as big as the stewing
Oyster; they make a rich Broth. The Creatures for profit only, by Skin or Furr,
and that are natural to those Parts, are the Wild-Cat, Panther, Otter, Wolf,
Fox, Fisher, Minx, Musk-Rat: And of the Water, the Whale for Oil, of which we
have good store; and two companies of Whalers, whose Boats are built, will soon
begin their work, which has the appearance of a considerable improvement to
nothing of our reasonable hopes, of good Cod in the Bay. We have no want of
Horses, and some are very good, and shapely enough; two Ships have been
fraighted to Barbados with Horses and Pipe-staves, since my coming in; here is
also plenty of Cow-Cattel, and some Sheep; the People Plow mostly with Oxen.

There are diverse Plants, Plants.
that not only the Indians tell us, but we have had occasion to prove, by
Swellings, Burns, Cuts, etc. that they are of great virtue, suddenly curing the
Patient; and for smell, I have observed several, especially one, the wild
Myrtle; the other I know not what to call, but are most fragrant; the Woods are
adorned with lovely Flowers, for color, greatness, figure and variety; I have
seen the Gardens of London best stored with that sort of beauty, but think they
may be improved by our Woods; I have sent a few to a Person of Quality this
year for a Trial. Thus much of the Country; next of the Natives or Origines.

The Natives I shall consider in their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion and
Government, with my sense of their Original. For their Persons, Their Persons.
they are generally tall, straight, well built, and of singular proportion;
they tread strong and clever, and mostly walk with a lofty Chin; of Complexion
black, but by design, as the Gypsies in England; they grease themselves with
Bear's Fat clarifi'd, and using no defense against Sun or Weather, there Skins
must needs be swarthy; their Eye is little and black, not unlike a
streightlook'd Jew; the thick Lip and flat Nose, so frequent to the
East-Indians and Blacks, are not common to them; for I have seen as comely
European-like Faces among them, of both, as on your side the Sea; and truly an
Italian Complexion has not much more of the White, and the Noses of several of
them have as much of the Roman.

Their Language Their Language.
is lofty, yet narrow, but like the Hebrew; in Signification full, like
Shorthand in Writing; one word serves in the place of three, and the rest are
supplied by the understanding of the Hearer; imperfect in their Tenses, wanting
in their Moods, Participles, Adverbs, Conjunctions, Interjections: I have made
it my business to understand it, that I might not want an Interpreter on any
occasion; and I must say, I know not a Language, spoken in Europe, that has
words of more sweetness or greatness, in Accent and Emphasis, than theirs; for
Instance, Octorockon Rancocas, Oricton, Schakamazon, Poquesin, all which are
Names of Places, and have grandeur in them of words of sweetness: Anna is
Mother, Issimus a Brother, Netap a Friend, Vsque oret very good, Poru Bread,
Metse cat, Matta no, Hatta to have, Payo to come, Sepassen, Passejou, the Names
of Places; Tamane, Secane, Menanse, Secatereus, are the Names of Persons; if
one ask them of any thing they have not, they will answer, Matta ne hotta,
which to Translate, is, not I have, instead of, I have not.

Of their Customs and Manners Customs and Manners.
there is much to be said. I will begin with Children: So soon as they are
born, they wash them in Water; and while very young, and in cold Weather to
choose, they plunge them in the Rivers to harden and embolden them: Having wrapped
them in a Clout, they lay them on a strait thin Board, a little more than the
length and breadth of the Child, and swaddle it fast upon the Board, to make it
straight; wherefore all Indians have flat Heads; and thus they carry them at
their Backs. The Children will go very young, at nine Months commonly; they
wear only a small Clout round their Waist till they are big; if Boys, they go a
Fishing till ripe for the Woods, which is about fifteen; then they Hunt, and
having given some proofs of their Manhood, by a good return of Skins, they may
Marry, else it is shame to think of a Wife. The Girls stay with their Mothers,
and help to Hoe the Ground, Plant Corn, and carry Burdens; and they do well to
use them to that Young, which they must do when they are Old; for the Wives are
the true Servants of their Husbands; otherwise the Men are very affectionate to
them. When the young Women are fit for Marriage, they wear something upon their
Heads for an Advertisement, but so as their Faces are hardly to be seen, but
when they please: The Age they Marry at, if Women, is about thirteen and
fourteen; if Men, seventeen and eighteen; they are rarely elder: their Houses
are Mats, or Barks of Trees, set on Poles, in the fashion of an English Barn,
but out of the power of the Winds, for they are hardly higher than a man; they
lie on Reeds or Grass. In travel they lodge in the Woods about a great fire,
with the Mantle-Duffils they wear by day, wrapped about them, and a few Boughs
stuck round them. Their Diet is Maiz or Indian-Corn, diverse ways prepapared;
sometimes roasted in the Ashes, sometimes beaten and boiled with Water, which
they call Homine; they also make Cakes, not unpleasant to eat; they have
likewise several sorts of Beans and Pease, that are good nourishment; and the
Woods and Rivers are their Larder.

If an European comes to see them, Their Enterment.
or calls for Lodging at their House or Wigwam, they give him the best place
and first cut. If they come to vi^^t us, they salute us with an It ah, which is
as much as to say, Good be to you, and set them down, which is mostly on the
ground, close to their Heels, their Legs upright; may be they speak not a word
more, but observe all passages: If you give them any thing to eat or drink,
well, for they will not ask; and be it little, or much, if it be with kindness,
they are well-pleased, else they go away sullen, but say nothing. They are
great concealers of their own resentments; brought to it, I believe, by the
revenge that has been practiced among them; in either of these they are not
exceeded by the Italians. A Tragical Instance fell out since I came into the
Country; A King's Daughter, thinking herself slighted by her Husband, in
suffering another Women to lie down between them, rose up, went out, plucked a
Root out of the ground, and eat it, upon which she immediately died; and for
which, last Week, he made an Offering to her Kindred, for Atonement, Liberty,
and Marriage, as two others did to the Kindred of their Wives, that died a
natural death: for till Widowers have done so, they must not Marry again. Some
of the young Women are said to take undue liberty before Marriage for a
Portion; but when Married, chaste: when with Child, they know their Husbands no
more, till delivered; and, during their Month, they touch no Meat they eat, but
with a stick, lest they should defile it; nor do their Husbands frequent them,
till that time be expired.

But in Liberality Their Liberality
they excel, nothing is too good for their Friend; give them a fine Gun, Coat,
or other thing, it may pass twenty hands, before it sticks; light of heart,
strong affections, but soon spent; the most merry Creatures that live, Feast
and Dance perpetually; they never have much, nor want much: Wealth circulateth
like the Blood, all parts partake; and though none shall want what another
has, yet exact observers of Property. Some Kings have sold, others presented
me with several Parcels of Land; the Pay or Present I made them, were not
hoarded by the particular owners, but the neighboring Kings and their Clans
being present when the Goods were brought out, the parties chiefly concerned
consulted, what and to whom they should give them; to every King then, by the
hands of a person for that work appointed, is a portion sent, so sorted and
folded, and with that gravity, that it is admirable; then that King subdivideth
it in like manner among the dependants, they hardly leaving themselves an equal
share with one of their Subjects: and be it on such occasions as Festivals, or
at their common Meals, the Kings distribute, and to themselves last; they care
for little, and the reason is, a little contents them: In this they are
sufficiently revenged on us; if they are ignorant of our pleasures, they are
also free from our pains. They are not disquieted with Bills of Lading and
Exchange, nor perplexed with Chancery-Suits and Exchequer-Reckonings; we sweat
and toil to live, their pleasure feeds them, I mean their Hunting, Fishing and
Fowling, and this Table is spread every where; they eat twice a day, Morning
and Evening; their Seats and Tables are the Ground. Since the Europeans came
into those parts, they are grown great lovers of strong Liquors, Rum
especially; and for it they exchange the richest of their Skins and Furs: If
they are healed with Liquors, they are restless till they have enough to sleep;
and this is their cry, Some more, and I will go to s^^ep; but, when drunk, one
of the most wretched'st spectacles in the world. In sickness, impatient to be
cured; for it, give any thing, especially for their Children, to whom they are
extremely natural; they drink at those times a Teran or Decostion of some
Roots, in Spring Water; and if they eat any flesh, it must be of the Female of
any Creature: if they die, they bury them with their Apparel, be they Men or
Women, and the nearest of Kin slings in something precious with them, as a
token of their love: their mourning is blacking of their faces, which they
continue for a Year: they are choice of the Graves of their dead; for, lest
they should be lost by time, and fall to common use, they pick off the Grass
that grows upon them, and heap up the fallen Earth with great care and
exactness.

These poor people are under a dark Night in things relating to Religion, Their
Religion.
to be sure the Tradition of it; yet they believe a God and Immortality without
the helps of Metaphysics; for they say there is a great King that made them,
who dwells in a glorious Country to the Southward of them, and that the Souls
of the good shall go thither, where they shall live again. Their Worship
consists of two parts, Sacrifice and Cantico: Their Sacrifice is their first
Fruits, the first and fattest Buck they kill, goes to the Fire, where he is all
burnt with a mournful Ditty of him that performs the Ceremony, but with such
mavelous fervency and labor of Body, that he will even sweat to a Foam; the
other part of their Cantico, is performed by round Dances, sometimes Words,
sometimes Songs, then Shouts; two being in the middle that begin, and by
singing and drumming on a Board, direct the Chorus; their Postures in the Dance
are very antic and differing, but all keep measure. This is done with equal
earnestness and labor, but great appearance of Joy. In the Fall, when the Corn
comes in, they begin to feast one another; there have been two great Festivals
already, to which all come that will: I was at one my self; their entertainment
was a great Seat by a Spring, under some shady Trees, and twenty Bucks, with
hot Cakes of new Corn, both Wheat and Beans, which they make up in a square
form, in the Leaves of the Stem, and bake them in the Ashes; and after that,
they fell to dance; but they that go, must carry a small Present of their
Money, it may be six pence, which is made in the Bone of a Fish; the black is
with them as Gold, the white Silver; they call it all Wampum.

Their Government Government.
is by Kings which they call Sachema, and those by succession, but always of
the Mothers-side; for instance, the Children of him that is now King, will not
succeed, but his Brother by the Mother, or the Children of his Sister, whose
Sons (and after them the Children of her Daughters) will reign; for no Woman
inherits: the Reason they render for this way of Descent, is, that their Issue
may not be spurious. Every King has his Council, and that consists of all the
old and wise men of his Nation, which perhaps is two hundred People: Nothing of
moment is undertaken, be it War, Peace, selling of Land, Traffic, without
advising with them; and which is more, with the young men too. It Is admirable
to consider how powerful the Kings are, and how they move by the Breath of the
People. I have had occasion to be in Council with them upon Treaties of Land,
and to adjust the Terms of Trade: Their Order is thus; The King sits in the
middle of a Half Moon, and has his Council, the old and wise on each hand;
behind them, or at a little distance, sit the younger Fry in the same Figure;
having consulted and resolved their Busisiness, the King ordered one of them to
speak to me, and he in the Name of his King saluted me; then took me by the
hand, and told me, That he was ordered by his King to speak to me; and that now
it was not he, but the King that spoke; because what he should say, was the
King's Mind. He first prayed me to excuse them that they had not complied with
me the last time, he feared there might be some fault in the Interpreter, being
neither Indian nor English; besides it was the Indian custom to deliberate, and
take up much time in Council before they resolve; and that if the young People
and Owners of the Land had been as ready as he, I had not met with so much
delay. Having thus introduced this Matter, he fell to the Bounds of the Land
they had agreed to dispose of, and the Price (which now is little and dear,
that which would have bought twenty Miles, not buying now two.) During the time
that this Person spoke, not a man of them was observed to whisper or smile; the
Old grave, the Young reverent in their deportment: They do speak little, but
fervently and with elegancy; I have never seen more natural sagacity,
considering them without the help of Tradition; and he will deserve the Name of
wise, that out-wits them in any Treaty about a thing they understand.

When the Purchase was agreed, great Promises passed between us of Kindness and
good Neighborhood, and that the Indians and English must live in Love as long
as the Sun gave Light; which done, another made a Speech to the Indians, in the
Name of all the Sachamakers or Kings, first to tell them what was done; next,
to charge and command them to love Christians; and particularly to live in
peace with me, and the People under my Government: That many Governors had been
in the River, but that no Governor had come himself to live and stay here
before; and having now such a one that had treated them well, they should never
do him or his any wrong. At every Sentence of which, they shouted, and said,
Amen, in their way.

The Justice Their Justice.
they have is pecuniniary; in case of any wrong or evil fact, be it Murder
itself, they atone by Feasts and Presents of their Wampum, which is
proportioned to the quality of the Offense, or Person injured, of the Sex they
are of: For in case they kill a Woman, they pay double; and the reason they
render, is, That she breeds Children, which men cannot do. It Is rare that
they fall out, if sober; and if drunk, they forgive it; saying, it was the
Drink, and not the Man, that abused them. We have agreed, that in all
differences between us, six of each side shall end the Matter. Don't abuse
them, but let them have Justice, and you win them: The worst is, they are the
worse for the Christians, who have propagated their Vices, and yielded them
Tradition for ill, and not for good things. But as low an Ebb as they are at,
and in as glorious as their condition looks, the Christians have not outlived
their sight with all their Pretensions to an higher manifestation. What Good
then might not a good People graft, where there is so distinct a Knowledge left
between good and evil? I beseech God to incline the hearts of all that come
into these parts, to outlive the Knowledge of the Natives, by a fixed obedience
to their greater Knowledge of the Will of God; for it were miserable indeed for
us to fall under the just censure of the poor Indian Conscience, while we make
profession of things so far transcending.

For their Original, Their Original.
I am ready to believe them of the Jewish Race; I mean of the stock of the Ten
Tribes; and that for the following Reasons: First, They were to go to a Land
not planted or known; which to be sure Asia and Africa were, if not Europe; and
he that intended that extraordinary Judgment upon them, might make the Passage
not uneasy to them, as it is not unpossible in itself, from the Eastermost;
parts of Asia, to the Westermost parts of America. In the next place, I find
them of like countenance, and their Children of so lively resemblance, that a
man would think himself in Dukes-Place or Berry-Street in London, when he sees
them. But this is not all; they agree in Rites, they reckon by Moons, they
offer their first Fruits, they have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles, they are
said to lay their Altar upon twelve Stones, their mourning a year, Customs of
Women, with many things that do not now occur.

So much for the Natives; next, the old Planters The old Planters.
will be considered in their Relation, before I come to our Colony, and the
Concerns of it. The first Planters in these parts, were the Dutch, and soon
after them the Swedes and Finns. The Dutch applied themselves to Traffic, the
Swedes and Finns to Husbandry. There were some Deputies between them some
years, The Dutch looked upon them as intruders upon their Purchase and
Possession; which was finally ended in the surrender made by John Rizeing, the
Swedes Governor, to Peter Styresant, Governor for the States of Holland, Anno
1655. The Dutch inhabit mostly those parts of the Province that lie upon or
near the Bay, and the Swedes the Freshes of the River Delaware. There is no
need of giving any description of them, who are better known there than here,
but they are a plain, strong, industrious People, yet have made no great
progress in Culture, or propagation of Fruit Trees; as if they desired rather
to have enough, than Plenty or Traffic. But I presume the Indians made them
more careless, by furnishing them with the means of Profit, to wit, Skins and
Furs for Rum, and such strong Liquors. They kindly received me as well as the
English, who were few, before the People concerned with me, came among them. I
must needs commend their respect to Authority, and kind behavior to the
English; they do not degenerate from the old Friendship between both Kingdoms.
As they are People proper and strong of Body, so they have fine Children, and
almost every house full; rare to find one of them without three of four Boys,
and as many Girls; some six, seven and eight Sons: And I must do them that
right, I see few young men more sober and laborious. The Dutch have a
Meeting Place for Religious Worship, at Newcastle; and the Swedes three, one at
Christina, one at Tenecum, and one at Wicoco, within half a Mile of this Town.

There rests, that I speak of the Condition we are in, and what settlement we
have made; in which I will be as short as I can; for I fear, and not without
reason, that I have tired your Patience with this long Story. The Country
lies bounded on the East, Its Situation.
by the River and Bay of Delaware and Eastern Sea; it has the advantage of
many Creeks, or Rivers Its Rivers.
rather, that run into the main River or Bay; some navigable for great Ships,
some for small Craft: Those of most eminency, are, Christina, Brandy-wine,
Shilpot and Skulkil; any one of which have room to lay up the Royal Navy of
England, there being from four to eight fathom water; the lesser Creeks or
Rivers, yet convenient for Sloops and Ketches of good Burden, are, Lewis,
Mespilon, Ceda, Dover, Cranbrook, Feversham, and Georges below, and Chichester,
Chester, Toacawry, Pemmapecka, Fortquessin, Neshimene, and Pennberry in the
Freshes, many lesser, that admit Boats and Shallops. Our People are mostly
settled upon the upper Rivers, which are pleasant and sweet, and generally
bounded with good Land.

The planted part of the Province and Territories, is cast into six Counties,
Their Counties.
Philadelphia, Buckingham, Chester, Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, containing
about four thousand Souls. Two General Assemblies have been held, and with such
Concord and Dispatch, that they sat but three weeks, and at least seventy Laws
were past without one Dissent in any material thing. But of this more
hereafter, being yet raw and new in our Geer: However, I cannot forget their
singular respect to me in this Infancy of things; who, by their own private
expenses so early considered mine for the certain Goods imported and exported:
which, after my acknowledgement of their Affection, I did as freely remit to
the Province and the Traders to it.

And for the well-government of the said Counties, Courts of Justice Courts of
Justice erected.
are established in every County, with proper Officers, as, Justices, Sheriffs,
Clerks, Constables, etc. Which Courts are held every two Months. But to prevent
Lawsuits, there are three Peacemakers chosen by each County Court, in the
nature of common Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences between man and man;
and Spring and Fall there is an Orphans-Court in each County, to inspect and
regulate the Affairs of Orphans and Widows.

Philadelphia, Philadelphia.
the Expectation of those that are concerned in this Province, is at last laid
out to the great content of those here that are any ways interessed therein:
The Situation is a Neck of Land, and lies between two navigable Rivers,
Delaware and Skulkil, whereby it has two Fronts upon the Water, each a Mile,
and two from River to River. Delaware is a glorious River, but the Skulkil
being an hundred Miles Boatable above the Falls, and its Course North-East
toward the Fountain of Susqitahannah (that tends to the heart of the Province,
and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of the Settlement of this
Age, in which those that are Purchasers of me, will find their Names and
Interest. But this I will say for the good Providence of God, That of all the
many Places I have seen in the world, I remember not one better seated; so that
it seems to me, to have been apointned for a Town, whether we regard the
Rivers, or the convenience of the Coves, Docks, Springs, the loftiness and
soundness of the Land and the Air, held by the People of those Parts, to be
very good. It is advanced within less than a Year to about fourscore Houses and
Cottages, such as they are; where Merchants and Handicraftsmen are following
their Vocations as fast as they can, while the Contrymen are close in their
Farms: Some of them got a little Winter-Corn in the Ground last Season, and the
generality have had a handsome Summer-Crop, and are preparing for their
Winter-Corn. They reaped their Barley this Year in the Month called May, the
Wheat in the Month following; so that there is time in these parts for another
Crop of diverse things before the Winter-Season. We are daily in hopes of
Shipping to add to our Number; for blessed be God there is both room and
accommodation for them; the Stories of our Necessity being either the Fear of
our Friends, or the Scare-crows of our Enemies; for the greatest hardship we
have suffered has been Salt-Meat, which by Fowl in Winter, and Fish in Summer,
together with some Poultry, Lamb, Mutton, Veal, and plenty of Venison the best
part of the Year, has been very passable I bless God, I am fully satisfied
with the Country and Entertainment I can get in it; for I find that particular
content which has always attended me, where God by his Providence has made it
my Place and Service to reside. You cannot imagine, my Station can be at
present free of more than ordinary an ordinary Business; and as such, I may say
it is a troublesome Work; but the Method things are putting in, will facilitate
the Charge, and give an easier motion to the Administration of Affairs.
However, as it is some men's Duty to plow, some to sow, some to water, and some
to reap, so it is the Wisdonm, as well as Duty of a man, to yield to the Mind
of Providence, and cheerfully, as well as carefully, embrace and follow the
Guidance of it.

The City of Philadelphia, The Extent of Philadelphia.
as now laid out, extends in length, from River to River, two Miles, and in
breadth near a Mile; and the Governor, as a further manifestation of his
kindness to the Purchasers, has freely given them their respective Lots in the
City, without defalcation of any of their Qualities of Purchased Lands; and as
it is now placed and modelled between two Navigable Rivers upon a neck of Land,
and that Ships may ride in good Anchorage, in six or eight fathom Water in both
Rivers, close to the City, and the Land of the City level, dry and wholesome;
such a situation is scarce to be paralleled. The City is so ordered now, by
the Governor's Care and Prudence, that it has a Front to each River, one half
at Delaware, the other at Skulkil; and though all this cannot make way for
small Purchasers to be in the Fronts, Yet they are placed in the next Streets,
contiguous to each Front; viz. all Purchasers of one thousand Acres and
upwards, have the Fronts, (and the High Street) and to every five thousand
Acres purchase in the Front, about an Acre, and the smaller Purchasers about
half an Acre in the backward Street; by which means the least has room enough
for a House, Garden, and a small Orchard, to the great content and satisfaction
of all here concerned.

The City consists of a large Front-Street to each River, and a High Street,
(near the middle) front (or River) to front, of one hundred foot broad, and a
broad Street in the middle of the City, from side to side, square of ten Acres;
at each Angle are to be Houses for Public Affairs, as a Meeting House Assembly
or State-House, Market-House, School-House, and several other Buildings for
other concerns. There are also in each Quarter of the City, a Square of eight
Acres to be for the like uses, as the Moor-fields in London, and eight Streets
(beside the High Street) that run from Front to Front, and twenty Streets
(besides the broad Street) that run cross the City, from side to side, all
these Streets are of fifty foot breadth.

After he had continued there above a Year, from the time or giving this
Relation, he came for England, upon the account of some Qarrels that arose
between him and the Lord Baltamore, who claimed the Lands of Delaware; but
after several Hearings before the Lords of the Committee, the Matter was
decided, after which he published a further Account of the Progress they made
in that Plantation, which is as follows:

1. We have had about Ninety Sail of Ships, with Passengers, Its Passengers.
since the beginning of the Year 1682, and not one Vessel, designed to this
Province, through God's mercy, hitherto miscarried.

The Estimate of the People may be thus made; Eighty to each Ship; which comes
to Seven thousand two hundred Persons: at least a Thousand there before, with
such as from other places in our neighborhood are since come to reside among
us: and, I presume, the Births at least equal to the Burials; for having made
our first Settlement high in the Freshes of the River, we do not find our
selves subject to those seasonings that affect some other Countries upon the
same Coast.

The People are a Collection of diverse Nations in Europe: Its Inhabitants.
As French, Dutch, Germans, Swedes, Danes, Finns, Scotch, Irish, and Englsh;
and of the last, equal to all the rest, and which is admirable, not a
reflection upon that account: But as they are of one kind, and in one place,
and under one Allegiance, so they live like People of one Country: which civil
union has had a considerable Influence toward the prosperity of that place.

2. Philadelphia, Philadelphia farther described.
and our intended Metropolis, as I formerly writ, is two Miles long, and a Mile
broad, and at each end it lies that Mile, upon a Navigable River; the Situation
high and dry, yet replenished with running streams; besides, the High Street,
that runs in the middle, from River to River, and is an hundred foot broad, it
has eight Streets more, that run the same course, the least of which is fifty
foot in breadth; and, besides Broad-street, which crosses the Town in the
middle, and is also an hundred Foot wide, there are twenty Streets more, that
run the same course, and are also fifty foot broad. The Names of those Streets
are mostly taken from the things that spontaneously grow in the Country; As
Vine-street, Mulberry-sreet, Chesnut-street, Walnut-street, Strawberry-street,
Cranberry-street, Plum-street, Hickery-street, Pine-street, Oak-street,
Beach-street, Ash-street, Popler-street, Sassafras-street, and the like.

3. I mentioned in my last Account, Increase of Building.
that from my arrival in 1682, to the date hereof, being ten Months, we had got
up fourscore Houses at our Town, and that some Villages were settled about it;
from that time, to my coming away, which was a Year, within a few weeks, the
Town advanced to 357 Houses, diverse of them large, well built, with good
Cellars, three Stories, and some Balconies.

4. There is a fair Key, A fair Key.
of about 300 foot square, built by Samuel Carpenter, to which a Ship of 500
Tuns may lay her broadside: and others intend to follow his example. We have
also a Rope-walk, made by B. Wilcox, and Cordage for Ships already spun at it.

5. There inhabits most sorts of useful Tradesmen; As Carpenters, Their Trades.
Joyners, Bricklayers, Masons, Plaisterers, Plummers, Smiths, Glasiers,
Tailors, Shoemaker, Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Glovers, Tanners, Felmongers,
Wheel-rights, Mill-rights, Ship-rights Boat-rights, Rope-makers, Sail-makers,
Block-makers, Turners, etc.

6. There are two Markets every Week, Their Markets and Fairs.
and two Fairs every Year. In other places Markets also, as at Chester, and
New Castle.

7. Seven Ordinaries Their Ordinaries.
for the entertainment of Strangers, and Workmen, that are not Housekeepers,
and a good Meal to be had for Sixpence, Sterling.

8. The Hours for Work, Hours for Work.
and Meals to Laborers are fixed, and known by ring of Bell.

9. After Nine at Night, the Officers go the Rounds, and no person, without
very good cause, suffered to be at any Publick-house, that is not a Lodger.
Hours for Lodgers.


10. Though this Town seemed at first contrived for the Purchasers of the first
hundred shares, An Addition for Improvement.
each share consisting of 5000 Acres, yet few going, and that their absence
might not check the Improvement of the Place, and Strangers, that flockt to us,
be thereby excluded, I added that half of the Town, that lies on the Skulkil,
that we might have room for present and after-comers, that were not of that
number, and it has already had great success to the Improvement of the place.

11. Some Vessels Vessels built.
have been here built, and many Boats, and by that means, a ready convenience
for passage for People and Goods.

12. Diverse Brickeries Diverse Brickeries.
going on, many Cellars already stoned, or bricked, and some Brick-Houses going
up.

13. The Town is well furnished what with convenient Mills; Convenient Mills.
and what with their Garden-Plots, (the least half an Acre) the Fish of the
River and their Labor, to the Countryman, who begins to pay with the
Provisions of his own growth, they live comfortably.

14. The Improvement Its Improvement.
of the place is best measured by the advance of value upon every man's Lot, I
will venture to say, that the worst Lot in the Town, without any improvement
upon it, is worth four times more than it was when it was laid out, and the
best forty; and though it seems unequal, that the absent should be thus
benefited by the improvement, of those upon the place, especially when they
have served no Office, run no Hazard, nor as yet defrayed any Public Charge,
yet this Advantage does certainly redound to them, and whoever theyare they are
great Debtors to the Country; of which I shall now speak more at large.

Of Country-Settlement.
1. We do settle in the way of Townships or Villages, Their Settlements.
each of which contains 5000 Acres in square, and at least ten Famlies, the
regulation of the Country, being a Family to each 500 Acres; some Townships
have more, where the interest of the People is less than that quantity, which
often falls out.

2. Many that had right to more Land, were at first covetous to have their
whole quantity, without regard to this way of settlement, though by such
Wilderness-Vacancies they had ruined the Country, and their own Interest, of
course. I had in my View, Society, Assistance, easy Commerce, Instruction of
Youth, Government of Peoples Manners, Convenience of Religious assembling,
Encouragement of Mechanics, distinct and beaten Roads, and it was answered in
all these respects, I think, to an universal content.

3. Our Townships lie square, generally the Village in the center; The Houses
either opposite, or else opposite to the middle, betwixt two Houses over the
way, for nearer neighborhood. We have another method, that through the Village
be in the center, yet after a different manner: five hundred Acres are allotted
for the Village, which, among ten Families, comes to fifty Acres each: this
lies square, and on the outside of the Square stands the Houses, and their
fifty Acres running back, whose ends meeting, make the center of the 500 Acres
as they are to the whole. Before the Doors of whole Houses, lies the Highway,
and cross it every man's 450 Acres of Land, that makes up his Complement of
500; so that the convenience of Neighborhood is made agreeable with that of
the Land.

4. I said nothing in my last, of any number of Townships, but there were at
least Fifty settled, before my leaving those Parts, which was in the Month
called August 1684.

5. I visited many of them, and found them much advanced in their Improvements;
Houses over their heads, and Garden-plots, Coverts for their Cattle, an
increase of Stock, and several Enclosures in Corn especially, the first
Commerce: And I may say of some poor men, even to the beginnings of an Estate,
the difference of laboring for themselves and for others; of an Inheritance,
and a Rack-Lease being never better understood.

The Product of the Earth.
1. The Earth, by Gods Blessing, has more than answered our expectation; The
Earths Product.
the poorest places in our Judgment, producing large Crops of Garden stuff,
and Grain; and though our Ground has not generally the Symptoms of the fat
Necks that lie upon Salt Waters in Provinces Southern of us, our Grain is
thought to excel, and our Crops to be as large. We have had the mark of the
good Ground amongst us, from thirty to sixty-fold of English Corn.

2. The Land requires less Seed; three Pecks of Wheat sows an Acre; a Bushel at
most, and some have had the increase I have mentioned.

3. Upon Trial, we find that the Corn and Roots that grow in England, thrive
very well there; as, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oats, Buck-Wheat, Pease, Beans,
Cabbages, Turnips, Carrots, Parsneps, Colliflowers, Asparagus, Onions,
Charlots, Garlic, and Irish Potatoes; we have also the Spanish, and very good
Rice, which do not grow here.

4. Our Low-Lands are excellent for Rape, and Hemp and Flax. A Trial has been
made, and of the two last there is a considerable quantity dressed yearly.

5. The Weeds of our Woods feed our Cattle, to the Market as well as Dairy: I
have seen fat Bullocks brought thence to Market before Midsummer. Our Swamps or
Maarshes yield us course Hay for the Winter.

6. English Grass-Seed takes well; which will give us fatting Hay in time. Of
this I made an Experiment in my own Courtyard, upon Sand that was dug out
of my Cellar, with Seed that had lain in a Cask, open to the Weather two
Winters and a Summer; I caused it to be sown in the beginning of the Month
called April, and a fortnight before Midsummer it was fit to mow; it grew very
thick; but I ordered it to be fed, being in the nature of a Grass-Plot, on
purpose to see if the Roots lay firm; and though it had been mere Sand cast out
of the Cellar, but a year before, the Seed took such Root, and held the Earth
so fast, and fastened it self so well in the Earth, that it held and fed like
old English Ground. I mention this, to confute the Objections that lie against
those Parts; as if that, First, English Grass would not grow; next, not enough
to mow; and lastly, not firm enough to feed, from the levity of the Mould.

7. All sorts of English Fruits that have been tried, take mighty well for the
time; the Peach excellent; on Standers; and in great quantities: They Sun-dry
them, and lay them up in Lofts, as we do Roots here, and stew them with Meat in
Wintertime. Musk-Melons and Water-Melons are raised here, with as little care
as Pumpkins in England; the Vine especially prevails, which grows every where;
and upon Experience of some French People from Rochel, and the Isle of Rhee.

Good Wine Wine
may be made there, especially, when the Earth and Stem are fined and civilized
by Culture. We hope that good skill in our most Southern parts will yield us
several of the Streights-Commodities, especially, Oil, Dates, Figs, Almonds,
Raisins and Currants.

Of the Product of our Waters.
1. Mighty Whales roll upon the Coast, The Waters
near the Mouth of the Bay of Delaware; eleven caught and worked into Oil in
one Season. We justly hope a considerable Profit by a Whalery, they being so
numerous, and the Shore so suitable.

2. Sturgeons play continually in our Rivers in Summer; and though the way of
curing them, be not generally known, yet by a Receipt I had of one Collins,
that related to the Company of the Royal Fishery, I did so well preserve some,
that I had of them good there three Months of the Summer, and brought some of
the same so for England.

3. Alloes, as they call them, the Jews, Alice, and our Igrorants, Shades, are
excellent Fish, and of the bigness of our largest Carp; they are so plentiful,
that Captain Smith's Overseer, at the Skulkil, drew six hundred and odd at one
Draught; three hundred is no wonder, one hundred familiarly: They are excellent
pickled or smoked, as well as boiled fresh; they are caught by Nets only.

4. Rocks are somewhat rounder and larger, also a whiter Fish, little inferior
in relish to our Mallet; we have them almost in the like plenty. These are
often Barrell'd like Cod, and not much inferior for their spending. Of both
these, the Inhabitants increase their Winter-Store: These are caught by Nets,
Hooks and Spears.

5. The Sheepshead, so called, from the resemblance of its Mouth and Nose to a
Sheep, is a Fish much preferred by some; but they keep in Salt Water; they are
like a Roch in fashion, but as thick as a Salmon, not so long. We have also the
Drum, a large and noble Fish, commended equal to the Sheeps-head, not unlike to
a New Foundland Cod, but larger of the two. It Is so called from a noise it
makes in its Belly when it is taken, resembling a Drum. There are three sorts
of them, the Black, Red, and Gold-colour; the Black is fat in the Spring, the
Red in the Fall, and the Gold-colour, believed to be the Black grown old,
because it is observed that young ones of that color have not been taken. They
generally take them by Hook and line, as they do Cod, and they save like it,
where People are skilful. There are abundance of lesser Fish to be caught at
pleasure, but they quit not cost, as those I have mentioned, neither in
magnitude nor number, except the Herring, which swarms in such shoals, that it
is hardly credible; in little Creeks, they almost shovel them up in Tubs. There
is the Cat-fish, or Flat-head, Lamprey, Eel, Trout, Perch, black and white
Smelt, Sun-fish, etc. Also Oysters, Cockles, Conks, Crabs, Muscles, Mananoses.

Of Provision in general.
1. It has been often said, we are starved for want of Food; Provision.
some were apt to sugest their Fears, others to insinuate their Prejudice, and
when this was contracted, and they assured we had plenty, both of Bread, Fish
and Flesh, then 'twas objected, we were forced to fetch it from other places at
great Charges: But neither is all this true, though all the World will, think
we must either bring Provision with us, or get it of the Neighborhood till we
had gotten houses over our heads, and a little Land in tillage. We fetched
none, nor were we wholly kept by Neighbors; the old Inhabitants supplied us
with most of the Corn we wanted, and a good share of Pork and Beef: It Is true,
New York, New England, and Road-Island, did with their Provisions fetch our
Goods and Money, but at such Rates, that some sold for almost what they gave,
and others carried their Provisions back, expecting a better Market nearer;
which showed no scarcity, and that we were not totally destitute in our own
River. But if my Advice be of any value, I would have them buy still, and not
weaken their Herds, by killing up their young Stock too soon.

But the right measure of Information must be the proportion of value of
Provision there, to what they are in more planted and mature Colonies. Beef is
commonly sold at the rate of two pence per pound; and Pork for two pence
halfpeny, Veal and Mutton at three pence, or three pence halfpeny of that
Country Money; an English Shilling goes for Sixteen pence. Grain sells by the
Bushel; Wheat at four shillings, Rye, and excellent good, at three shillings;
Barley, two shillings six pence, Indian Corn two shillings six pence, Oats, two
shillings, in that Money still, which in a new Country, where Grain is so much
wanted for Seed, as well as Food, cannot be called dear; and especially if we
consider the consumption of the many new Comers.

3. There is so great an increase of Grain, by the diligent application of
People to Husbandry, that within three years, some Plantations have got twenty
Acres in Corn, some forty.

4. They are very careful to increase their Stock, and get into Dairies as fast
as they can. They already make good Butter and Cheese. A good Cow and a Calf by
her side, may be worth three pounds Sterling, in Goods at first cost. A pair of
working Oxen eight pound, a pair of fat ones little more, and a plain breeding
Mare about five pounds sterling.

5. For Fish, it is brought to the door, both fresh and salt, six Alloes or
Rocks for twelve pence, and salt-fish at three farthings per pound, Oysters at
two shillings per Bushel.

6. Our Drink has been Beer and Punch, made of Rum and Water; Our Beer was
mostly made of Molosses, which well boiled with Sassafras or Pine, infused into
it, makes very tolerable Drink; but now they make Malt, and Malt-Drink begins
to be common, especially at Ordinaries, and the houses of the more substantial
people. In our great Town there is an able man that has set up a Brew House in
order to furnish the people with good Drink, both there and up and down the
River.

Having said this of the Country, for the time I was there, I shall add one of
many Letters that have come to my hand, because brief and full, and that he is
known to be a Person of an extraordinary Caution as well as Truth, in what he
is wont to write or speak.

Philadelphia, the Third of the Sixth Month, (August) 1685.
Governor,
HAving an opportunity by a Ship from this River (out of which several have
gone this year) I thought fit to give a short account of Proceedings, as to
Settlement here, and the Improvement both in Town and Country: As to the
Country, the Improvements are large, and Settlements very much thronged, by
way of Township and Villages, great inclination to planting Orchards, which are
easily raised, and some brought to perfection, much Hay-seed sown, and much
planting of Corn this year, and great product said to be, both of Wheat, Rye
and Rice; Barley and Oats prove very well; besides Indian Corn and Pease of
several sorts; also Kidney-Beans, and English Pease of several kinds, I have
had in my own Ground, with English Roots, Turnips, Parsnips, Carrots, Onions,
Leeks, Radishes and Cabbages, with abundance of Herbs and Flowers: I know but
of few Seeds that have missed, except Rosemary Seed, which being English, might
be old. Also I have such plenty of Pumkins, Musk-Melons, Water Melons,
Squashes, Coshaws, Bucks-hens, Cucumbers and Simnels of diverse sorts, admired
at by new comers, that the Earth should so plentifully cast forth, especially
the first years breaking up, and on that which is counted the worst sort of
Sandy Land. I am satisfied, and many more, that the Earth is very fertile, and
the Lord has done his part, if man use but a moderate diligence: Grapes,
Mulberries, and many wild Fruits, and natural Plums in abundance this year have
I seen and eat of. A brave Orchard and Nursery have I planted, and they thrive
mightily, and bear Fruit the first year; I endeavor to get choice of Fruits
and Seeds from many parts; also Hay-Seed, and have sowed a Field this Spring
for Trial. First, I burned the Leaves, then had it grubb'd, not the Fields, but
the small Roots up, then sowed great and small Clovers, with a little old
Grass-Seed, and had it only raked over, not plowed nor harrowed, and it grows
exceedingly: Also, for Experience, I sowed some Patches of the same sort in my
Garden, and dunged some, and that grows worst; I have planted the Irish
Potatoes, and hope to have a brave increase to transplant next year. Captain
Rapel (the Frenchman) says, he made good Wine of the Grapes of the Country
last year, and transplanted some, but intends to make more this year; also a
Frenchman in this Town intends the same; for Grapes are very plentiful.

Now as to the Town of Philadelphia, it goes on in Planting and Building to
admiration, both in the Front and backward, and there are about 600 Houses in
three years time; and since I built my Brick-House, the Foundation of which was
laid at my going, which I design after a good manner, to encourage others, and
that from building with Wood; it being the first, many take example; and some
that built wooden Houses, are sorry for it; Brick Building is said to be as
cheap: Bricks are exceeding good, and better than when I built, more makers
fallen in, and Bricks cheaper; they were before at 16 s. English, per Thousand,
and now many brave Brick houses are going up with good Cellars. Arthur Cook is
building him a brave Brick House near William Frampton's, on the Front; for
William Frampton has since built a good Brick House, by his Brew House and
Bake-house, and let the other for an Ordinary. John Wheeler from New England,
is building a good Brick House by the Blew Anchor, and the two Brick-makers a
double Brick House and Cellars; besides several other going on. Samuel
Carpenter has built another House by his. I am building another Brick House by
mine, which is three large Stories high, besides a good large Brick Cellar
under it of two Bricks and a half thickness in the Wall, and the next Story
half under ground; the Cellar has an arched Door for a Vault to go (under the
Street) to the River, and so to bring in Goods, or deliver out. Humphrey Murry,
from New York, has built a large Timber-House with Brick Chimneys. John Test
has almost finished a good Brick House, and a Bake-house of Timber; and N.
Allen a good House next to Thomas Wynn's Front-Lot. John Day a good House after
the London fashion, most Brick with a large Frame of Wood in the Front, for
Shop-windows; all these have Balconies. Thomas Smith and Daniel P^ge are
Partners, and set to making of Brick this year, and they are very good: Also
Pastors, the German Friend; Agent for the Company at Frankford, with his Dutch
People, are preparing to make Bricks next year. Samuel Carpenter is our
Lime-burner on his Wharf. Brave Lime stone is found here, as the Workmen say,
being proved. We build most Houses with Balconies. Lots are much desired in the
Town; great buying one of anothe. We are now laying the Foundation of a large
plain Brick House for a Meeting House, in the Center (sixty foot long, and
about forty foot broad) and hope to have it soon up, there being many hearts
and hands at work that will do it: A large Meeting House, fifty foot long, and
thirty eight broad also going on the front of the River, for an
Evening-Meeting, the Work going on apace; many Towns-people settling their
Liberty-Lands. I hope the Society will rub off the Reproaches some have cast
upon them. We now begin to gather in something of our many great Debts.

I do understand three Companies for Whale-catching, are designed to fish in
the Rivers-mouth this Season, and find through the great plenty of Fish, they
may begin early. A Fisherman this year found a way to catch Whitings in this
River; and it is expected, many sorts of Fish more than has been yet caught,
may be taken by the skilful. Fish are in such plenty, that many sorts on Trial,
have been taken with Nets in the Wintertime. The Swedes laughing at the
English for going to try, have since tried themselves. The River is so big, and
full of several sorts of brave Fish, that its believed, except frozen over, we
may catch any time in the Winter. It is great pity, but two or three
experienced Fishermen were here to ply this River, to salt, and serve, fresh
Fish to the Town. A good way to pickle Sturgeon is wanting; such abundance
being in the River, even before the Town: many are caught, boiled, and eaten.
Last Winter great plenty of Deer were brought in by the Indiands and English
from the Country. We are generally very well and healthy here, but abundance
dead in Maryland this Summer.

The Manufacture of Linen by the Germans goes on finely, and they make fine
Linen. Samuel Carpenter having been lately there, declares, They had gathered
one Crop of Flax, and had sown the second, and saw it come up well, and, they
say, might have had forwarder and better, had they had old Seed, and not stayed
so long for the growth of the new Seed to sow again. I may believe it, for
large has my experience been this year, though in a small piece of ground, to
the admiration of many.

I thought fit to signify thus much, knowing thou would be glad to hear of
the People and Provinces welfare: The Lord preserve us all, and make way for
thy return, which is much desired, not only by our friends, but all sorts, I
am, etc. thy truly Loving Friend,

Robert Turner.


Of further Improvements for Trade and Commerce.
These things that we have in Prospect for Staples of Trade, Trade and Commerce.
are Wine, Linen, Hemp, Potashes and Whale-oyl; to say nothing of our
Provisions for the Islands, our Saw-Mills, Sturgeon, some Tobacco, and our
Furrs and Skins, which of themselves are not contemptible: I might add Iron
(perhaps Copper too) for there is much Mines, and it will be granted us, that
we want no Wood, though I must confess, I cannot know how to help preferring a
Domestic or Self-subsistence to a life of much profit, by the extreme toil of
Foreign Traffic.

Advice to Adventurers how to employ their Estates with fair profit.
It is sit now that I give some Advertisement to Adventurers, Advice to
Adventurers.
which way they may lay out their money to best advantage, so as it may yield
them fair returns, and with content to all concerned, which is the last part of
my present task; and I must needs say so much wanting, that it has perhaps
given some occasion to ignorance and prejudice to run without mercy, measure or
distinction, against America, of which, Pensylvania to be sure has had its
share.

1. It is agreed on all hands, that the poor are the hands and feet of the
rich. It is their labor that improves Countries, and to encourage them, is to
promote the real benefit of the Public. Now as there are abundance of these
People in many parts of Europe, extremely desirous of going to America, so the
way of helping them thither, or when there, and the return thereof to the
Disbursers, will prove what I say to be true.

2. There are two sorts, such as are able to transport themselves and Families,
but have nothing to begin with there, and those that want so much as to
transport themselves and Families thither.

3. The first of these may be entertained in this manner. Say I have five
thousand Acres, I will settle ten Families upon them in way of Village, and
build each an House, an out-House for Cattle, furnish every Family with stock;
as four Cows, two Sows, a couple of Mares, and a yoke of Oxen, with a
Town-horse, Bull and Boar. I find them with Tools, and give each their first
Ground-seed; they shall continue seven years, or more, at half increase, being
bound to leave the Houses in repair, and a Garden and Orchard, I paying for the
Trees, and at least twenty Acres of Land within Fence, and improved to Corn and
Grass. The charge will come to about sixty pounds English each Family; at the
seven years end, the improvement will be worth, as things go now, one hundred
and twenty pounds, besides the value of the increase of the Stock, which may be
near as much more, allowing for casualties, especially if the People are honest
and careful, or a man be upon the Spot himself, or have an Overseer sometimes
to inspect them. The charge in the whole is eight hundred thirty and two
Pounds. I think I have been modest in my Computation. These Farms afterward
are sit for Leases at full Rent, or how else the owner shall please to dispose
of them; also the People will by this time be skilled in the Country, and well
provided to settle themselves with Stock upon their own Land.

4. The other sort of poor People may be very beneficially transported upon
these terms. Say I have five thousand Acres, I should settle as before, I will
give to each Family one hundred Acres, which in the whole makes one thousand,
and to each Family thirty Pounds English, half in hand and half there, which in
the whole comes to three hundred Pounds, after four days are expired, in which
time they may be easy, and in a good condition; they shall each of them pay 5
l. and so yearly for ever, as a Fee-farm-rent, which in the whole comes to
fifty Pounds a year. Thus a Man that buys five thousand Acres may secure and
settle his four thousand by the gift of one, and in a way that hazard and
interest allowed for, amounts to at least ten per Cent. upon Land security,
besides the value it puts upon the rest of the five thousand Acres. I propose
that there be at the least two working hands besides the Wife, whether Son or
Servant, and that they oblige what they carry; and for further security, bind
themselves as Servants for some time, that they will settle the said Land
accordingly: And when they are once seated their improvements are security
enough for the Rent.

5. There is yet another expedient, and that is, to give ten Families one
thousand Acres for ever, at a small acknowledgment, and settle them in way of
Village, as before; by their seating thus, the Land taken up is secured from
others, because the method of the Country is answered, and the value such a
settlement gives to the rest reserved, is not inconsiderable, I mean the four
thousand Acres, especially that which is contiguous, for their Children when
grown up, and Handicrafts, will soon covet to fix next them, and such and such
after settlements to begin at an improved rent in Fee, or for long Leases, or
small acknowledgments, and good improvements must advance the whole
considerably. I conceive any of these methods to issue in a sufficient
advantage to Adventurers, and they all give good encouragement to feeble and
poor Families.

6. That which is most advisable for People intended thither, to carry with
them, is, in short, all things relating to Apparel, Building, Household Stuff,
Husbandry, Fowling and Fishing, some Spice, Spirits, and double Beer, at first,
were not amiss. But I advise all to proportion their Estates thus, one third in
Money, and two thirds in Goods. Upon Pieces of Eight there will be almost a
third gotten, for they go at six shillings; and by Goods well bought, at least
fifty Pounds Sterling for every hundred Pounds, so that a Man worth four
hundred Pounds here, is worth six hundred Pounds there, without sweating.

Of the Natives.
1. Because many stories have been Prejudicially progagated, as if we were upon
ill terms with the Natives, The Natives.
and sometimes, like Job's Kindred, all cut off but the Messenger that brought
Tidings; I think it requisite to say thus much, that as there never was any
such Messenger, so the dead People were alive at our last advices, so far are
we from ill Terms with the Natives, that we have lived in great friendship. I
have made several Purchases, and in Pay and Presents they have received at
least twelve hundred Pounds of me. Our humanity has obliged them so far, that
they generally leave their Guns at home, when they come to our Settlements;
they offer us no affront, not so much as to one of our Dogs; and if any of them
break our Laws, they submit to be punished by them: And to this they have tied
themselves by an Obligation under their Hands. We leave not the least indignity
to them unrebuked, nor wrong unsatisfied; Justice gains and awes them. They
have some great Men amongst then, I mean, for Wisdom, Truth and Justice. I
refer to my former Account about their Laws, Manners and Religious Rites.

Of the Government.
The Government Their Government.
is, according to the words of the Grant, as near to the English as
conveniently may be; in the whole we aim at Duty to the King, the preservation
of Right to all, the suppression of Vice, and encouragement of Virtue and Arts;
with liberty to all People to Worship Almighty God, according to their Faith
and Persuasion.

Of the seasons of Going, and usual time of Passage.
1. Though Ships go hence all times of the Year, The seasons of the Ships
Passage.
it must be acknowledged, that to go so as to arrive at Spring or Fall, is
best: For the Summer may be of the hottest for fresh Comers; and in the Winter
the Wind that prevails, is the North-West, and that blows off the Coast; so
that sometimes it difficult to enter the Capes.

2. I purpose therefore, that Ships go hence about the middle of the Months
called February and August, which (allowing two Months for Passage) reaches
time enough to plant in the Spring such things as are carried hence to plant;
and in the Fall, to get a small Cottage, and clear some Land against the next
Spring. I have made a discovery of about a hundred Miles West, and find those
back-Lands richer in Soil, Woods and Fountains, than that by Delaware,
especially upon the Sasquehanah River.

3. I must confess, I prefer the Fall to come thither, as believing it most
healthy to be followed with Winter than Summer; though (through the great
goodness and mercy of God) we have had an extraordinary portion of Health for
so new and numerous a Colony, notwithstanding we have not been so regular in
time.

4. The Passage is not to be set by any Man, for Ships will be quicker and
slower; some having been four Months, and some but one: and as often generally
between six and nine Weeks: One Year, or four and twenty Sail, I think, there
was not three above nine, and there was one or two under six Weeks in Passage.

5. To render it more healthy; it is good to keep as much upon Deck as may be,
for the Air helps against the offensive smells of a crowd, and a close place.
Also to scrape often the Cabbins, under the Beds; and either carry store of Rue
and Wormwood, and some Rosemary, or often sprinkle Vinegar about the Cabin.
Pitch burnt is not amiss sometimes, against faintness and infectious Scents. I
speak my experience, for their benefit and direction that may need it.

And because some has urged my coming back, as an argument against the place,
and the probability of its improvement; adding, that I would for that reason
never return: I think fit to say, That next Summer (God willing) I intend to go
back, and carry my Family and the best part of my personal Estate with me. And
this I do not not only of Duty, but Inclination and Choice. God will bless and
prosper poor America.

I shall conclude with this further notice, That to the end such as are willing
to embrace any of the foregoing Propositions, for the improvement of
Adventurers Estates, may not be discouraged from an inability to find such
Landlords, Tenants, Masters and Servants, if they intimate that desire to my
Friend Philip Ford, living in Bow-lane in London, they may in all probability
be well accommodated; few of any quality or capacity, designed to the Province,
that do not inform him of their inclination and condition.

Now for you that think of going, thither, I have this to say, by way of
Caution. If an hair of our heads fall not to the ground, without the Providence
of God, remember your removal is of greater moment. Wherefore have a due
reverence and regard to his good Providence, as becomes a People that profess a
Belief in Providence. Go clear in yourselves, and of all others. Be moderate in
Expectation, count on Labor before a Crop, and Cost before Gain; for such
Persons will best endure difficulties, if they come and bear the success, as
well as find the comfort that usually follows such considerate undertakings.

Worminghurst-place, the 12th. of the 10th. Month, 1685. William Penn.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of MONTSERRAT.
MOntserrat is a Island of a small extent, Its Extent.
being not above Ten Miles long, and Nine broad. It was so called by the
Spaniards, at their discovery of it, from a Mountain therein, which resembles
that of Montserrat, near Barcelona, in Spain. It is Situated in the Latitude of
seventeen degrees on this side the Line. Its Situation.
It Is very much inclined to Mountains, which for the most part are very well
clothed with Cedar and other useful Trees; the Valleys and Plains being
likewise very pleasant and fruitful. It Is chiefly Inhabited by Irish,
Inhabitants.
intermixed with some English, making together about seven Hundred Persons.
There is in it a very fair Church, of a delightful Structure, built by the
liberal contributions of the Governor and Inhabitants; the Pulpit, Seats, and
all the rest of the Carpenters and Joyners Work, being framed of the most
precious sweet-sented Wood of its own Product.

There is sometimes taken upon the Coast of this Island, a strange kind of
Monster, A strange Monster.
about four Foot long, and proportionable in bulk, having on its Head a great
bunch like an Hedghog; his Skin hard and rough, like that of a Sea-Dog; of a
black color,; his Head is flat, having on the upper part of it many little
risings, and among them two very small black Eyes; his Mouth is very wide, his
Teeth sharp, and two of them crooked like a Boars; he has two Finns, and a
broad forked Tail; all which renders him of so terrible a look, that they call
him the Sea-Devil; which Name was given it chiefly upon his having two liltle
black Horns, growing above the Eyes, turning toward his Back like a Rams; his
Flesh is soft, full of strings, and of a poisonous quality, causing strange
Vomitings and Swoonings, which prove mortal, if not timely prevented by a
specific Antidote.

Another, called the Sea-Vnicorn, Sea-Vnicorn.
is no less wonderful; some of them being eighteen Foot long, of a curious
Vermilion color; the Body covered with blew Scales, (intermixed in some places
with white) about the bigness of a Crown piece; it has six large Finns, like
the end of Galley Oars; a Head like a Horse, and a fair straight Horn, about
nine Foot long, issuing out of the forepart of it, waxing smaller and smaller
to the very point; which is so exceeding hard and sharp, that it will pierce
through the hardest Bodies; its Fesh is delicate Meat, and its Body so large,
that three Hundred Persons are reported to have fed upon one taken in those
Parts.

But none of those Sea Monsters, that are eatable, are so much in esteem as a
certain Fish, called by the French, Lamantine, or Manaty; some whereof are
eighteen Foot long, having a Head like a Cow, and is therefore called the
Sea-Cow; it has a thick dark colored Skin, somewhat hairy, which when dried,
serves for a defense against the Arrows of the Indians; instead of Finns they
have two short Feet, which seem much too weak for the supporting so heavy a
Body; he lives upon what grows on the Rocks, and in shallow places. where there
is not much Water.

Upon this Coast likewise are often seen great numbers of Fishes which Fly
fifteen or twenty Foot above Water, Flying Fish.
and near one Hundred Paces in length, but no more, in regard their Wings are
dried by the Sun; they are somewhat like Herrings, but of a rounder Head and
broader Back; their Wings like a Bats; in their flight they often strike
against the Sails of Ships, and fall, even in the day time, upon the Decks, and
some report them to be very good Meat; the occasion of their flying, is, to
avoid danger from greater Fishes; but they meet with Enemies in the Air, as
well as Water, having open hostility with certain Sea-Fowl, which living only
upon prey, seize them as they fly.

The Sword-Fish The Sword-Fish.
is worth observing, as well as the Flying-Fish; it has at the end of the
upper Jaw a defensive weapon, about the breadth of a great broad Sword, which
has sharp hard Teeth on both sides; several of these Swords are five Foot
long, and about six Inches broad toward the lower end; with seven and twenty
white solid Teeth in each rank, and the bulk of their Bodies answering thereto;
the Head of this Monster is flat, and hideous to behold, being in form of a
Heart, having near their Eyes two vents, at which they cast out the Water they
have swallowed; they have no Scales, but a grayish Skin on the Back, and white
under the Belly, which is rough like a File; they have seven Finns, two on each
Side, two on the back, and one which serves them for a Tail: Some call them
Saw-Fishes, and others Emperors; because there is always open War between them
and the Whale, which is very often wounded to death by their terrible weapon.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of ANGVILLA.
THhis Isle of Anguilla, sometimes called Snake-Island, from its shape, seated
in the Latitude of 18 degrees. and 21 min. on this side the Equinoctial, Situation.
is a long Tract of Land, and extends itself length about ten Leagues, and in
breadth about three. The Inhabitants Inhabitants.
are English, which are computed to amount unto two or three Hundred; which
Plant Tobacco, which is highly esteemed by those who are good Judges in that
Commadity.

Before the discovery of America, there were not found in these Parts any
Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, or Dogs; but for the better
convenience of their Navigations, and supply of their Ships, in case of
necessity, they left some of these Creatures in several Parts of this Newfound
World; where they have since multiplied and become so numerous, that they are
more common than in any Part of Europe.

But besides these Foreign kind of Cattle, there were before in these Islands
certain sorts of strange four footed Beats; Their Beasts and Cattle.
as, the Opassum, about the bigness of a Cat, with a sharp Snout, the neither
Jaw being shorter than the upper, like a Pigs; it has very sharp Claws, and
climbs Trees easily, feeding upon Birds, and (in want thereof) upon Fruit; it
is remarkable for a purse or bag of its own Skin, folded together under its
Belly, wherein it carries its Young, which he lays upon the ground at pleasure,
by opening that natural purse; and when he would depart, he opens it again, and
the Young ones get in, and he carries them with him wherever he goes; the
Female suckles them without setting them on the ground, for her Teates lie
within that purse; they commonly bring six Young ones; but the Male, who has
such another natural purse under his Belly, takes his turn to carry them, to
ease the Female.

There is also in some of these Islands a kind of wild Swine, with short Ears,
almost no Tail, and their Navels on their Backs; some of them are all black,
others have certain white spots; their strange grunting is more hideous than
that of Swine; they are called Javaris; the flesh is of taste good enough, but
very hardly taken, in regard the Boar is in a manner unwearied, by reason of a
vent or hole he has on his Back, by which his Lungs are mightily refreshed;
and if he be forced (when he is pursued by Dogs) to stop, he is armed with such
sharp and cutting Tushes, that he tearts to pieces all that set upon him.

The Tatous is another strange Creature, armed with a hard scaly coat,
wherewith they cover and secure themselves, as with armor; having a Head and
Snout like a Pig, wherewith they turn up the ground; they have also in each Paw
five very sharp Claws, which help them to thrust out the Earth with the more
ease, and pull up the Roots whereupon they feed in the night time; they have in
their Tail a small bone, which is reported to help deafness, and noise, and
pains in the Ears; they are about the bigness of a Fox, and their flesh is
accounted delicate Meat; when they are pursued or sleep, which is usually in
the day time, they close themselves close up together like a Bowl, and get in
their Feet, Head and Ears with so much dexterity under their hard Scales, that
their whole Body is by that natural armor secured against all the attempts of
Huntsmen and Dogs; and when at any time they come near any precipiece, or steep
hill, they roll down without getting any harm.

There is likewise the Agouty, another Creature of a dark color, with a little
Tail, without Hair, having two Teeth only in each Jaw; it holds its meat in the
two fore-Claws like a Squirrel, and its usual cry is, as if it distinctly
pronounced the word Covey; when it is hunted, it gets into hollow Trees, out of
which it is not to be forced but by smoke, making a hideous cry before they
will leave the holes in which they are gotten; if taken while young, they are
easily tamed; but if old, with exceeding difficulty; when they are angry, they
strike the ground with their hind-feet like a Rabbet, being about the same
bigness and shape, only their Ears are short and round; it is a fierce Creature,
and its hair (when angry) stands perfectly upright.

There is likewise Musk-Rats, which live in holes and boroughs like Rabbets;
there comes from them a scent like Musk, which causes melancholy, and so
strongly perfumes their boroughs, that it is easy to find them out.

But of all the Creatures which this Island produces, the Alegator is the most
remarkable; it keeps near the Sea, and in Rivers, and Islands un-inhabited, and
sometimes likewise on shore, among the Reeds; it is a Creature very fearful to
behold, and grows to the very last day of its life; so that many of them are
eighteen Foot long, and as big about as a Hogshead; their lower Jaws are
immovable, but their Mouth is so wide, and their Teeth so exceeding sharp,
that they can with ease bite a Man in two: Those that are bred in fresh Water
smell of Musk, and that so strongly, that they perfume the very Air an hundred
Paces round about them, and scent the very Water in which they live; those of
them that live in the Sea have not so strong a scent, however both kinds are
exceeding dangerous to such as swim in those Parts; they are always very sly,
and make use of a cunning slight for the seizing Horses and Cows, it being
their custom to lie lurking at the places where usually they come to drink,
watching his advantage; and having half shut his eyes, sloats upon the top of
the Water like a piece of rotten Wood, by which means he gets by small degrees
still nearer to the poor Beast, and while he is drinking, without the least
dread of such an Enemy, suddenly seizes him by the lips, dragging him under
Water until he is drowned, after which he eats him.

He likewise sometimes surprises Men by the same slight; for one who was a
Servant to the Consul of Alexandria, going to take up one of them, thinking it
had been a piece of Wood, was suddenly seized on, and drawn by it to the bottom
of the River, and never seen more.

A DESCRIPTION Of the ISLAND of BARBADA, or BARBVDA.
BArbada is situated in 17 degrees and a half of Northern Latitude; Situation.
of no great extent, not exceeding fifteen Miles in length, and of no great
account to the English, who are the Possessors of it; yet it is found to be of
a fertile Soil, well stored with Cattle and Sheep, and might produce several
good Commodities were it well managed, to the advantage of the Inhabitants. But
it is subject to one great inconveniency, as well as some others of those
Islands, viz. the Caribeans of Dominica, and other places, make frequent
Incursions, and commit great Spoils in it; the enmity and aversion which those
Canibals have received against the English Nation in general, be so great and
irreconcilable, that there seldom passes a Year wherein they do not make an
Eruption into some one or other of these Islands; and if not presently
discovered, and vigorously opposed at their first Landing, do much mischief,
destroying all before them with Fire and Sword, except the Women and Children,
which, together with the Spoil and Plunder, they carry off to their own
Territories.

The Caribeans, who Inhabit diverse of those Islands, are generally thought to
have been formerly driven by their Enemies from the Continent of America, and
forced to take shelter here, having amongst themselves various and very
different Opinions, Customs and Ceremonies; such as live near, and converse
with the Christians, have relinquished many of their ancient barbarous Usages,
and have very much civilized their Conversations; which gave occasion to two
ancient Caribeans to entertain some of the European Christians with this or the
like Discourse. Our People are now quite degenerated from what they formerly
were, and in a manner become just like yours; and so different are we now grown
from what we were before, that we find it a matter of some difficulty, for us
to know ourselves. To which degeneracy of ours, attribute those furious
Hurricanes which happen now more frequently, than they were wont to do in the
Days of Old.

The Inhabitants are handsome, well-proportioned, of a smiling Countenance,
their Eyes and Hair are black, their Foreheads and Noses flat, being crushed
down by their Mothers, at the time of their Birth, and all the time of their
Sucking, because they imagine that flatness to be a kind of beauty and
perfection: Their Feet are large and thick, and so exceeding hard, that
although they go barefoot, neither shall you see any of them blind, lame,
crook-back'd, bald, or having any other natural infirmity. Such Scars and
Deformities as they get in the Wars, they glory in, as evident demonstrations
of their Valor. Their Hair is strait and long, the Women attributing the
highest excellency to that which exceeds in blackness; both Men and Women tie
up their Hair behind, which they bind so hard, that it stands up upon their
Heads like a horn, but hangs loose upon the top; it falls down again on each
side of their Heads. The Men, so soon as their Beards begin to grow, pluck them
up by the roots, accounting it a great deformity to the Europeans to wear any:
both Men and Women go naked, and if any should so much as endeavor to touch
their Privy-Parts, all the rest will deride them: and those who converse
amongst the Christians, though they are much civilized, and have forsaken many
of their odd and barbarous Customs, yet no persuasion can prevail with them to
relinquish this.

They generally say, they came naked into the World, and it will be a madness
for them to hide the bodies nature has bestowed upon them; notwithstanding
which they change the natural colors of their skins, by dying them with a red
Composition, which they make for that purpose, and wherewith they always anoint
themselves after washing; and many times, to make themselves appear the more
gallant, as they imagine, they draw black Circles about their Eyes with the
Juice of Juniper-Apples; and when they would appear more gallant than ordinary,
put on a Crown of Feathers of different colors, and hang Fish-bones, or Buck,
made of Gold, Siver, or Tin, in their Ears, and some of them make holes through
their Lips, or in the space between their Nostrils, wherein they hang Rings,
Fish-bones, or some such Toys, to increase their gallantry; and some of the
better sort wear Necklaces of Amber, Coral, Cristal, or some such kind of
glittering stuff.

There grows in this Island great store of excellent Fruits, Their Fruits.
viz. Oranges, Pomegranates, Citrons, Raisins, Indian-Figgs, and Coco-Nuts,
that famous Fruit whereof some Historians tell such Miracles; the Nut grows
upon the very trunk or top of the Tree, which is never found without Fruit, for
it bears new every Month: when the Nut is broke, which is very large, (many of
them weighing above ten pound) the Fruit appears as white as Snow, extremely
nourishing, and in taste much like an Almond, in the middle whereof there lies
a clear Liquor, so exceeding pleasant and delicious in taste, that many prefer
it before the best Florence-Wine. One of them affords Meat enough to fill a
good large Dish withal. Besides which, there are diverse excellent Trees and
Woods, Their Commodities.
as Brazil, Ebony, and the like; Cassia, Cinnamon, Cotton, Pepper, Tobacco,
Indico, Ginger, Potatoes, Pine-Apples, and Sugarcanes, grow likewise there in
great plenty; and a certain living or sensible Plant, esteemed one of the
admirablest rarities in the World, which, as soon as touched with the hand,
falls down, and the Leaves run together, as if they were suddenly withered;
but, so soon as the hand is removed, and the party gone, it presently rises up
and flourishes again; from whence it is called, by some, The Chaste Plant, in
regard it will not endure to be touched, without expressing its resentments of
its injury.

There are not many venomous Creatures Venomous Creatures.
to be found in this Island, nor in any of the Caribbees, but yet there are
many Snakes and Serpents of many colors and forms, some whereof are nine or
ten foot long, and near as big as a Man's thigh; one whereof being killed, a
whole Hen, feathers and all, were found in her belly, besides a dozen Eggs,
upon which the Hen was sitting when the Serpent seized her, which shows them to
be very large; notwithstanding they are not poisonous, but pleasure the
inhabitants by freeing their Houses from Rats and other such like Vermin,
which they kill and devour. There is another sort of Serpent, above an Ell
long, and not above an Inch about, which feed upon Frogs and Birds, and are in
color of so lovely green, that they are very delightful to the eye. But there
are two sorts of Snakes that are very hurtful and dangerous; the first is gray
on the back, and feels soft like Velvet; the other is either yellow or red,
very dreadful to look on, their heads being flat and broad, and their jaws
exceeding wide, and armed with eight or ten teeth as sharp as Needles, from
whence they produce their poison, which lies in little purses near the roots of
their teeth; they do not chew their Food, (but swallow it down whole) for if
they should, the inhabitants say, they would poison themselves: they are so
exceeding venomous, that if a man chance to be hurt by them, if help be not
immediately had, the wound in two hours proves incurable: nor have they any
other virtue, that deserves commendation, but this, they never hurt any man,
which does not first molest them.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Islands of BERMVDAS, OR THE SUMMER-ISLANDS.
EAst of Virginia and Carolina, which is a part of Florida, lies the Isles of
Bermudas, so called from John Bermudas, by whom they were first discovered, or
the Summer-Islands, as they are likewise sometimes called, from the Shipwreck
which Sir George Summers, an Englishman, suffered upon that Coast; they are a
great multitude of Isles, being no less than 400 in number, as some affirm,
that lie distant 1600 Leagues from England, from Madera 1000, from Hispaniola
400, and from Carolina, which is the nearest part of land, about 300 Leagues.

map of Bermuda AESTIVARUM INSULAE ^ BARMUDAS
Lat. 32D 25m 3300 miles from London 500 from Roanoke in Virginia
by R. Morden
A. Sands Fort

B. Warwick Fort

C. Davers Fort

D. Cavandish F.

E. Pagets Fort

F. Smiths Fort

G. Pembrak F.

H. Kings Castle

I. Charles F.

K. Tuckers Tom.

L Smiths I.

Circasoltitium aestirum Anno 16^6 solvere ex his Insulis quinque viri in
Schapha superne aperta trium doliorum majorum capacitatis, et post septem
hebdomadarum navigationu^ omnes incolumes in Hiberniam appulerunt, quale ab
hominum memoria vix accidiss creditur.



The biggest of these Isles is called St. Georges, St. Georges.
and is about five or six Leagues long, and in the broadest place not a League
broad, all the rest being much less. The whole cluster do together form a body
much like a Crescent, and enclose several very good Ports, the chief whereof
are those of the Great Sound, Harrington's Inlet, Southhampton, and Pagets,
which, with their Forts of Dover and Warwick, take their names from the several
Noblemen that have been concerned as Adventurers.

The Earth in those Isles is exceeding fertile, yielding two Crops every Year,
Fertility.
which they generally gather in about the Months July and December.

They have several sorts of excellent Fruits, Fruits.
as Oranges, Dates, Mulberries both white and red, (in the Trees whereof breed
abundance of Silkworms, which produce great plenty of that Commodity) and
Tobacco: there has been found some Pearl and Amber-grease. They have likewise
there plenty of Tortoise, their flesh being counted there very delicious: they
have good store of Hogs, and great variety of Fowls and Birds, amongst which
are Cranes, and a sort of Sea-Fowl, which breeds in holes, like our Rabits; and
such is the fruitfulness and the delightful verdure wherein these Isles always
appear, that Summers seemed to take pleasure in his Shipwreck, and, neglecting
his return for England, endeavored, with the assistance of Sir Thomas Gates,
to settle a Plantation there. At their first coming ashore they found
themselves supplied by a vast variety of Fowl, which were taken without
difficulty, no less than one thousand of one kind, somewhat bigger than a
Pigeon, being caught by them in two or three hours space: this sort of Fowl lay
speckled Eggs, as large as Hens, on the Sand, and this they do every day,
without being frighted, though Men sit down by them. The greatest inconveniency
that attends the place, is their want of fresh Water; there is none for their
occasions, but what is to be found in Wells Pits, there being neither Fountain
nor Stream in all these Isles.

The Sky is almost continually serene and clear, and the Air Air.
so exceeding temperate and healthy, that it is rare to hear of a Man's dying
of any other distemper than that of Old Age, which has occasioned many to
remove from England thither, barely for the enjoyment of a long and healthful
Life, and when they have continued there for any considerable time, they are
exceeding fearful of removing out of so good an Air, lest it should hasten
their removal to the grave: However, when the Sky is at any time darkened with
Clouds, it Thunders and Lighten, and the Weather proves exceeding stormy and
tempestuous, the Wind sometimes rather thundering than blowing from every
quarter, for forty eight hours together. The North and North-West Winds cause
Winter in December, January, and February, which is however so very moderate,
that young Birds and Fruits, and other Concomitants of the Spring are seen
there in those Months. The Isle of St. Georges, which is the biggest and of
more fame than all the rest, and to which the name of Bermudas is more
generally given, is situated in thirty two Degrees and thirty Minutes of
North-Latitude.

No venomous Beasts Beasts.
are to be found in this Island, neither will they live, if brought thither;
their Spiders are no way poisonous, but are of sundry and various colors, and
in hot weather make their Webs so exceeding strong that the small Birds are
sometimes entangled and caught therein.

There grows in this Island a sort of Ceder-trees, Trees.
which differ from all other in the World, in several respects, the Wood
whereof is very sweet and well sented.

The English, who settled themselves upon this Isle in the Year 1612, are the
only Proprietors Proprietors.
thereof, having now established a powerful Colony there, wherein are about
five thousand Inhabitants. The Island is exceeding strong, and defended as it
were with a kind of natural Fortification, being so fenced about with Rocks,
that without knowledge of the Passages, a Boat of ten Tun cannot be brought
into the Haven, although, by the assistance of a skilful Pilot, there is
entrance for Ships of the greatest burden. And, besides the natural strength of
those Islands, the English have, since their settling there, added such
artificial helps, and so strongly fortified the approaches, by Blockhouses and
Forts, as renders it impregnable.

In the Year 1616, which is four Years after the first settling there, Captain
Tucker is sent over with a new Supply, whereupon they applied themselves the
more earnestly to the planting of Corn, Tobacco, and other Commodities, so
that, in about three Years, those Isles began to gain so much repute in
England, that the improving them became a public business, many great Lords
and Persons of Quality interesting themselves therein, as Adventurers,
whereupon Captain Buttler, was dispatched thither with a new Supply of 500 Men,
about which time the Isle was divided into Tribes or Counties, and the whole
reduced to a settled Government, both in Church and State; after which, things
succeeded so well, that it has been ever since growing to greater perfection.

A DESCRIPTION OF CAROLINA.
CAROLINA, so called from his late Majesty King Charles the Second, of eternal
Memory, is a new Colony not long since settled by the English in that part of
Florida adjoining to Virginia, which makes its Northern bounds in the Latitude
of thirty six Degrees, Situation.
and extends its self to the Latitude of 29 Degrees, which terminates its
extreme Southern bounds; It is on the East washed with the Atlantic Ocean, and
is bounced on the West by Mare Pacificum of the South Sea.

This Tract of Land is beyond all controversy the most fertile and pleasant
place of Florida, Fertility.
upon which the Spanish Authors have bestowed such large Encomiums; and which
is so highly commended by an map of Carolina A New Map of CAROLINA
By Robt. Morden
English Gentleman, who has lived there, and was concerned in the settlement
thereof.

This Province of Carolina (says he) was in the Year 1663. granted by Letters
Patents from his late Majesty, in propriety to Edward, Earl of Clarendon;
George, Duke of Albemarl; William, Earl of Craven; John, Lord Berkley; Anthony,
Lord Ashly, since Earl of Shaftsbury; Sir George Carteret, and Sir John
Coleton, Knights and Baronets; and Sir William Berkley, Knight: By which
Letters Patents the Laws of England are always to be in force in Carolina, only
the Lords Proprietors have power, with the consent of the Inhabitants, to make
such Bylaws as may be thought necessary for the better government of the
Province. So that no Money can be raised, or Law made, without the consent of
the Inhabitants or their Representatives. They are likewise thereby endued with
a right to appoint and empower Governors and other Magistrates, to grant
Liberty of Conscience, make Constitutions, with many other great Privileges,
etc. as will sufficiently appear by the Letters Patents. And the said Lords
Proprietors have there settled a Constitution of Government, whereby is granted
Liberty of Conscience, and wherein all possible care is taken for the equal
administration of Justice, and for the lasting security of the Inhabitants both
in their Bodies and Estates. And by their Care and Endeavors, and at their
very great charge, two Colonies are likewise settled in that Province, one at
Albemarl, in the most Notherly part, and the other at Ashly-River, which is in
the Latitude of thirty two Degrees and some odd Minutes.

Albemarl, Albemarl.
which borders upon Virginia, only exceeds it in Health, Fertility, and
Mildness of Winter, being in the Growths, Productions, and other things much of
the same nature with it, and therefore I shall not trouble my self nor the
Reader with a particular Description of that part, but apply my self
principally to discourse of the Colony settled at Ashly-River.

This Colony was first settled in the Month of April, 1670. by the Lords
Proprietors, who did, at their sole charge, furnish out three Ships with a
considerable number of able Men, and eighteen Months Provision, together with
Cloth, Tools, Ammunition, and whatsoever else was thought necessary for this
new Settlement; and continued for several years after to supply the place with
all things necessary, until the Inhabitants were, by their own industry, able
to live of themselves; in which condition they have now been for diverse years
past, and are arrived to a very great degree of plenty, so that most sorts of
Provisions are cheaper there than in any other of the English Colonies.

Ashly-River, Ashly-River.
about seven Miles from the Sea, divides itself into two branches, the
Southermost still retains the name of Ashly, but the North branch is called
Cooper-River. Upon the Point of Land, which divides those two Rivers, the
Proprietors, in the Year 1680. ordered the Port-Town, that should serve for
them both, to be built, calling it Charlestown, which is since considerably
advanced, to the number of near two hundred Houses, more being daily raising by
persons of all sorts, that repair thither from the more Northern English
Colonies in the Sugar-Islands, besides those that go from England and Ireland;
many persons who likewise went thither Servants, having, since their times were
out, gotten good stocks of Cattle and Servants of their own, built themselves
Houses, and exercise their Trades. Many that went thither in that condition,
being now worth several hundred Pounds, living in a very plentiful condition,
and continually adding to, and increasing their Estates; so that Land is
already become of that value, near the Town, that it is sold for twenty
Shillings per Acre, though pillaged of all its valuable Timber, and not cleared
of the rest. And the Land that is cleared and fitted for planting, and fenced,
is let for ten Shillings per Annum, the Acre, though twenty Miles distance from
the Town; and six Men will, in six Weeks time, fell, clear, fence in, and fit
it for planting. At this Town, as soon as its Foundations were well laid, there
Rode, at one time, sixteen Sail of Ships, (some whereof carried above two
hundred Tun) that came from diverse Parts of the King's Dominions, to traffic
there, which great concourse of Shipping will undoubtedly make it a
considerable Town of Trade.

It Is a Country blessed with a temperate and wholesome Air, Temperature.
neither the heat in Summer, nor the cold in Winter, being the least troublesome
or offensive, the latter being so exceeding moderate, that it does not so much
as check the growth and flourishing of the Trees and Plants; which is
occasioned either by reason of its having the great Body of the Continent to
the Westward of it, and by consequence the North-West Wind, which always blows
contrary to the Sun, and is the freezing Wind, as the North-East is with us in
Europe, or else from the frozen Lakes which lie beyond Canada, or from the
uncultivated Earth, which being for the most part covered with large, shading
Trees, or from all those reasons together; but certain it is, much more
moderate both in heat and cold than any other place that lies in the same
Latitude; December and January, which are the coldest Months, are much of the
same temperature as the latter end of March or beginning of April in England,
which small Winter causes a Fall of the Leaf, and does as it were adopt the
Country-Production of all the Grains and Fruit that grow with us in England, as
well as those that require a greater degree of heat, so that the Apple, the
Pear, the Plum, the Quince, the Apricock, the Peach, the Walnut, the Mulberry,
and the Chestnut, thrive very well in the same Garden, with the Orange, the
Limon, the Pomgranate, the Figg, and the Almond. Nor is the Winter subject to
Clouds and Fogs, but the Rain, though it fall often in the Winter Months,
usually comes in quick Showers, and are no sooner past, but the Sun presently
shines out again.

The Summer is not so hot as in Virginia, Climate.
which is chiefly occasioned, as I said before, from those Briezes which
constantly rise about Eight of the Clock in the Morning, and blow from the
East, till about Four in the Afternoon, about which time it cease, and a
North Wind rises, which blowing all Night, keeps it exceeding fresh and cold.

Such as are seated near Marshy places, are somewhat inclined to Agues, but in
other places it is so exceeding healthy, that in the first nine years there died
but one of those Masters of Families that went over, and he was seventy five
years of Age before he came their; insomuch that diverse from the Bermudas
removed thither, though they could never be prevailed upon to forsake that for
any other Country than Carolina; where there is a fairer Prospect both of
Health, Pleasure and Profit than in any other place in all the West Indies;
several persons who went out of England sickly and consumptive, having
presently upon their Arrival there, recovered their health.

The Soil is generally very fruitful, Its Fertility.
and besides what is proper to the Climate, produces good Wheat, Rye, Barley,
Oats and Pease, Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips and Potatoes, and near twenty sorts
of Pulse which we have not in England, so that our Garden-Bean is not regarded
there.

Near the Sea, the Trees The Trees.
are not very large, but further up they are bigger, and grow further asunder,
and so free from Under-wood, than you may see near half a Mile between the
Bodies of those Trees, whose tops meeting, make a pleasing shade without
hindering the Grass, Myrtle, and other sweet-sented Shrubs from growing under
them. There grow besides the Cedar, Cypress and the like, the Oak, Ash, Elm,
Poplar, Beech, and all other useful Timber.

Their Woods likewise abound with Hares, Squirrels, Racoons, Beasts and Cattle
Conies and Deer, which last are so plentiful, that an Indian Hunter killed
nine fat ones in a day, and the considerable Planters have one of those Indian
Hunters for less than twenty shillings a year, who will find the Family,
consisting of thirty People, with as much Venison and Fowl as they can well
eat; their Woods and Fields being likewise stored with great plenty of wild
Turkeys, Partridges, Doves, Paraquetes, Pigeons, Cranes, and diverse other Birds
whose flesh is delicate Meat. They have likewise plenty of Sheep and Hogs, both
which increase wonderfully there.

Carolina does so well abound with Rivers, Its Rivers.
that within fifty miles of the Sea, you can scarcely place your self seven
miles from one that is navigable; and some of them are navigable for big Vesels
above three hundred miles up into the Country. Their Rivers and Brooks abound
with great variety of excellent Fish, and near the Sea with good Oysters, in
some whereof Pearls are often found.

The English have a perfect Friendship with the Natives, and the Proprietors
have taken care that no injustice shall be done them; a particular Court of
Judicature composed of the soberest and disinterested Persons being established
by their order, to determine all differences that shall happen between the
English and them. They are a People of a ready wit, and though illiterate, are
generally found to be of a good understanding. For their keeping an account of
Time, they make use of Hieroglyphics, and instruct their Children in such
matters as relate to their Family and Country, which is so preserved from one
generation to another. Where a Battle has been fought, or a Colony settled,
they raise a small Pyramid of Stones, consisting of the number of the slain, or
those settled at the Colony; and for Religious Rites, as Sacrifices, Burials,
and the like, they make round Circles with Straws or Reeds, by the differing
placing whereof, it is known for what it is made; and to meddle with any of
those Circles, is accounted by them no better than Sacrilege.

They are generally well proportioned, and so well affected to the English,
that they are ready upon all occasions to contribute their Assistance to them;
they are generally of a good and honest meaning, being no ways addicted to Vice
or any Extravagancies, and always content themselves with a mean Diet and
Apparel for their present subsistence, without taking much care for the time to
come. They are much addicted to Mirth and Dancing, and to Acts of Courage and
Valor, which they prefer above all other Virtues, and are therefore almost
continually engaged in War, one Town or Village against another; their
Governments generally being of no greater extent; and that side which Fortune
crowns with Victory, rejoice with triumphant Jollities: By which means several
Nations have been in a manner quite destroyed since our first Settlement at
Ashley River; which keeps them so thin of People, and so divided among
themselves, that were they less affected to the English, yet they would have no
reason to entertain the least apprehensions of Danger from them, being already
too strong for all the Indians that inhabit within five hundred miles of them,
if they were perfectly united; which the Indians know so well, that they will
never adventure to fall out with them, nor offer the least injury to any of thy
English Nation.

They worship Their Worship.
one God, as the creator of all things, whom they call Okee, and to whom their
High Priest offers Sacrifice, but believes he has something else to do than to
mind humane affairs; which they fancy he commits to the Government of less
Deities, that is, to good and evil Spirits, to whom their inferior Priests make
their Devotion and Sacrifices. They believe the transmigration of Souls; and
when any of them die, their Friends inter with their Corpse Provisions and
Household Stuff for their Elysium Shades, which they imagine to be beyond the
Mountains from the Indian Ocean. They are very superititious in their
Marriages, and from a strange kind of Belief which is entertained amongst them,
that from four Women only all Mankind sprang: They divide themselves into the
like number of Tribes, and have four Burying-places; believing it to be a
wicked and ominous thing to mingle their Bodies even when dead.

The Lords Proprietors do immediately grant to all persons that come thither to
inhabit, the following terms; for each Master or Mistress of a Family, fifty
Acres of Land, and for every able Son or Manservant that they carry, or cause
to be carried thither, fifty Acres more, and the like for each Daughter and
Woman-Servant that is marriageable, and for every Child or Man or Woman-Servant
under the Age of Sixteen, forty Acres, and fifty to each Servant so soon as
their Time with their Master is expired; which Land is to be enjoyed by them
and their heirs for ever, upon paying only one penny an Acre as a Quit-Rent to
the Lords Proprietors, which is not to commence neither till two years after
their first taking up their Land.

And in regard some who have already settled themselves at Carolina, and others
that intend to go thither, are desirous to secure to themselves large
convenient Tracts of Land, without being compelled to carry over a great number
of Servants at one time, or being cumbred with the payment of a yearly Rent,
the Lords Proprietors have been prevailed upon to enter into an agreement to
sell Land outright to such who have a mind to buy it at the rate of fifty
pounds for a thousand Acres, reserving to themselves only a Pepper-corn, when
demanded.

The way of a man's taking up Land there, Their way of taking up Land.
due to him either by carrying himself or Servants into the Country, or by
Purchase from the Lords Proprietors, is after this manner; Having found a place
to his Liking, which is not already possessed by another, he applies himself to
the Governor, and the Proprietors Deputies, to show what Right he has to it by
Purchase or otherwise; who thereupon immediately issue out their Warrant to the
General Surveyor to measure them out a Plantation containing such a number of
Acres, as he has proved to be his Right; which being presently done, the
Surveyor makes a Certificate that he has measured out the Land, and determined
the Bounds of it: Whereupon, a Deed is prepared, and signed by the Governor
and the Deputies; which being sealed with the Proprietor's Seal, and registered,
is there accounted a good Conveyance in Law, the Estate being thereby assured
and confirmed to him and his Heirs for ever: For the improving whereof, he
ought to carry with him from England as many Axes, Bills, broad Hoes, and
grubbing-Hoes as he designs to have men in his Plantation, together with a Saw
or two, a Set of Wedges, Frames and Beetle-rings, some reaping-hooks, Scythes,
Hooks, Hinges, Bolts, Locks, and Nails of all sorts; and if his Stock will
reach it, such Commodities as are the best Merchandise, and will yield him
ready Money there; which are, Linen and Woollen Cloth, and all other Stuffs to
make Clothes with; together with Thread, Silk, Buttons, Ribonds, Hats,
Stockings, Shoes, and the like; which go off there at very good rates, and for
which a man may purchase whatsoever Provision he has need of. Ships are
generally going thither at all times of the Year, and the Passage of a Man or
Woman is generally five pounds.

The Commodities Commodities.
which this Country produces, for the Profit as well as the subsistence of
the Inhabitants, are several sorts of Wines; five several sorts of Grapes
growing naturally there; and there is care taken to plant the Rhenish, Canary,
Claret, Muscat, Madera and Spanish Grapes; of all which are already Vineyards
completed, and Wine made, which proves very good both in color and taste, the
Country having gentle rising Hills, of a fertile sandy Earth, proper for the
production of Vines; and further from the Sea several Gravel-Rocks, whereon
they naturally grow, being indifferent large, and luscious in taste; so that
several French Protestants, that inhabit there, doubt not but in a little time
to produce great quantities of good Wine. Oil Olive, which being carried
thither from Portugal and Bermudas, flourish and increase exceedingly, and will
in all probability produce as large quantities of Oil, that it will very much
conduce to the enriching of the Inhabitants; Cotton, Indigo, Silk, Ginger,
Tobacco, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Jallop, Sassaparilla, Turmerick, Sassafras,
Snake-root, and the like.

There are in this Country several sorts of strange and monstrous Creatures;
Creatures.
for an English Gentleman traveling with some Indians, they met with a
Rattle-Snake two yards and a half long, and as big as a man's Arm, which by the
greatness of its Belly, they imagined to be big with young; but having killed
and opened her, they found there only a small Squirrel, which she had swallowed
whole; the Indians affirming, that those Serpents use to lie under Trees upon
which they see any Squirrels, and fixing their Eyes steadfastly upon them, the
little Creature is so frighted thereby, that he falls down,, and tumbles into
the Jaws of his Enemy. Traveling through a Wood, a Deer seized by a wild Cat,
crossed their way, almost spent with the Burden and Cruelty of his Rider, who
having fastened upon his Shoulder, continued sucking his Blood till the poor
Beast fell down under her; which one of the Indians perceiving, shot an Arrow
at the wild Cat, which wounding her under the Belly, made her leave her Prey,
which was already slain, and run toward them with a fierce and dreadful Look;
but her wound being mortal, her strength and spirits failed before she reached
them; whereby they escaped her revenge, which peradventure otherwise some of
them might have felt. This Creature is somewhat larger than a Fox, of a kind of
a reddish gray Color, and in figure every way like an ordinary Cat, but
exceeding fierce, ravenous, and so cunning, that knowing the Deer, upon which
they chiefly prey, to be two swift for them, they lurk upon Branches of Trees,
and as the Deer walk and feed under them, suddenly jump down upon their backs.
Their Fur is greatly esteemed, and their Flesh, though as rank as that of a
Dog, is eaten by the Indians.

They saw daily great Herds of Red and Fallow Deer, Bears, Leopards and Wolves,
but no Lions. The Wolves were to exceeding ravenons, that they were in great
fear lest their Horses should have been devoured; for in the nightime they
got together in clusters, and howled so near them, that it was impossible to
have saved them, had not the Fires which they kept continually burning in the
nightime, terrified them, and frighted them away: The Woods were likewise
full of Bears, Otters and gray Foxes: And arriving at length to the Appalatean
Mountains, which were so high and steep, that they were a whole day before they
could gain the Top; from whence the next Morning they had a beautiful prospect
of the Atlantic Ocean, which washes the Virginian Shores; but to the North and
West other Mountains prevented their sight, and the exceeding Coldness
prevented further Discovery, and compelled them to a speedy return.

The same Gentleman, at another time, when he went to make what Discovery he
could of the Country, met with another sort of Indians, who were Enemies to
the Christians; yet venturing amongst them, and presenting them with some small
Trifles of Glass and Metals, found them very kind to him, and would fain have
obliged him to have settled amongst them, by proposing a Match between him and
their King's or some other Great Man's Daughter, whom he should best fancy; nor
could he wave their Courtesy, nor obtain leave to depart, without a Promise of
returning again within six Months. And South-west from them, he found a Nation
differing in Government from all the other Indians that inhabit those Parts,
being rather Slaves than Subjects to their King, who was a very grave Man, and
courteous to Strangers, yet horrid barbarous in his Superstition; that whilst
this Gentleman was there, he sent three Youths to kill as many young Women of
their Enemies as they could meet withal, to serve his Son (who was then newly
dead) in the other World. They were not long before they returned with Skins
torn off the Head and Faces of several young Girls, which they laid at the Feet
of their King, who received them as the most acceptable Presents.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Whereas by Our Letters Patents, bearing date the Twenty Fourth Day of March,
in the Five and Twentieth Year of Our Reign, We were graciously pleased to give
unto our right Trusty and right Well-beloved Cousen and Counselor, Edward,
Earl of Clarendon, Our High Chancellor of England; Our right Trusty and right
entirely Beloved Cousen and Counselor,. George, Duke of Albemarl, Master of
Our Horse; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved William, now Earl of Craven; Our
right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, Anthony, Lord Chancellor of our
Exchequer; Our right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, Sir George Carteret,
Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of Our Household; Our right Trusty and
Well-beloved, Sir John Colleton, Knight and Barronet; and Sir William Berkley,
Knight, all that Territory Province, or Tract of Ground, called Carolina,
situate, lying and being within our Dominions of America; extending from the
North end of that Island called Luke-Island, which lies in the Southern
Virginia Seas, within six and thirty degrees. of Northern Latitude; and to the
West, as far as the River of St. Matthias, which Bordereth upon the Coast of
Florida, and within one and thirty degrees. of Southern Latitude; and so West, in a
direct Line, as far as the South Seas aforesaid. Now know ye, that We, at the
humble Request of the said Grantees in the aforesaid Letters Patents named, and
as a farther mark of Our particular Favor toward them, We are graciously
pleased to enlarge Our said Grant unto them, according to the Bounds and Limits
hereafter specified; and in Favor to the Pious and Noble purpose of the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion, have Given, Granted, and Confirmed; and by this Our present
Charter, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give, Grant, and Confirm unto the
said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, at that Province,
Territories, or Tract of Land, situate, lying and being within Our Dominions of
America aforesaid; extending North and Eastward as far as the North end of
Carah-Tuck River or Inlett, upon a straight Westerly Line, to Wianoacke Creek,
which lies within or about thirty six degrees. thirty min. of Northern Latitude;
and so West, in a direct Line, as far as the South-Seas; and South and
Westward, as far as thirty nine degrees. inclusive Northern Latitude, and so West
in a direct Line as far as the South Seas; together with all and singular
Ports, Harbors, Bays, Rivers and Islets, belonging unto the Province and
Territory aforesaid; and also all the Soil, Lands, Fields, Woods, Mountains,
Fenns, Lakes, Rivers, Bays, Islets, situated or being within the Bounds or
Limits last before mentioned; with the Fishing of all sorts of Fish, Whales,
Sturgeons, and all the Royal Fishes in the Seas, Bays, Islets and Rivers,
within the Premises; and the Fish therein taken, together the Royalty of the
Sea upon the Coast, within the Limits aforesaid. And moreover, all Veins, Mines
and Quarries, as well discovered as not discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gems, and
Precious Stones, and all other whatsoever, be it of Stones, Marble, or any
other thing whatsoever, found or to be found within the Province, Territory,
Isles and Limits aforesaid. And furthermore, the Patronage and Advowsons of all
the Churches and Chapels, which (as Christian Religion shall increase within
the Province, Territory, Isles, Islets and Limits aforesaid) shall happen
hereaf-to be Erected; together with License and Power to Build and Found
Churches, and Chapels, and Oratories, in convenient and fit places within the
said Bounds and Limits, and to cause them to be dedicated and consecrated
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of our Kingdom of England; together with
all and singular the like, and as ample right, Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Prerogatives, Royalties, Liberties, Immunities and Franchises, of what kind
soever, within the Territories, Isles, Islets, and Limits aforesaid, to have
Use, Exercise, and enjoy the same as amply and fully, and in as ample manner as
any Bishop of Durham, in our Kingdom of England, ever heretofore had, held,
used or enjoyed, or of right, ought or could have, use or enjoy; and them, the
said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, we do by these
Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, make, create and constitute the
true and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the said Province or Territory, and
of all other the Premises, saving always the Faith, Allegiance, and Sovereign
Dominions, due to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the same, to have, hold,
possess and enjoy the said Province, Territories, Isles, Islets, and all and
singular of them the Premises, unto them the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon,
etc. their Heirs and Assigns, for ever, to be holden of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, as of our Manor of Eastgreen, within Our County of Kent, in free
and common Soccage, and not in Capite, nor by by Knight Service, yielding and
paying a parley to Us, Our Heirs and Successors for the same, a fourth part of
all Gold and Silver O^r, which (within the Limits hereby granted) shall from
time to time happen to be found over and beside the yearly Rent of twenty
Marks, and the fourth part of the Gold and Silver Oar in and by the said
recited Letter Patents reserved and payable. And that the Province or Territory
hereby granted and described, may be dignified with as large Titles and
Privileges, as any other Part of our Dominions and Territories in that Region,
Know ye, that We of our further Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have
thought fit to annex the same Tract, Ground and Territory unto the said
Province of Carolina, and out of the fullness of our Royal Power and
Prerogative, so do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, annex and unite the same
to the said Province of Carolina. And for as much as we have made and ordained
the aforesaid Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, the ame
Lords Proprietors of all the Province or Territory aforesaid, Know ye therefore
moreover, that We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in their Fidelity,
Wisdom, Justice, Prudence and Circumspection, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
Do Grant full and absolute Power, by virtue of these Presents, to them the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, and their Heirs and Assigns, for the good and happy
Government of the said whole Province or Territory, full Power and Authority to
Erect and make several Counties, Baronies and Colonies of and within the said
Province, Territories, Lands and Hereditaments, in and by the said Rented
Letters Patents, and these Presents Granted or mentioned to be Granted as
aforesaid, with several and distinct Jurisdictions, Powers, Liberties and
Privileges; and also to make, ordain and enact, and under their Seals to
publish any Laws and Constitutions whatsoever, either appertaining to the
Public State of the said whole Province or Territory, or of any distinct or
particular County, Barony or Colony of or within the same, or to the private
Utility of particular Persons, according to their best direction, by and with
the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Province or
Territory, or of the Freemen of the County, Barony or Colony for which such
Laws or Constitutions shall be made; or of the greater part of them, or of
their Diligates or Deputies, whom for enacting of the said Laws, when and as
often as need shall require, We will that the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon,
etc. and their Heirs or Assigns shall from time to time Assemble in such manner
and form as to them shall seem best; and the same Laws duly to execute upon all
Persons within the said Province, Territory, County, Barony or Colony, or the
Limits thereof, for the time being, or which shall be constituted under the
Power and Government of them, or any of them, either sailing toward the said
Province or Territory of Carolina, or returning from thence toward England, or
any other of our Foreign Dominions, by Imposition of Penalty, Imprisonment, or
any other Punishment; yet if it shall be needful, and the quality of the
offense require it, by taking away Member and Life, either by them the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. and theirs, by them or their Deputies,
Lieutenants, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Officers and Ministers, to be
ordained and appointed according to the Tenor and true Intention of them
Presents; and likewise to Erect or make any Court or Courts whatsoever of
Judicature, or otherwise, as shall be requisite; and to appoint or establish
any Judges, Justices, Magistrates or Officers whatsoever, as well within the
said Province as at Sea, in such manner and form as unto the said Edward, Earl
of Clarendom, etc. or their Heirs, shall seem most convenient; also to remit,
release, pardon and abolish (whether before Judgment and after) all crimes and
offenses whatsoever against the said Laws; and to do all and every other thing
and things, which unto the complete establisment of Justice unto Courts,
Sessions and forms of Judication, and manner of proceedings therein do belong,
although in these Presents express mention is not made thereof, and by Judges,
by him or them deligated, to award, press, hold, please and determine in all
the said Courts, Places of Judicature, all Actions, Suits and Causes
whatsoever, as well Criminal as Civil, Real, Mixed, Personal, or any other kind
or nature whatsoever, which Laws so as aforesaid to be published, Our Pleasure
is, and we do enjoin, require and Command, shall be absolute, firm and
available in Law; and that all the liege People of Us, Our Heirs or Successors,
within the said Province or Territory, do observe and keep the same inviolably
in those Parts, so far as they concern them, under the Patents or Penalties
therein expressed, or to be expressed, provided nevertheless that the said Laws
be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be conveniently agreeable to the
Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England; and because such Assemblies of
Freeholders cannot be so suddenly called, as there may be occasion to require
the same, We do therefore by these Presents, Give and Grant unto the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns by themselves and their
Magistrates in that behalf, lawfully authorized, full power and authority from
time to time, to make and ordain fit and wholesome Orders and Ordinances within
the Province or Territory aforesaid, or any County, Barony or Province of or
within the same, to be kept and observed, as well for the keeping of the Peace,
as for the better Government of the People there abiding, and to publish the
same to all whom it may concern; which Ordinances we do by these Presents
straightly Charge and Command to be inviolably observed within the same
Province, Territory, Counties, Baronies and Provinces, under the Penalty
therein expressed, so as such Ordinances reasonable, and not repugnant and
contrary, but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this our
Kingdom of England, and so as the same Ordinances do not extend to the
bringing, charging, or the taking away of the Right of any Person or Persons in
their Freehold, Goods or Chattels whatsoever; and to the end the said
Provinces or Territories may be the more happily increased by the multude of
People resorting thither, and likewise be the more strongly defended from the
Incursion of Savages and other Enemies, Pirates and Robbers, therefore We, for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant by these Presents, Power,
License and Liberty to all the Liege People, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
in Our Kingdom of England, or elsewhere, within any other Our Dominions,
Islands, Colonies or Plantations, excepting those who shall be expressly
forbidden to Transport themselves and Families into the said Province or
Territory with convenient Shipping, and fitting Provision, and there to settle
themselves to dwell and inhabit, any Law, Act, Statute, Ordinance, or any thing
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And We do also of Our more special
Grace, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, straightly Enjoin, Ordain, Constitute
and Command, that the said Province or Territory shall be of our Allegiance;
and that all and singular the Subjects and Liege People of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, Transported or to be Transportcd into the said Province, and the
Children of them, or such as shall descend from them, there born, or hereafter
to be born, be and shall be Denizens and Lieges of Us, Our Heirs and Successors
of this Our Kingdom of England, and be in all things held, treated and imputed
as the Liege faithful People of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, born within this
Our Kingdom, or any other of Our Dominions; and may inhabit, or otherwise
purchase and receive, take, have, hold, buy and possess any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments within the said places, and then may Occupy and Enjoy, Give,
Sell, Alien and Bequeath; as likewise Liberties, Franchises, Privileges of
this Our Kingdom of England, and of other Our Dominions aforesaid, may freely
and quietly Have, Possess and Enjoy, as our Liege People born within the same,
without the least molestation, vexation, trouble or grievance of Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, any Statute, Act, Ordinance or Provision to the contrary
notwithstanding. And farthermore, That Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom of
England, and other Our Dominions, may be rather encoured to undertake this
Expedition with ready and cheerful minds, Know ye, that We of Our especial
Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, do Give and Grant by virtue of these
Presents, as well to the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. and their Heirs,
as unto all others as shall from time to time repair unto the said Province or
Territory, with a purpose to Inhabit there, and to Trade with the Natives
thereof, full Liberty and License, to Lade and Freight in any Ports whatsoever
of Us, Our Heirs and Successors and into the said Province of Carolina, by
them, their Servants and Assigns, to Transport all and singular their Goods,
Wares and Merchandises; as likewise all sorts of Grain whatsoever, and any
other things whatsoever, necessary for their Food and Clothing, not Prohibited
by the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdoms and Dominions, to be carried out of
the same without any Let or Molestation of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or of
any other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever: Saving also to Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, the Customs, and other Duties and Payments due for the said
Wares and Merchandises, according to the several Rates of the Places from
whence the same shall be Transported. We will also, and by these Presents for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant, License by this Our Charter,
unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, and to
all the Inhabitants or Dwellers in the Province or Territory aforesaid, both
present and to come, full Power and absolute Authority to Import or Unlade, by
themselves or their Servants, Factors or Assigns, all Merchandise and Goods
whatsoever, that shall arise of the Fruits and Commodities of the said Province
or Territory, either by Land or by Sea, into any the Ports of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; or otherwise to
dispose of the said Goods in the said Ports: And if need be, within one year
after the Unlading, to Lade the same Merchandise or Goods again into the same
or other Ships, and to Export the same into any other Countries, either of Our
Dominions or Foreign, being in Amity with Us, Our Heirs and Successors, so as
they pay such Customs, Subsidies and other Duties, for the same, to Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, as the rest of Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom, for the
time being, shall be bound to pay; beyond which, We will not that the
Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory shall be any way charged,
provided nevertheless. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We have farther, for
the Considerations aforesaid, of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge, mere
Motion, Given and Granted, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc.
their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License and Liberty, and Power and
Authority, at any time or times, from and after the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, which shall be in the Year of our Lord Christ, 1667. as well to
Import and bring into any of Our Dominions, from the said Province of Carolina,
or any parts thereof, of the several Goods and Commodities herein after
mentioned; that is to say, Silks, Currants, Raisons, Capers, Wax, Almonds, Oil
and Olives, without paying or answering to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, any
Customs, Imposts, or other Duty, for on in respect thereof, for or during the
term or space of seven years to come, and be accounted or from and after the
first Importation of four Tuns of any the said Goods, in any one Bottom, Ship
or Vessel, from the said Province or Territory, unto any of Our Dominions: As
also, to Export and carry out of any of Our Dominions, into the said Province
or Territory, Custom-free, all sorts of Tools which shall be useful and
necessary for the Planters there, in the accommodation and improvement of the
Premises, any thing before in these Presents contained, or any Law, Act,
Statute, Prohibition, or other matter or thing heretofore Had, Made, Enacted or
Provided, or hereafter to be Had, Made, Enacted or Provided to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. And furthermore, of our more ample and especial
Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, We do for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and
Assigns, full and absolute Power and Authority to Make, Erect and Constitute,
within the said Province or Territory, and Islet or Islets aforesaid, such and
so many Seaports, Harbors, Creeks, and other places for Discharge and
Unlading of Goods and Merchandises out of Ships, Boats and other Vessels, and
for Lading of them in such and so many places, as with such Jurisdictions,
Privileges and Franchises, unto the said Ports belonging, as to them shall
seem most expedient; and that all and singular the Ships, Boats, and other
Vessels which shall come for Merchardize, and Trade into the same Province or
Territory, or shall depart out of the same shall be laden and unladen at such
Ports, only as shall be erected and Constituted by the said Edward Earl of
Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, and not elsewhere any Use, Custom or
any thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And We do furthermore
Will, Appoint and Ordain, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs
and Assigns, that they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. and their Heirs
and Assigns, may from time to time for ever, have and enjoy the Customs and
Subsidies in the Ports, Harbors, Creeks, and other places within the Province
aforesaid, payable for Goods, Merchandises and Wares, there Laden or Unladen,
the said Customs to be reasonably Assessed upon any occasion by themselves, and
by and with the consent of the free People there, or the greater part of them
as aforesaid, to whom we give Power by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, for just Cause, and in due Proportion, to Assess and Impose the
same.

And furthermore, of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, We
have Given, Granted and Confirmed, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do Grant and Confirm unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc.
their Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute License, Power and Authority, that
they the said Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, from time
to time hereafter, for ever, at his and their Will and Pleasure, may Alien,
Grant, Demise or Enfeoff the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, to him or
them that shall be willing to Purchase the same, and to such Person or Persons
as they shall think fit, To have and to hold to them the said Person or
Persons, their Heirs of Assigns, in the Fee-simple or Fee-tail, or for term of
Life, or Lives, or Years, to be held of them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
etc. their Heirs and Assigns, and not immediately of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors. And to the same Person or Persons, and to all and every of them, We
do Give and Grant by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, License
and Authority and Power, that such Person or Persons, may have and take the
Premises, or any parcel thereof, of the said Earl of Clarendon, etc. their
Heirs and Assigns, and the same to hold to themselves, their Heirs or Assigns,
in what estate of Inheritance soever, in Fee-simple or in Fee-tail, or
otherwise, as to them and the said Earl of Clarendon, their Heirs and Assigns,
shall seem expedient. The Statute of the Parliament of Edward, Son of King
Henry, heretofore King of England, Our Predecessor, commonly called the Statute
of Quia Emptores Terrarum, or any other Statutes, Act, Ordinance, Use, Law,
Customs, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing, heretofore Published or Provided
to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding; and because many Persons born or
Inhabiting in the said Province, for their Deserts and Services, may expect to
be capable of marks of Honor and Favor, which in respect of the great
distance cannot be conferred by Us; Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We
do by these Presents, Give and Grant unto the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
etc. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority, to give and confer
unto, and upon such of the Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, as
they shall think do or shall merit the same, such Marks of Favor and Titles of
Honor as they shall think fit, so as those Titles of Honor be not the same as
are enjoyed by and conferred upon any of the Subjects of this Our Kingdom of
England. And further also, We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Give and Grant by these, to them the said Edward Earl of Clarendon,
etc. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power, Liberty and License, to Erect, Raise
and Build, within the said Province and Places aforesaid, or any other part or
parts thereof, such and so many Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Boroughs,
Towns, Villages and other Fortifications whatsoever, and the same or any of
them, to fortify and furnish with Ordnance, Powder, Shot and Arms, and all
other Weapons, Ammunition, and Habiliments of War, offensive and defensive, as
shall be thought fit and convenient for the welfare and safety of the said
Province or places of any parts thereof, and the same, or any of them, from
time to time, as occasion shall require, dismantle, disfurnish, demolish, and
put down, and also to place, constitute and appoint in, or over all, or any of
the said Castles, Forts, Fortifications, Cities, Towns, or Places aforesaid,
Governors, Deputy-Governours, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other Officers, Civil
and Military, as to them shall seem meet, and to the said Cities, Towns,
Boroughs, Villages, or any other place or places within the said Province or
Territory, to grant Letters or Charters of Incorporation, with all Liberties,
Franchises and Privileges, requisite and usual, or to be within any
Corporation within this Our King of England, granted or belonging: And in the
same Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and other places, to constitute, erect, and
appoint, such and so many Markets, Marts, and Fairs, as shall in that behalf be
thought fit and necessary. And further also, to make and erect, in the Province
or Territory aforesaid, or any parts thereof, so many Manors, with such
Seignories as to them shall seem meet and convenient, and every of the said
Manors to hold and to have a Court Baron, with all things whatsoever which to
a Court Baron does belong, and to have and to hold Views of Frank-pledge and
Courts-Leet, for the conservation of the peace and better government of those
Parts, with such Limits, Jurisdictions, Precincts, as by the said Edward, Earl
of Clarendon, etc, or their Heirs shall be appointed for that purpose, with all
things whatsoever, which to a Court Leet or a View of Frank-pledge belong, the
same Courts to be holden by Stewards to be deputed and authorized by the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. or their Heirs, or by the Lords, other Manors
and Leets for the time being, when the same shall be erected, and because that
in so remote a Country, and situate among so many Barbarous Nations, the
Invasion as well of Savages as other Enemies, Pirates and Robbers may probably
be seared, Therefore we have, as for Us, our Heirs and Successors, given power
by these presents unto the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and
Assigns, by themselves or their Captains or other Officers, to Levy, Muster and
Train all sorts of Men of what condition soever, born whether in the said
Province or elsewhere, for the time being, and to make War, and to pursue the
Enemies aforesaid, as well by Sea as by Land, yea even without the Limits of
the said Province, and, by God's assistance, to vanquish and take them, and,
being taken, to put them to death, by the Laws of War, and to save them at
their pleasure, and to do all and every thing which to the Charge and Office of
a Captain General of any Army belongs, or has accustomed to belong, as fully
and freely as any Captain General of an Army has ever had the same. Also Our
Will and Pleasure is, and by this Our Charter We do give unto the said Edward,
Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority, in
cause of Rebellion, Tumults, or Sedition, if any should happen, (which God
forbid) either upon the Land, within in the Province aforesaid, or upon the
main Sea, in making a Voyage thither, or returning from thence, by him and
themselves, their Captains, Deputies, or Officers, to be authorized under his
or their Seals for that purpose, to whom also for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, We do give and grant by these presents, full power and authority
to exercise Martial Laws against mutinous and seditious persons of these parts,
such as shall refuse to submit themselves to their Government, or shall refuse
to serve in the Wars, or shall fly to the Enemy, or shall forsake their
Colors or Ensigns, to be loyterers or straglers otherwise howsoever offending
against Law, Custom, or Discipline Military, as freely and in as ample manner
and form as any Captain General of an Army, by virtue of his Office might or
has accustomed to use the same. And Our further pleasure is, and by these
presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the said Edward,
Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, and to the Tenants and
Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, both present and to come, and to
every of them the said Province or Territory, and the Tenants and Inhabitants
thereof shall not from henceforth be held or reputed any member or part of any
Colony whatsoever in America, or elsewhere now transported or made, or
hereafter to be transported or made, nor shall be depending on or subject to
their Government, but be absolutely divided and separated from the same. And
Our Pleasure is, that they be separated, and that they be subject immediately
to our Crown of England, as depending thereof, for ever, and that the
Inhabitants of the said Province or Territory, nor any of them, shall hereafter
be compelled or compellable, or be any ways subject or liable to appear or
answer to any Matter, Suit, Causes or Plaints whatsoever, out of the Province
or Territory aforesaid, in any other of our Islands, Colonies or Dominions in
America, or elsewhere, other than in Our Realm of England or Dominion of Wales,
and because it may happen, that some of the People and Inhabitants of the said
Province cannot in their Private Opinions conform to the Public Exercise of
Religion, according to the Liturgy, Forms and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take or subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and established in
that behalf. And, that the same, by reason of the remote distance of those
places, will (as we hope) be no breach of the Unity and Uniformity established
in this Nation, Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and We do by these
presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give and grant unto the said
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, full and free License,
Liberty and Authority, by such ways and means as they shall think fit to give
and grant to such person or persons inhabiting and being within the said
Province and Territory hereby, or by the said recited Letters Patents mentioned
to be granted, as aforesaid, or any part thereof, such Indulgences and
Dispensations, in the behalf for and during such time and times, and with such
limitations and restrictions as the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their
Heirs or Assigns, shall in their direction think fit and reasonable. And that
no person or persons, unto whom such liberty shall be given, shall be any way
molested, punished, disquieted, or called in question, for any difference in
Opinion, or practices in Matters of Religious Concernment, who do not actually
disturb the Civil Peace of the Province, County or Colony, that he or they
shall make their abode in, but all and every such person and persons may from
time to time and at all times freely and quietly have and enjoy their Judgment
and Consciences in Matters of Religion throughout the whole Province or Colony,
they behaving themselves peaceably, and not using this Liberty to
Licentiousness, nor to the Civil Injury or outward disturbance of others, any
Laws, Statutes or Clause contained or to be contained, Usage or Custom of Our
Realm of England, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And in
case it shall happen, that any Doubts or Questions should arise concerning the
true sense and understanding of any Word, Clause or Sentence contained in this
Our present Charter, We Will, Ordain and Command, that at all times and in all
things, such Interpretations be made thereof, and allowed in all and every of
Our Courts whatsoever, as lawfully maybe adjudged as most advantageous and
favorable to the said Edward, Earl of Clarendon, etc. their Heirs and Assigns,
although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the Premises,
or of any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by Us, or by any of Our
Progenitors or Predececessors heretofore made to the said Edward, Earl of
Clarendon, etc. in these presents is not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Provision, Proclamation or Restriction heretofore had, made, enacted, ordnined
or provided, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof We have caused these Our
Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Ourself at Westminster, the Thirtieth Day of June, in the Seventeenth
Year of Our Reign.
By the KING.
Copia Vera.

VYNER.




A DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA.
THis Country of Virginia, now so called, has for its Southern limits,
Carolina; for its Eastern, the Atlantic Ocean; for its Northern, Its Situation.
Mariland; and for its Western, that vast; Tract of Land which runs into the
South Sea.

map of Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey A New Map of VIRGINIA.
MARYLAND. PENSILVANIA. NEW YARSEY.
By Robt. Morden.
B. Baltimore C A Arundelton C Call. Cal^erton C Chapter Charles C M Mary C Cae
Caecil C F Talhot C D Doreli^ster C K Kent C We Westmorland No Northumberland
La Lancaster Mi Middlesex Gl Gloucester C Charles C Y York C W War^^ck E
Elizabeth I. N Lower Norfolk Na Nantimond Co Corratuck N Northampton Ac
Accom^^o Ar. ^r^idia




This Country was first discovered in the Year 1497. Its Discovery.
by Sebastian Cabot, a Portuguese, but his Mariners were all English, and
therefore may justly be claimed by us. But it was more fully discovered,
together with all that Tract of Seacoast, by Sir Francis Drake, and was called
Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who visited it soon after in honor of his
Virgin Mistress, Queen Elizabeth. In the Year 1603. diverse persons, who obtained
the Propriety of it from Sir Walter, made a Voyage thither, who discovered
Whitson-Bay in forty one Degrees. The People used Snake-skins of six Foot long
for Girdles, and were exceedingly ravished with the Music of a Gittern, a Boy
dancing in a Ring about him; they were more afraid of two English Mastives than
of twenty Men.

There being much time spent in the discovery of this Country, and not without
vale Expenses, in the setting forth of Ships, and that not without the loss of
several Men's lives before it could be brought to perfection, but at length, in
the Year 1607. Sir John Popham, and others, settled a Plantation at the Mouth
of the River Saghadoc, but Captain James Davis having chosen a small place,
almost an Island, to set down in, where, having heard a Sermon, read their
Patent and Laws, and, after he had built a Fort, sailed further up the River
and Country, where, finding an Island that had a great fall of Water, and
having haled their Boat over with a Rope, they came to another fall, which, by
reason of its being very shallow and swift, proved unpassable; the Head of the
River lying in about forty five Degrees: They ^all their Fort, St. George,
Captain George Popham being President; and the People seemed much affected with
our men's devotion, and would say, King James is a good King, and his God a good
God, but our God Tanto a naughty God, which is the Name of the evil Spirit that
haunts them every new Moon, and makes them worship him for fear; he commanded
the Indians not to converse, nor come near the English, threatening to kill some
of them, if they did, and inflict sickness upon others, if they disobeyed him,
beginning with two of their Sagamores or King's Children, affirming he had
power to do the like against the English, and would the next new Moon execute
it on them. In January, in the space of seven hours, they had Thunder,
Lightning, Rain, Frost and Snow, all in very great abundance: There is likewise
found a Bath so hot for two Miles about, they cannot drink of it. One of the
Indians, for a Straw-hat and Knife, stripped himself of his clothing, which was
Beaverskins, worth in England 50 s. or 3 l. to present them to the President,
only leaving himself a piece to cover his Nudities.

About this time, by the industry of Capt. Gosnold and Capt. Smith, James-Town
was built, James-Town built.
the Indians supplying their Necessities, which were sometimes very extreme;
the Winter approaching, the Rivers afforded them very great plenty of Cranes,
Swans, Geese, Ducks, wherewith they had Pease and wild Beasts, etc. But in the
discovery of Chickahamine-River, George Casson was surprised, and Smith, with
two others, beset with two hundred Savages, his Men slain, and himself taken
Prisoner; but in about a Months time he procured not only his liberty, but was
in great favor among them, being extraordinary well pleased with his
Discourses of God, Nature and Art, so that he had a most noble Entertainment
from Powhatan, one of their Emperors, who sat in state upon his Bed of Mats,
Pillow of Leather, imbroidered with Parl and white Beads, attired with Robes of
Skins, as large as an Irish-Mantle; at his Head sat a handsome young Woman, and
another at his Feet, and on each side the Room twenty others, their Heads and
Shoulders painted red, with a great Chain of white Beads about their Necks, and
a Robe of Skins, large like an Irish-Mantle; before these sat his chiefest
Men, in their orders: In his Palace or Arbor, one Newport, who accompanied
Captain Smith, gave the Emperor a Boy, in requital whereof Powhatan bestowed
upon him Namontack his Servant, who was afterward brought into England; yet
after this Powhatan treacherously contrived the Murder of sixteen of of our
Men, which was happily prevented by Captain Smith, who seized another of their
Kings, and thereby obtained Peace with them upon his own Terms.

This Emperor had about thirty Kings under him, his chief Treasure consisting
of Skins, Copper, Pearls, Beads, and the like, all which were kept in store
against his Burial, being reserved on purpose against that time; his House
being fifty or sixty Yards long, frequented only by Priests; at the four
Corners stood four Images, as Sentinels, one of a Bear, another a Dragon, the
third a Leopard, and the fourth a Giant: He has as many Women as he pleases,
whom, after he is grown weary of, he bestows upon his Favorites. His Will, with
the Custom of the Country, are his Laws, punishing his Malefactors by broiling
to death, enclosed about with fire, with several other Tortures. About ten
Miles from James-Town one of their Kings made a Feast in the Woods, the people
being most monstroully painted, some like black Devils, with Horns, and their
Hair loose, of variety of colors; they continued two days dancing in a Circle
of a quarter of a Mile about, four in a rank, in two companies, exercising
several Antic Tricks, the King leading the Dance; all in the midst had black
Horns on their Heads, and green Boughs in their Hands; next whom were four or
five principal Men, differently painted, who with Clubs beat those forward that
tired in the Dance, which held so long, that they were scarce able either to go
or stand; they made a hellish noise, and throwing away their Boughs, ran
clapping their Hands up into a Tree, and tearing down a Branch, fell into their
order again. After this, fifteen of their proper Boys, between ten and fiften
years old, painted white, were brought forth to the people, who spent the
Forenoon in sporting and dancing about them with Rattles; then, the Children
being fetched away, the Women wept, and passionately cried out, providing Moss,
Skins, Mats and dry Wood, making Wreaths for their Heads, and decking their
Hair with Leaves; after which, they were all cast on a heap in a Valley as
dead, where a great Feast was made for all the company for two hours; they then
fell again into a Circle, and danced about the Youths, causing a Fire to be
made on an Altar, which our Men thought was designed to sacrifice them to the
Devil, but it was a mistake, and the Indians deluded our Men by false stories,
one denying, and another affirming the same thing, being either ignorant or
unwilling to discover the devilish Mysteries of their Religion; but a King
being demanded the meaning of this Sacrifice, answered, That the Children were
not all dead, but the Okee, or the Devil, did suck the Blood from their left
Breast, till some of them died, but the rest were kept in the Wilderness, till
nine Moons were expired, during which they must not converse with any; of these
were made Priests and Conjurers.

They think these Sacrifices so necessary, that if omitted, they believe their
Okee or Devil, and their other Gods would hinder them from having any Deer,
Turkies, Corn or Fish, and would likewise make a great Slaughter among them.
They imagine their Priests after Death, go beyond the Mountains toward the
Sunsetting, and remain there continually in the shape of their Okee, having
their Heads painted with Oil, and finely trimmed with Feathers, and being
furnised with Beads, Hatchets, Copper and Tobacco, never cease to dance and
sing with their Predecessors; yet they suppose the common People shall die like
Beasts, and never live after Death: Some of their Priests were so far
convinced, that they declared our God exceeded theirs, as much as our Guns did
their Bows and Arrows, and sent many Presents to the President, entreating him
to pray to his God for Rain, for their God would not send them any. By Break of
Day, before they eat or drink, the Men, Women and Children above ten years old,
run into the Water, and there wash a good space, till the Sun arise; then they
offer Sacrifice to it, strewing Tobacco on the Land and Water, repeating the
same Ceremony at Sunset. George Casson aforementioned, was sacrificed, as they
thought, to the Devil, being stripped naked, and bound to two stakes, with his
Back against a great Fire; after which they ripped up his Belly, and burnt his
Bowels, drying his Flesh to the Bones, which they kept above ground in a Room;
many other Englishmen were cruelly and treacherously executed by them, though
perhaps not sacrificed, and none had escaped if their Ambush had succeeded.
Powhatan invited one Captain Ratcliff and thirty others to trade for Corn, and
having brought them within his Ambush, murdered them all.

Virginia, after its discovery, cost no small pains before it was brought to
perfection, with the loss of many Englishmens Lives. In the Reign of King James
the First, a Patent was granted to several Persons as a Corporation, and called
the Company of Adventurers of Virginia. But upon several Misdemeanors and
Miscarriages in 1623. the Patent was made null; since which, it has been free
for all his Majesty's Subjects to Trade into these Parts.

This Country is blessed with a sweet and wholesome Air, Temperature.
and the Climate so agreeable to the English, since the clearing it from Woods,
that few die of the Countrey-Disease, called Seasoning.

It is every where interlaced with delectable Hills and rich Valleys, Its
Fertility.
and of a Soil so fertile, that an Acre of Ground commonly yields 200 Bushels
of Corn, and produces readily the Grain, Fruits, Plants, Seeds and Roots which
are brought from England, besides those that are natural to this Country and
the rest of America.

Here are excellent Fruits in great abundance, Its Fruits.
which may be compared to those of Italy or Spain; as, Apricocks, Peaches,
Melons, Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, Grapes, Figs, Quinces, Marrocks,
Punchamins, Chestnuts, Walnuts, Olives, Strawberries, Rasberries, Gooseberries,
and Mulberries in great abundance. Of their Apples they make Sider, of their
Pears Perry, and of their Grapes Wine.

They have several sorts of Roots, as, Potatoes, Carrots, Turnips, Their Roots.
Artichokes, Onions, Cabbages, Colliflowers, Asparagus, etc. with most sorts of
Garden-Herbs known to us, in great plenty.

They have great plenty of Fowl; as, wild Turkeys, Their Fowl.
which usually weigh six Stone, or forty eight pound; Partridges, Swans, Geese,
Ducks, Teal, Wigeons, Dotterels, Heath-cocks, Oxe-eyes, Brants, Pigeons,
Cranes, Herons, Eagles, and several sorts of Hawks, and for small Birds,
innumerable quantities of sundry sorts; as, Black-birds, Thrushes, Red-birds,
and above all, the Mock-bird, which counterfeits the Noise of all Birds.

They have great store of wild Beasts; as, Lions, Bears, Leopards, Wild Beasts.
Tigers, Wolves, and Dogs like Wolves, but bark not; Buffeloes, Elks, whose
Flesh is as good as Beef, Rosconnes, Vtchunquois, Deer, Hares, Bevers, Otters,
Foxes, Martins, Polcats, Wesels, Musk-Rats, Flying Squirrels, etc. And for tame
Cattle, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and Horses in great plenty.

There is great plenty of excellent Fish, as well in the Sea, Their Fish.
and Bay of Chesopeack, as in the Rivers; viz. Cods, Thornback, Sturgeon,
Crampusses, Porpusses, Drums, Cat-Fish, Basses, Sheeps-heads (which makes Broth
like that of Mutton) Coney-fish, Rock-fish, Cray-fish, White Salmons, Soals,
Plaice, Mullets, Makarel, Trouts, Perches, Conger-Eels, Herrings, Oysters,
Shrimps, Cockles, Muscles, etc.

The Commodities Commodities.
which the Country does or may produce, are, Hemp, Flax, Hops, Rape-seed,
Annise-seed, Woad, Madder, Potashes, Honey, Wax, Silk, if they would make it,
since Mulberry-leaves grow in so great plenty, several sweet Gums and excellent
Balsoms of sovereign Virtues; several sorts of Plants and Woods used by Dyers;
Here are Veins of Alum, Iron and Copper, together with sundry sorts of rich
Furs, Elk-Skins (which makes excellent Buff) and other Hides; Pitch, Tar,
Rozen, Turpentine, Butter, Cheese, salted Fish and Flesh, which find vent at
Barbados and other Charibby-Islands; but above all, Tobacco, which is their
principal Commodity, and the Standard whereby all the rest are prized.

There grows a kind of Flax, called Silk-grass, of which the Indians make Thread
and Strings, and is good to make Linen Cloth and Shifts, and and would make
excellent strong Cables.

Here all Tradesmen, especially Handicrafts find good encouragement; and for
those Commodities aforesaid, the English (who have the sole Trade) bring them
all sorts of Apparel, all manner of Utensils belonging to Household Stuff, or
necessary for their Plantations, or otherwise; also Wine, Brandy, and other
strong Drinks; likewise all Silks, Stuff, and Cloth, both Linen and Woollen,
which they convert to several Uses according to their slancies, being now
supplied with Tailors.

Here grows likewise sundry sorts of Trees; Their Trees.
as, the red and white Oak, black Walnut, Cedar, Pine, Cypress, Chestnut,
Poplar, Ash, Elm, etc. many of which are very good for the building of Ships,
and other Uses.

This Country is well watered with several great and swift Rivers, Their
Rivers.
which lose themselves in the Gulf or Bay Chesopeak, which gives entrance for
Shipping into this Country, and also to Maryland, next adjoining, which said
Bay is very large, capacious, and commodious for Shipping, being said to run up
into the Country Northwards 75 Leagues; in breadth in many places being 5, 6,
or 7 Leagues, and sometimes more, and 6 or 7 fathom deep; and its opening to
the South, between Cape Henry, which begins Virginia, and Cape Charles on
the other side opposite, being about 10 or 12 Leagues wide.

The principal of these Rivers beginning at Cape Henry, are Pawhonan, now
called James's River, being found navigable about 50 Leagues. Pamaunke, now
York-River, also large and navigable about 20 Leagues. Rapahanock, or
Topahanock, likewise a good River, and navigable about 40 Leagues, which is the
last River of Virginia northwardly, that falls into the Bay of Chesopeak.

Upon, or near these Rivers, for the convenience of Shipping, the English are
seated, which at present do amount unto the number of about thirty or forty
thousand, and have some Towns; the chief amongst which is James-Town, or rather
James-City, commodiously seated on James-River; the Town is beautified with
many fair and well built Brick Houses; and as it is the chief Town of the
Country, here are kept the Courts of Judicatory, and Offices of public
Concern.

Next to James-Town, may be reckoned that of Elizabeth, seated at the bottom of
the said River, a well built Town. Also Dales-Gift, Wicocomeco, Bermuda, and
others.

The Governor is sent over by His Majesty; who at present is the Right
Honorable the Lord Howard of Effingham, and the Country is governed by Laws
agreeable with those of England, for the decision of all Causes both Civil and
Criminal; which said Laws are made by the Governor, with the consent of the
General Assembly, which does consist of his Council, and the Burgesses chosen
by the Freeholders. And for the better Government, the Country possessed by
the English, is divided into several Counties, in each of which are Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, which are from time to time
appointed by the Governor.

The Names of the Counties, are those of Carotuck, Their Counties.
Charles, Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New-Kent, Lancaster, Middlesex,
Nansemund, Lower-Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, Rappahanock, Surrey,
Warwick, Westmorland, Isle of Wight, and York, and in each of these Counties
are held petty Courts every Month; from which there may be Appeals to the
Quarter-Court held at James-Town.

The Virginians are not born so swarthy as they appear; Their Complexion.
their hair is generally black and flaggy, which they wear long; few men have
Beards, because they pluck out the Hairs that would grow; their ointments and
smoaky houses do in a great measure cause their Blackness, whereby they look
like Bacon; they are of a ready wit, very subtle and treacherous, not much
addicted to Labor, being too great lovers of their ease, and much given to
hunting. They have one Wife, many Concubines, and are likewise Sodomites; the
ancient Women are used for Cooks, Barbers, and other Services, the younger for
Dalliance; they are modest in their Carriage, and seldom quarrel, in
entertaining a Stranger, they spread a Mat for him to sit down, and then dance
before him; they wear their Nails long to flea their Deer, and put Bows and
Arrows into the hands of their Children before they are six years old. In each
Ear they have generally three great holes, wherein they commonly hang Chains,
Bracelets, or Copper; some wear a Snake therein, colored green and yellow,
near half a yard long, which crawls about their necks, and offers to kiss their
Lips; others have a dead Rat tied by the Tail. The women raze their Bodies,
Legs and Thighs with an Iron incurious knots and shapes of Fowls, Fishes, and
Beasts, and rub a painting therein which will never come out. The Queen of
Apometica was attired with a Cornet beset with many white bones, with Copper in
her Ears, and a Chain of the same, six times encompassing her Neck. The
Sasquchanocks are a Giant-like People, very monstrous in proportion, behavior
and attire; their Voice sounds as out of a Cave, their Garments are Bear-skins,
hanged with Bears Paws, a Wolfes Head, and such odd Jewels, their Tobacco-pipes
three quarters of a yard long, with the Head of some Beast at the end, so
weighty, as to beat out the Brains of a Horse. The Calf of one of their Legs
was measured three quarters of a yard about, their other Limbs being
proportionable. They have several ridiculous Conceits concerning their
Original; as that a Hare came into their Country, and made the first men, and
after preserved them from a great Serpent; and two other Hares came thither,
the first killed a Deer for their entertainment, which was then the only Deer
in the world, and strewing the hairs of that Deer, every hair became a Deer.

In the Reign of King James the First, one Tomacona, an Indian, and Councellor
to one of their Kings, came into England; who landing in the West, was much
surprised at our plenty of Corn and Trees, imagining we ventured into their
Country to supply those defects; he began then to number the Men he met with,
but his Arithmetic soon failed him. He related that Okee their God, did often
appear to him in his Temple; to which purpose four of their Priests go into the
House, and using certain strange words and gestures, eight more are called in,
to whom he discovers what his Will is; upon him they depend in all their
Proceedings; as in taking Journeys, or the like: sometimes when they resolve to
go a hunting, he by some known token will direct where they shall find Game;
which they with great cheerfulness acknowledging, follow his Directions, and
many times succeed therein; he appears like an handsome Indian, with long black
Locks of Hair; after he has staid with his twelve Confederates for some time,
he ascends into the Air from whence he came. The Natives think it a disgrace
to fear Death, and therefore when they must die, they do it resolutely; as it
happened to one that robbed an Englishman, and was by Pawhatan (upon complaint
made against him) fetched sixty miles from the place where he lay concealed,
and by this Tomocomo executed in the presence of the English, his Brains being
knocked out, without the least show of fear or terror.

Their Apparel Their Apparel.
is but mean, only contenting themselves with something to cover their
nakedness; and for the better defending themselves from the Weather, they
anoint their bodies with certain Oils mixed with Bears-Grease.

Their Houses Their Houses.
are no better than our English Hogsties, being made of Boughs, and covered
with Barks of Trees, and in the midst thereof is placed their Chimney, or
Fireplace.

Their Diet Their Diet.
in meanness, is answerable to their Houses not endeavoring to please their
Palats, with curious Sauces, or pampering their Bodies with provocative Meats.

A DESCRIPTION OF MARYLAND.
THE Province of Maryland is situated between the degrees of 37 and 50 min. or
thereabouts, Situation.
and 40 degrees. of Northern Latit. It is bounded on the North with Pennsylvania,
New England, and New York, formerly part of New England; on the East, the
Atlantic Ocean, and Delaware Bay; on the South, by Virginia; from whence it is
parted by the River Patowmeck, whose Southern Banks divide the Province from
Virginia.

The Bay of Chesopeack, giving entrance to Ships, both into this Country and
Virginia, passing through the heart of this Province, being found near 200
miles in the Land, into which falls several considerable River; Its Rivers
as, Patowmeck, Patuxent, Ann-Arundel, (alias Severn) and Sasquesahanough,
lying on the West Side of the Bay; and to the East of the said Bay, those of
the Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomocke, and several other Rivers and Rivulets, to
the great improvement of the Soil, and Beauty of the Province.

The Climate The Climate.
of late is very agreeable to the English Constitution, especially since the
felling of the Woods, and the People accustoming themselves to English Diet, is
very healthful and agreeable to the constitution of the English, few now dying
at their first coming, of the Country Disease or seasoning; neither is the Heat
extreme in Summer, being much qualified by the cool and gentle Briezes of winds
from the Sea, and refreshing Showers of Rain, and the Cold in Winter, being of
so little durance, that the Inhabitants cannot be said to suffer by either.

The Country is generally plain and even, yet rising in some places into small
and pleasant Hills, which heighten the Beauty of the adjacent Valleys.

The Soil is rich and fertile, naturally producing all such Commodities as are
particularly set down to its neighboring Colony, Virginia; as, all sorts of
Beasts and Fowl, both tame and wild; Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots, Herbs, Gums,
Trees, Balsoms, etc. as likewise all Commodities produced by Industry, are here
found in as great plenty and perfection. But the chief Trade of Maryland
depends upon Tobacco, which is esteemed better for a foreign Market than that
of Virginia, finds greater vent abroad; which Trade is not inconsiderable,
since a hundred Sail of Ships have in one year traded thither from England, and
the neighboring English Plantations. There is a competent stock of ready Money
in this Province, both of English and Foreign, and his Lordships own Coin; yet
their chief way of Commerce is by way of Barter or Exchange of Commodities.

The Natives, The Natives.
as to their Complexion, Stature, Customs, Dispositions, Laws, Religion,
Apparel, Diet, Houses, etc. are much the same with those of Virginia, already
treated of, being likewise many different Tribes or sorts of People, and each
governed by their particular King.

There are many strange Rites and Ceremonies used by the Native Indians; Their
Religion.
they believe there are several Gods, which they call Mantaac, but of different
sorts and degrees; yet there is but one absolute God from all eternity, who,
when he made the World, created other Gods, to be as a Means and Instrument
used in the Creation, and that the Sun, Moon and Stars are petty Gods; out of
the Waters they affirm all the variety of Creatures were made; for Mankind,
that Woman was made first, who, by the assistance of one of the Gods, conceived
and brought forth Children, but know not how long it was since this was done,
having no Arithmetic nor Records, but only Tradition from Father to Son; they
make the Images of their Gods in the shape of Men, placing one at least in
their Houses or Temple, where they worship, sing, pray and make Offerings.

They believe, that after this Life, the Soul shall be disposed of according to
its Works here, either to the habitation of the Gods, to enjoy perpetual
happiness, or to a great Pit or Hole in the furthest part of their Country
toward Sunset (which they count the furthermost part of the World) there to
burn continually; which place they call Popogusso; and relate, that one that
was buried, was the next day seen to move upon his Grave; whereupon his Body
was taken up again, who, when he was revived, declared, that his Soul was near
entering into Popogusso, had not one of the Gods saved him, and suffered him to
return, and warn his Friends to avoid that terrible place: another being taken
up, related, that his Soul was alive while his Body was in the Grave, and had
been traveling in a long broad way, on both sides whereof, grew delicate
Trees, bearing excellent Fruits, and at length arrived at most curious houses,
where he met his Father, that was dead before. who charged him to go back, and
show his Friends what good they were to do to enjoy the pleasures of this
Place, and then to return to him again: Whatever Tricks or Subtilty the Priests
use, the Vulgar are hereby very respectful to their Governors, and careful of
their actions, though in criminal Causes they inflict punishments according to
the quality of the Offense; they are great Negromancers, and account our
Fireworks, Guns and Writing to be the works of God rather than Men. When one
of their Kings was sick, he sent to the English to pray for him: Some of them
imagine that we are not mortal men, nor born of Women, but say we are an old
Generation revived, and believe that there are more of us yet to come to kill
their Nation, and take their places, who are at present invisible in the Air
without Bodies, and that at their intercession they cause those of their Nation
to die who wrong the English.

Their Idol they place in the innermost Room of the House, of whom they relate
incredible Stories, they carry it with them to the Wars, and ask counsel
thereof, as the Romans did of their Oracles; they sing Songs as they march
toward Battle, instead of Drums and Trumpets; their Wars are exceeding bloody,
and have wasted the people very much. Once a year they hold a great Festival,
meeting together out of several Villages, each having a certain Mark or
Character on his Back, whereby it may be discerned whose Subject he is; the
place where they meet is spacious, and round about are Posts carved on the top
like a Nuns Head; in the midst are three of the fairest Virgins lovingly
embracing and clasping each other; about this living Image and artificial
Circle they dance in their savage manner. Their chief Idol, called Kiwasa, in
made of wood four foot high, the Face resembling the Inhabitants of Florida,
painted with flesh-colors, the Breast white, the other parts black, the Legs
only sported with white, with Chains and Strings of Beads about his neck. This
Idol is the Keeper of the dead Bodies of their Kings, which are advanced on
Scaffolds nine or ten foot high, this Kiwasa or Guardian being placed near
them, and underneath lives a Priest, who there mumbles his Devotions night and
day.

This Province of Maryland, His Majesty King Charles the First, in Anno 1632.
granted by a Patent to the Right Honorable Caecilius Calvert, Lord Baltemore,
and to his Heirs and Assigns, and by that Patent created him and them the true
and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the same (saving the Allegiance and
Sovereign Dominion due to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors;) thereby
likewise granting to them all Royal Jurisdictions both military and Civil; as,
Power of enacting Laws, martial Laws, making of Warand Peace, Pardoning
Offenses, conferring of Honors, coining of Money, etc. and in acknowledgment
thereof, yielding and paying yearly to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
two Indi^n Arrows at Windsor-Castle in the County of Berks, on Easter-Tuesday,
together with the fifth part of all the Gold and Silver-Oar that shall be found
there.

The Lord Baltemore has his Residence at Mattapany, about eight miles distance
from St. Mary's, where he has a pleasant Seat, though the general Assemblies
and Provincial Courts are kept at St. Mary's; and for the better inviting of
People to settle here, his Lordship by the Advice of the General Assembly of
that Province, has long since established a Model of good and wholesome Laws,
for the ease and benefit of the Inhabitants, with toleration of Religion to all
sorts that profess the Faith of Christ, which has been a principal motive to
many to settle under that Government, rather than in another, where Liberty of
Conscience was denied them.

This Province, where it is peopled with English, Its Counties.
is divided into ten Counties, to wit, five Eastwards of Chesopeak-Bay, as,
Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, Somerset, map of New England, New York NEW ENGLAND And
NEW YORK
by Rob, Morden
i Charles Town k Cambridg l Water town m Na^ton n Dabham o Medfeild p
Chensford q Ballerica r Sudbury a Roxbury b De^byster c Miltem d ^^ymouth e
B^^^bry f Malden g Wi^^sunt h Farmington


and Talbot; and five Westwards of the said Bay; as, Anne-Arundel, Baltemore,
Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary's. Here are likewise certain Magistrates
appointed by his Lordship in each County, as, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
etc.

The Inhabitants (being in number about 16000) have begun the building of
several Towns, which in few years it is hoped may come to some perfection; as,
Calverton, Herrington, and Harvey-Town, all commodiously seated for the benefit
of Trade, and convenience of Shipping; but the principal Town is St. Mary's,
seated on St. Georges River, being beautified with diverse well built Houses,
and is the chief Place, or Scale of Trade for the Province.

A DESCRIPTION Of NEW YORK.
Adjoining to Maryland Northwards, is a Colony called New York, from our
present Gracious Sovereign, when Duke of York, the Proprietor thereof by Grant
from His Majesty, and is that part of New England which the Dutch once
possessed; it was first discovered by Mr. Hudson, Its Discovery.
and sold presently by him to the Dutch without Authority from his Sovereign
the King of England, in 1608. The Hollanders in 1614. began to plant there, and
called it New-Netherland; but Sir Samuel Argal, Governor of Virginia, routed
them; after which, they got leave of King James to put in there for Fresh Water
in their Passage to Brazile, and did not offer to plant till a good while after
the English were settled in the Country. In 1664. His late Majesty King Charles
the Second sent over four Commissioners to reduce the Colony into bounds, that
had been encroached upon by each other; who marched with three hundred
Red-Coats to Manhadees, and took from the Dutch the chief Town, then called
New-Amsterdam, now New York; and Aug. 29. turned out their Governor with a
Silver Leg, and all the rest but those who acknowledged Subjection to the King
of England; suffering them to enjoy their Houses and Estates as before.
Thirteen days after, Sir Robert Car took the Fort and Town of Aurania, now
called Albany, and twelve days after that, the Fort and Town of Arasapha, then
Delaware-Castle, manned with Dutch and Swedes; so that now the English are
Masters of three handsome Towns, three strong Forts and a Castle, without the
loss of one man. The first Governor of these Parts for the King of England was
Colonel Nicols, one of the Commissioners.

It is a Country of a rich and fertile Soil, Its Fertility.
well watered with Rivers, as in Maryland, already spoken of; and is found to
produce the same Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fruits, Commodities, Trees, etc. and in
as great plenty; and it is reported that one Bushel of European Wheat has
yielded an hundred in one year.

The most considerable Town is that of New York; Its Situation.
being well seated both for Trade, Security, and Pleasure, in a small Isle
called Manahatan, regarding the Sea, made so by Hudson's River, which severeth
it from Long Island, which said River is very commodious for Shipping, being
about two Leagues broad. The Town is large, containing about five hundred
well built Houses, built with Dutch-Brick, and the meanest not valued under one
hundred Pounds; to the landward it is encompassed with a Wall of good
thickness, and fortified at the entrance of the River, so as to command any
Ship which passes that way, by a Fort, called James-Fort: and for Civil
Government, it has a Mayor, Alderman, Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace for
their Magistrates. The Inhabitants are most English and Dutch, who have a very
considerable Trade with the Indians, for the Skins of Elks, Deer, Bears, etc.
also for those of Beaver, Otter, Racoon-skins, with other rich Furs, and are
supplied with Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer, by the
Indians, at an easy price.

This Province formerly contained all that Land which is seated in the North
part of America, betwixt England and Maryland, the length toward the North
being not fully known; the breadth is about 200 Miles: The chief Rivers are
Hudson-River, Raritan River, and Delaware-Bay; and the principal Islands are
the Manahatan-Island, Long Island, and Stater-Island. Manahatan-Island, so
called by the Indians, lies within land, betwixt forty one and forty two
Degrees of North Latitude, and is in length about fourteen Miles, and two
broad. New York is seated on the West End of this Island, having a small Arm of
the Sea, which divides it from Long Island on the South. Long Island runs
Eastward above a hundred Miles, and in some places eight, twelve and fourteen
Miles broad, inhabited from one end to the other, having a rich Soil for all
English-Grain; the Fruits, Trees and Herbs very good; in May you may see the
Woods and Fields so richly bedecked with Roses, and variety of other delightful
Flowers, as equal, if not excel, many Gardens in England.

This Country is also possessed with sundry sorts of People, Its Inhabitants.
not much unlike the Indians of Virginia, being well-proportioned, swarthy,
blackhaired, very expert in their Bow and Arrows, which are their chief Weapons
of War; they are very serviceable and courteous to the English, being of a
ready Wit and very apt to recieve Instruction from them; but there are now but
few Indians upon the Island, being strangely decreased since the English first
settled there, for not long ago there were six Towns full of them, which are
now reduced to two Villages, the rest being cut off by Wars among themselves,
or some raging, mortal Diseases. They live principally by Hunting Fowling and
Fishing, their Wives tilling the Land and planting the Corn; they feed on Fish,
Fowl and Venison, likewise Pol-cats, Turtles, Racoon and the like: they build
small moveable Tents, which they remove three times a year, chiefly quartering
where they plant their Corn, besides their Hunting and Fishing-Quarters. Their
principal Recreation are Football and Cards, at which they will play away all
they have, except a Flap to cover their nakedness: they are very great lovers
of Strong-drink, so that without they have enough to be drunk, they care not to
drink at all; if their company be so great, that they have not enough to make
them all drunk, they usually choose so many as are proportionable to that
quantity, and the rest must be spectators; if any happen to be drunk, before he
has taken his share, which is ordinarily a quart of Brandy, Rum or
Strong Water; to show their Justice, they will pour the rest down his Throat:
in which debauches they often kill one another, which the Friends of the dead
revenge upon the Murderer, unless he purchase his Life with Money, which is
made of Periwinkle-shell, both black and white, strung like Beads.

They observe several Ceremonies in their Reigious Rites, Their Religion.
and are said to Worship the Devil, which usually they perform once or twice a
Year, unless upon some extraordinary occasion, as the making of War, or the
like, when their Corn is ripe, which is usually about Michaelmas; The day being
appointed by their Chief Priest, or Pawaw, most of them go a Hunting for
Venison; when they are all assembled, if the Priest wants Money, he then tells
them, their God will accept no Offering, but Money; which the People believing,
every one gives according to his ability: the Priest takes the Money, and
putting it into some Dishes, sets them upon the top of their low, flat-roofed
Houses, and so falls a calling upon their God, to come and receive it, which,
with many loud hollows and out-crys, striking the ground with sticks, and
beating themselves, is performed by the Priest, and seconded by the People.
After, being thus wearied, a Devil, by his conjuration, appears amongst them,
sometimes in the shape of a Fowl, a Beast, or a Man, which so amazeth the
people, that they dare not stir; the Priest improves the opportunity, and
stepping out, makes sure of the Money, and then returns to lay the Spirit, who
is often gone before he comes back, having taken some of the company along with
him; but if at such times any English come among them, it puts a period to
their proceedings, and they will desire his absence, saying, Their God will not
come, till they are departed. They are much addicted to go to War against one
another, but they sight no pitched Battle, but upon their Enemies approach,
(having first secured their Wives and Children in some Island, or thick Swamp)
armed with Guns and Hatchets, they way-lay their Enemy, and it is counted a
great Fight when seven or eight are slain; they seldom give quarter to any, but
the Women and Children, whom they reserve and make use of for the increasing
their strength.

When an Indian dies, they bury him upright, Their way of Burial.
sitting upon a Seat, with his Gun, Money, and Goods, to furnish him in the
other World, which they believe to be Westward, where they shall have great
store of Game for Hunting, and live at ease; at his Funeral, his Relations
paint their Faces black, making, at his Grave, once or twice every day, sad
Lamentations; thus continuing till the blackness is wore off their Faces; and
after that, once a Year they mourn afresh for him, visiting and trimming up the
Grave, not suffering any Grass to grow near it, fencing it with a Hedge, and
covering it with Mats for a shelter from the Rain. Notwithstanding all this
bustle, when an Indian is dead his Name dies with him, none daring ever after
to mention his Name, it being not only a breach of their Law, but an affront to
his Friends and Relations, as if done on purpose to renew their grief. And
every person, bearing the same Name, instantly changes it for another, which
every one invents for himself; some call themselves Rattlesnakes, others
Buckshorn, or the like; yea, if a person die, whose Name is some Word used in
common Speech, they change that Word, and invent a new one, which makes their
Language very troublesome. When any one is sick, after his Friends have used all
possible means, every one pretending skill in Physic, but all proving
ineffectual, they send for a Pawaw, or Priest, who, sitting down by the sick
person, without the least inquiring after the Distemper, expects a Fee or Gift,
according to which he proportions his work, beginning with a low voice to call
sometimes upon one God, and then on another, still raising his vice, beating
his naked breasts and sides till the sweat runs down, and his breath is almost
gone, and what remains, he breaths upon the face of the sick person three or
four times together, so takes his leave.

Their Weddings are performed without any Ceremony, Their Marriages.
the Match being first made by Money, which being agreed on, and given to the
Woman, makes a Consummation of the Marriage, if we may so call it; after which,
he keeps her during pleasure, and, upon the least dislike, turns her away and
takes another. It is no offense for their married Women to lie with another
Man, provided she acquaint her Husband, or some of her nearest Relations
therewith; but if not, they account it such a fault as is sometimes punishable
by death. When any Woman finds herself quick with Child, she keeps herself
chaste, or untouched by Man, until her delivery, the like she observes in her
giving such, a strange Custom which our European Ladies would not well relish.
An Indian may have two or three or more Wives if he please; but it is not now
so much used, as before the English came, they being inclined to imitate them
in things both good and bad. Any Maid, before she is married, lies with whom
she pleases for Money, without the least scandal or aspersion, it being not
only customary, but lawful. They are extreme charitable to one another, for if
any one has to spare, he freely imparts to his friends, and whatever they get
by Gaming, or otherwise, they share one with another, leaving commonly the
least part to themselves.

When their King or Sachen sits in Council, he has a company of armed Men to
guard his person, great respect being showed him by the people, which chiefly
appears by their silence; after he has declared the cause of their convention,
he demands their Opinions, ordering who shall first begin, who, having
delivered his mind, tells them, he has done, for no man interrupts him, though
he makes never so many long stops and halts, till he says, he has no more to
say; the Council having all delivered their Opinions, the King, after some
pause, gives the definitive Sentence, which is commonly seconded by a shout
from the people, thereby signifying their assent or applause. If any person be
condemned to die, which is seldom, but for Murder, or Incest, the King himself
goes out in person, (for they have no Prisons, and the guilty person flies into
the Woods) to seek him out, and having found him, the King shoots first, though
at never such a distance, and then happy is the man that can shoot him down,
who, for his pains, is made some Captain or Military Officer.

Their Clothing Their Clothing.
is a yard and a half of broad Cloth, which they hang on their Shoulders, and
half a yard of the same, being put between their Legs, is tied up before and
behind, and fastened with a Girdle about their middle, and hangs with a slap on
each side; they wear no Hats, but commonly tie either a Snakes-skin about their
^eads, a Belt of their Money, or a kind of Ruff, made with Deers-hair, and dyed
of a Scarlet-colour, which they esteem very rich, they grease their Bodies and
Hair very often, and paint their Faces with diverse Colors, as Black, White,
Red, Yellow, Blew, which they take great pride in, every one being painted in a
several manner. Thus much for the Customs of the Indians, and the Colony of
New York.

Hudson's River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the head
of which is seated New-Albany, a place of a very considerable Trade with the
Natives, betwixt which and New York, being above an hundred Miles distance, is
as good Corn-land as the World affords; it was reduced to his Majesty's
obedience by Col. Nicholas, and a League of Friendship concluded between the
Inhabitants and the Indians, by whom they have never been since disturbed, but
every man has sat under his own Vine, and has peaceably reaped and enjoyed
the Fruits of his own Labor, which God continue.

A DESCRIPTION OF NEW ENGLAND.
Its Discovery. New England was first discovered, as well as the other
Northern-Coasts of America, by Sebastian Cabot, in the Year 1497. and in 1584.
Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow, were the first Christians that took
possession thereof for Queen Elizabeth. The Year following Sir Richard
Greenvile conveyed an English Colony thither, under the government of Mr. Ralph
Lane, who continued there till the next Year, but, upon some extraordinary
occasion, returned with Sir Francis Drake into England, being accounted by some
the first discoverer thereof. It is seated on the North of Maryland, Its
Situation.
and on the South Virginia, lying about 40 and 41 Degrees of North-Latitude,
and it is reported to have 70 Miles of Sea-Cost, where are found diverse good
Havens, several of which being capable to harbor five hundred Sail of Ships
from the rage of the Sea and Winds, by reason of the interposition of several
Isles (to the number of about 200) which lie about this Coast. The Account of
the Worship and Ceremonies of the Indians has been much perfected by the
Industry and Voyages of Capt. Gosnold, Capt. Hudson, Capt. Smith, and others,
the last of which gives a very large Account, this Captain being taken Prisoner
by the Natives, and while he stayed among them observed their Magical Rites,
three or four days after his being seized, seven of their Priests, in the
House, where he lay, each with a Rattle, (making him sit down by them) began
about Ten in the Morning to sing about a fire, which they encompassed with a
Circle of Meal, at the end of every Song (which the Chief Priest begun, the
rest followed in order) they laid down two or three Grains of Wheat, then the
Priest disguised with a great Skin, his Head hung round with little Skins of
Weasles, and other Vermin, and a Cornet of Feathers, painted as ugly as the
Devil, at the end of every Song he used strange and vehement Gestures, throwing
great Cakes of Deer-Suet and Tobacco into the fire, thus these howling
Devotions continued till Six a Clock at Night, and held so three days. This
they pretended was to know of their God, whether any more English should
arrive, and what they intended to do in that Country. They sed Capt. Smith so
high, that he much doubted they would have sacrificed him to their Chief Deity,
the Image of whom is so deformed, that nothing can be more monstrous, the Women
likewise, after he was freed and President of the Company made him a very odd
Entertainment, thirty of them came out of the Woods, only covered before and
behind with a few green Leaves, their Bodies painted of different colors the
Commander of these Nymphs had on her Head a large pair of Stag's Horns, and a
Quiver of Arrows at her Back, with Bow and Arrows in her hand; the rest
followed with Horns and Weapons all alike; they rushed through the Streets with
hellish shouts and cries, dancing about a fire, which was there made for that
purpose, for an hour together; then they solemnly invited him to their Lodging,
where he was no sooner come, but they all surrounded him, and crying, Love you
not me? after which they feasted him with great variety, cooked after their mad
fashion, some singing and dancing all the while, and at last lighted him home
with a Firebrand, instead of a Torch, to his Lodgings.

And although this Country is seated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, yet is
the Clime more uncertain, Temperature.
as to the heat and cold, than those European Kingdoms, which lie Parallel with
it; and, as to Virginia, this may be compared as Scotland is to England.

The Air The Air.
is found very healthful, and agreeable to the English, which makes them
possess many Potent Colonies, being very numerous and powerful.

When they design to make War, they first consult with their Priests and
Conjurers, no People being so Barbarous almost, but they have their Gods, Their
Religion.
Priests, and Religion; they adore as it were all things that they think may
unavoidably hurt them, as Fire, Water, Lightning, Thunder, our Great Guns,
Muskets and Horses; yea, some of them once seeing an English Boar, were struck
with some terror, because he bristled up his Hairs and gnashed his Teeth,
believing him to be the God of the Swine, who was offended with them. The chief
God they Worship is the Devil, which they call Okee; they have conference with
him, and fashion themselves into his shape: In their Temple they have his Image
ill-favouredly Carved, Painted and Adorned with Chains, Copper and Beads, and
covered with a Skin. The Sepulcher of their Kings is commonly near them, whose
Bodies are first Imbowelled, dried on a Hurdle, adorned with Chains and Beads,
and then wrapped in white Skins, over which are Matts; they are afterward
Intombed orderly in Arches made of Matts, their Wealth being placed at their
feet: But for their common Burials, they dig a hole in the Earth with sharp
Stakes, and the Corpse being wrapped in Skins and Matts, they lay them in the
Ground, placing them upon sticks, and then cover them with Earth; the Burial
ended, the Women having their Faces painted black with Cole and Oil, sit
Mourning in the House twenty four hours together, howling and yelling by turns.

The Natives are clothed with loose Mantles made of Deers Skins, and Aprons of
the same round their Middle, Their Clothing.
all else being naked; of Stature like to us in England: They Paint themselves
and their Children, and he is most Gallant who is most deformed. The Women
Imbroider their Legs, Hands, and other Parts, with several Works, as of
Serpents, and the like, making black spots in their Flesh. Their Houses are
made of small Poles, round, and fastened at the top in a circle like our
Arbours, covered with Matts twice as long as broad; they are exact Archers, and
with their Arrows will kill Birds flying, or Beasts running full speed: One of
our Men was with an Arrow shot through the Body and both the Arms at once.
Another Indian shot an Arrow of an Ell long through a Target, that a Pistol
Ballet could not pierce; their Bows are of tough Hazle, and their Strings of
Leather; their Arrows of Cane or Hazle, headed with Stones or Horn, and
Feathered Artificially: They soon grow heartless, if they find their Arrows do
no execution. They say there is Men among them of above two hundred years of
Age.

Though the Planting of this Country was designed by several of the English,
yet it lay much neglected, 'till a small company of Planters, under the Command
of Captain George Popham, and Captain Gilbert, was sent over at the charge of
Sir John Popham, in 1606. to begin a Colony upon a Tract of Land about Saga de
hoch, the most Northernly part of New England, but that design within two years
expired with its Founder. Soon after, some Honorable Persons of the West of
England, commonly called the Council of Plymouth, being more certainly informed
of several Navigable Rivers, and Commodious Havens, with other places sit
either for Planting or Traffic, newly discovered by many skilful Navigators,
obtained of King James the First, a Patent under the Great Seal, of all that
part of North America, called New England, from forty to forty eight Degrees of
North Latitude. This vast Tract of Land, was in 1612. Cantoned, and divided by
Grant into many lesser Parcels, according as Adventurers presented; which
Grants being founded upon uncertain and false Descriptions, and reports of some
that Traveled thither, did much interfere one with another, to the great
disturbance of the first Planters, so that little profit was reaped from
thence: Nor was any greater Improvement made of those Grand Portions of Land,
saving the erecting some few Cottages for Fishermen, and a few inconsiderable
Buildings for the Planters; yea, for want of good Conduct, they were by degrees
in a manner quite destitute of Laws and Government, and left to shift for
themselves

This was the beginning of New England, when, in the Year 1610. one Mr.
Robinson a Presbyterian, or rather Independent Preacher, and several other
English, then at Leyden in Holland, though they had been courteously
entertained by the Dutch as Strangers; yet foreseeing diverse inconveniences
might follow, and that they could not so well provide for the good of their
Posterity under the Government of a Foreign Nation, they resolve to entreat so
much Favor of their Sovereign Prince, King James, as to grant them Liberty,
under the Protection of his Royal Authority, to place themselves in some place
of New England. Having therefore obtained a Patent or Grant for some place
about Hudsons River, they set Sail from Plymouth, in September, for the
Southern Parts of New England; but as they intended their Course thither-ward,
they were through many dangers, at last, about November the eleventh, cast upon
a bosom of the South Cape of the Massachusetts Bay, called Cape Cod. When,
Winter approached so fast, that they had no opportunity to remove, and finding
some encouragement from the hopefulness of the Soil, and courtesy of the
Heathen, they resolved there to make their abode, laying the Foundation of a
new Colony, which from the last Town they Sailed from in England, they called
New-Plymouth, containing no considerable Tract of Land, scarce extending one
hundred Mile in length through the whole Cape, and not half so much in breadth,
where broadest.

From this time, to the Year 1636. things were very prosperously and
successfully carried on in New England, which was much increased in Buildings
and Inhabitants; at which time, the Naraganset Indians, who are the most
Warlike and Fierce, and much dreaded by all the rest, committed diverse outrages
upon several of them, and likewise upon the English and Dutch, as they came
occasionally to Trade with them, barbarously murdering Capt. Stone, Capt.
Oldham, with several others: Whereupon the Inhabitants of all the Colonies
unanimously falling upon them, in 1637. they were easily suppressed, about
seven hundred of them being destroyed, and the rest cut off by their neighbor
Indians. Upon which, Miantonimoh, the chief of the Magchins, expecting to be
sole Lord and Ruler over all the Indians, committed many Insolences upon some
others, who were in Confederacy with the English as well as himself; and he
being sent for to the Massacusets Court, at Boston, endeavored to clear
himself, but was clearly convicted by one of his fellows, named Vncas: In
revenge of which, after his return home, he made War upon Vncas, by whom being
taken Prisoner, by the Advice and Counsel of the English, he cut off his Head,
it being justly feared no firm Peace could be concluded while he was alive.
This happened in 1643. from whence, to 1675. there was always an appearance of
Amity and good Correspondence on all sides, only in 1671. one Matoonas, being
vexed that an intended Design against the English did not take effect, out of
mere malice against them, slew an Englishman on the Road; the Murderer was a
Nipnet Indian, and under the Command of the Sachem of Mount-Hope, the Author of
all the mischief against the English in 1675.

Upon a due inquiry therefore of all the Transactions between the Indians and
English, from their first settling on these Coasts, there will appear no ground
of quarrel or provocation given by the English. For when Plymouth Colony was
first Planted in 1620. within three months after, Massasoit, the chief Sachem
or Commander of all that side of the Country, repairs thither to the English,
and entered solemnly into a League upon the following Articles. 1. That neither
he nor any of his should injure or do any hurt to any of their People. 2. If
any of his hurt the English, he should send them the offender to punish. 3. If
any thing should be taken away by his, he should see it restored, and the
English to do the like to them. 4. If any made War unjustly against him, they
were to aid him, and he likewise them. 5. That he should certify his neighbor
Confederates hereof, that they might be likewise comprised in the Peace. 6.
That when his men should come to the English they should leave their Arms
behind; which were then Bows and Arrows, and were then their only Weapons,
though now they have learn- the use of Guns and Swords as well as the
Christians. This League the same Sachem confirmed a little before his death, in
1630. coming with his two Sons, Alexander and Philip, to Plymouth, and renewing
the same for Himself, his Heirs and Successors; yet it is apparent this
Massasoit never loved the English, and would have engaged them never to have
attempted to draw away any of his People from their old Pagan Superstition and
Devilish Idolatry, to the Christian Religion: But finding they would make no
Treaty with him upon such Conditions, he urged it no further. But this was a
bad Omen, that whatever kindness he pretended to the Englijh, yet he hated them
for being Christians; which strain was more apparent in his Son that succeeded
him, and all the People: Insomuch, that some discerning Persons of that
Jurisdiction, were afraid that that part of the Indians would be all rooted
out, as it is since come to pass.

Neither was Passaconaway, the great Sagamore or Sachim of Merimack River,
insensible of the fatal consequence of opposing the English; for a Person of
Quality relates, that being invited by some Sachims to a great Dance, in 1660.
Passaconaway intending at that time to make his last and farewell Speech to his
Children and People, that were then all gathered together: He addressing
himself to them in this manner. I am now going the way of all flesh, or ready
to die, and not like to see you meet together any more; I will now leave this
word of Counsel with you, that you take heed how you quarrel with the English,
for though you may do them much mischief, yet assuredly you will all be
destroyed and rooted off the Earth if you do: For I was as much an Enemy to
them, at their first coming into these Parts, as any one whatsoever, and tried
all ways and means possible to have destroyed them, at least to have prevented
them sitting down here, but could no way effect it, therefore I advise you
never to contend with the English, nor make War with them. And accordingly, his
eldest Son, as soon as he perceived the Indians were up in Arms, withdrew
himself into some remote place, that he might not be hurt either by the English
or Indians.

But to proceed, after this digression; After the death of Massasoit, his
eldest Son Alexander succeeded, about twenty years since, who, notwithstanding
the League he had entered into with the English with his Father, in 1639. had no
affection to them nor their Religion, but was Plotting to Rise against them;
whereupon a stout Gentleman was sent to bring him before the Council of
Plymonth, who found him and eight more in a Hunting-House, where they were just
come in from Hunting. leaving all their Guns without doors, which being seized
by the English, they then entered the Wigwam, and demanded Alexander to go along
with them before the Governor. At which Message he was much appalled, but being
told that if he stirred or refused to go, he was a dead man, he was persuaded
by one of the chief Confidents to go; but such was the Pride of his Spirit,
that his very Indignation for this surprizal, cast him into a Fever, whereof
he soon after died. After his death, Philip his Brother, nicknamed King
Philip, for his haughty Spirit, came in his own Person, in 166. with Sausaman
his chief Secretary and Counselor, to renew the former League that had been
made with his Predecessors; and there was as much correspondence betwixt them,
for the next seven years, as had ever been in former times; and yet without any
kind of provocation, this treacherous Man, in 1676. harbored mischievous
thoughts against them, Plotting a general Insurrection in all the English
Colonies, all the Indians being to rise as one man against the Plantations
which were next them. Which being discovered by John Sausaman, Philip thereupon
caused him to be murdered; the Murderers being apprehended, were Executed,
and Philip fearing his own Head, got openly into Arms, killing, burning and
destroying the English, and their Habitations, with all manner of Barbarity and
Cruelty. Which Troubles continued almost two years, 'till at length, after
several Defeats given to Philips and his Forces, the loss of his Friends,
bereavement of his dear Wife and beloved Son, whom in his haste he was forced
to leave Prisoners to save his own life, his Treasurers taken, and his own
Followers Plotting against his life, Divine Vengeance overtook him for
causelessly breaking his League. For having been Hunting like a Savage Beast
through the Woods, about a hundred Miles backwards and forwards, at last he was
driven to his own Den upon Mount Hope, retiring himself, with a few of his best
Friends, in a Swamp, which proved now a Prison to secure him 'till the
Messenger of death came.

For such was his hatred against the English, that he could not hear any thing
should be suggested to him about Peace, insomuch that he caused one of his
Confederates to be killed for propounding it; which so provoked some of his
Company, not altogether so desperate as himself, that one of them (that was
near Kin to him that was killed) fled to Road-Island, and informed Captain
Church where Philip was, offering to lead him thither: Upon this welcome news,
a small Party of English and Indians came very early in the Morning and
surrounded his Swamp, from whence (as he was endeavoring to make his escape)
he was shot through the Heart by an Indian of his own Nation; for Capt. Church
having appointed an Englishman and an Indian to stand at such a place of the
Swamp, where it happened that Philip was breaking through; the Morning being
very wet and rainy, the Englishman's Gun would not fire; the Indian having an
old Musket, with a large Touchhole, it took fire the more readily; which when
Philip was dispatched, the Bullet passing directly through his heart, soon
after several of his Confederates and Counselors were taken, and suffered
deserved punishment, and in a short time most of the Murderers received their
condign rewards. It cannot be altogether impertinent, but may discover much of
the temper and management of the Indians in this War, to insert an account of
one Stockwell, of Deerfield, concerning his Captivity and Redemption, with
other notable occurrences during his continuance among them, written with his
own Hand, and are as follow in his own Words, viz.

September 19. 1677. About Sunset, I and another Man being together, the
Indians with great shouting and shooting came upon us, and some other of the
English hard by, at which we ran to a Swamp for refuge; which they perceiving,
made after us, and shot at us, three Guns being discharged upon me; the Swamp
being mine, I slipped in, and fell down; whereupon an Indian stepped to me, with
his Hatchet lifted up to knock me on the head, supposing I was wounded, and
unfit for Travel: It happened I had a Pistol in my Pocket, which (though
uncharged) I presented to him, who presently stepped back, and told me, if I
would yield I should have no hurt, boasting falsely, that they had destroyed
all Hatfield, and that the Woods were full of Indians; whereupon I yielded
myself, and fell into the Enemies Hands, and by three of them was led away to
the place whence I first fled; where two other Indians came running to us, and
one lifting up the But-end of his Gun to knock me on the head, the other with
his hand put by the blow, and said I was his Friend. I was now near my own
House, which the Indians burnt last year, and I was about to build up again,
and there I had some hopes to escape from them; there was a Horse just by,
which they bid me take, I did so, but attempted no escape, because the Beast
was dull and slow, and I thought they would send me to take my own Horses;
which they did, but they were so frighted, that I could not come near them, and
so fell again into the Enemies Hands, who now took me, bound me, and led me
away. Soon after, I was brought to other Captives, who were that day taken at
Hatfield, which moved two contrary Passions, Joy, to have Company; and Sorrow,
that we were in that miserable Condition: We were all pinioned and led away in
the Night over the Mountains, in dark and hideous ways, about four Miles
further, before we took up our place of rest, which was a dismal place of a
Wood on the East Side of that Mountain; we were kept bound all that night, the
Indians watching us, who, as they Traveled, made strange noises, as of Wolves,
Owls, and other Birds and Beasts, that they might not lose one another; and if
followed, might not be discovered by the English.

About break of day we marched again, and got over the great River Pecompt uck;
there the Indians marched out upon Trays, the number of their Captives and
Slain, as there manner is: Here I was again in great dange0r, a quarrel arising
whose Captive I was, and I was afraid I must be killed to end the controversy;
they then asked me whose I was, I said three Indians took me; so they agreed to
have all a share in me: I had now three Masters, but the Chief was he that
first laid hands on me, which happened to be the worst of the company, as
Ashpelon the Indian Captain told me, who was always very kind to me, and a
great comfort to the English, In this place they gave us Victuals which they
had brought away from the English, and ten Men were again sent out for more
Plunder, some of whom brought Provision, others Corn out of the Meadows, upon
Horses; from hence we went up above the Falls, where we crossed that River again,
when I fell downright Lame of my old Wounds received in the War; but the
apprehension of being killed by the Indians, and what cruel death they would
put me to, soon frighted away my pain, and I was very brisk again. We had
eleven Horses in that company? which carried Burdens and the Women; we
traveled up the River till night, and then took up our Lodgings in a dismal
place, being laid on our Backs and staked down, in which posture we lay many
nights together; the manner was, our arms and legs being stretched out, were
staked fast down, and a Cord put about our necks, so that we could not possibly
stir; the first night (being much tired) I slept as comfortably as ever; the
next we lay in the Saquahog-Meadows; our Provision was soon spent, and whilst
we were there, the Indians went a Hunting, and the English Army came out after
us. Then the Indians moved again, dividing themselves and the Captives into
many companies, that the English might not follow their Track; at night, having
crossed the River, we met again at the place appointed; the next day were
passed it, where we continued a long time, which being about thirty Miles above
Squag, the Indians were quite out of fear of the English, but much afraid of
the Mo-hawks, another sort of Indians, Enemies to them.

In this place they built a strong Wigwam, and had a great Dance, as they
called it, where it was concluded to burn three of us; having provided Bark for
that purpose, of whom (as I heard afterward) I was to be one, Sergeant
Plumpton another, and the Wife of Benjamin Wait the third; I knew not then who
they were, yet I understood so much of their Language, that I perceived some
were designed thereto; that night I could not sleep for fear of the next day's
work, the Indians (weary with dancing) lay down and stepped soundly. The English
were all loose, whereupon I went out for Wood, and mended the fire, making a
noise on purpose, but none awaked; I thought if any of the English should wake,
we might kill them all sleeping; to which end I removed out of the way all the
Guns and Hatchets, but my heart failing, I put all things where they were
again. The next day (when they intended to burn us) our Master and some others
spoke for us, and the evil was prevented at this time: We lay here about three
Weeks, where I had a Shirt brought me to make; one Indian said it should be
made this way, another a different way, and a third this way, whereupon I told
them I would make it according to my chief Master's order; upon this an Indian
struck me on the face with his fist, I suddenly rose in anger to return it
again, which raised a great Hubbub; the Indians and English coming about me, I
was fain to humble my self to my Master, which ended the matter. Before I came
to this place, my three Masters were gone a Hunting, and I was left with only
one Indian (all the company being upon a march) who fell sick, so that I was
fain to carry his Gun and Hatchet, whereby I had opportunity to have dispatched
him, but did not, because the English Captives had engaged the contrary to each
other, since if one should run away, it would much endanger the remainder:
Whilst we were here, Benjamin Stebbins, going with some Indians to Wachuset
Hills, made his escape, the tidings whereof caused us all to be called in and
bound. One of the Indians Captains, and always our great Friend, met me coming
in, and told me Stebbins was run away, and the Indians spoke of burning us;
some were only for burning our fingers, and then biting them off; he said there
would be a Court, and all would speak their minds, but he would speak last, and
declare, That the Indian, who suffered Stebbins to make his escape, was only in
fault; and bid us not fear any hurt should happen to us, and so it proved
accordingly.

Whilst we lingered here-about, Provision grew scarce, one Bear's Foot must
serve five of us a whole day; we began to eat Horseflesh, and devoured several
Horses, three only being left alive. At this time the Indians had fallen upon
Hadley, where some of them being taken, were released, upon promise of meeting
the English on such a Plain, to make further Terms: Captain Ashpalon was much
for it, but the Sachins of Wachuset, when they came, were against it; yet were
willing to meet the English, only to fall upon and destroy them. Ashpalon
charged us English not to speak a word of this, since mischief would come of
it. With these Indians from Wachuset, there came above fourscore Squaws, or
Women and Children, who reported the English had taken Vncas and all his Men,
and sent them beyond the Seas; whereat they were much enraged, asking us if it
were true; we denied it, which made Ashpalon angry, saying he would no more
believe Englishmen. They then examined every one apart, and dealt worse with us
for a time, than before; still Provision was scarce; at length we came to a
place called Squaro-Maug-River, where we hoped to find Salmon, but came too
late; this place I reckon two hundred Miles above Deer-field, then we parted
into two companies, some went one way, and some another; we passed over a
mighty Mountain, being eight days in traveling of it, though we marched very
hard, and had every day either Snow or Rain; we observed that on this Mountain
all the Water ran Northward. Here we likewise wanted Provision, at length we
got over and came near a Lake, where we staid a great while to make Canoes,
wherein to pass over. Here I was frozen, and here again we were like to starve;
all the Indians went a Hunting, but could get nothing several days; they
Pawawed, or Conjured, but to no purpose; then they desired the English to pray,
confessing they could do nothing, and would have us try what the Englishmans
God could do: I prayed, so did Sergeant Plumpton in another place, the Indians
reverently attending Morning and Night; next day they killed some Bears, then
they would needs make us desire a Blessing, and return Thanks at Meals; but
after a while they grew weary of it, and the Sachim forbid us; when I was
frozen, they were very cruel to me, because I could not do as at other times.

When we came to the Lake, we were again sadly straightened for Provision, and
forced to eat Touch-wood fried in Bear's Grease; at last we found a company of
Racoons, and then we made a Feast, the Custom being that we must eat all; I
perceived I had too much for one time, which an Indian that sat by observing,
bid me to slip away some to him under his Coat, and he would hide it for me
till another time; this Indian, as soon as he had got my meat, stood up and
made a Speech to the rest, discovering what I had done, whereat they were very
angry, and cut me another piece, forcing me to drink Racoons Grease, which made
me sick and vomit; I told them I had enough, after which they would give me no
more, but still told me I had Racoon enough, whereby I suffered much, and
(being frozen) was in great pain, sleeping but little, and yet must do my task
that was set me; as they came to the Lake, they killed a great Moose, staying
there till it was all eaten, and then entered upon the Lake; a Storm arose,
which endangered us all, but at last we got to an Island, and there the Indians
went to Pawawing, or Conjuring; the Pawaw declared, that Bejamin Wait and
another were coming, and that Storm was raised to cast them away: This
afterward appeared to be true, though then I believed it not; upon this Island
we lay still several days, and then set out again, but a Storm took us, so that
we continued to and fro upon certain Islands about three weeks; we had no
Provisions but Racoons, that the Indians themselves were afraid of being
starved; they would give me nothing, whereby I was several days without any
Victuals: At length we went upon the Lake on the Ice, having a little Slead,
upon which we drew our Loads; before Noon I tired, and just then the Indians
met with some Frenchmen: One of the Indians, who took me, came and called me
all manner of ill Names, throwing me on my back; I told him I could do no more,
then he said he must kill me, which I thought he was about to do, for pulling
out his knife, he cut off my Pockets and wrapped them about my Face, and then he
helped me up, and took my ^lead and went away, giving me a bit of Biscuit like a
Walnut, which he had of the Frenchman, and told me he would give me a Pipe of
Tobacco; when my Slead was gone, I ran after him, (but being tired) soon fell
to a foot-pace, whereby the Indians were out of sight; I followed as well as I
could, having many falls upon the Ice; at length I was so spent, I had not
strength enough to rise again, but crept to a Tree that lay along, upon which I
continued all the cold night, it being very sharp weather.

I now counted no other but I must here die, which whilst I was ruminating of,
an Indian hollowed, and I answered; he came to me and called me bad Names,
telling me if I would not go, he must knock me on the head; I told him he must
then do so, he saw how I had wallowed in the Snow, but could not rise, hereupon
he wrapped me in his Coat, and going back, sent two Indians with a Slead; one
said he must knock me on the head, the other said no, they would carry me away
and burn me; then they bid me stir my Instep, to see if that were frozen, I did
so; when they saw that, they said there was a Surgeon with the French that
could cure me; then they took me upon a Slead and carried me to the fire,
making much of me, pulling of my wet, and wrapping me in dry Clothes, laying me
on a good Bed, they had killed an Otter, and gave me some of the Broth, and a
bit of the Flesh; here I slept till toward day, and was then able to get up
and put on my Clothes; one of the Indians awaked, and seeing me go, shouted, as
rejoicing at it. As Soon as it was light, I and Samuel Russel went before on the
Ice upon a River, they said I must go on foot as much as I could for fear of
freezing; Russul slipped into the River with one foot, the Indians called him
back and dried his Stockins, and sent us away with an Indian Guide; we went
four or five Miles before the rest of the Indians overtook us; I was pretty
well spent, Russel said he was faint, and wondered how I could live, for he said
he had had ten Meals to my one; I was then laid on the Slead, and they ran away
with me on the Ice; the rest and Russel came softly after, whose face I never
after saw more, nor knew what become of him. About midnight we got near
Shamblee, a French Town, where the River was open; when I came to travel, I was
not able, whereupon an Indian who staid with me would carry me a few Rods, and
then I would go as many, telling me I would die if he did not carry me, and I
must tell the English how kind he was.

When we came to the first house, there was no Inhabitants; the Indian and I
were both spent and discouraged, he said we must now both die; at last he
left me alone, and got to another house, from whence came ioms French and
Indians, who brought me in; the French were very kind, putting my hands and
feet in cold Water, and gave me a dram of Brandy, and a little Hasty-Pudding
and Milk; when I tasted Victuals, I was very hungry, but they would not
suffer me to eat too much; I lay by the sire with the Indians that night, yet
could not sleep for pain; next morning the Indians and French fell out about
me, the Indians saying, that the French loved the English better than the
Indians: The French presently turned the Indians out of doors, being very
careful of me, and all the Men in the Town came to see me: Here I continued
three or four days, and was invited from one house to another, receiving much
civility from a young Man, who let me lie in his Bed, and would have bought
me, but the Indians demanded a hundred Pounds; we traveled to a place called
S^rril, vvhither this young Man accompanied me to prevent my being abused by
the Indians; he carried me on the Ice one day's Journey, for now I could not
go at all; when we came to the place, the People were kind.

Next day, being in much pain, I asked the Indians to carry me to the
Surgeon, as they had promised; vvhereat they were angry, one taking up his
Gun to knock me down, but the French would not suffer it, falling upon them
and kicking them out of doors; we went away from thence to a place two or
three Miles of, where the Indians had Wigwams; some of them knevv me, and
seemed to pity me: While I was here, which was three or four days; the
French came to see me, and (it being Christmas time) they brought me Cakes and
other Provision, the Indians tried to cure me, but could not; then I asked for
the Surgeon, at which one of them in anger struck me on the face with his
sist; a Frenchman being by, who spoke to him some words, and went his vvays;
soon after came the Captain of the place to the Wigwam, with about twelve
armed Men, and asked where the Indian was that struck the Englishman, and
seizing him, told him, he should go to the Bribocs, and then be hanged: The
Indians were much terrified at this, as appeared by their countenance and
trembling; I would have gone away too, but the Frenchman bid me not fear, the
Indians durst not hurt me.

When that Indian was gone, I had two Masters still, I asked them to carry me
to that Captain, that I might speak in behalf of the Indian; they ansvvered, I
was a Fool, did I think the Frenchmen were like the English, to say one thing
and do another? they were Men of their Words; but at length I prevailed with
them to help me thither, and speaking to the Captain by an Interpreter, told
him, I desired him to set the Indian free, declaring how kind he had been to
me; he replied, he was a Rouge, and should be hanged; then I privately
alleged, that if he were hanged, it might fare the worse with the English
Captives; the Captain said, that ought to be considered, vvhereupon he set him
at liberty, upon condition he should never strike me more, and bring me every
day to his house to eat Victuals; I perceived the common People did not approve
of what the Indians acted against the English: When he was free, he came and
took me about the middle, saying, I was his Brother, I had saved his life
once, and he had saved mine (he said) thrice; he then called for Brandy, and
made me drink, and had me away to the Wigwam again; when I came there, the
Indians one after another shook hands with me, and were very kind, thinking
no other but I had saved the Indian's life.

Next day he carried me to the Captain's house, and set me down; they gave me
my Victuals and Wine, and being left there avvhile by the Indians, I shevved
the Captain and his Wife my Fingers, who were assrighted thereat, and bid me
lap it up again, and sent for the Surgeon, who when he came, said, he
would cure me, and dressed it: That night I was full of pain, the French
were afraid I would die, five Men did vvatch me, and strove to keep me
cheerful, for I was sometimes ready to faint; oft-times they gave me a little
Brandy.

The next day the Surgeon came again and dressed me, and so he did all the
while I was among the French, which was from Christmas till May. I continued in
this Captain's House till Benjamin Wait came, and my Indian Master (being in
want of Money) pawned me to the Captain for fourteen Beavers, or the worth of
them, by such a day; which if he did not pay, he must lose his Pawn, or else
sell me for one and twenty Beavers; but he could get no Beaver, so I was sold,
and (in Gods good time,) set at liberty, and returned to my Friends in
New England again.

This Country is possessed by diverse sorts of People, who are judged to be of
the Tartars, called Samoids, bordering upon Muscovia, being divided into
Tribes; those to the East and North-East are called Churchers, Tarentines, and
Monhegans: To the South are the Pequets and Naragansets: Westwards,
Connecticuts and Mow-hacks: To the North, Aberginians, which consist of
Mattachusets, Wippanaps and Tarentines: The Pocanets live to the Westward of
Plymouth. Not long before the English came into the Country, happened a great
Mortality among them, especially when the English afterward planted. The East
and Northern Parts were sore smitten, first by the Plague, after, when the
English came, by the Smallpox; the three Kingdoms, or Sagamorships of the
Mattachusets, being before very populous, having under them seven Dukedoms or
petty Sagamorships, but were now by the Plague reduced from 30000 to 300. There
are now many to the Eastward, the Pequods were destroyed by the English, the
Mow-hacks are about five Hundred, their Speech is a Dialect of the Tartars,
they are of Person tall, and well Limbed, of a pale and lean Visage, black
Eyed, which is counted strongest for sight; and black Hair'd, both smooth and
curled, generally wearing it long; they have seldom any Beards, their Teeth
very white, short and even, which they account the most necessary and best part
of Man; and as the Austrians are known by their great Lips, the Bavarians by
their Pokes under their Chins, the Jews by their goggle Eyes, so the Indians
are remarkable for their flat Noses. The Indesses, or young Women, are some
very comely, with round plump Faces, and generally plump of their Bodies (as
well as the Men,) soft and smooth like a Mole-skin, of a reasonable good
Complexion, but that they dye themselves Tawny; yet many pretty Brownetto's and
small fingered Lasses are found amongst; them; the Vetuala's, or old Women, are
lean and ugly, yet all of a modest demeanor, considering their savage
breeding; and indeed they shame our English Rusticks, whose rudeness in many
things exceeds theirs.

The Natives are of a very inconstant, crafty and timorous disposition, but are
very ingenious and quick of apprehension, soon angry, and so malicious, that
they seldom forget injury; and barbarously cruel, witness their direful revenge
upon each other; prone to injurious violence and slaughter, both Men and Women
being very theevish, and great haters of Strangers; all of them Canibals, or
Eaters of humane Flesh; and so were formerly the Heathen Irish, who used to
feed upon the Buttocks of Boys, and the Paps of Women. The Spanish Relation
gives an account, that the Natives would not eat a Spaniard, till they had kept
him two or three days dead, to grow tender, because their flesh was hard. At
Martins Vineyard, an Island that lies South of Plymouth, in the way to
Virginia, certain Indians seized upon a Boat that put into a by Cove, killed
the Men, and in a short time eat them up before they were discovered.

Wives they have two or three, according to their ability and strength of body;
the Women have the easiest labor of any in the World, for when their time is
come, they go out alone, carrying a Board with them two Foot long, and a Foot
and an half broad, bored full of holes on each side, having a foot beneath, and
on the top abroad strap of Leather, which they put over their Forehead, the
Board hanging at their Back; when they come to a convenient Bush or Tree, they
lay them down, and are delivered in an instant, without so much as one groan;
they wrap the Child up in young Beaver Skin, with his Heels close to his
Buttocks, and laced down to the Board upon his Back, his Knees resting upon the
foot beneath; then put the strap of Leather upon their Forehead, with the
Infant hanging at their Back, home they trudg, and dye the Child with a liquor
of boiled Hemlock-Bark, and then throw him into the Water, if they suspect it
gotten by any other Nation; if it will swim, they acknowledge it for their own;
they give them Names when they are Men grown, and love the English, as Robbin,
Harry, Philip, and the like; they are very indulgent to their Children, as well
as Parents; but if they live so long as to be burthensom, they either starve or
bury them alive, as it was supposed an Indian did by his Mother at Casco, in
1669.

Their Apparel, Their Apparel
before the English came among them, was the Skin of wild Beasts, with the hair
on; Buskins of Deer Skins, or Moose, dressed, and drawn with lines into several
works, the lines being colored with yellow, blew or red; Pumps too they have,
made of tough Skins, without soles. In the Winter, when Snow will bear them,
they fasten to their Feet Snow-Shoes, made like a large Racket for Tennis Play,
laced on before, and behind they wear a square piece of Leather, tied about
their Middle with a string, to hide their Secrets. But since they have had to
do with the English, they buy of them a Cloth called Trading-Cloth, of which
they make Mantles, Coats with short Sleeves, and Caps for their Heads, but the
Men keep their old Fashion. They are very proud, as appears by decking
themselves with white and blew Beads of their making, and painting their Faces
with variety of Colors, and sometimes weave curious Coats with Turkey Feathers
for their Children, etc.

This Country is well watered with Rivers, the chief among which, are
Agamentico, Conecticut, Kinebequy, Merrimick, Mishum, Mistick, Neragansat,
Pascataway, Pemnaquid, Tachobacco, etc. And in these Rivers, together with the
Sea, are taken excellent Fish, as Cod, Thorn-back, Sturgeon, Porpusses,
Haddock, Salmons, Herrings, Mackarel, Oysters, Crab-fish, Tortoise, Cockles,
Muscles, Clams, Smelts, Eels, Lamprons, Alewives, Basses, Hallibuts, Shacks,
Scales, Grampus and Whales.

Here are great variety of Fowls, as Pheasants, Patridges, Heath-Cocks,
Turkeys, Geese, Ducks, Herons, Cranes, Cormorants, Swans, Widgeons, Sheldrakes,
Snipes, Doppers, Black-birds, the Humbird, Loor, etc.

The wild Beasts of chief note, are Lions, Bears, Foxes, Rackoons, Mooses,
Musquashs, Otters, Beavers, Deer, Hares, Coneys, etc. and for tame Beasts,
Cows, Sheep, Goats, Swine and Horses.

Amongst the hurtful things in this Country, the Rattle-Snake is most
dangerous. Here is also several sorts of stinging Flies, which are found very
troublesome to the Inhabitants.

Here are several sorts of Trees, as the Oak, Cyprus, Pine, Chestnut, Cedar
Walnut, Firr, Ash, Asp, Elm, Alder, Maple, Birch, Sassaphras, Sumach; several
Fruit Trees, as Apples, Pears, Plums, with several others that are growing in
Virginia and Maryland, which has already been taken notice of.

This Country affords several sorts of rich Furrs, Flax Linen, Amber, Iron,
Pitch, Tarr, Cables, Masts, and Timber to build Ships; also several sorts of
Grain, wherewith they drive a considerable Trade to Barbados, and other
English Plantations in America, supplying them with Flower, Biscuit, Salt, Flesh
and Fish, etc. and in return, bring Sugars, and other Commodities. They also
drive a considerable Trade with England for wearing Apparel, Stuffs, Cloth,
Iron, Brass, and other Utensils for their Houses, and such like things that are
useful to Man, and not found amongst them.

As to the Coins, Weights and Measures of New England, and the rest of the
American Plantations belonging to his Majesty, are the same with those of
England; but as to Coins, they are not much made use of in Trade, their way
being Bartering of one Commodity for another, etc.

The English, now Inhabiting in New England, are very numerous and powerful,
possessing many Potent Colonies, and are governed by Laws of their own making,
having having several Courts of Judicature, where they assemble together once a
Month, as well for the making of new Laws, abolishing of old, hearing and
determining of Causes: As for the Electing of a Governor, Deputy Governor,
Assistants, Burgesses, and other Magistrates, (every Town having two Burgesses)
each County annually Electing such like Officers. The Government, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, is in the hands of Independents or Presbyterians. The
Military part of their Government, is by one Major General and three
Serjeant-Majors, to whom belong the four Counties of Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex
and Norfolk.

Here are several fine Towns, as Boston, the Metropolis of New England,
commodiously seated for Traffic on the Seashore; it is at present a very
large and spacious Town, or rather City, composed of several well-ordered
Streets, and graced with several fair and beautiful Houses, which are well
Inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen, who drive a considerable Trade for such
Commodities as the Country affords, to Barbados and other Caribbee Isles; as
also to England and Ireland, taking in exchange such Commodities as each place
affords, or are found useful to them. It is a place of good strength, having
two or three Hills adjoining, on which are raised Fortifications, with great
Pieces mounted thereon, which are well guarded.

Charlestown, seated on and between the Rivers Charles and Mistick; it is
beautified with a large and well built Church, and near the Riverside is the
Marketplace, from which runs two Streets, in which are several good Houses.

Dorchester, situated near the Sea, where there falls two Rivulets; an
indifferent Town.

Cambridge, formerly New-Town, seated on the River Merrimick: This Town
consists of several Streets, and is beautified with two Colleges, and diverse
fair and well built Houses.

St. Georges Fort, seated on the mouth of the River Sagadebock.

New-Plymouth, seated on that large Bay of Patuxed.

Reading, commodiously seated above a great Pond, and well Watered and
Inhabited. In this Town are two Mills, one for Corn, and the other for Timber.

Salem, pleasantly seated between two Rivers.

Other Towns placed Alphabetically.

Berwick, Braintree, Bristol, Concord, Dartmouth, Dedham, Dover, Exeter,
Falmouth, Gloucester, Greens-Harbour, Hampton, Hartford, Haverhil, Hingham,
Hull, Ipswich, Lin, Mulden, New-bury, New Haven, Northam, Norwich, Oxford,
Rowley, Roxbury, Salisbury, Sandwich, Southampton, Springfield, Sudbury,
Wenham, Weymouth, Woburne and Tarmouth.

Most of these having their Names from some Towns in England, many of them
being of good account, and commodiously seated, either on the Sea Shore, or on
Navigable Rivers, and are well Inhabited. And most of these Towns are known to
the Indians by other Names. The present Governor for his Majesty, is Henry
Cranfield, Esquire

A DESCRIPTION OF NEW-FOVND-LAND.
New Foundland is an Island, in Extent Its Extent.
equal to England, from whence it is distant little above six hundred Leagues,
lying near half way between Ireland and Virginia.

It is situated between 46 and 53 Degrees North Latitude; Its Situation.
the North part being better Inhabited than the South, though fitter for
Habitation; and it is only severed from the Continent of America, by an Arm of
the Sea, like that which separates England from France.

Its Bays, Rivers, Fish, Fowls, Beasts, etc.

It is famous for many spacious and excellent Bays and Harbors; and within the
Land, for the variety of fresh Springs, whose Waters are excellent delicious.

It is enriched by Nature with plenty of Fish, Land and Water Fowl, and
sufficiently stocked with Deer, Hares, Otters, Foxes, Squirrels, and other
Beasts, which yield good Furrs; Cod-Fish, Herrings, Salmons, Thorn-back,
Oysters, Muscles, etc. And though not overrun generally with Woods, it does
afford (besides store of Fuel) abundance of stately Trees fit for Timber,
Masts, Planks, and sundry other uses.

The Soil in most places is reputed fertile, Its Fertility.
the Climate wholesome, though the rigor of the Winter season, and the excels of
Heats in Summer, does detract something from it due praise.

The Island of New Foundland was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot; The
first Discoverer.
likewise Fabian gives an account, that in the time of Henry the Seventh, three
men being taken in New Foundland were brought to the King: And Robert Thorn
writes, that his Father, and one Mr. Eliot, were the Discoverers of the
New Foundland, in 1530. Mr. Hoar sets out for a further Discovery, but was
brought to such extremity by Famine, that many of his Company were killed and
eaten by their fellows; and those which returned, were so altered, that Sir
William Butts, a Norfolk Knight, could not know his Son Thomas, who was one of
this starved number, but only by a Wart that grew upon one of his knees.

After the first Discovery, the business of Trading thither was laid aside for
many years. In the mean time, the Normans, Portugals, and Britains of France,
resorted to it, and changed the Names which had been given by the English to
the Bays and Promontories; but the English would not so soon relinquish their
Pretensions: And therefore, in 1583. Sir Humphrey Gilbert took Possession
thereof, in the Name, and by the Commission, of Queen Elizabeth, forbidding all
other Nations to use Fishing, and intending to have settled an English Colony
there, but being wracked in his return, the settling of the Colony was
discontinued till 1608. and then undertook by John Guy, a Merchant of Bristol,
who in twenty three days failed from thence to Conception Bay in
New Foundland. In 1611. they had scarce six days of Frost in October and
November, which presently thawed, the rest of the Months being warmer and dryer
than in England, neither were the Brooks frozen up three nights together with
Ice able to bear a Dog: They had Filberds, Fish, Mackerel and Foxes in the
Winter, White Patridges in the Summer, larger than ours, who are much afraid of
Ravens. They kill a Wolf with a Mastiff and a Greyhound.

In 1612. they found some Houses of the Natives, which were nothing but Poles
set round, and meeting on the top, ten foot broad, the fire in midst, covered
with Deer-skins. The People are of a reasonable Stature, Beardless,
Broad-faced, their faces covered with Oker: Some of them went naked, only their
Privities covered with a Skin. They believe in one God, who Created all things,
but have many whimsical Notions, and ridiculous Opinions; for they say, That
after God had made all things, he took a number of Arrows, and struck them in
the Ground, from whence Men and Women first sprung up, and have multiplied ever
since. A Sagamore or Governor being asked concerning the Trinity, answered,
There was only one God, one Son, one Mother, and the Sun, which were four, yet
God was above all. Being questioned if they or their Ancestors had heard that
God was come into the World, he said, That he had not seen him. Some among them
speak visibly to the Devil, and he tells them what they must do, as well in War
as other matters.

One Samuel Chaplain, in 1603. gives an acconnt of a Feast made by one of their
Great Lords in his Cabin; eight or ten Kettles of Meat were set on several
Fires, some yards asunder: The men sat on both sides the Room, each of them
having a Dish of the Bark of a Tree, one of which was appointed to give every
man his Portion. Before the Meat was boiled, one took his Dog and Danced about
the Kettles, and when he came before the Sagamore, threw the Dog down, and then
another succeeded in the like Exercise: After the Feast, they Danced with the
Heads of their Enemies in their hands, singing all the while. Their Canoes are
of the Bark of Birch, strengthened with little Wooden Hoops, they have many
Fires in their Cabbins, ten Households sometimes live together, lying upon Skins
one by another, and their Dogs with them, which are like Foxes. At another
Feast, the Men cause all the Women and Maids to sit in Ranks, themselves
standing behind Singing; suddenly all the Women threw off all their Mantles of
Skins, and strip themselves stark naked, being not at all ashamed; their Songs
ended, they cried with one Voice, Ho, Ho, Ho, and then covered themselves with
their Mantles, and after a while renewed their former Songs? and Nakedness.
When a Maid is fourteen or fifteen years of Age, she has many Lovers, and uses
her Pleasure with as many of them as she pleases, for five or six years, and
then takes whom she likes for a Husband, providing he be a good Hunter, living
Chastely with him all her life after, except for Barrenness he forsakes her.

When any dies, they make a Pit, and therein put all his Goods with the Corpse,
covering it over with Earth, Their Iurials.
and setting many pieces of Wood over it, and a stake Painted red. They believe
the immortality of the Soul, and that the Dead go into a far Country, to make
merry with their Friends. If any fall sick, they send to one Sagamon Memberton,
a great Conjurer, who made Prayers to the Devil, and blowed upon the Party, and
cutting him, sucks the Blood; if it be a Wound, he heals it after the same
manner, applying a round slice of Beaver Stones, for which they make him a
Present of Venison or Skins. If they desire News of things absent, the Spirit
answers doubtfully, and sometimes false. When the Savages are hungry, they
consult with this Oracle, and he tells them the place where they shall go; if
they find no Game, the excuse is, the Beast has wandered and changed his
place, but most times they speed, which makes them to believe the Devil to be
God, though they do not Worship him. When these Conjurers consult with the
Devil, they fix a staff in a Pit, to which they tie a Cord, and putting their
Head into the Pit, make Invocation in an unknown Language, with so much
stirring and pains, that they sweat again; when the Devil is come, the Wizard
persuades them he holds him fast with his Cord, forcing him to answer before he
lets him go: Then he begins to sing something in praise of the Spirit, who has
discovered where there are some Deer, and the other Savages answer in the same
Tune; they then Dance and Sing in a strange Tongue: After which they make a
Fire, and leap over it, putting an half Pole-out of the top of the Cabin,
wherein they are, with something tied thereto, which the Devil carries away.
Memberton wore about his neck the mark of his Profession, which was a Triangle
Purse, with something within it like a Nut, which he said was his Spirit. This
Office is Hereditary, they teaching this Mystery of Iniquity to their Sons by
Tradition.

In 1613. fifty four Englishmen, six Women, and two Children, Wintered there;
they killed Bears, Otters and Sables, sowed Wheat, Rye, Turnips and Coleworts.
Their Winter was dry and clear, with some Frost and Snow: Several had the
Scurvey, against which, their Turnips proved a sovereign Remedy. There are
Musk-Cats and Musk-Rats, and near the Coasts, is great killing of Marses, or
Sea-Oxen; a small Ship, in a small time, slew fifteen hundred of them: They are
bigger than an Ox, the Hide dressed, is as thick again as a Bull's; they have
Teeth like Elephants, about a foot longer, growing downwards out of the upper
Jaw, and therefore less dangerous: It is sold dearer than Ivory, and by some
thought ns great an Antidote as the Vnicorn's Horn. The young ones eat like
Veal, which the old will defend to the utmost, holding them in their Arms or
Fore-feet; out of the Bellies of five of these Fishes (which live both on the
Land and Water) they make an Hogshead of Train-Oyl: They sleep in great
Companies, and have one Sentinel, or Watchman, to wake the rest upon occasion.
Their S^ins are short-haired like Seals, theirfaces resembles a Lion's, and may
therefore more justly be called Sea-Lyons than Sea-Oxen or Horses.

East of New Foundland, over against Cape-Ray, at the distance of about 70
Miles from that Shore, lies a Bank or Ridge of Ground, extending about 300
Miles in length, and not above 75 in breadth, where broadest. This great Bank
is covered with Water when the Sea is high, and uncovered and dry on the Ebb,
on all sides whereof the Sea is 200 fathom deep, so that ships of a
considerable Burden may ride over it. And about this Bank lies dispersed
several small Isles, called by St. Sebastian Cabot (the first Discoverer) Los
Boocaloos, or the Isles of Cod-Fish, from that Prodigious quantities of
Cod-fish there found, which were said to obstruct the passage of his Vessels.

It is almost incredible how many Nations yearly Trade thither, Their Trade.
amounting to between three or four hundred Sail of Ships, that are assured to
find sufficient Freight of Cod and Poor John, one man catching an hundred in an
hour; they Fish with Hooks, which are no sooner thrown into the Sea, but the
greedy Fish snapping the Bait, is taken, and drawn on Shipboard, where they
lay him on a Plank, one cutting off his Head, another guts and takes out its
biggest Bones, another salts and barrels it; which being thus ordered, is hence
transported by the European Nations to all parts of Christendom, and through
most other parts of the World: They fish only in the Day, the Cod not biting in
the Night; nor does the Fish last all Seasons, but begins toward Spring, and
ends in September; for in Winter they retire to the bottom of the Sea, where
Storms and Tempests have no power.

Near these Coasts is another kind of Fishing for Cod, which the call Dried, as
the other Green-Fish. The Fishermen retire into some Harbor, and every Morning
send out their Shallops two or three Leagues into the Sea, who fail not of
their Load by Noon or soon after, which they bring to Land, and order as the
other: After this Fish has lain some days in Salt, they take it out, and dry it
in the Wind, laying it again in heaps, and exposing it daily to the open Air
till it be dry, which ought to be good and temperate, to make the Fish
saleable; for Mists moisten it and make it rot, and the Sun causes yellowness.

At this their Fishing, the Mariners have likewise the pleasure of taking Fowl
without going out of their Vessels; for baiting their Hook, with the Cod's
Livers, these Fowls are so greedy that they come by Flocks, and fight who shall
get the Bait first, which soon proves its Death; and one being taken, the Hook
is no sooner thrown out, but another is instantly caught.

And were the English diligent to inspect the advantage that might accrue to
this Nation by settling Plantations on the Island, and raise Fortifications for
the security of the Place, we might give Laws to all Foreigners that come to
Fish there, and in few years engross the whole Fishery to our selves; the
greatest Balance perchance of Foreign Trade.

In the Year 1623. Sir George Calvert Knight, and Principal Secretary of State,
and afterward Lord Baltemore, obtained a Patent of part of New Foundland,
which was erected into a Province, and called Avalon; where he caused a
Plantation to be settled, and a stately House and Fort to be built at Ferryland,
and afterward transported himself and Family thither, and continued the
Plantation by his Deputy, till by Descent (after his Lordships Decease) it came
to his Son and Heir, the right Honorable Caecilius, now Lord Baltemore, who by
Deputies from time to time was no less careful to preserve his interest there;
which though during the last Troubles in England, was by Sir David Kirk's means,
for some years discontinued; he was soon re-invested in the same by His
Majesty's most happy Restoration.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Island of TOBAGO.
THis Island of Tobago is situaated in 11 degrees, Iss Situation.
30 minutes North Latitude, and in 53 degrees 6 minutes Longitude, West from
the Lizard, and about 40 League distance from Barbados, its extent not
exceeding 32 Miles in Length, and about 11 in Breadth.

It is a Country blessed with a temperate and wholesome Air, Its Temperature.
by reason of a warm and temperate heat; being moderated by a continual Brieze
of Wind; so that here is no Summer spent on purpose for Winter-provisions,
because all the year long both Herbage and Fruit bud up by a perpetual Spring.
And the Island is so well stored with Materials for Building, that provided you
bring dextrous Hands, and good Artificers, you may in a short time with little
Charge, build both Houses, Towns, and Fortifications.

The Soil does naturally produce Indian-Corn, Corn and Grain.
such as grows at Virginia, New York, Carolina, etc. But no English Grain grows
here: however there are English Pease of diverse sorts, and Beans and Pulse
enough; likewise there is Guinea-Corn, Bonevis, the French-Pea, the Kidney-Pea,
the Pigeon-Pea, the French-Bean, etc.

Here are excellent Fruits in great abundance; Its Fruits.
as, the Cushen-Apple, which are both Meat and Drink, only made distinguishable
by the Art of Boiling; whose Nut if preserved, you may eat, and of the Rinds
while green, make an excellent Lamp-Oyl, which by small Labor is easily
obtained.

Here is a Fruit called a Bonano, which may be eaten raw, or bettered by an
easy decoction of Fire.

Here is also the Fig Tree, such as is that in Spain and Portugal and several
parts in America.

Then there is the Prickle-Apple, the Pomegranate, the Pineapple, Pome
Citrons, Oranges of three sorts; the sower for Sauce, and the Flowers for
Essences, the sweet ones are eaten for Recreation. But the China-Orange, that
grows here in America, super-excels those in Europe beyond expression.

Of Limons here are two sorts; the sower one for Limonadoes; and the sweet one
for Delectation. So of Limes also, here are sweet and sower; with the last of
which, they make Limeads and Punch. Guavers is a Fruit that is exceeding stony;
there is the White and the Red; but they differ in virtue; and if baked or
boiled green, if you pick out the stones, you have then a Basis for Marmalade
to equalize Quinces. Tamarinds grow here naturally; but the Plantin, of all
Fruit the Negroes love best, which is a nourishing, sovereign, wholesome Food.

Here are Grapes great store, but are eaten off the Cluster; for the Planter
has another Prospect more profitable than Wine. Then there is the Custard-Apple,
the Sowr-Soap, the Papaw-Apple, the Mamme-Apple, the Yellow-Plum. There are
Cherries also (which bear the year about) whose Fruit is somewhat of a sharpish
taste; but the Coco-Nut-Tree, and the Fruit that hangs upon it, the Indians
idolize, and call it Gods-Tree, because it produces both Meat, Drink and
Clothes; it is true beyond dispute, that the Nut of it self is a Sweet beyond
the sweetest Almond; the Shell serves for Cups, Spoons and Dishes, etc. Of the
Maccaw-Nut shell the Indians make the Bowls of their Tobacco-Pipes; the Kernel
is eatable, the Nut makes an excellent Lamp-Oyl. Then there is the Physick-Nut;
also two sorts of Melons, the one is called Musk, the other Water-Melon. Also
there are Penguins, Cucumbers, Pumpkins. Then there is two sorts of Gourds, the
sweet are those which the Planter boyls to make Broth Medicinal; and the Wild
Gourd, for Instruments, and Vessels to contain Liquors.

They have several sorts of Roots; as, Potatoes, Eddies, Yanis: Their Roots.
These and Potatoes are their natural Bread, if not improper to call it so;
however it is Food, if not Bread of another fashion: Then there are Carrots,
Turnips, Parsnips, Onions, Cassado-Root: Likewise Tea grows naturally,
Tobago-Cinamon, Long-Pepper, Cod-Pepper, Bell-Pepper, and Round Pepper, some
red, and some green, that grows naturally without Cultivation; also
Jamaica-Pepper, with great plenty of other Fruits and Roots.

They have great store of Wild Beasts; as, the Wild-Hog, Wild Beasts.
of which sort of Cattle their Numbers are innumerable, when yearly the People
cut off at least twenty Thousand, and yet they increase at such a prodigious
rate, that neither Gun, nor any other Artifice can be found to destroy them.

The Pickery is a Beast much resembling a Hog, save only he draws his Breath at
his Ventricle; which for the most part concentrates on the middle of his Back.

Then here is great quantities of the Armadillaes, which the Hollanders call
Tattoos.

Likewise here is two sorts of Guanoes, the one of a green, but the other of a
gray color, which is shaped like a Lizard, somewhat resembling the Allegator;
some of them being four or five foot in length; they live upon Herbs, Insects
and Fruits, and borough like a Coney in the hollow Pits in Sand. The Indian
Coney is much taller and larger than ours, and their Skins smell of Musk.

Then there is the Apostum, much like our English Badger (but his Legs are
equal) and most of all assimilates the Racoon, and naturally, because so
affected with Mankind in general, that he follows him, comes to him, and
delights to gaze on him.

Then there are Horses, Cows, Ass-Negroes, Sheep, Deer, Hogs, Goats, Rabbets,
etc.

Likewise there is the Land-Tortoise, also Land-Crabs (viz.) the red, the black
and white Crab; and there is the Land-Shell-Souldier, whose Claws resemble the
Claws of a Crab, but is of himself a very little Creature; some say they are
eatable; their Fat is a sovereign Oil, and of that singular virtue and
excellency, as to blunt the venom of a poisoned Dart.

Here is great plenty of excellent Fish; as, the Groper, the gray Porgo, the
red Porgo, the Cavallus, the green and the gray; the last we call Horse-Eye, of
the size of a Salmon, and scaled much alike; of the Mullet here are plenty,
from the size of a Makarel, to the extent of a Pickerel.

The Manatee, or Sea-Cow, is of an amphibious nature, it eats Grass like an
Ox, and swims like an Otter, that swims sometimes under water, and grows to a
prodigious greatness; for some of them have weighed ten and twelve hundred
pound weight; they are struck with harping-Irons, or other Engines, and so
taken; whose Flesh of Fish necessity only extols it. There are various sorts of
Turtles; the Hawks-Bill, the Vandorus, the Loggerhead, and the green Turtle;
which last the Natives think sacred; for they call its Gods-fish, by reason of
that extraordinary virtue that is found therein, it being found a very great
Antidote against Poison, and for the Gonorhaea, the Yaws, and the French Pox,
there is not in nature a Food more effectual; she lives in the Water, and
without it, it swims like a Fish, and yet in the Sand lays Eggs like a Fowl;
whose Fish is Flesh, and admits of various tastes, as, of Veal, of Beef, but
the Fat is green, and eats like Marrow, and their Eggs undistinguishable from
those of a Hen, etc. And also there is Barracooto, and they are of two sorts,
and some about two foot in length, they have a long Beak or Snout filled full
of Teeth. The white-mouth'd Barracooto is the wholsomest Fish, but the
black-mouthed Fish his Teeth are venomous. Likewise there is the Great Garr,
which the Spaniards call Needle-fish, the Pilchard, the Anchovy, much smaller
than a Pilchard, the Hedg-hog-fish, the Coney-fish, the Dolphin, the Indian
Sturgeon, the Flying-fish, the Parrot-fish, the Amber-fish, the Albacore, the
Boneto, the Lobster or Craw-fish, the Sea-Souldier, the Crunk, the Horn-fish,
the Orney, the Shallop-fish, Cockles, the Sea-Snail, the Rock-Oyster, the
Mangrove-Oyster; the Sea-Egg is of two sorts, some black, and some gray; but
the gray Eggs are the Oysters, because resembling them in taste, and are eaten
raw, with Vinegar and Pepper, but better stewed with Wine and Shellots, etc.

Here is great plenty of Fowl; Their Fowl.
as, the Bill-bird, whose Bill or Beak shows as big as his Body; the
Blackbird, about the bigness of a Crow, whose flesh is nothing inferior to a
Pigeon; but the smaller Blackbird resembles ours in England, save only it has
a longer Bill. Then there is the Booby-bird, the blew-headed Parrot, the Macaw,
the Flamingo, Ducks, the Sea-gull, the Sea-mew, the Plover, the Turtle-Dove,
the Man of War-bird, the Bird of Paradise, or the King-fisher, the Pelican, the
Cockerrico, the Indians Name for the Tobago-Pleasants; the Carlew, the
Wood-Pigeon, etc.

Here are sundry sorts of Trees, Their Trees.
as, the Cedar, Green-Hart, Locust, of two several sorts, the one white, and
the other red, Mastick, Mohogony, Man-grove, White-wood, yellow Sanders, Bay,
Box, Brazil, Bully, Crocus, Cassia, Callabosh, Lignum vitae, Ebony, with
several others.

Commodities Commodities.
which the Country does or may produce, are, Cacao-Nut, Sugar, Tobacco, Indico,
Ginger, Sarsaparilia, Semper-vivum, Bees-Was, Vinillioes, Natural Balsam, Balm,
Silk-Grass, Green Tar, Soap-Earth, etc. with many curious Shells, Stones,
Markasites and Minerals found up and down the Island of Tobago, whose Virtue
and Worth is yet unknown.

DIRECTIONS For Improvement of the Island of TOBAGO.
SUppose a man that has an Hundred Pound Sterling, is minded to transport
himself and Family, consisting of Eleven in number, to this Island of Tobago
and suppose their Passage cost him fifty pound, and Manuals, with other things
requisite and necessary for Planting, as also Provision for the first Twelve
Months, together with the Charge of Houshold-stuffs, and all other Necessaries,
may stand him in forty seven pound ten shillings more; suppose also this man
takes a Lease of fifty Acres of Land for a Thousand Years at the rate of Twelve
pence an Acre annually, it amounts but to Two pound Ten shillings a Year
(except otherwise he purchase the Fee simple of the Proprietors) which
compleats the Hundred pound. This is the first Money laid out, nor need he be
at any more Charge for in twelve Months time, he will have Ground-provision
enough, and in all probability two Crops of Tobacco.

The next thing to consider of, is the Improvement Its Improvement.
of the said Land, which is as follows: After your arrival in the Island of
Tobago, the first six Months may be spent to clear fifteen Acres of Land, and
to put Provisns into the Ground; to build Conveniences to accommodate your
self and Family; to adapt and fit Ground for planting a Nursery of Cacao-Nuts;
as also a Bed sowed with Tobacco-seeds, and be sure to keep your Nursery clear
from Weeds: then, about a Months time after, you have sown your Tobacco-seed,
(provided the Season be good) you may then draw your Tobacco-Plants, and plant
them about some four foot distance one from another, regularly and in rows,
which said Tobacco, Tobago produces, is nothing inferior to Spanish Trinidado,
that lies about seven Leagues distance from the said Island of Tobago, who sell
their Trinidado-Tobacco at the rate of Two Shillings a Pound, which said
Tobacco the Spaniards transport from thence to Old Spain, and sell it there for
considerable advantage. Now among your Tobacco-Plants, you may plant your
Cacao, and transplant them, when about six Months old, into new Ground, at ten
or twelve foot distance, and be sure to keep them clear from Weeds, in which
latter six Months time, you may have on your cleared Ground two Crops of
Tobacco. Now admitting you make but Eight thousand Weight of Neat Tobacco on
the said Ground, yet in all probability (provided your People be healthy) it
may double the number to Sixteen thousand. But if it do not, and put the case
your Tobacco sell but for an eighth part of what the Spaniards sell for in
Trinidado, (which is but three Pence per Pound, sold here in our Island) yet
will this Crop yield you One hundred Pound sterling, which is your Money gained
the very first Year, and in six Months time all Charges being born.

Now suppose at the beginning of the second Year, the said sixteen Acres be all
cleared, and Provision enough put into the Ground, sufficient for double your
number of hands, you may rationally then expect four Crops in twelve Months
time, when as formerly you made two Crops in the last six Months; so that with
the Hundred Pounds you gained last Year, you may now purchase seven or eight
Slaves, or Servants, which may in all probability treble the first Year. But
put the case, it but only double, yet at the worst, it may yield you (and all
Charges born) Two hundred Pounds sterling.

Now we cannot otherwise conclude, (if things succeed well) but the third Year
will double the second by improvement, as is above expressed; and if so, your
Crop will amount to Four hundred Pounds sterling, and the fourth Year double
the third, by reason of the Cacao that was planted the first Year on the
fifteen Acres of Land, may produce to the value of Thirty Pounds sterling an
Acre, besides the increase of Tobacco, and clearing of more ground, together
with your increase of Servants ana Slaves, and planting of more Cacao-Trees,
which at least will arise to Eight hundred Pounds sterling the fourth Year; the
fifth Year, in all probability, doubles the fourth Year; the sixth Year you may
very well clear Six thousand Pounds sterling, and all Charges born, by reason
the Cacao, planted the first Year, is now come to perfection, and at its full
height of bearing; which in this Latitude may yield One hundred Pounds sterling
an Acre, viz. the first fifteen Acres which were planted the first Year; and
the second years Plants, planted the second Year, will yield you Sixty Pounds
sterling; and the third years Plants, as by the same Calculation, may yield you
Thirty Pounds sterling an Acre: So that by purchasing the more Servants and
Slaves, you may, if you please, decline so much planting of Tobacco, as
formerly you did.

The seventh Year you will have all your Land planted with Cacao, and that
increasing, you need not plant above ten or fiften Acres of Tobacco this Year
amongst your Cacao; but you may plant Provisions amongst them, for support and
maintenance of your self and Family. So that from that Increase of your seventh
Year's Crop, you may hope and expect, by a modest computation, to clear from
the said fifty Acres of Land, at least Five thousand Pounds sterling a Year.

And now we come to the Reasons for this great Improvement; The Reasons for
Improvement.
You must consider, that the Spaniards in Trinidado, etc. give among themselves
One hundred Pounds sterling, for a Negro-Slave, and yet the said Slave will not
stand his Master in one single Penny at the Year's end for his purchase; and
all the labor and service the Spaniard imploys him in the Year about, is only
in Cacao and Spanish-Tobacco, in this our Latitude.

Now pray consider, that we can have Negro-slaves brought and delivered to us
at Fifteen Pounds sterling a head, by reason we have an open Trade, and the
Spaniards allows not of a free Trade. Where note, the Spaniard pays Sixpence
or more for every thing he wants, when we have the same for a single Penny.
That Is one Reason.

The second Reason is, The Spaniard cannot have any Tunnage for Goods from Old
Spain to the West Indies, and home again, for less than Forty or Fifty Pounds
sterling per Tun; besides, the Duties run very high: And we can have, Freight
for Five or Six Pounds per Tun, and no Duties from us to a tree Port. When
therefore, to consider and compute the Charge on either side, we profit by what
we transport six to one; which makes the Spaniard generally so poor in the
Indies, and we generally to flourish so much the more.

The third Reason is, That in a Ship of Three hundred Tun, the Spaniards have
seldom less than two hundred Men belonging to her, and the Wages each Man comes
to at least Fifty Shilling sterling per Month, which, in the whole, amounts to
Five hundred Pounds a Month, barely for Wages; then you are to consider the
Monthly Provisions, to accommodate these Men, cannot come to less than One
hundred and fifty Pounds sterling; and Ten Months, at Six hundred and fifty
Pounds per Month, amounts to Six thousand and five hundred Pounds sterling for
Ten Months. Moreover, this Ship of Three hundred Tun, seldom carries less than
Forty Pieces of Ordnance, which with their Provisions, etc. by modest
computation, takes up no less room than One hundred and fifty Tun; so that the
Ship, in all probability, cannot bring home more than One hundred and fifty Tun
of Merchants Goods, and the Freight of these Goods comes to Forty Pounds
sterling a Tun, to pay Ware and Tare of the Ship and Men's Wages; so that for
the Ship's Ware and Tare, it comes barely but to One hundred and fifty Pounds
sterling clear.

Now admit an English Ship of Three hundred Tun, be bound for Jamaica, and
suppose the Freight of this Ship be at Six Pounds sterling per Tun, this Ship
shall make her Voyage better in Eight Months time than the Spaniard shall in
Ten Months; now the Freight of the English Ship comes to One thousand eight
hundred Pounds sterling, and the Wages and Victuals of the said Ship, at Sixty
Pounds per Month, comes to Four hundred and eighty Pounds sterling; so that you
see the Ship clears, for her Ware and Tare, the sum of One thousand three
hundred and twenty Pounds sterling. See here therefore the great difference.

The fourth and last reason is this; The King of Spain contracts with a body of
Merchants, to furnish the West Indies with Four thousand Negroes every Year,
and the Nigrilloes, or Merchants, there engage to pay the King one hundred
Pieces of Eight Custom for each Negro-slave brought unto them; which comes to
Four hundred thousand Pieces of Eight by the Year, which is paid to the said
King; the King therefore prohibits all Merchants and others, for bringing
Negroes to the West Indies; and each Piece of Eight is valued at Five Shillings
sterling in Barbados, but in the Leeward Islands it goes for six.

The Proposals lately made by Captain John Poyntz, for Himself and Company, to
all such People as are minded to Transport or Concern themselves in the Island
of Tobago.
WHereas his late Majesty, Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, has
given and granted unto James, Duke of Courland, his Heirs and Successors, the
said Island of Tobago, on condition that none shall inhabit the said Island,
save only the Subject of the King of England, and the Duke of Courland, their
Heirs and Successors, on the said condition, I have contracted with the said
Duke, that my self and Company settle One hundred and twenty thousand Acres of
Land in the said Island, and to have several great and large Privileges, some
of which are here inserted, viz.

Imprimis, That one hundred and twenty thousand Acres of Land, in the said
Island of Tobago, is given and granted to my self and Company, and our Heirs
for ever, and seven Years to be free from the payment of any Rent, and after
the expiration of seven Years, each for himself is to pay Twopence per Acre
every Year, to the Duke, his lawful Heirs and Successors.

Secondly, That my self and Company, and all the Inhabitant^, shall enjoy
Liberty of Conscience, without interruption, Roman Catholics only excepted.

Thirdly, That my self and Company, etc. are to be governed by a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assembly, to be yearly chosen by the majority of
Freeholders Votes, of the People in the Island, to make good and wholesome Laws
for the good Government and Defense of the said Island; and all Controversies
in the Promises to be decided by the majority of Voices.

Note, These are but Breviates and part of the Heads of the Grant from the Duke
of Courland, and ratified to my self and Company, whereby we hold and enjoy our
Land; for that end I do refer all People to the Grant, as more at large, as
also them that have been on the skirt or body of the said Island, to confirm
the truth of what is before spoken of the Products of the said Island.

Proposals for further Encouragement.
First, THose that are desirous to concern themselves in the said Island, shall
and may have as much Land as they themselves please, either by Lease or
Purchase, only they are to put upon every Fifteen Acres of Land, one White Man,
and so in proportion to the rest; and this to be done in three Years time.

Secondly, All Persons that are desirous to transport themselves to the said
Island, in the quality of Servants, shall have better Encouragement from my
self and Company than has been yet propounded by any of his Majesty's Subjects
in any Settlement in the American Plantations.

Thirdly, And, for a further encouragement, all those Persons and Planters that
are any way concerned in the Premises, shall have Credit given unto them from
Crop to Crop, as the Factory is stored, for what they shll stand in need of;
for which the said Company will erect a Bank or Factory of Credit in the said
Island, the Debtor allowing only two and a half per Cent.

Fourthly, All Merchants and others, that shall import any Negroes, or other
Merchandise, into the said Island, shall have their Goods and Debts insured,
and disposed of for two and a half per Cent. with Facto^age Storage, Wharfage,
etc. and exported again for two and a half per Cent. more. And all Tradesmen
and others, that contract any Debts against themselves, shall have Credit given
them out of the Bank or Factory, from Crop to Crop, for two and a half per
Cent. And the Proprietors to engage their whole Interest for the true
performance of the foresaid Premises.

Fifthly, All Merchants and others, that have Goods fit to accommodate the said
Island, and have not ready Money to purchase Land, nor to pay for their own or
servants Passage, such may Barter with Goods in lieu of Money: Always this
implies only such Persons as Contract with the Proprietors, or some of them,
before the first Shipping departs out of the River of Thames, to Ship off, as
above, their proportion of Goods or People, as is already sufficiently above
expressed.

FINIS.
ASTRONOMICAL TABLES,
SHOWING The Rising and Setting of the Sun; with the Length of the Days and
Nights in all the Principal English Plantations in the West Indies.
ALSO, Tables of the New and Full Moons in every Month, from the Year 1686, to
1700, in the Meridian of London, and from thence referred to the Meridians of
the Principal Plantations abovesaid.

The which Tables will serve as a constant Diary or Calendar, for the Use of
the English Inhabitants in those Islands.

ALSO, A Table by which, at any Time of the Day or Night here in England, you
may know what Hoar it is in any of those Islands.

AND How to make Sun-Dials fitting for all those Remote Parts.

A Table showing the Prime or Golden Number, the Dominical (or Sunday Letter,)
and the Moveable Feasts from the Year 1686, to the Year 1700.
Years of our Lord. Pr. or Go. Nu. Dom. or Sun. Let. Shrove Sunday. Easter Day.
Ascension Day. Whit-Sunday. Advent Sunday. 1686 15 C Feb. 14 Apr. 4 May 13 May
2^ No. 28 1687 16 B 6 Ma. 27 5 15 27 1688 17 A C 25 Ap. 15 24 Jun. 3 Dec. 2
1689 18 F 10 Ma. 31 9 May 19 1 1690 19 E Mar. 2 Ap. 20 29 Jun. 8 No. 30 1691 1
D Feb. 22 12 21 May 3 29 1692 2 C B 6 Ma. 27 5 15 27 1693 3 A 26 Ap. 16 25 Jun.
4 Dec. 3 1694 4 G 18 8 17 May 27 2 1695 5 F 3 Ma 24 2 12 1 1696 6 E D 22 Ap. 12
21 31 No. 29 1697 7 C 14 4 13 23 28 School 8 B Mar. 6 24 Jun. 2 Jun. 12 27 1699 9
A Feb. 19 9 May 28 May 18 Dec. 3

The Use of this Table.
TO find the Moveable Feasts for any Year, seek the Year in the first Row (or
Column) of the Table, and in the same Line you shall have your desire. --
Example; In the Year 1686, find 1686 in the first Column, and against it in the
same Line you have 15 for the Epact. C for the Dominical (or Sunday Letter.)
February 14 for Shrove Sunday. April 4 for Easter Day. May 13 for
Ascersion-day. May 23 for Whit-Sunday. November 28 for Advent-Sunday. And so
for any other Year, till 1700.

A Description of the following Tables.
1. IN the first Column of each Table toward the Left Hand, you have the Day
of the Month.

2. In the second, you have the Day of the Week noted with A, B, C, D, E, F G,
for the seven Days of the Week; and these Letters continue in this order, from
the First of ^anuary, beginning with A, to the Thirty First of December, ending
with A also -- And here it is to be noted, that which soever of these Letters
is Domical (or Sunday Letter) for any Year, all those Days in the Calendar,
which have that Letter standing against them, are Sundays for that Year. As for
Example: In the Year 1686 you found (by the former Table) that C was Dominical
(or Sunday Letter,) wherefore all the Days that have C standing against them,
were Sundays that Year; as in the Month of January, C stands against the 3, the
10, the 17, the 24, and the 31 Days, all which Days were Sundays -- Again, by
the former Table, you may find in the Year 1690, the Dominical Letter will be
E; wherefore, that Year, all the Days that have E standing against them, in any
Month, are Sundays; as in the Month of March, E stands against the 2, the 9,
the 16, the ^3, and the 30, all which D^ys will be Sundays in the Year 1690.
But if there be two Dominic^l Letters in one Year, (as in the Year 1688, 1692,
etc.) then the first of those two Lerters is Sunday Letter till the 25 of
February, and the other of them to the end of the Year.

3. The Third Colum contains the Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting
at London, etc.

4. The other part of each Page, is divided into five parts or spaces;

The 1 2 3 4 5 Shows the Rising and Setting- of the Sun, with the Length x The
Vof the Da us and Nights for) every fisth Day, accordi ngs 5 to the Titles, at
New England. Virginia. Carolina and Bermudas. Barbados. Jamaica.


5. On the other Page are Tables, showing the time of the New and Full Moon in
every Month of the Year, from 1686, to 1700, in the Meridian at London (in
Old-England.) By help whereof, and the little Table following, the time of the
New or Full Moon, in any of the Places mentioned in this Book, may be easily
attained.

h. m. If to the time of the New or Full Moon at Land. you add 4 40 You shall
have the time of the New or Full Moon, at New England. 5 12 Virginia. 5 45
Carolina. 5 4 Jamaica. 3 53 Barbados. 4 58 Maryland. 4 52 New-Jearsey. 4 56
Transylvania. 4 48 New York. 3 20 New Foundland.

Example. In the Month of January, 1687, I find that it is New Moon upon the
3d. Day, 56 m. after 7 at Night. Now to know what time it will be New Moon at
Virginia upon that Day, look in this Table, and against Virginia you will find
4 h. 40 m. which added to 7 h. 56 m. the Sum will be 12 h. 36 m. at which time
it will be New Moon at Virginia upon the 3d. of January, 1687.

d. h. m. New Moon at London. Jan. 03 07 56 at Night. Add to it for Virginia --
00 04 40 The Sum is 03 12 36 at Night.

JANVARY.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 A New Years d
At New England on the 1 7 25 4 35 09 10 14 50 2 B 6 7 23 4 37 09 14 14 46 3 C
Sun rise 4 8 11 7 18 4 42 09 24 14 36 4 D Sun set 3 57 16 7 13 4 47 09 34 14 26
5 E Day 8 h. 2 m. 21 7 9 4 51 09 42 14 18 6 F Twelfth-day 26 7 1 4 59 09 48 14
2 7 G At Virginia on the 1 7 11 4 49 09 38 14 22 8 A Lucian 6 7 7 4 43 39 26 14
14 9 B 11 7 4 4 40 09 20 14 8 10 C Sun rise 7 54 16 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 11 D Sun
set 4 8 21 6 53 5 7 10 14 13 46 12 E Day 8 h. 18 m. 26 6 50 5 10 10 20 13 40 13
F Hilary 14 G At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 7 1 4 59 9 58 14 2 15 A Sun
rise 7 46 6 6 58 5 2 0 4 13 56 16 B Sun set 4 15 11 6 55 5 5 10 10 13 50 17 C
Day 8 h. 34 m. 16 6 52 5 8 10 16 13 44 18 D Prisca 26 21 6 46 5 14 10 28 13 32
19 E 26 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 20 F Fabian At Barbados on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18
12 42 21 G Agnes 6 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 22 A Vincent 11 6 19 5 41 11 22 12 38
23 B Day 8 h. 54 m. 16 6 17 5 43 11 26 12 34 24 C Sun set 7 31 21 6 16 5 44 11
28 12 32 25 D Conv. S. Paul 26 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 26 E Sun set 7 27 At
Jamaica on the 1 6 28 5 32 11 4 12 56 27 F 6 6 26 5 34 11 8 12 52 28 G Day 9 h.
12 m. 11 6 23 5 37 11 14 12 46 29 A 16 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 30 B K. Cha. I.
Mar. 21 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 31 C 26 6 ^8 5 42 11 24 12 36

JANVARY.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of January; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred tot he Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon the 3 at 7 and 56 Night Full Moon the 18 at 0 and 27 Morn. 1688 New Moon
the 22 at 10 and 12 Night Full Moon the 7 at 1 and 12 Aftern 1689 New Moon the
11 at 10 and 10 Morn. Full Moon the 25 at 10 and 12 Morn. 1690 New Moon the 30
at 8 and 17 Morn. Full Moon the 15 at 3 and 38 Morn. 1691 New Moon the 19 at 10
and 8 Morn. Full Moon the 4 at 11 and 40 Morn. 1692 New Moon the 8 at 9 and 52
Morn. Full Moon the 23 at 2 and 3 Aftern. 1693 New Moon the 26 at 5 and 38
Morn. Full Moon the 12 at 4 and 0 Morn. 1694 New Moon the 15 at 1 and 14
Aftern. Full Moon the 31 at 3 and 34 Morn. 1695 New Moon the 5 at 3 and 5 Morn.
Full Moon the 20 at 5 and 41 Morn. 1696 New Moon the 24 at 5 and 36 Morn. Full
Moon the 9 at 6 and 36 Morn. 1697 New Moon the 12 at 9 and 0 Night Full Moon
the 27 at 1 and 53 Morn. School New Moon the 2 at 8 and 48 Morn. Full Moon the 16
at 7 and 7 Morn. 1699 New Moon the 21 at 4 and 0 Morn. Full Moon the 5 t 7 and
0 Night

FEBRVARY
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Day. Sun
Rises. h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 D At New England
on the 1 6 52 5 8 10 16 13 44 2 E Candlemas d. 6 6 48 5 12 10 24 13 36 3 F
Blase 11 6 38 5 22 10 44 13 16 4 G Sun rise 7 10 16 6 32 5 28 10 56 13 4 5 A
Agathy 21 6 24 5 36 11 12 12 48 6 B 26 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 7 C Sun set 4 56
At Virginia on the 1 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 8 D 6 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 9 E Day
10 h. 11 6 31 5 29 10 58 13 2 10 F Scholastica 16 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 11 G 21
6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 12 A Sun rise 6 54 26 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 13 B 14 c
Valentine At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 15 D 6 6 32 5
28 10 56 13 8 16 E Julian 11 6 26 5 34 11 8 12 52 17 F Sun set 5 16 16 6 21 5
39 11 18 12 42 18 G 21 6 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 19 A Sabine 26 6 13 5 47 11 34 12
26 20 B Day 10 h. 44 m. At Barbados on the 1 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 21 c 69
Martyrs 6 6 11 5 49 11 38 12 22 22 D 11 6 9 5 51 11 42 12 18 23 E Sun rise 6 31
16 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 24 F St. Matthias 21 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 25 G Sun set
5 33 26 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 26 a Day 11 h. 10 m. At Jamaica on the 1 6 15 6 45
11 30 12 30 27 B Augustine 6 6 14 6 45 11 32 12 28 28 c 11 6 13 6 47 11 34 12
26 16 6 11 6 49 11 38 12 22 21 6 8 6 52 11 44 12 16 26 6 6 6 54 11 48 12 12

FEBRVARY.
A Table showing the day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old England, in the Month of February; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon the 2 at 6 and 13 Morn. Full Moon the 17 at 7 and 26 Morn. 1688 New Moon
the 21 at 8 and 24 Morn. Full Moon the 6 at 7 and 4 Morn. 1689 New Moon the 9
at 11 and 21 Night Full Moon the 24 at 2 and 12 Morn. 1690 New Moon the 28 at
11 and 4 Night Full Moon the 13 at 8 and 29 Morn. 1691 New Moon the 28 at 4 and
28 Morn. Full Moon the 2 at 9 and 51 Night 1692 New Moon the 7 at 4 and 31
After. Full Moon the 21 at 11 and 48 Night 1693 New Moon the 24 at 10 and 50
Night Full Moon the 10 at 3 and 52 After. 1694 New Moon the 14 at 2 and 50
Morn. Full Moon 1695 New Moon the 3 at 1 and 52 After. Full Moon the 19 at 0
and 13 Morn. 1696 New Moon the 21 at 3 and 20 After. Full Moon the 8 at 2 and
10 Morn. 1697 New Moon the 11 at 9 and 34 Morn. Full Moon the 25 at 8 and 10
Night School New Moon the 1 at 2 and 18 Morn. Full Moon the 14 at 10 and 2 Night
1699 New Moon the 19 at 7 and 52 Night Full Moon the 4 at 2 and 49 Morn.

MARCH.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Rises h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 D David B. At
New England on the 1 6 12 5 42 11 24 12 24 2 E Chad 6 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 3 F
11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 4 G Sun rise 6 13 16 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 5 A Sun set 5 49
21 5 43 6 17 12 34 11 26 6 B 26 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 7 C Perpetua At Virginia
on the 1 6 9 5 51 11 42 12 18 8 D 6 6 3 5 57 11 54 12 6 9 E Day 11 h. 56 m. 11
6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 10 F Sol in Aries 16 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 11 G Sun rise 5 58
21 5 48 6 12 12 24 11 36 12 A Gregory 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 13 B At Carolina
and Bermulas on the 1 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 14 C Sun set 6 9 6 6 3 5 57 11 64 12
5 15 D 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 16 E 16 5 55 6 5 12 10 11 50 17 F Day 12 h. 30. m.
21 5 50 6 10 12 20 11 40 18 G Edward 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 19 A At Barbados
on the 6 3 5 57 11 54 12 6 20 B Sun rise 5 41 6 6 1 5 59 11 58 12 2 21 C 11 6 0
6 0 12 0 12 0 22 D 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 22 E Sun set 6 27 16 5 58 6 2 12 4 11
56 23 E Sun set 6 27 21 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 24 F At Jamaica on the 26 5 54 6 6
12 12 11 48 25 G Lady Day 1 6 4 5 51 11 48 12 8 27 B 6 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 28 C
Dorothy 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 29 D 16 5 53 6 2 12 4 11 56 30 E Day 13 h. 24 m.
21 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 50 31 F 26 5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46

MARCH.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of March; from Anno 1686. to 1700. And from thence
referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise
described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 4 and 3 After. the 19 at 0 and 17 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 21 at 5 and 15 Night the 21 at 2 and 0 Morn. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 11 at 10 and 0 Morn. the 26 at 4 and 4 Morn. 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 30 at 10 and 8 Morn. the 14 at 10 and 14 Night 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 19 at 7 and 52 Night the 4 at 8 and 25 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 7 at 10 and 30 Night the 22 at 8 and 53 Morn. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 26 at 4 and 2 Aftern the 12 at 1 and 32 Morn. 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 15 at 5 and 41 Aftern the 1 at 4 and 13 Aftern 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 5 at 1 and 21 Morn. the 20 at 2 and 50 Aftern 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 23 at 1 and 0 Morn. the 8 at 7 and 51 Night 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 at 5 and 14 Aftern the 27 at 1 and 23 Aftern School New Moon Full Moon
the 31 at 8 and 13 Night the 16 at 4 and 18 Aftern 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 21 at 8 and 54 Night the 5 at 7 and 14 Night T

APRIL.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Day^.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 G Theodore At
New England on the 1 5 28 6 32 13 4 10 56 2 A 6 5 22 6 38 13 16 10 44 3 B Sun
rise 5 10 11 5 16 6 44 13 28 10 32 4 C Sun set 6 52 16 5 9 6 48 13 36 10 18 5 D
Day 13 h. 48 m. 21 5 0 7 0 14 0 10 0 6 E 26 4 56 7 8 14 16 9 52 7 F Perpetua At
Virginia on the 1 5 36 6 24 12 48 11 12 8 G Sun rise 5 0 6 5 29 6 31 13 2 10 58
9 A Sun set 7 2 11 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 10 B Day 14 h. 8 m. 16 5 17 6 43 13 26
10 34 11 C Leo P. 21 5 13 6 47 13 34 10 26 12 D 26 5 7 6 53 13 46 10 14 13 E
Sun rise 4 50 14 F Sun set 7 11 At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 5 39 6 21 12
42 11 18 15 G Day 14h. 26 m. 6 5 34 6 26 12 52 11 8 16 A 11 5 28 6 32 13 4 10
56 17 B Cosmie 16 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 18 G Edward 21 5 20 6 40 13 20 10 40 19
D Sun ris 4 39 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 20 E Sun set 7 22 At Barbados on the 1
5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46 21 F Day 14h. 48m. 6 5 53 6 7 12 18 11 42 22 G 11 5 49 6
11 12 22 11 38 23 A S. George 16 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 24 B Sun rise 4 30 21 5
46 6 14 12 28 11 32 25 C S. Mark Evan. 26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 26 D Sun set 7
33 At Jamaica on the 1 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 27 E Anestasius 6 5 48 6 12 12 24
11 36 28 F 11 5 46 6 14 12 28 11 32 29 G Day 15h. 16 m. 16 5 44 6 16 12 32 11
28 30 A 21 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 26 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22

APRIL.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of April; from Anno 1686. to 1700. And from thence
referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise
described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 2 at 2 and 8 Morn. the 17 at 2 and 18 Night. 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 20 at 3 and 27 After. the 5 at 6 and 4 Night. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 9 at 6 and 3 Night the 24 at 11 and 0 Foren 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 28 at 7 and 0 Night the 14 at 9 and 34 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 18 at 10 and 40 Morn. the 2 at 7 and 22 Night 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 6 at 3 and 6 After. the 20 at 5 and 49 After. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 25 at 8 and 20 Night the 9 at 9 and 44 Morn. 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 9 and 6 Night the 29 at 10 and 13 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 1 and 41 After. the 19 at 2 and 0 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 21 at 11 and 0 Foren the 7 at 11 and 10 Foren 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 11 at 1 and 32 Morn. the 26 at 5 and 27 Morn. School New Moon Full Moon
the 30 at 2 and 14 Morn. the 15 at 6 and 19 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 19 at 6 and 46 Night the 4 at 8 and 50 Morn.

MAY.
M. Days W. Days. The fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days. Sun
Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 B S. Phil. and
Jac. At New England on the 1 4 51 7 9 14 18 9 42 2 6 4 46 7 14 14 28 9 32 3 D
Sun rise 4 15 11 4 42 7 18 14 36 9 2^ 4 E ^un set 7 46 16 4 36 7 12 14 24 9 36
5 F Day 15 h. 36 m. 21 4 33 7 6 14 12 9 24 6 G Ioh. Po. Lat. 26 4 30 7 30 15 0
9 0 7 A At Virginia on the 1 5 3 6 57 13 54 10 6 8 B Sun rise 4 8 6 5 0 7 0 14
0 10 0 9 ^ Sun set 7 53 11 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 10 D Day 15 h. 48 m 16 4 53 7 7
14 14 9 46 11 E Sun in Gem. 21 4 49 7 11 14 22 9 38 12 F 26 4 45 7 15 14 30 9
30 13 G Sun rise 4 2 14 A Sun set 8 0 At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 5 11 6
49 13 38 10 22 15 B Day 16 h. 2 m. 6 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 16 C 11 5 5 6 55 16
50 10 10 17 D Dunstan 16 5 2 6 58 13 56 10 4 18 E Sun rise 3 56 21 4 59 7 1 14
2 9 58 19 F 26 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 20 G Ellen Q. At Barbados on the 1 5 43 6 17
12 34 11 26 21 A Julian 6 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 22 B 11 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22
23 C Sun set 8 10 16 5 40 6 20 12 40 11 20 24 D Adelm B. 21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11
18 25 E 26 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 26 F Day 16 h. 26 m. At Jamaica on the 1 5 40
6 20 12 40 11 20 27 G Sun rise 3 46 6 5 39 6 21 12 41 11 18 28 A German 11 5 38
6 22 12 44 11 16 29 B 16 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 30 C Sun set 8 16 21 5 35 6 25
12 50 11 10 31 D Day 16 h. 34 m. 26 5 35 6 25 12 50 11 10

MAY.
A Table showing the Day, Hour and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of May; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence
referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise
described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon the 1 at 0 and 41 Noon Full Moon the 17 at 2 and 4 Morn. 1688 New Moon the
19 at 4 and 10 After. Full Moon the 5 at 9 and 36 Morn. 1689 New Moon the 9 at
1 and 34 After. Full Moon the 24 at 2 and 19 Morn. 1690 New Moon the 28 at 2
and 31 Morn. Full Moon the 13 at 3 and 19 Morn. 1691 New Moon the 17 at 6 and
19 Night Full Moon the 31 at 8 and 0 Night 1692 New Moon the 6 at 4 and 48
After. Full Moon the 20 at 3 and 40 Morn. 1693 New Moon the 24 at 11 and 7
Night Full Moon the 9 at 5 and 37 After. 1694 New Moon 14 day 41 min. after
Mid- night. Full Moon the 28 at 5 and 56 After. 1695 New Moon the 3 at 3 and 3
Morn. Full Moon the 18 at 11 and 8 Fore. 1696 New Moon the 20 at 9 and 52 Night
Full Moon the 6 at 11 and 45 Night 1697 New Moon the 10 at 9 and 39 Fore. Full
Moon the 25 at 7 and 13 Night School New Moon the 29 at 9 and 10 Morn. Full Moon
the 14 at 9 and 55 Night 1699 New Moon the 19 at 2 and 43 Morn. Full Moon the 3
at 11 and 13 Night

JUNE.
M. Days W. Days. The fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 E Sun rise 3
42 At New England on the 1 4 28 7 32 15 4 8 56 2 F 6 4 27 7 33 15 6 8 54 3 G
Erasmus 11 4 26 7 34 15 8 8 52 4 A 16 4 26 7 34 15 8 8 52 5 B Sun set 8 19 21 4
27 7 33 15 6 8 54 6 C Claudius 26 4 29 7 31 15 2 8 58 7 D At Virginia on the 1
4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 8 E Day 16 h. 38 m. 6 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 9 F 1^ 4 45 7
15 14 30 9 30 10 G Margaret 16 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 11 A Barnabas Ap 21 4 45 7
15 14 30 9 30 12 B Sun in Canc. 26 4 45 7 15 14 30 9 30 13 C 14 D Sun rise 3 41
At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 15 E Vitus 6 4 56 7 4 14 8
9 52 16 F 11 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 17 G Sun set 8 19 16 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 18 A
Marcelline 21 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 19 B 26 4 56 7 4 14 8 9 52 20 C Day 16 h. 36
m. At Barbados on the 1 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 21 D 6 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 22
E Albany 11 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 23 F 16 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 24 G St. John
Bapt. 21 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 25 A 26 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 26 B Sun rise 3 46
At ^amaica on the 1 5 33 6 27 12 54 11 6 27 C Sun set 8 13 6 5 32 6 28 12 56 11
4 28 D 11 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2 29 E St. Peter Ap. 16 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2 30 F
Day 16 h. 20 m. 21 5 31 6 29 12 58 11 2 26 5 32 6 28 12 56 11 ^

JUNE.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of June; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence
referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise
described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon the 29 at 1 and 29 Aftern Full Moon the 15 at 10 and 30 Foren. 1688 New
Moon the 17 at 8 and 5 Night Full Moon the 3 at 9 and 56 Night 1689 New Moon
the 7 at 10 and 8 Foren. Full Moon the 22 at 4 and 18 Aftern 1690 New Moon the
26 at 9 and 29 Morn. Full Moon the 11 at 4 and 13 Aftern 1691 New Moon the 16
at 2 and 38 Morn. Full Moon the 30 at 10 and 26 Foren. 1692 New Moon the 4 at 4
and 28 Aftern Full Moon the 18 at 2 and 22 Aftern 1693 New Moon the 23 at 11
and 56 Foren. Full Moon the 8 at 1 and 36 Morn. 1694 New Moon the 12 at 3 and
22 Aftern Full Moon the 26 at 11 and 52 Night 1695 New Moon the 1 at 4 and 56
Aftern Full Moon the 16 at 6 and 17 Night 1696 New Moon the 1, 9 at 10 and 32
Morn. Full Moon the 5 at 9 and 48 Morn. 1697 New Moon the 8 at 6 and 36 Night
Full Moon the 24 at 7 and 0 Morn. School New Moon the 27 at 5 and 0 Aftern Full
Moon the 13 at 12 and 40 Aftern 1699 New Moon the 17 at 9 and 32 Morn. Full
Moon the 2 at 0 and 12 Aftern

JVLY.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Day. Sun
Rises. h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 G At New England
on the 1 4 32 7 28 14 56 9 4 2 A Visit. Mary 6 4 36 7 34 14 48 9 12 3 B 11 4 40
7 20 14 40 9 20 4 C 16 4 45 7 10 14 30 9 30 5 D Anselm 21 4 50 7 10 14 20 9 40
6 E 26 4 55 7 5 14 10 9 50 7 F Sun rise 3 57 At Virginia on the 1 4 49 7 11 14
22 9 38 8 G Sun set 8 2 6 4 53 7 7 14 14 9 46 9 A Day 16 h. 2 m. 11 4 56 7 4 14
8 9 52 10 B 7 Brethren 16 5 0 7 0 14 0 10 0 11 C 21 5 3 6 57 13 54 10 6 12 D
Sun rise 4 3 26 5 7 6 53 13 46 10 14 13 E Sun in Leo At Carolina and Bermudas
on the 1 5 59 7 1 14 2 9 58 14 F Sun set 7 54 6 5 2 6 58 13 56 10 4 15 G S.
Swythin 11 5 5 6 55 13 50 10 10 16 A Day 15 h. 44 m. 16 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 17
B 21 5 11 6 49 13 38 10 22 18 C Sun rise 4 11 26 5 14 6 46 13 32 10 28 19 D Sun
set 7 48 20 E Margaret At Barbados on the 1 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 21 F 6 5 40
6 20 12 40 11 20 22 G Mary Magd. 11 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22 23 A Day 15 h. 24 m.
16 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 24 ^ 21 5 43 6 17 12 34 11 26 25 C (...). James. Ap.
26 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 26 ^ At Jamaica on the 1 5 33 6 27 12 54 11 6 27 ^
Martha 6 5 35 6 25 12 50 11 10 28 F Sun rise 4 27 11 5 37 6 23 12 46 11 14 ^9 ^
un set 7 32 16 5 38 6 22 12 44 11 16 30 A Day 15 h. 21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11 18 ^1
B 26 5 41 6 19 12 38 11 22

JVLY.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of July; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from thence
referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this Treatise
described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 29 at 4 and 4 Morn. the 14 at 6 and 24 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 6 and 24 Night the 14 at 6 and 24 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 17 at 7 and 47 Night the 3 at 8 and 38 Morn. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 6 at 5 and 28 After. the 22 at 4 and 58 Morn. 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 25 at and 42 After. the 11 at 9 and 28 Foren. 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 15 ^t 9 and 49 Morn. the 30 at 1 and 29 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 4 and 25 Morn. the 18 at 3 and 9 Morn. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 22 at 11 and 7 Night the 7 at 10 and 40 Foren 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 at 6 and 6 Night the 26 at 8 and 50 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 30 at 10 and 52 Night the 16 at 1 and 10 Foren 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 18 at 11 and 52 Night the 4 at 6 and 56 Night 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 8 at 4 and 58 Morn. the 23 at 5 and 1 After. School New Moon Full Moon
the 27 at 1 and 51 Morn. the 13 at 2 and 20 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 16 at 4 and 3 After. the 31 at 7 and 15 Night.

AUGUST.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feats, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days. Sun
Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h. m. 1 C Lammas day At
New England on the 1 5 1 6 59 13 58 10 2 2 D Stephen 6 5 8 6 52 13 44 10 16 3 E
Sun rise 4 38 11 5 15 6 45 13 30 10 30 4 F Sun set 7 20 16 5 21 6 39 13 18 10
42 5 G Day 14 h. 34 m. 21 5 29 6 31 13 2 10 58 6 A Trans. Christ 26 5 34 6 26
12 52 11 8 7 B At Virginia on the 1 5 13 6 47 13 34 10 26 8 C 6 5 17 6 43 13 26
10 34 9 D Sun rise 4 48 11 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 10 E Sun set 7 10 16 5 29 6 31
13 2 10 58 11 F Day 14 h. 16 m. 21 5 36 6 24 2 48 11 2 12 G 26 5 39 6 21 12 42
11 18 13 A Sun in Virgo At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 5 20 6 40 13 20 10 40
14 B Sun rise 4 58 6 5 23 6 37 13 14 10 46 15 C Sun set 7 0 11 5 28 6 32 13 4
10 56 16 D Day 13 h. 56 m. 16 5 34 6 26 12 52 11 8 17 E 21 5 39 6 21 12 42 11
28 18 F Helen 26 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 19 G 20 A Sun rise 5 10 At Barbados on
the 1 5 46 6 14 12 28 11 32 21 B Sun set 6 48 6 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 22 C Day
13 h. 32 m. 11 5 49 6 11 12 22 11 38 23 D 16 5 51 6 9 12 18 11 42 24 E S.
Barthol. Ap. 21 5 53 6 7 12 14 11 46 25 F 26 5 54 6 6 12 12 11 48 26 G Sun rise
5 22 At Jamaica on the 1 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 27 A Sun set 8 36 6 5 45 6 15 12
30 11 30 28 B Augustine 11 5 47 6 13 12 26 11 34 29 C 16 5 49 6 11 12 22 11 38
30 D Day 13 h. 21 5 23 6 7 12 14 11 46 31 E Adr^an 26 5 55 5 5 12 10 11 50

AUGUST.
A Table showing the Day, Hour and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of August; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Bardadoes, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 27 at 8 and 0 Night the 13 at 3 and 11 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 15 at 9 and 10 Night the 1 at 5 and 40 After. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 5 at 3 and 21 Morn. the 20 at 4 and 17 After. 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 24 at 1 and 21 Morn. the 9 at 11 and 45 Night 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 13 at 4 and 50 After. the 25 at 5 and 16 After. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
New Moon
the 1 at 11 and 48 Night the 16 at 5 and 55 After. the 3 at 1 and 45 After.
1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 21 at 9 and 26 Morn. the 5 at 9 and 50 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 10 at 7 and 27 Night the 24 at 6 and 30 Night 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 29 at 2 and 13 After. the 14 at 8 and 33 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 17 at 3 and 10 After. the 3 at 1 and 31 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 6 at 5 and 27 After. the 22 at 1 and 54 Morn. School New Moon Full Moon
the 25 at 0 and 52 After. the 11 at 2 and 25 After. 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 13 at 0 and 29 Morn. the 30 at 10 and 22 Morn.

SEPTEMBER.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Nights long h. m. 1 F Giles Ab.
At New England on the 1 5 44 6 16 12 32 11 28 2 G Sun rise 5 37 6 5 50 6 10 12
20 11 40 3 A Sun set 6 21 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 4 B 16 6 7 5 53 11 46 12 14 5 C
Day 13 h. 34 m. 21 6 15 5 45 11 30 12 30 6 D Magnus 26 6 20 5 40 11 20 12 40 7
E At Virginia on the 1 5 48 6 12 12 24 11 36 8 F Not. V. Mary 6 5 54 6 6 12 12
11 48 9 G 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 10 A Nicholas 16 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 11 B 21 6
9 5 51 11 42 12 18 12 C Day 12 h. 26 6 14 5 46 11 32 12 28 13 D Sun in Libra At
Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 5 50 6 10 12 20 5 40 14 E 6 5 55 6 5 12 10 5 55
15 F 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 6 0 16 G Sun rise 6 6 16 6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 17 A 21 6 8
5 52 11 44 12 16 18 B Sun set 5 49 26 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 19 C 20 D At
Barbados 1 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 21 E St. Matthew 6 5 58 6 2 12 4 11 56 22 F Day
11 h. 22 m. 11 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 23 G 16 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 24 A Samuel 21 6 3
5 57 11 54 12 6 25 B 26 6 5 5 55 11 60 12 10 26 C Sun rise 6 27 At Jamaica on
the 1 5 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 27 D Cos. and Dam. 6 5 58 6 2 12 4 11 56 28 E 11 5 59
6 1 12 2 11 58 29 F Sun set 5 27 16 6 2 5 58 11 56 12 4 30 G Day 10 h. 50 m. 21
6 5 5 55 11 50 12 10 26 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12

SEPTEMBER.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of September. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 26 at 0 and 29 Aftern the 11 at 9 and 30 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 0 and 49 Aftern the 29 at 11 and 0 Foren. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 3 and 39 Aftern the 19 at 5 and 46 Morn. 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 22 at 0 and 32 Aftern the 8 at 1 and 42 Aftern 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 at 1 and 13 Morn. the 27 at 9 and 8 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 30 at 2 and 24 Morn. the 15 at 10 and 26 Foren. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 19 at 6 and 57 Night the 4 at 11 and 34 Foren. 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 9 at 8 and 10 Morn. the 23 at 7 and 8 Morn. 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 28 at 4 and 55 Morn. the 12 at 5 and 30 Aftern 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 16 at 7 and 46 Morn. the 30 at 5 and 52 Aftern 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 5 at 8 and 17 Morn. the 20 at 10 and 10 Foren. School New Moon Full Moon
the 24 at 2 and 29 Morn. the 10 at 1 and 30 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 13 at 10 and 29 Morn. the 29 at 2 and 10 Morn.

OCTOBER.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Nights long h. m. 1 A At
New England on the 1 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 2 B Sun rise 6 46 6 6 34 5 26 10 52
13 8 3 C 11 6 40 5 20 10 40 13 20 4 D Francis 16 6 45 5 15 10 30 13 30 5 E 21 6
53 5 7 10 14 13 46 6 F Faith 26 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 7 G Sun set 5 10 At Virginia
on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 8 A Victor 6 6 27 5 33 11 6 12 54 9 B 11 6 34 5
26 10 52 13 8 10 C Day 10 h. 8 m. 16 6 40 5 20 10 40 13 20 11 D Trans. Ed. 21 6
43 5 17 10 43 13 26 12 E 26 6 50 5 10 10 50 13 40 13 F Sun in Scorpio 14 G Sun
rise 7 4 At Carolina and Bermudas on the 1 6 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 15 A Sun set 4
54 6 6 24 5 36 11 12 12 48 16 B 11 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58 17 C Florence 16 6 34 5
26 10 52 13 8 18 D S. Luke. Evan. 21 6 37 5 23 10 46 13 14 19 E Day 9h. 32 m.
26 6 43 5 17 10 34 13 26 20 F At Barbados on the 1 6 6 5 54 11 48 12 12 21 G
Vrsula 6 6 8 5 52 14 44 12 16 22 A 11 6 10 5 50 11 40 12 20 23 B Sun rise 7 25
16 6 12 5 48 11 36 12 24 24 C 21 6 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 25 D Sun set 4 35 26 6
15 5 45 11 30 12 30 26 E At Jamaica on the 1 6 8 5 52 11 44 12 16 27 F Day 9h.
6 m. 6 6 11 5 49 11 38 12 22 28 G S. Sim. and Jud. 1 16 13 5 47 11 34 12 26 29
A 16 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 30 B Sun rise 7 34 2 16 18 5 42 11 24 12 36 31 C 26
6 19 5 41 11 22 12 38

OCTOBER.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of October; from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 25 at 10 and 50 Night the 10 at 6 and 49 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 6 and 40 Morn. the 28 at 8 and 12 Night 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 6 and 55 Morn. the 18 at 0 and 40 Aftern 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 22 at 1 and 10 Morn. the 8 at 2 and 26 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 11 at 1 and 4 Aftern the 26 at 12 and 29 Night 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 29 at 0 and 36 Aftern. the 15 at 3 and 52 Morn. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 19 at 4 and 17 Morn. the 4 at 3 and 41 Morn. 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 8 at 7 and 32 Night the 22 at 10 and 34 Night 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 27 at 6 and 57 Night the 12 at 4 and 45 Morn. 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 15 at 11 and 36 Night the 30 at 4 and 30 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 19 at 7 and 44 Night the 19 at 7 and 44 Night School New Moon Full Moon
the 23 at 7 and 24 Night the 9 at 0 and 2 Aftern 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 at 10 and 41 Night the 28 at 0 and 26 Aftern.

NOVEMBER.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h m. 1 D All Saints At
New England on the 1 7 8 4 52 9 44 14 16 2 E All Souls 6 7 13 4 47 9 34 14 26 3
F 11 7 18 4 42 9 24 14 36 4 G Sun rise 7 42 16 7 22 4 38 9 16 14 44 5 A Powder
Treas. 21 7 25 4 35 9 10 14 50 6 B 26 7 29 4 31 9 2 14 58 7 C Sun set 4 13 At
Virginia on the 1 6 57 5 3 10 6 13 54 8 D 6 7 0 5 0 10 0 14 0 9 E Day 8h. 18m.
11 7 4 4 56 9 52 14 8 10 F 16 7 7 4 53 9 46 14 14 11 G Sun rise 7 54 21 7 11 4
49 9 38 14 22 12 A Sun in Sagit. 26 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 13 ^ At Carolina and
Bermudas on the 14 C Sun set 4 2 1 6 49 5 11 10 22 13 38 15 D Leopold 6 6 52 5
8 10 16 13 44 16 E 11 6 55 5 5 10 10 13 50 17 F Day 7h. 54m. 16 5 58 5 2 10 4
13 50 18 G 21 7 1 4 59 9 58 14 2 19 A Sun rise 8 5 26 7 4 4 56 9 52 14 8 20 B
Edmund R. At Barbados on the 1 6 17 5 43 11 26 12 34 21 C 6 6 18 5 42 11 24 12
36 22 D Cicely V. 11 6 19 5 41 11 25 12 38 23 E S^^ set 3 50 16 6 20 5 40 11 20
12 40 24 F 21 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 25 G Day 7h. 36m. 26 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44
26 A Conrade At Jamaica on the 1 6 21 5 39 11 18 12 42 27 B 6 6 23 5 37 11 14
12 40 28 C Sun rise 8 14 11 6 25 5 35 11 10 12 50 29 D Sun set 3 45 16 6 27 5
33 11 6 12 54 30 E S. Andrew Ap. 21 6 28 5 32 11 4 12 56 26 6 29 5 31 11 2 12
58

NOVEMBER.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of November. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 24 at 8 and 38 Night the 9 at 6 and 26 Morn. 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 ^t 12 and 54 Night the 27 at 9 and 5 Morn. 1689 New Moon Full Moon
the 1 at 12 and 35 Night the 16 at 10 and 30 Night 1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 20 at 7 and 34 Night the 6 at 0 and 5 After. 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 9 at 12 and 15 Night the 25 at 2 and 30 After. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 27 at 11 and 48 Night the 13 at 9 and 46 Night 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 17 at 2 and 9 After. the 2 at 9 and 16 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 7 at 6 and 20 Morn. the 21 at 4 and 42 After. 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 26 at 4 and 7 Morn. the 10 at 7 and 0 Nigh 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 5 and 12 After. the 25 at 5 and 22 After. 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 7 and 46 Night the 18 at 5 and 51 Morn. School New Moon Full Moon
the 22 at 2 and 10 After. the 7 at 10 and 0 Night 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 11 at 2 and 43 After. the 26 at 12 and 3 Nigh^

DECEMBER.
M. Days. W. Days. The Fixed Feasts, with the Suns Rising and Setting. Days.
Sun Rises h. m. Sun Sets h. m. Day long h. m. Night long h m. 1 F At
New England on the 1 7 31 4 29 8 58 15 2 2 G Sun rise 8 16 6 7 33 4 27 8 54 15
6 3 A Lucius 11 7 34 4 26 8 52 15 8 4 B 16 7 33 4 27 8 54 15 6 5 C Sun set 3 43
21 7 30 4 30 9 0 15 0 6 D Nicholas 26 7 28 4 32 9 4 14 56 7 E At Virginia on
the 1 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 8 F Cencept. Ma. 6 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 9 G 11 7 15
4 45 9 30 14 30 10 A Day 7h. 22m. 16 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 11 B Sun in Capric.
21 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 12 C 26 7 15 4 45 9 30 14 30 13 D Lucy Virg. At
Carolina and Bermudas on the 14 E 1 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 15 F 6 7 4 6 56 9 52 14
8 16 G O Sapientia 11 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 17 A 16 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 18 B Sun
rise 8 18 21 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 19 C Sun set 3 42 26 7 4 6 56 9 52 14 8 20 D At
Barbados on the 1 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 21 E St Tho. Ap. 6 6 22 5 38 11 16 12
44 22 F 11 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 23 G Day 7h. 30m. 16 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 24
A 21 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 25 B Christ Not. 26 6 22 5 38 11 16 12 44 26 C St.
Stephen At Jamaica on the 1 6 30 5 30 11 0 13 0 27 D St. John Ev. 6 6 30 5 30
11 0 13 0 28 E Innocents 11 6 2^ 5 31 11 2 12 58 29 F 16 6 29 5 31 11 ^ 12 58
30 G Sun rise 8 10 21 6 29 5 31 11 2 12 58 31 A Silvester 26 6 29 5 31 11 2 12
58

DECEMBER.
A Table showing the Day, Hour, and Minute of the New and Full Moons at London,
in Old-England, in the Month of December. from Anno 1686, to 1700. And from
thence referred to the Meridians of all the English Plantations in this
Treatise described. Viz.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
Jamaica, Barbados, Bermudas and St. Christophers, etc. Day Hour Min. 1687 New
Moon Full Moon
the 24 at 10 and 30 Foren the 8 at 8 and 31 Night 1688 New Moon Full Moon
the 12 at 6 and 58 Night the 26 at 7 and 42 Night 1689 New Moon Full Moon New
Moon
the 1 at ^ and 4 After. the 16 at 10 and 2 Foren. the 31 at 3 and 2 After.
1690 New Moon Full Moon
the 20 at 2 and 42 After. the 6 at 1 and 11 Morn. 1691 New Moon Full Moon
the 9 at 1 and 21 After. the 25 at 3 and 9 Morn. 1692 New Moon Full Moon
the 27 at 1 and 35 After. the 13 at 1 and 50 After. 1693 New Moon Full Moon
the 16 at 11 and 17 Night the 2 at 5 and 16 Night 1694 New Moon Full Moon
the 6 at 4 and 43 After. the 21 at 0 and 8 After. 1695 New Moon Full Moon
the 25 at 6 and 11 Night the 10 at 12 and 0 Noon 1696 New Moon Full Moon
the 14 at 8 and 4 Morn. the 28 at 8 and 49 Morn. 1697 New Moon Full Moon
the 3 at 2 and 0 After. the 17 at 5 and 31 After. School New Moon Full Moon
the 22 at 9 and 37 Morn. the 7 at 7 and 54 Morn. 1699 New Moon Full Moon
the 11 at 8 and 51 Morn. the 26 at 10 and 58 Morn.

How these Islands and Plantations are seated upon the Globe of the Earth; and
of other things relating thereunto: And,
I. Of Virginia, at James Town.
IT is situate in 37 degrees. 15 min. of North Latitude. The Sun rises there upon
their longest Day at 45 min. after 4 in the Morning; and sets 15 min. after 7
at Night.

Their longest Day is 14hou. 30 min.

Their shortest Day is 9 hou. 30 min.

The Sun rises upon their longest Day 30 degrees. 4 min. distant from the East
toward the North, and sets as many degrees. from the West Northwards.

The greatest Altitude that the Sun has at Noon, is 76 degrees. 15 min; and the
lealt Altitude at Noon, 29 degrees. 15 min.

It bears from London N. N. W.

It is distant from thence 3420 miles.

Its length from N. to S. is 116 miles; and its breadth from E. to W. 80.

It differs in Longitude from London Westward 75 degrees. 40 min. or (in Time) 5
hou. 12 min.

II. Of Boston, in New England.
It lies in 42 degrees. 32 min. of North Latitude.

It differs in Longitude West ward 68 degrees. 30 min. or (in Time 4 hou. 40 min.

The Sun rises there, upon their longest day, at 28 min. after 4 inthe
morning; and sets 32 min. after 7 at Night.

The length of their longest Day, is 15 hou. 4 min.

The length of their shortest Day 8 hou. 56 min.

The Sun rises upon their longest day 32 degrees. 45 min. distant from the East
Northward; and sets as many degrees. from the West toward the North.

The greatest Altitude that the Sun has at Noon on their longest day, is 71
degrees. and the least Meridian Altitude that they have, is 24 degrees.

It bears from London N. W. by W.

It is distant from London 47 degrees. or 2820 miles.

The length of New England from N. to S. is unknown; and its breadth E. and W.
from Maschussets Bay, to Hudsons River, is 158 miles.

III. Of Port Royal, in Jamaica.
It is situate in 18 degrees. 51 min. of Northern Latitude.

It differs in Longitude from London Westward 75 degrees. 30 min. or (in Time) 5
hou. 4 min.

The Sun rises there upon the longest day ( viz. June 11) at 26 min. ufter 5
in the Morning; and sets 34 min. after 6 at Night.

The length of their longest day is 13 hou. 8 min.

The length of their shortest day is 10 hou. 52 min.

The Suns Amplitude or place of Rising upon the longest day, is 24 degrees. 53 min.
from the East Northward, and his setting as many degrees. from the West Northward.

Their Meridian Altitude upon their longest day, is 85 degrees 21 min. from the
North part of the Horizon; and 94 degrees. 39 min. from the South part thereof.

The Sun is in their Zenith, that is, it passes just over their heads, upon
the Fifth of May, and the Fifteenth of July.

It bears from London W. by N.

It is distant from London 70 degrees. or 4200 miles.

Its length is 150 miles, and breadth above 60.

IV. Of Barbados.
It is situate in 13 degrees. 10 min. of North Latitude.

It differs in Longitude from Lond^n West ward 58 degrees. 25 min. or (in Time) 3
hou. 53 min.

The sun rises upon their longest day at 37 min. after 5 in the morning; and
sets 23 min. after 6 at night.

The length of their longest day is 12 hou. 46 min.

The length of their shortest day is 11 hou. 14 min.

The Sun rises 24 degrees. from the East Northwards, and sets as many from the
West; toward the North.

The Meridian upon their longest day, is 100 degrees. 20 min. from the South part
of the Horizon; and 79 degrees. 56 min. from the North part thereof.

The Sun is in their Zenith, or passes just over their heads, upon the Fourth
of May, and the Eighteenth of July.

It beats from London W. by S.

It is distant from London 61 degrees. or 3660 miles.

Its length from N. to S. is 24 miles.

Its breadth from E. to W. is 5 Leagues, or 15 Miles.

V. Of Charles Town, in Carolina.
It is situate in 33 degrees. 10 min. of North Latitude.

It differs in Longitude from London Westward 78 degrees. 30 min. or (in Time) 5
hou. and 3 quarters.

The Sun rises, upon their longest day, 50 min. after 4 in the morning; and
sets 10 min. after 7 at night.

The length of their longest day is 14 hou. 20 min.

The length of their shortest day is 9 hou. 40 min.

The Sun rises upon their longest: day 28 degrees. 27 min. from the East Northward;
and sets as many from the West toward t he North also.

The Meridian Altitude, upon the longest day, is 80 degrees. 20 min. and upon the
shortest day 33 degrees. 20 min.

It bears from London W. N. W.

It is distant from London 60 degrees. or 3600 miles.

Its length is from N. to S. 540 miles, and its breadth from E. to W. 230 miles.

VI. Of Bermudas.
It is situate in 32 degrees 25 min. of North Latitude.

It differs in Longitude from London 63 degrees. 30 min. or (in Time) 4 hou. 14 min.

Upon the longest day there, the Sun rises 4 min. before 5 in the morning; and
sets 4 min after 7 at. night.

The length of their longest day, is 14 hou. 8 min.

The length of their shortest day, is 9 hou. 52 min.

The Amplitude of the Suns rising, upon their longest day, is 28 degrees. 11 min.
from the East toward the North; and his setting, as many from the West
Northwards; And, on the shortest day, it rises and sets as much from the East
and West Southwards, as, on the longest day, it does Northward.

It bears from London W. by. N.

It is distant from London 49 degrees. or 2940 miles.

Its length is 17 miles.

Its breadth not above 3 miles in the breadest place.

A Table, by which (knowing what Hour of the Day it is at London) you may know
what Hour of the Day or Night it is any of these Plantations.
James Town in Virginia. Boston in New England. Port Royal in Jamaica. In
Barbados Charles Town in Carolina. In Bermudas H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. H.
M. M. XII Noon 6 Morning 48 7 Morning 20 6 Morning 56 8 Morning 7 6 Morning 16
7 Morning 46 When it is at London I of the Clock in the Mor. it is at 6 48 8 20
7 56 9 7 7 16 8 46 II 8 48 9 20 8 56 10 7 8 16 9 46 III 9 48 10 20 9 56 11 7 9
16 10 46 IV 10 48 11 20 10 56 XII Noon 10 16 11 46 V 11 48 XII Noon 11 56 1
Afternoon 7 11 16 XII Noon VI XII Noon 1 Afternoon 20 XII Noon 2 7 XII Noon 1
Afternoon 46 VII 1 Afternoon 48 2 20 1 Afternoon 56 3 7 1 Afternoon 16 2 46
VIII 2 48 3 20 2 56 4 7 2 6 13 46 IX 3 48 4 20 3 56 5 7 3 16 4 46 X 4 48 5 20 4
56 6 7 4 16 5 56 XI 5 48 6 20 5 56 7 7 5 16 6 46 XII Noon 6 48 7 20 6 56 8 7 6
16 7 46 When it is at London I of the Clock in the Mor. it is at 7 48 8 20 7 56
9 7 7 16 8 46 II 8 48 9 20 8 56 10 7 8 16 9 46 III 9 48 10 20 9 56 11 7 9 16 10
46 IV 10 48 11 20 10 56 XII Nigh 10 16 11 46 V 11 48 XII Nigh 11 56 1 Morning 7
11 16 XII Nigh VI XII Nigh 1 Morning 20 XII Nigh 2 7 XII Nigh 1 Morning 46 VII
1 Morning 48 2 20 1 Morning 56 3 7 1 Morning 16 2 46 VIII 2 48 3 20 2 56 4 7 2
16 3 46 IX 3 49 4 20 3 56 5 7 3 16 4 46 X 4 48 5 20 4 56 6 7 4 16 5 46 IX 5 48
6 20 5 56 7 7 5 16 6 46

The Use of this Table.
IF at Eight of the Clock in the Morning at London, you would know what it were
a Clock in all the abovenamed Places, you shall find it then to be at Virginia
2 hou. 48 min. Morning. At New England 3 hou. 20 min. Morn. At Jamaica 2 hou.
56 min. Morn. At Barbados 4 hou. 7 min. Morn. At Carolina hou. 16 min. Morn.
And at Bermudas 3 hou. 46 min. Morn.

A Table of the true Hour-distances, for Horizontal Dials, for all these
Plantations following; with their Halves and Quarters, ready Calculated.
Hours, Halves and Quarters. New England, for Boston. Barbados Jamaica, for
Port Royal. Virginia, for James Town. Bermudas or Carolina. D. M. D. M. D. M.
D. M. D. M. XII. 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 32 0 45 1 11 2 17 2 2 2 5 5 1 42 2 27
4 33 4 3 3 7 39 2 35 3 41 6 51 6 5 XI I 10 17 3 30 4 57 9 13 8 11 1 13 0 4 24 6
17 11 38 10 21 2 15 40 5 22 7 39 14 3 12 30 3 18 20 6 24 9 3 16 37 14 48 X II
21 19 7 29 19 34 19 16 17 12 1 24 10 8 36 11 11 22 1 19 38 2 27 20 9 52 13 55
24 50 22 14 3 30 24 10 19 15 49 27 58 25 11 IX III 34 4 12 50 17 54 31 11 28 12
1 37 50 14 30 20 30 44 40 31 35 2 40 56 16 35 22 50 37 35 35 15 3 45 2 18 49 25
48 42 10 38 45 VIII IV 49 28 21 32 29 19 46 21 42 52 1 53 50 24 48 33 10 50 55
48 52 2 58 28 28 45 37 57 55 40 52 35 3 63 6 33 52 46 25 60 43 58 39 VII V 68
43 44 22 50 21 66 7 63 27 1 73 40 49 0 58 28 71 52 70 34 2 78 55 59 55 67 50 77
45 76 48 3 84 25 73 56 78 32 83 49 83 2 VI 90 00 90 0 90 0 90 00 90 00 Styles
heigh 42 32 13 10 18 51 37 15 32 25

How to Set any of these Dials, or any other, truly upon a Post in a Garden, or
elsewhere.
LET the Square in the Figure at the end of this Book, noted with A B C D, be
the top of a Post (or other level Plain or Window) upon which you would six
your Dial.

About the middle thereof, as at O, describe a Circle, as E G F, and upon O
(the Center) erect a small Pyn or Wire, as O S, exactly perpendicular, and in
the Forenoon observe when the point of the shadow of the top of the Pyn or Wire
touches the Circle, which suppose to be at the point E, (which point mark.)
Then again (in the Afternoon of the same day) observe when the shadow touches
the same Circle, (which (in the Afternoon) let be at the point F.

These two Observations being made, divide the Circle between E and F, into two
equal parts, which will be at G; so a line drawn from G through O (as the line
G O H) shall be a true Meridian line; upon which the Hour line of XII of your
Dial must be placed, and the Dial so fixed, (truly Horizontal) shall constantly
give you the true Hour.

You may make more Circles than one upon the Plain, lest the Sun upon the same
day should not be seen exactly at the same time of both parts of the day, as
the Figure plainly shows.

sun's position Place this at the end of the Astronomicall Tables



Books Printed for, and Sold by Dorman New-man, at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultrey.
Folio.
POol's English Annotations, 2 Vol. Causin's Holy Court. Clelia, a Romance.
Reynolds, of Murder and Adultery. Bentivoglio's Wars of Flanders. Sir Robert
Stapleton's Translation of Juvenal. Hugh's Exposition on Genesis and Exodus.
Viguola's Architecture. Davis, of Uniformity in Churches. The Exact Politician,
or Complete Statesman. Ambroses, his Looking to Jesus. -- War with Devils. --
Communion with Angels. Bentevolio and Urania. Bishop Reynold's Works. Rea's
Flora, Cemes and Pomona. Sir James Melvil's Memoirs. Esquire Marvil's Poems. The
State and Wars of New England; in 3 Parts. Bailii Operis Historici and
Chronologici. Twiss de Scientia Media. Scotiae Illustrata, per Dom. Robert
Sibbald. Trial of Henry, Baron Delamere. Bachanalia, or a Description of a
Drunken Club. Lower's Relation of the King's Voyage to Holland. Collection of
Loyal Addresses.
Quarto.
GAles Court of the Gentiles. Sir Henry Vanes Meditations. Crofton, of Infant
Baptism. Caryl, on Job. Durham, on the Canticles. -- On the Commandments.
Brook's Golden Key. -- Paradise Opened. Case's Mount Pisgah. Firmin's Real
Christian. Leybourn's Penorganon. Alexander's Jesuitico-Quakerism. Burrough's
Gospel Remission. Baxter's Apology for the Nonconformists. Northern Lass, a
Comedy. Rollo, or the Bloody Brothers, a Tragedy. Scornful Lady, a Comedy.
Elder Brother, a Comedy. Duchess of Malfey, a Comedy. Leslii Historia
Scotorum. Flavel's Husbandry spiritualized. Strangii de Voluntate Dei. Mather,
on the Types. Dr. Owen, On Justification. Baxter's Saints Rest. The Man of Sin.
Light foot in Lucam. Dr. Charlton's Enquiry into Human Nature. Boy's Sermons.
Behn's Remains. Manly, of Usury. Brown, against the Quakers. Quaker's Spiritual
Court Proclaimed. Warning to Souls to beware of Quakerism. Answer to Mr. Read's
Case. Call to the Shepherds of Israel. Seven Champions. Poor Robin's Perambul.
from Saffronwalden to Land. Dr. Beyfields Treatise of Consumptions, and Rules
for Health.
Sermons.
Dr. Meggot, before the Artillery Company. Mr. Ryther, at Mr. Janeway's
Funeral. Mr. Williams, on the Fifth of November. -- On the Late Rebellion. Mr.
Gray, on the Rebellion. Mr. Blake, at Mr. Sharp's Funeral. Mr. Nicholet, at Mr.
Bernard's Funeral, a Sermon Preached at Sea. Dr. Sudbury, before the King. Mr.
Pearson, at Dr. Hatfield's Funeral. Mr. Claget's Assize Sermon, at Bury. Mr.
Hollingsworth, before the Lord Mayor. The Case of Lay-Communion. Case of
Hearing Scandalous Ministers. Roma Mendax. Discourse of the East India Company.
Trade of England Revived. Quakerism Subverted. Sea Mirror. Derbishire Damosel.
Large Octavo.
BIshop Taylor's Contemplations. Duty of Man, 2d. Part. Turenne's Life and
Actions. Smith's Gramatica Quadrilinguis. Doctrine of Devils. Nalton's twenty
Sermons. Ferguson's Interest of Reason in Religion. Heywood's Life in God's
Favor. Derridon, agninst Atheism, Engl. Tesmarii Rhetorica. Ryther's Morning
Seeker. Swinock, of Sins, of Omissions. Esquire Polhil against Dr. Sherlock.
Present State of Russia. Basil Valentine, of Antimony. History of the Treaty at
Nimuegen. Conold, of Schism. Homer Burlesque. Dr. Manwaring, of Health and long
Life. Synopsis of Vocal Music. Pool's Nullity of the Romish Faith. Wilson, of
right Interpretation of Scripture. Durham, of Scandal. Dr. Trapham's State of
Jamaica. Sclater, of Grace. Flavels two Treatises of Fear, etc. Janeway's
Works. Dr. Duveile's Explanation on the Acts. Brucher's Rudiments of Latin
Grammar. Dr. Bates's Sermon on the Sovereignty of God's Grace. Marirner's
Everlasting Almanac. Synopsis of Quakerism. Quakers Cannons. Robert's Tree of
Life. Lockier's Sermons. Catalines Conspiracy.
Small Octavo and Twelves.
COrahs Doom, in Answer to the Contempt of the Clergy. Janeway's Legacy.
Guthry's Trial of a Saving Interest in Christ. London Jests. Helvicus
Colloquies. Quintus Curtius. Flavel's Saint Indeed. -- Token for Mourners.
Simpson's Philosophical Dialogue. -- Medela Medicorum. -- Treatise of Fevers.
Diversity of Salts and Spirits maintained, by Matthew Mackaile, of Aberdeen.
Ness, his Christian Walk. Sherly, of the Gout. Tachmas, Prince of Persia, a
Novel. Adamite, or Loves of Father Rock, a Novel. Amors of the Pallas-Royal,
Viz. Madam de la Valliere, Madam de Ollonne, Madam de Chastillion. Madam de
Savigny, etc. Madam Lavallier's Devotions. Baysied Exercitationes Annatomici.
Trimmer, or Life and Death of Moderation. Life and Death of the Queen Mother.
Wits, or various Poems. Dutch Grammar and Dictionary. Call to Prayer. Smith's
Weaned Christian. Sir George Downing against the Dutch. Dr. Rebotham's Sermons.
Seven Wise Masters. History of St. Patrick. History of the Twelve Apostles.
History of Jewels. Roma Restituta. Curious Distillatory. Manly's History of
Jopan and Syam. Looking-glass for Children. Hugh's Disputationes Grammatica.
Virtues of Tunbridge-Wells. Morland's Doctrine of Interest. Miltoni Logica.
Sydenham's Works. Soloman's Remenbrancer. Manning's Catholic Religion. Golden
Chain. Du Moulin's Devotions. Whip for the Devil. Protestant Prayer book.
Protestants Resolution. Shelton's Zeiglography. -- Tachygraphy. Present State
of Scotland. Rapin's Observations on Homer, Virgil, Plato, etc. Frambesarius's
Art of Physic. Engl. Scotch Psalms. Starr, of the Eastern Sages. Bunnian's
Holy War. Doolittle's Call. Dr. Beyfield, on the Spaw Waters. Mercury-Gallant,
or French-Mercury. Blood for Blood.
Small Twelves and Twenty-fours.
JAneway's Token for Children, in two Parts. Wadsworth's Legacy. Crown and
Glory of a Christian. Milk for Babes. Likewise the Pictures of King Charles II.
his Statue on the Royal-Exhange. Sir Roger L'Estrange. Count Staremberg. Method
of His Majesty's Curing the Evil. The Elephant. The Spanish Inquisition. The
late Blazing-Star.
Where is also to be had (in large quantities or small) the following
Medicines, rightly Prepared by the first Authors. Viz. Daffey's Elixir Salutis.
Bateman's Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Golden and Plain. Matthew's Pills. Dr.
Fletcher's Powder. Thomson's Pill. Spirit of Salt. Pearse's Lozenges. Natures
Familiar Balm. An Excellent Balsom for Wounds. Balsomum Apoplecticum. The
Extract of Liquoras.

FINIS.

