Honmus, Franciscus Baconus, Baro de Verulam: Vice-Comes Scti Albani. Mortuus
9o Aprilis, Anno Dn^i. 1626. Annoque Aetat 66.


Resuscitatio, Or, Bringing into PUBLIC LIGHT SEVERAL PIECES, OF THE WORKS,
Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological, HITHERTO SLEEPING; Of the
Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban.

According to the best Corrected COPPIES. Together, With his Lordships LIFE.

By WILLIAM RAWLEY, Doctor in Divinity, His Lordships First, and Last,
CHAPLEINE.

Afterward, CHAPLEINE, to His late MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, near the Mitre Tavern, 1657.

A GENERAL TABLE OF THE TRACTATES, Contained in this BOOK.
1. SPeeches in Parliament, S^a^-chamber, Kings Bench, Chancery, and other
where. Fol. 1 2. Observations upon a Libell, published in Anno 1592. 103 3. A
true Report, of Doctor Lopez, his Treason. 151 4. An Advertisement, touching
the Controversies, of the Church, of England. 162 5. A Collection, of the
Felicities, of Queen Elizabeth. 181 6. A brief Discourse, of the Union, of
England, and Scotland. 197 6. Articles, and Considerations, touching the Union,
aforesaid. 206 7. A Beginning, of the History, of Great Britain. 221 8. A
Letter, and Discourse, to Sir Henry Savill, touching Helps, for the
Intellectual Powers. 225 9. Certain Considerations, touching the better
Pacification, and Edification, of the Church, of England. 233 10. Certain
Considerations, touching the Plantation, in Ireland. 255 11. Advice to the
King, touching Mr. Suttons Estate. 265 12. A Proposition, to the King, touching
the Compiling, and Amendment, of the Laws, of England. 271 13. A Fragment, of
an Essay, of Fame. 281 14. Letters, to Queen Elizabeth, King James, diverse
Lords, and others. 1 15. Other Letters. 89 16. A Confession, of the Faith. 115
TO THE READER.
HAving been employed, as an Amanuensis, or daily instrument, to this
Honorable Author; And acquainted with his Lordships Conceits, in the
composing, of his Works, for many ye^rs together; Especially, in his writing
^ime; I conceived, that no Man, could pretend a better Interest, or Claim, to
the ordering of them, after his Death, then myself. For which cause, I have
compiled in one, whatsoever bears the true Stamp, of his Lordships excellent
Genius; And has hitherto slept, and been suppressed; In this present Volume;
Not leaving any Thing, to a future Hand, which I found, to be of moment, and
communicable to the Public; Save only some few Latin Works; Which, by Gods
Favor and sufferance, shall soon after follow.

It is true, that for some of the Pieces, herein contained, his Lordship did
not aim, at the Publication of them, but at the Preservation only; And
Prohibiting them from Perishing; So as, to have been reposed, in some Private
shrine, or Library: But now, for that, through the loose keeping, of his
Lordships Papers, whilst he lived, diverse Surreptitious Copies have been
taken; which have since, employed the Press, with ^undry Corrupt, and Mangled,
Editions; whereby Nothing has been more difficult, than to find the Lord Saint
Alban, in the Lord Saint Alban; And which have presented, (some of them,)
rather a Fardle of Non-s^nse, then any true Expressions, of his Lordships Happy
Vein; I thought my self, in a sort, tied, to vindicate these Injuri^s, and
wrongs, done to the Monuments, of his Lordships Pen; And at once, by setting
forth, the true, and Ge^uine, writings themselves, to prevent the like
Invasions, for the time to come. And the rather, in regard, of the Distance, of
the time, since his Lords^ips Days; whereby, I shall not tread too near, upon
the Heels of Truth; Or of the Passages, and Persons; then concerned, I was
induced hereunto. Which, considering the Lubricity of Life; And for that, I
account my self, to be; Not now in Vergentibus, but in Praecipitantibus Annis,
I was desirous to hasten.

Wherein, I shall crave leave, to open, my Counsels, and Purposes, as
concerning this present Edition, in these five Particulars. First, I have
ranked the several Tractates; Either, according to the Dignity, of the Work;
as Demosthenes, or Cicero's, Orations, do precede Demosthenes, or Cicero's
Epistles; Or else, according to the Series of the Times, wherein they were
written; or to which, they refer. By which Means, they may give the better
Light; the one Part, to the other.

Secondly, I thought it fitting, to intimate; That the Discourse, within
contained; Entitled, A Collection, of the Felicities, of Queen Elizabeth; was
written, by his Lordship, in Latin only: whereof, though his Lordship had his
particular Ends, then; yet, in regard, that I held it a Duty, That her own
Nation, over which she so happily reigned, for many years; should be
acquainted, and possessed, with the Virtues, of that excellent Queen, as well
as Foreign Nations; I was induced, many years ago, to put the same, into the
English Tongue; Not, Ad Verbum; For that had been ^ut Flat, and Injudicious;
But, (as far, as my slender Ability could reach,) according to the Expressions,
which, I conceived; his Lordship would have rendered it in, if he had written
the same in English: Yet ever acknowledging, that Zeuxis, or Apelles, Pencill,
could not be attained, but by Zeuxis, or Apelles, Himself. This Work, in the
Latin, his Lordship so much affected; That He had ordained, by his last Will,
and Testament, to have had it published, many years since: But that singular
Person, entrusted therewith, soon after deceased. And therefore, it must now,
expect a Time, to come forth, amongst his Lordships, other Latin Works.

Thirdly, in the Collection of Letters; which is, as the Fourth Part, of this
Volume; there are inserted some few, which were written, by other Pens, and
not by his Lordships own: Like as we find, in the Epistolar Authors; Cicero,
Plinius secundus, and the rest: which because I found them immixed, amongst his
Lordships Papers; And that they are written, with some similitude of Style; I
was loath, they should b^ left, to a Grave, at that time, when his Lordships
own Conceptions, were brought to life.

Fourthly, for that Treatise, of his Lordships, Inscribed, A Confession of the
Faith; I have ranked that, in the Close, of this whole Volume: Thereby, to
demonstrate to the World; That he was a Master, in Divinity, as well as in
Philosophy, or Politics; And that he was Versed, no less, in the saving
Knowledge; Than, in the Universal, and Adorning, Knowledges. For though, he
composed the same, many years, before his Death, yet I thought that, to be the
fittest place; As the most acceptable Incense unto God, of the Faith, wherein
he resigned his Breath; The Crowning, of all his other Perfections, and
Abilities; And the best Perfume, of his Name, to the World, after his Death.

Lastly, if it be objected, that some few, of the Pieces, whereof this whole
consists, had visited the Public Light before; It is true, that they had
been obtruded, to the World, by unknown Hands; But with such Skars, and
Blemishes, upon their Faces; That they could pass, but for a Spurious, and
Adulterine Brood, and not for his Lordships Legitimate Issue: And the
Publishers, and Printers, of them, deserve to have an Action, of Defamation,
brought against them, by the State of Learning, for Disgracing, and
Personating, his Lordships Works.

As for this present Collection, I doubt not, but that it will verify it self,
in the several Parcells thereof; And manifest, to all understanding, and
unpartiall, Readers, who is the Author of it; By that Spirit, of Perspicuity,
and Aptness, and Concisenesse, which runs through the whole Work; And is ever
an Annex, of his Lordships Pen.

There is required now; And I have been moved by many; Both from Foreign
Nations, and at Home; who have held in Price, and been Admirers, of this
Honorable Authors Conceits, and Apprehensions; That some Memorialls, might be
added, concerning his Lordships Life; Wherein I have been more Willing, then
sufficient, to satisfy their Requests: And to that End, have endeavored, to
contribute, not my Talent, but my Mite, in the next following Discourse;
Though, to give the true Value, to his Lordships Worth; There were more need,
of another Homer, to be the Trumpet, of Achilles Virtues.

WILLIAM RAWLEY.

THE LIFE OF THE HONORABLE AUTHOR.
FRANCIS BACON, the Glory, of his Age, and Nation; The Adorner, and Ornament,
of Learning; Was born, in York House, or York Place, in the Strand; On the 22th
Day of January; In the Year of our Lord, 1560. His Father, was that Famous
Counselor, to Queen Elizabeth; The Second Propp, of the Kingdom, in his Time;
Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal, of England; A Lord,
of Known Prudence, Sufficiency, Moderation, and Integrity. His Mother, was Ann
Cook, one of the Daughters, of Sir Anthony Cook; unto whom, the Erudition, of
King Edward, the Sixth, had been committed: A choice Lady, and Eminent, for
Piety, Virtue, and Learning; Being exquisitely Skilled, for a Woman, in the
Greek, and Latin, Tongues. These being the Parents, you may easily imagine,
what the Issue, was like to be; Having had, whatsoever, Nature, or Breeding,
could put into Him.

His first, and childish, years, were not without some Mark of Eminency; At
which Time, he was endued, with that Pregnancy, and Towardness, of Wit; As they
were Pre^ages, of that Deep, and Universal, Apprehension, which was manifest
in him, afterward: And caused him, to be taken notice of, by several Persons,
of Worth, and Place; And, especially, by the Queen; who, (as I have been
informed,) delighted much, then, to confer with him; And to prove him with
Questions: unto whom, he delivered Himself, with that Gravity, and Maturity,
above his years; That her Majesty, would often term Him; The young Lord Keeper.

At the ordinary years, of Ripeness, for the university; or rather, something
earlier; He was sent, by his Father, to Trinity College, in Cambridge; To be
educated, and bred, under the Tuition, of Doctor John White-Gift, then Master
of the College; Afterward, the Renowned Archbishop, of Canterbury; A
Prelate, of the First Magnitude, for Sanctity, Learning, Patience, and
Humility: Under whom, He was observed, to have been more, then an Ordinary
Proficient, in the several Arts, and Sciences. Whilst he was commorant, in the
University, about 16. years of Age, (As his Lordship has been pleased, to
impart unto my Self;) he first fell, into the Dislike, of the Philosophy, of
Aristotle: Not for the Worthlesnesse, of the Author, to whom he would ever
ascribe, all High Attributes; But for the Unfruitfulnesse, of the way; Being a
Philosophy, (as his Lordship used to say,) only strong, for Disputations, and
Contentions; But Barren, of the Production, of Works, for the Benefit, of the
Life, of Man. In which Mind, he continued, to his Dying Day.

After he had passed, the Circle, of the Liberal Arts; His Father, thought
fit, to frame, and mould him, for the Arts, of State: And, for that end, sent
him over into France, with Sir Amyas Paulet, then Employed Ambassador Lieger,
into France: By whom, he was, after a while, held fit to be entrusted, with
some Message, or Advertisement, to the Queen: which having performed, with
great Approbation, he returned back, into France again; With Intention, to
continue, for some years, there. In his absence, in France, his Father, the
Lord Keeper, died; Having collected, (as I have heard, of Knowing Persons,) a
considerable sum of Money, which he had separated, with Intention, to have
made a competent Purchase of Land, for the Livelihood, of this his youngest
Son; (who was only unprovided for; And though, he was the youngest in years,
yet he was not the lowest, in his Fathers Affection;) But the said Purchase,
being unaccomplished, at his Fathers Death, there came no greater share to him,
than his single Part, and Portion, of the Money, dividable amongst 5. Brethren:
By which means, he lived, in some streits, and Necessities, in his younger
years. For as for that pleasant Site, and Manor, of Gorhambury, he came not
to it, till many years after, by the Death, of his Dearest Brother, Mr. Anthony
Bacon; A Gentleman, equal to him, in Height of Wit; Though inferior to him,
in the Endowments, of Learning, and Knowledge: Unto whom he was, most nearly,
conjoined in Affection; They two, being the sole Male Issue, of a second Venture.

Being returned from Travail, he applied himself, to the study, of the Common
Law; which he took upon him, to be his Profession. In which, he obtained to
great Excellency; Though he made that, (as himself said,) but as an Accessory,
and not as his Principal study. He wrote, several Tractates, upon that
Subject. Wherein, though some great Masters, of the Law, did out-go him, in
Bulk, and Particularities of Cases; yet, in the Science, of the Grounds^ and
Mysteries, of the Law, he was exceeded by none. In this way, he was, after a
while, sworn, of the Queens Counsel Learned, Extraordinary; A Grace, (if I err
not,) scarce known before. He seated himself, for the Commodity, of his
studies, and Practice; amongst the Honorable Society, of Greyes Inn; Of which
House, he was a Member; where he Erected, that Elegant Pile, or Structure,
commonly known, by the Name, of the Lord Bacons Lodgings: which he inhabited,
by Turns, the most part, of his Life, (some few years only excepted,) unto his
Dying Day. In which House, he carried himself, with such Sweetness, Comity,
and Generosity; That he was much revered, and loved, by the Readers, and
Gentlemen, of the House.

Notwithstanding, that he professed the Law, for his Livelihood, and
Subsistence; Yet his Heart, and Affection, was more carried, after the
Affairs, and Places, of Estate; For which, if the Majesty Royal then, had
been pleased, he was most fit. In his younger years, he studied, the Service,
and Fortunes, (as they call them,) of that Noble, but unfortunate Earl, the
Earl of Es^ex; unto whom, he was, in a sort, a Private, and free, Counselor;
And gave him safe, and Honorable Advice; Till, in the end, the Earl inclined
too much, to the violent, and precipitate Counsel, of others, his Adherents,
and Followers; which was his Fate, and Ruin.

His Birth, and other Capacities, qualified him, above others of his
Profession, to have Ordinary Accesses at Court; And to come freque^tly, into
the Queens Eye; who would often grace him, with private, and free,
Communication; Not only about Matters of his Profession, or Business in Law;
But also, about the Arduous Affairs, of Estate; From whom she received, from
time to time, great Satisfaction. Nevertheless, though she cheered him much,
with the Bounty, of her Countenance; yet she never cheered him, with the
Bounty, of her Hand: Having never conferred upon him, any Ordinary Place, or
Means, of Honor, or Profit, Save only, one dry Reversion, of the Registers
Office, in the Star Chamber; worth about 1600 l. per Annum; For which he
waited, in Expectation, either fully, or near, 20. years: Of which his Lordship
would say, in Queen Elizabeth's Time; That it was, like another Man's Ground,
buttalling upon his House; which might mend his Prospect, but it did not fill
his Barn. (Nevertheless, in the time, of King James, it fell unto him. Which
might be imputed; Not so much, to her Majesty's Averseness, or Disaffection,
toward him; As to the Arts, and Policy, of a Great Statesman, ^hen; who
labored, by all Industrious, and secret, Means, to suppress, and keep him
down; Lest, if he had rise^, he might have obscured his Glory.

But though, he stood long at a stay, in the Days, of his Mistress, Queen
Elizabeth; Yet, after the change, and Coming in, of his New Master, King
James, he made a great Progress; By whom, he was much comforted, in Places, of
Trust, Honor, and Revenue. I have seen, a Letter, of his Lordships, to King
James, wherein he makes Acknowledgement; That He was that Master to him, that
had raised, and advanced him, nine times; Thrice in Dignity, and Six times, in
Office. His Offices (as I conceive,) were; Counsel Learned Extraordinary, to
his Majesty, as he had been, to Queen Elizabeth; Kings Solliciter General; His
Majesty's Attorney General; Counselor of Estate, being yet but Attorney; Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England; Lastly, Lord Chanceller: Which two last
Places, though they be the same, in Au^hority, and Power; yet they differ in
Patent, Height, and Favor of the Prince: Since whose time, none of his
Successors, did ever bear the Title, of Lord Chanceller. His Dignities were,
first Knight; Then Baron of Verulam; Lastly, Viscount Saint Alban: Besides
other good Gifts, and Bounties, of the Hand, which his Majesty gave him; Both
out of the Broad Seal; And out of the Alienation Office.

Toward his Rising years, not before, he entered into a married Estate; And
took to Wife, Alice, one of the Daughters, and Co-Heires, of Benedict Barnham,
Esquire, and Alderman of London; with whom He received, a sufficiently ample,
and liberal Portion, in Marriage. Children he had none: which though they be
the Means, to perpetuate our Names, after our Deaths; yet he had other Issues,
to perpetuate his Name; The Issues, of his Brain; In which he was ever happy,
and admired; As Jupiter was, in the production of Pallas. Neither did the want
of Children, detract from his good usage, of his Consort, during the
Intermarriage: whom he prosecuted, with much Conjugall Love, and Respect; with
many Rich Gifts, and En^owments; Besides a Roab of Honor, which he invested
her withal; which she wore, until her Dying Day; Being twenty years, and
more, after his Death.

The last five years of his Life, being withdrawn from Civil Affairs, and
from an Active Life, he employed wholly, in Contemplation, and Studies. A Thing,
whereof his Lordsh^p would often speak, during his Active Life; As if he
affected, to dye in the Shadow, and not in the Light; which also, may be found,
in several Passages, of his Works. In which time, he composed, the greatest
Part, of his Books, and Writings; Both in English, and Latin: Which I will
enumerate, (as near as I can,) in the just Order, wherein they were written.
The History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the Seventh: Abecedarium Naturae; or
A Metaphysicall Piece; which is lost: Historia Ventorum: Historia vitae and
Mortis: Historia Densi, and Rari, not yet Printed: Historia Gravis, and Levis,
which is also lost: A Discourse, of a War, with Spain: A Dialogue, touching an
Holy War: The Fable, of the New Atlantis: A Preface, to a Digest, of the Laws
of England: The Beginning, of the History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the
Eighth: De Augmentis Scientiarum; Or the Advanccment of Learning, put into
Latin, with several Enrichments, and Enlargements: Counsels Civil, and
Moral; Or his Book of Essays, likewise, Enriched, and enlarged: The
Conversion, of certain Psalms, into English Verse. The Translation into Latin;
of the History, of King Henry the Seventh; of the Counsels, Civil, and
Moral; of the Dialogue, of the Holy War; of the Fable, of the New Atlantis;
For the Benefit, of other Nations. His Revising, of his Book, De Sapientia
Veterum. Inquisitio de Magnete; Topica Inquisitionis, de Luce, and Lumine; Both
these, not yet Printed. Lastly, Sylva Sylvarum, or the Natural History. These
were the ^ruits, and Productions, of his last five years. His Lordship also
designed, upon the Motion, and Invitation, of his late Majesty; To have written
the Reign, of King Henry, the Eighth; But that Work Perished, in the
Designation^ merely; God not lending him Life, to proceed further upon it, then
only, in one Mornings Work: Whereof there is Extant, An, Ex Ungue Leonem,
already Printed, in his Lordships Miscellany Works.

There is a Commemoration due; As well, to his Abilities, and Virtues, as to
the Course, of his Life. Those Abilities, which, commonly, go single, in other
Men, though of prime, and Observable, Parts, were all conjoined, and met, in
Him. Those are, Sharpnes^ of Wit, Memory, Judgment, and Elocution. For the
Former Three, his Books do abundantly speak them; which, with what Sufficiency
he wrote, let the World judge; But with what Celerity he wrote them, I can best
testify. But for the Fourth, his Elocution; I will only set down, what I
heard, Sir Walter Rauleigh, once speak of him, by way of Comparison; (whose
Judgment may well be trusted;) That the Earl of Salisbury, was an excellent
Speaker, but no good Penman; That the Earl of Northampton, ( the Lord Henry
Howard,) was an excellent Penman, but no good Speaker; But that, Sir Francis
Bacon, was Eminent in Both.

I have been enduced to think; That if there were, a Beam of Knowledge,
derived from God, upon any Man, in these Modern Times, it was upon Him. For
though he was a great Reader of Books; yet he had not his Knowledge from Books;
But from some Grounds, and Notions, from within Himself. Which,
notwithstanding, he vented, with great Caution, and Circumspection. His Book,
of Instauratio Magna, (which, in his own Account, was the chiefest, of his
works,) was no Slight Imagination, or Fancy, of his Brain; But a Settled, and
Concocted, Notion; The Production, of many years, Labor, and Travel. I my
Self, have seen, at the least, Twelve Coppies, of the Instauration; Revised,
year by year, one after another; And every year altered, and amended, in the
Frame thereof; Till, at last, it came to that Model, in which it was committed
to the Press: As many Living Creatures, do lick their young ones, till they
bring them, to their strength of Limms.

In the Compos^ng, of his Books, he did rather drive, at a Masculine, and
clear, Expression, than at any Finenes, or Affectation, of Phrases: And would
often ask, if the Meaning were expressed, plainly enough: As being one, that
a^counted words, to be but subservient, or Ministerial, to Matter; And not the
Principal. And if his Style were Polite, it was because he could do no
otherwise. Neither was he given, to any Light Conceits; Or Descanting upon
Words; But did ever, purposely, and industriously, avoid them, For he held such
Things, to be but Digressions, or Diversions, from the Scope intended; And to
derogate, from the Weight, and Dignity, of the Style.

He was no Plodder upon Books; Though he read much; And that, with great
Judgment, and Rejection of Impertinences, incident to many Authors: For he
would ever interlace, a Moderate Relaxation, of His Mind, with his Studies; As
Walking; Or Taking the Air abroad in his Coach; or some other befit^ing
Recreation: And yet, he would loose no Time, In as much, as upon his First, and
Immediate Return, he would fall to Reading again: And so suffer, no Moment of
Time, to Slip from him, without some present Improvement.

His Meals, ^ere Refections, of the Ear, as well as of the Stomach: Like the
Noctes Atticae; or Convivia Deipno-Sophistarum; Wherein, a Man might be
refreshed, in his Mind, and understanding, no less, then in his Body. And I
have known some, of no mean Parts, that have professed, to make use, of their
Note-Books, when they have risen, from his Table. In which Conversations, and
otherwise, he was no Dashing Man; As some Men are; But ever, a Countenancer,
and Fosterer, of another Man's Parts. Neither was he one, that would appropriate
the Speech, wholly to Himself; or delight to outvie others; But leave a
Liberty, to the Co-Assessours, to take their Turns. Wherein he would draw a Man
on, and allure him, to speak upon such a Subject, as wherein he was peculiarly
Skillful, and would delight to speak. And, for Himself, he contemned no Man's
Observations; But would light his Torch, at every Man's Candle.

His Opinions, and Assertions, were, for the most part, Binding; And not
contradicted, by any: Rather like Oracles, then Discourses. Which may be
imputed, either to the well weighing of his Sentence, by the Skales, of Truth,
and Reason; Or else, to the Reverence, and Estimation, wherein he was,
commonly, had, that no Man would contest with him^ So that, there was no
Argumentation, or Pro and Con, (as they term it,) at his Table: Or if their
chanced, to be any, it was Carried, with much Submission, and Moderation.

I have often observed; And so have other Men, of great Account; That if he had
occasion, to repeat, another Man's Words, after him; he had an use, and Faculty,
to dress them, in better Vestments, and Apparel, then they had before: So
that, the Author, should find his own Speech much amended; And yet the
Substance, of it, still retained. As if, it had been Natural to him, to use
good Forms; As Ovid spoke, of his Faculty, of Versifying; Et quod tentabam
Scribere, Versus erat.


When his Office, called him, as he was of the Kings Counsel Learned, to
charge any Offenders, either in Criminals, or Capitals; He was never of an
Insulting, or Domineering Nature, over them; But always tender Hearted, and
carrying himself decently toward the Parties; (Though it was his Duty, to
charge them home:) But yet, as one, that looked upon the Example, with the Eye
of Severity; But upon the Person, with the Eye, of Pity, and Compassion. And
in Civil Business, as he was Counselor of Estate, he had the best way of
Advising; Not engaging his Master, in any Precipitate, or grievous, Courses;
But in Moderate, and Fair, Proceedings: The King, whom he served, giving him
this Testimony; That he ever dealt, in Business, Suavibus Modis; Which, was
the way, that was most according to his own Heart.

Neither was He, in his time, less Gracious with the Subject, then with his
Sovereign: He was ever Acceptable, to the House, of Commons, when He was a
Member thereof. Being the Kings Attorney, and chosen to a place, in Parliament;
He was allowed, and dispensed with, to sit in the House; which was not
permitted, to other Atturneys.

And as he was, a good Servant, to his Master; Being never, in 19. years
Service, (as himself averred,) rebuked by the King, for any Thing, relating to
his Majesty; So he was, a good Master, to his Servants; And rewarded, their
long Attendance, with good Places, freely, when they fell into his Power. Which
was the Cause, that so many young Gentlemen, of Blood, and Quality; Sought to
list themselves, in his Retinew. And if he were abused, by any of them, in
their Places; It was only the Error, of the Goodness, of his Nature; But the
Badges of their Indiscretions, and Intemperances.

This Lord was Religious: For though the World be apt, to suspect, and
prejudge, Great Wits, and Politics, to have somewhat, of the Atheist; Yet he
was conversant with God: As appears, by several Passages, throughout the
whole Current, of his Writings. Otherwise, he should have crossed, his own
Principles; which were; That a little Philosophy, makes Men apt, to forget
God; As attributing too much, to Second Causes; But Depth of Philosophy,
brings a Man back, to God again. Now, I am sure, there is no Man, that will
deny him, or account otherwise of him, but to have been, a deep Philosopher.
And not only so; But he was able, to render a Reason, of the Hope, which was
in him; Which that Writing of his, of the Confession, of the Faith, does
abundantly testify. He repaired frequently, when his Health would permit him,
to the Service, of the Church; To hear Sermons; To the Administration, of the
Sacrament, of the Blessed Body, and Blood, of Christ; And died, in the true
Faith, established in the Church, of England.

This is most true; He was free from Malice; which, (as he said Himself,) He
never bred, nor fed. He was no Revenger of Injuries; which if he had minded, he
had both Opportunity, and Place High enough, to have done it. He was no Heaver
of Men, out of their Places; As delighting, in their Ruin, and Undoing. He was
no Defamer, of any Man, to his Prince. One Day, when a great Statesman, was
newly Dead; That had not been his Friend; The King asked him; What he thought,
of that Lord, which was gone? He answered; That he would never have made, his
Majesty's Estate better; But he was sure, he would have kept it, from being
w^rse. Which was the worst, he would say of him. Which I reckon, not amongst
his Moral, but his Christian, Virtues.

His Fame is greater, and sounds louder, in Foreign Parts, abroad, then at
home, in his own Nation. Thereby verifying that Divine Sentence; A Prophet is
not without Honor, save in his own Country, and in his own House. Concerning
which, I will give you a Taste only, out of a Letter, ^ritten from Italy, (The
Storehouse of Refined Wits,) to the late Earl of Devonshire; Then, the Lord
Candish. I will expect the New Essays, of my Lord Chancell^r Bacon; As also
his History, with a great deal of Desire; And whatsoever else, he shall
compose. But in Particular, of his History, I promise my Self, a Thing perfect,
and Singular; especially in Henry the Seventh; Where he may exercise, the
Talent, of his Divine Understanding. This Lord is, more and more, known; And
his Books here, more and more, delighted in; And those Men, that have more than
ordinary Knowledge, in Humane Affairs, esteem him, one of the most capable
Spirits, of this Age; And he is truly such. Now his Fame does not decrease with
Days since, but rather increase. Diverse of his Works, have been, anciently,
and yet lately translated, into other Tongues, both Learned, and Modern, by
Foreign Pens. Several Persons of Quality, during his Lordships Life, crossed
the Seas on purpose, to gain an Opportunity, of Seeing him, and Discoursing
with him^ whereof one, carried his Lordships Picture, from Head to Foot, over
with Him, into France; As a Thing, which he foresaw, would be much desired
there; That so they might enjoy, the Image of his Person; As well as the Images
of his Brain, his Books. Amongst the rest, Marquis Fiat; A French Nobleman; who
came Ambassador into England, in the Beginning, of Queen Mary, Wife to King
Charles^ was taken, with an extraordinary Desire of Seeing him: For which, he
made way, by a Friend: And when he came to him, being then, through weakness,
confined to his Bed; The Marquis saluted him, with this High Expression; That
his Lordship, had been ever to Him, like the Angels; of whom he had often
heard; And read much of them in Books; But he never saw them. After which, they
contracted an intimate Acquaintance; And the Marquis did so much revere him;
That besides his Frequent visits; They wrote Letters, one to the other, under
the Titles, and Appellations, of Father, and Son. As for his many Salutations,
by Letters, from Foreign Worthies, devoted to Learning; I forbear, to mention
them; Because that is a Thing, common to other Men, of Learning, or Note,
together with him.

But yet, in this Matter of his Fame, I speak, in the Comparative, only, and
not in the Exclusive. For his Reputation is great, in his own Nation, also;
Especially amongst those, that are, of a more Acute, and sharper, Judgment:
Which I will exemplify, but with two Testimonies, and no more. The Former;
When his History, of King Henry, the Seventh was to come forth; It was
delivered, to the old Lord Brook, to be perused by him; who when he had
dispatched it, returned it to the Author, with this Eulogy: Commend me, to my
Lord; And bid him take care, to get good Paper and Ink; For the Work is
Incomparable. The other, shall be that, of Doctor Samuel Collins, late Provost,
of Kings College, in Cambridge; A Man of no vulgar Wit; who affirmed unto me;
That when he had read, the Book of the Advancement of Learning; He found
Himself in a case, to begin his Studies a new; And that he had lost, all the
Time, of his ^tudying, before.

It has been desired; That something should be signified, touching his Diet;
And the Regiment, of his Health: Of which, in regard, of his Universal
Insight, into Nature, he may, (perhaps,) be, to some, an Example. For his Diet;
It was rather a plentiful, and liberal, Diet, as his Stomach would bear it,
then a Restrained. Which he also commended, in his Book, of the History, of
Life, and Death. In his younger years, he was much given, to the Finer, and
Lighter, sort of Meats; As of Fowls, and such like: But afterward, when he
grew more Judicious; He preferred the stronger Meats; such as the Shambles
afforded; As those Meats, which bred the more firm, and substantial Juyces, of
the Body; And less Dissipable: upon which, he would often make his Meal;
Though he had other Meats, upon the Table. You may be sure; He would not
neglect that Himself, which He so much extolled, in his Writings; And that was
the Use of Nitre: Whereof he took, in the Quantity, of about three Grains, in
thin, warm, Broth, every Morning, for thirty years together, next before his
Death. And for Physic, he did, indeed, live Physically, but not miserably: For
he took only, a Maceration of Rhubarb: Infused into a Draught, of White Wine,
and Beer, mingled together, for the Space of half an Hour; Once in six, or
seven Days; Immediately before his Meal, (whether Dinner, or Supper,) that it
might dry, the Body, less: which, (as he said,) did carry away frequently, the
Grosser Humors, of the Body; And not diminish, or carry away, any of the
Spirits; As Sweating does. And this was no Grievous Thing to take. As for other
Physic, in an ordinary way, (whatsoever has been vulgarly spoken;) he took
not. His Receipt, for the Gout; which did, constantly, ease him of his Pain,
within two Hours, Is already set down, in the End, of the Natural History.

It may seem, the Moon, had some Principal Place, in the Figure, of his
Nativity. For the Moon, was never in her Passion, or Eclipsed, but he was
surprised, with a sudden Fit, of Fainting: And that, though he observed not,
nor took any previous Knowledge, of the Eclipse thereof: And as soon as the
Eclipse ceased, he was restored, to his former strength again.

He died, on the 9th. Day of April, in the year 1626^ In the early Morning, of
the Day, then celebrated, for our Saviors Resurrection; In the 66th. year of
his Age; At the Earl of Arundells House, in High-gate, near London; To which
Place, he casually repaired, about a week before; God so ordaining, that he
should dye there: Of a Gentle Fever, accidentally accompanied, with a great
Cold; whereby the Defluxion of Rheum, fell so plentifully upon his Breast,
that he died by Suffocation: And was buried, in Saint Michaels Church, at Saint
Albans; Being the Place, designed for his Burial, by his last Will, and
Testament; Both because, the Body, of his Mother, was interred there; And
because, it was the only Church, then remaining, within the Precincts, of old
Verulam: Where he has a Monument, erected for him, of White Marble; (By the
Care, and Gratitude, of Sir Thomas Meautys, Knight, formerly his Lordships
Secretary; Afterward Clark, of the Kings Honorable Privy Counsel, under two
Kings:) Representing his full Pourtraiture, in the Posture, of studying; with
an Inscription, composed, by that Accomplished Gentleman, and Rare Wit, Sir
Henry Wotton.

But howsoever, his Body, was Mortal; yet, no doubt, his Memory, and Works,
will live; And will, in all probability, last, as long as the World lasts. In
order to which, I have endeavored, (after my poor Ability,) to do this Honor,
to his Lordship, by way, of conducing to the same.

SPEECHES IN Parliament, STAR CHAMBER, Kings Bench, CHANCERY, AND OTHER-WHERE,
Of the Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON, Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban.

LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, near the Mitre Tavern, 1657.

A SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Elizabeth 39. UPON THE MOTION of SVBSIDY.
AND please you, (Mr. Speaker,) I must consider the Time, which is spent; yet
so, as I must consider also the Matter, which is great. This great Cause was,
at the first, so materially, and weightily, propounded; And after, in such sort
persuaded, and enforced; And by Him, that last spoke, so much time taken, and
yet to good purpose; As I shall speak at a great disadvantage: But because it
has been always used, and the Mixture of this House does so require it; That
in Causes of this Nature, there be some Speech and Opinion, as well from
persons of Generallity, as by persons of Authority; I will say somewhat, and
not much: wherein i^ shall not be fit for me, to enter into, or to insist, upon
secrets, either of her Majesty's ^offers, or of her Council, but my Speech
must be, of a more vulgar Nature.

I will not enter (Mr. Speaker) into a laudative Speech, of ^he high and
singular Benefits, which, by her Majesty's, most politic, and happy
Government, we receive, thereby to incite you to a Retribution; partly, because
no breath of Man, can set them forth worthily; and partly, because I know her
Majesty, in her Magnanimity, does bestow her benefits, like her f^ee'st
Pattents, absque aliquo inde reddendo; Not looking for any thing again, (i^ it
were in respect only of her particular,) but Love, and Loyalty. Neither, will I
now, a^ this time, put the case of this Realm of England, too precisely; How it
stands with the Subject, in point of payments to the Crown; Though I could
make it appear by D^monstration, (what opinion soever be conceiv^d,) that never
Subjects were partakers of greater Freedom, and Ease; And that, whether you
look abroad, into other Countries, at this present time^ or look back to former
Times, in this our own Country; we shall find an exceeding Difference, in
matter ^f Taxes; which now I reserve to mention; not so much in doubt to
acquaint your Ears with Foreign S^rains, or to dig up the Sepul^hers ^f
Buried and Forgotten Impositions, which in this case, (as by way of
Comparison,) it is necessary you understand; But because Speech in the House,
is ^it to persuade the general point; And particularity is more proper and
seasonable for the Comm^ttee. Neither will I make any Observations, upon her
Majes^ies manner of expending and issuing Treasure; being not upon ^xc^ssive
and exo^bitant Donatives; nor upon sumptuous and unnecessary Triu^ph^,
Buildings, or like Magnificence; but upon the Preservation, Protection, and
Hon^ur of the Realm. For I dare no^ scan upon he^ Majesty's A^^ion; which it
becomemeth me, rather to admire in silence, then to gloss, or discourse upon
them, though with never so good a meaning. Sure I am, that the Treasure that
comes from you to her Majes^y, is but as a Vapor, which ^iseth from the
Earth, and gather^th into a Cloud, and stays not there long; but upon the
same Earth it falls again; and what if some drops of this, do fall upon
^rance, or Flaunders? It is like a sweet Odor of Honor, and Reputation, to
our Nation throughout the World. But I will only insist upon the Natural, and
Inviolate, Law of Preservation.

It is a Truth, (Mr. Speaker,) and a familiar Truth, that safety, and
preservation, is to be preferred, before Benefit, or Increase: In as much as
those Counsels which tend to preservation, seem to be attended with necessity;
whereas those Deliberations, which tend to Benefit, seem only accompanied with
persuasion. And it is ever gain, and no loss, when at the foot of he account,
the^e remains the purchase of safety. The Prints of this are, every where, to
be found: The Patient, will ever part, with some of his Blood, to save and
clear the rest. The Seafaring Man will, in a Storm, cast over some of his
Goods, to save and assure the rest. The Husbandman will afford some Foot of
Ground, for his Hedge and Ditch, to fortify and defend the rest. Why (Mr.
Speaker) the Disputer will, if he be wise, and cunning, grant somewhat, that
seems to make against him, because he will keep himself within the strength
of his opinion, and the better maintain the rest. But this Place advertiseth
me, not to handle the Matter, in a Common Place. I will now deliver unto you
that, which upon a probatum est, has wrought upon my self, knowing your
Affections to be like mine own. There has fallen out, since the last
Parliament, four Accidents or Ocurrents of State; Things published and known to
you all, by every one whereof, it seems to me, in my vulgar understanding,
that the danger of this Realm is increased: Which I speak not, by way of
apprehending fear; For I know, I speak to English Courages; But by way of
pressing Provision; For I do find, (Mr. Speaker,) that when Kingdoms and
States are entered into Terms and Resolutions of Hostility, one against the
other, yet they are, many times, restrained from their Attempts, by four
Impediments.

The first is by this same Aliud agere; when they have their Hands full of
other Matters, which they have embraced, and serves for a diversion of their
Hostile purposes.

The next is, when they want the Commodity, or opportunity, of some places of
near Approach.

The third, when they have conceived an apprehension of the Difficulty, and
churlishness of the enterprise, and that it is not prepared to their Hand.

And the fourth is, when a State, through the Age of the Monarch, grows
heavy, and indisposed, to actions of great Peril, and Motion, and this dull
Humor, is not sharpened, nor inflamed, by any provocations, or scorns. Now if
it please you to examine, whither by removing the Impediments in these four
kinds, the Danger be not grown, so many degrees nearer us, by accidents (as I
said) fresh, and all dated since the last Parliament.

Soon after the last Parliament, you may be pleased to remember, how the French
King revolted from his Religion; whereby every Man of common understanding, may
infer, that the Quarrel, between France, and Spain, is more reconcilable; And
a greater inclination of affairs to a peace than before: which supposed, it
follows, Spain shall be more free, to intend his Malice, against this Realm.

Since the last Parliament, it is also notorious, in every man's knowledge, and
remembrance; That the Spaniards have possessed themselves, of that Avenue, and
place of approach, for England, which was never in the Hands of any King of
Spain before; And that is Callais; which, in true Reason, and Consideration of
estate, of what value or service it is, I know not; but in common
understanding, it is a knocking at our Doors.

Since the last Parliament also, that Ulcer of Ireland, which indeed brake
forth before, has run on, and raged more: which cannot but be a great
Attractive, to the Ambition, of the Couucel of Spain, who by former experience
know, of how tough a Complexion, this Realm of England is, to be as^ailed: And
therefore (as Rheumes, and Fluxes, of Humors,) is like to resort to that part,
which is weak, and distempered.

And lastly, it is famous now, and so will be many Ages hence, how by these two
Sea-Journey's, we have braved him, and objected him to scorn: so that no Blood,
can be so frozen, or mortified, But must needs take Flames of Revenge, upon so
mighty Disgrace.

So as this Concurrence of Occurents, all since our last Assembly; some to
deliver, and free, our enemies; some to advance, and bring him, on his way;
some to tempt, and allure him; some to spur on, and provoke him; cannot but
threaten, an increase of our Peril, in great Proportion.

Lastly, (Mr. Speaker,) I will but reduce to the Memory of this House, one
other Argument, for ample and large providing, and supplying Treasure; And this
it is.

I see, Men do with great Alacrity, and Spirit, proceed, when they have
obtained a course, they long wished for, and were restrained from. My self can
remember, both in this Honorable ^ssembly, and in all other places of this
Realm, how forward, and affectionate, men were, to have an Invasive War. Then
we would say; A Defensive War, was like eating, and consuming Interest; And
needs we would be Adventurers, and Assailants. Habes quod tota mente petisti.
Shall we not now make it good? especially, when we have tasted, so prosperous
Fruit, of our Desires?

The first of these Expeditions Invasive, was achieved with great Felicity;
ravished a strong and famous Port, in the Lap, and Bosom, of their high
Countries: Brought them to such Despair, as they fired themselves, and their
Indian Fleet; in Sacrifice, as a good Odor unto God, for the great and
Barbarous Cruelties, which they have committed, upon the poor Indians, whither
that Fleet was sailing; Disordred their Reckonings; so as the next News we
heard of, was nothing but protesting of Bills, and Breaking credit.

The second Journey, was, with notable Resolution, born up against Weather, and
all Difficulties; And besides the success, in amusing him, and putting him to
infinite charge, sure I am, it was like a Tartars, or Parthians Bow, which
shoots backward; And had, a most strong, and violent effect, and Operation,
both in France and Flaunders, so that our Neighbors, and Confederates, have
reaped the Harvest of it; And while the Life Blood of Spain, went inward to the
Heart, the outward Limbs, and Members trembled, and could not resist. And
lastly, we have a perfect account, of all the Noble, and good Blood, that was
carried forth; And of all our Sea-walls, and good Shipping without Mortality of
Persons, wreck of Vessels, or any manner of Diminution. And these have been the
happy Effects, of our, so long, and so much desired, Invasive War.

To conclude (Mr. Speaker) therefore I doubt not, but every Man will consent,
that our Gift must bear, these two Marks, and Badges: The one, of the Danger,
of the Realm, by so great a Proportion, since the last Parliament, increased:
The other, of the satisfaction we receive, in having obtained, our so earnest,
and ardent Desire, of an Invasive War.

A Speech made by Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, chosen by the Commons, to present a
Petition, touching Purveyors, delivered to his Majesty, in the withdrawing
Chamber, at White Hall, in the Parliament, held ^o. and 2o. Iacobi, the first
Session.
IT is well known, to your Majesty, (excellent King) that the Emperors of
Rome, for their better Glory, and Ornament, did use in their Titles, the
Additions of the Countries and Nations, where they had obtained victories: As
Germanicus, Britannicus, and the like: But after all those Names, as in the
higher place, followed the Name of Pater Patriae, as the greatest Name of all
human Honor, immediately preceding that Name of Augustus; whereby they took
themselves, to express some Affinity, that they had, (in respect of their
Office,) with Divine Honor. Your Majesty might, with good reason, assume to
your self, many of those other Names; As, Germanicus, Saxonicus, Britannicus,
Francicus, Danicus; Gothicus, and others, as appertaining to you; Not by
Bloodshed, (as they bare them,) but by Blood: your Majesty's Royal Person,
being a noble confluence, of streams, and veins, wherein the Royal Blood of
many Kingdoms of Europe, are met, and united. But no Name is more worthy of
you, nor may more truly be ascribed unto you, then that Name, of Father of your
people, which you bear, and express, not in the Formality of your style, but in
the real Course of your Government. We ought not to say unto you, as was said
to Caesar Julius; Quae miremur, habemus, quaelaudemus, expectamus: That we have
already, wherefore to admire you, And that now we expect somewhat, for which to
commend you. For we may, (without suspicion of Flattery) acknowledge, that we
have found in your Majesty, great Cause, both of Admiration, and Commendation.
For great is the Admiration, wherewith you have possessed us, since this
Parliament began, in those two Causes, wherein we have had access unto you,
and heard your Voice: That of the return of Sr. Francis Goodwine; And that of
the Union: Whereby it seems unto us; The one of these, being so subtle a
Question of Law; And the other, so high a Cause of Estate; That, as the
^cripture ^aith, of the wisest King; That his Heart was as the Sands of the
Sea; which, though it be one of the largest, and vastest Bodies, yet it
consists, of the smallest Moates, and Portions. So (I say) it appears unto
us, in these two examples, that God has given your Majesty a rare sufficiency,
both to compass, and fathom, the greatest matters, and to discern the least.
And for matter of Praise, and Commendation, which chiefly belongs to
Goodness, we cannot but with great thankfulness profess; That your Majesty,
within the Circle of one Year, of your Reign, ( infra Orbem Anni Vertentis)
has endeavored, to unite your Church, which was divided; To supply your
Nobility, which was diminished; And to ease your People, in Cases, where they
were burdened, and oppressed.

In the last of these, your high Merits; That is the Ease, and Comfort, of your
People; Does fall out to be comprehended, the Message, which I now bring unto
your Majesty; concerning the great Grievance, arising, by the manifold Abuses,
of ^urveyors; Differing, in some Degree, from most of the things, wherein we
deal, and consult; For it is true, that the Knights, Citizens, and ^urgesses
in Parliament assembled, are a Representative Body, of your Commons, and Third
Estate: And in many matters, although we apply our selves, to perform the
trust, of those that choose us; yet, it may be, we do speak much, out of our
own Senses, and Discourses. But in this Grievance, being of that Nature,
whereunto the poor People is most exposed, and Men of Quality less; we shall
most humbly desire your Majesty, to conceive, That your Majesty, does not hear,
our Opinions, or Senses, but the very Groans, and Complaints t^emselves, of
your Commons, more truly, and vively, then by Representation. For there is no
Grievance, in your Kingdom, so general, so continual, so sensible, and so
bitter unto the common Subject, as this whereof we now speak. Wherein, it may
ple^se your Majesty, to vouchsafe me leave; First, to set forth unto you, the
dutiful, and respective Carriage, of our proceeding; N^xt the substance of our
Petition; And Thirdly, some Reasons and Motives, which, in all Humbleness, we
do offer to your Majesty's, Royal Consideration, or Commiseration: we assuring
our selves, that never King reigned, that had better Notions of Head, and
Motions of Heart, for the Good, and Comfort, of his loving Subjects.

For the first; In the Course of Remedy, which we desire, we pretend not, nor
intend not, in any sort, to derogate from your Majesty's Prerogative; Nor to
touch, diminish, or question, any your Majesty's Regalities, or Rights. For we
seek nothing, but the Reformation of Abuses, and the Execution of former Laws,
whereunto we are born. And although, it be no strange Thing in Parliament, for
new Abuses, to crave new Remedies; yer nevertheless in these Abuses, (which, if
not in Nature, yet in extremity, and Height of them, are most of them new) we
content our selves with the old Laws: Only we desire a Confirmation, and
Quickening of them, in their Execution; So far are we, from any Humor of
I^novation, or Incroachment.

As to the Court, of the Green-Clo^h, ordained, for the Provision, of your
Majesty's most Honorable Household, we hold it Ancient, we hold it Reverent.
Other Courts respect your Politic Person, but that respects your Natural
Person. But yet notwithstanding, (most Excellent King,) to use that Freedom,
which to Subjects, that pour out their Griefs before so gracious a King, is
allowable, we may very well allege unto your Majesty, a Comparison, or
Simitude, used by one of the Fathers, in another Matter; And not unfitly
representing our Case, in this point: And it is of the Leaves, and Roots, of
Net^les. The Leaves, are venomous, and stinging, where they touch: The Root is
not so, but ^s without Venom, or Malignity: and yet it is that Root, that
bears, and supports, all the Leaves.

To come now, to the substance, of our Petition. It is no other, then by the
Benefit of your Majesty's Laws, to be relieved, of the Abuses, of Purveyors;
Which Abuses, do naturally divide themselves, into three sorts. The first, they
take in Kind, that they ought not to take. The second, they take in Qu^ntity, a
far greater proportion, then comes to your Majesty's Use. The Third, they
take in an unlawful manner: In a manner, (I say) directly, and expressly,
prohibited, by diverse Laws.

For the First of these; I am a little to alter their Name. For instead of
Takers, they become Taxers: Instead of taking Provision for your Majesty's
service, they tax your people, ad redimendam vexationem: Imposing upon them,
and exto^ting from them, diverse sums of Money, sometimes in gross, sometimes in
the nature of Stipends annually paid, Ne noceant, to be freed, and eased, of
their oppression. Again, they take Trees, which by Law they cannot do;
Timber Trees, which are the Beauty, Countenance, and Shelter, of Men's Houses;
That Men have long spared, from their own purse, and profit; That Men esteem,
(for their use, and delight,) above ten times the value: That are a Loss, which
Men cannot repair, or recover. These do they take, to the Defacing, and
Spoiling, of your Subjects Mansions, and Dwellin^s; Except they may be
compounded with, to their own Appetites. And if a Gentleman, be too hard for
them, while he is at home, They will watch their time, when there is but a
Bayliffe, or a Servant, remaining, And put the Axe to the Root of the Tree, ere
ever the Master can stop it. Again they use a strange, and most unjust,
Exaction; In causing the Subjects, to pay Poundage, of their own Debts, due
from your Majesty unto them: So as a poor Man, when he has had his Hay, or his
Wood, or his Poultry, (which, perchance, he was full loath to part with, and
had, for the Provision, of his own Family, and not, to put to Sale,) taken from
him; And that not at a just Price, but under the value; And comes to receive
his Money, he shall have, after the rate, of 12. pence in the Pound, abated, for
Poundage, of his due Payment, upon so hard Conditions. Nay further, they are
grown to that extremity, (as is affirmed, though it be scarce credible; save
that in such Persons, all things are Credible) that they will take double
Poundage; Once when the Debentur is made; And ^gain the second time, when the
Money is paid.

For the second Point, (most Gracious Sovereign) touching the Quantity which
they take, far above that which is answered to your Majesty's use, they are the
only Multipliers in the world; They have the Art of Multiplication: For it is
affirmed unto me^ by diverse Gentlemen, of good report, and Experience, in these
Causes, as a Matter, which I may safely avouch, before your Majesty, (To whom
we owe all Truth, as well of Information, as Subjection;) That there is no
Pound Profit, which redoundeth to your Majesty, in this Course; But induces,
and begets three Pound damage upon your Subjects; besides the
Coffeehouse. And to the end, they may make their Spoil, more securely, what
do they? whereas diverse Statutes, do stric^ly provide, that whatsoever they
take, shall be registered, and attested; To the end, that by making a Collation,
Of that which is taken from the Country, and that which is answered above,
their Deceits might appear; They, to the end, to obscure their Deceits, utterly
omit the Observation of this, which the Law prescribes.

And therefore to descend, if it may please your Majesty, to the Third sort of
Abuse; which is of the unlawful Manner of their Taking, whereof this Question
is a Branch; It is so manifold, as it rather asks an Enumeration, of some of
the Particulars, then a prosecution of all. For their Price: By Law they ought
to take, as they can agree with the Subject; By Abuse they take, at an imposed,
and enforced, Price: By Law, they ought to make, but one Aprizement, by
Neighbors, in the Country; By Abuse, they make a second Aprizement at the
Court Gate; And when the Subjects Cattle, come up, many Miles, lean, and out
of Plight, by reason of their Travel, then they prize them anew, at an abated
price: By Law, they ought to take, between Sun and Sun; By Abuse, they take by
Twilight, and in the Night time, A Time well chosen for Malefactors: By Law,
they ought not to take in the High ways, (A place, by your Majesty's high
prerogative, protected; And by Statute, by special words, excepted;) By abuse,
they take in the ways, in Contempt of your Majesty's prerogative, and Laws: By
Law, they ought to show their Commission; And the Form of Commission, is, by
Law set down; The Commissions, they bring down, are against the Law; And
because, they know so much, they will not show them. A number of other
particulars there are, whereof, (as I have given your Majesty a Taste,) so the
chief of them, upon deliberate Advise, are set down in writing, by the Labor
of certain Committees, and approbation of the whole House, more particularly,
and lively, than I can express them; My self having them at the second hand, by
reason of my Abode above. But this writing, is a Collection of theirs, who
dwell amongst the Abuses of these offenders, and Complaints of the People: And
therefore, must needs have, a more perfect understanding, of all the
Circumstances of them.

It remains only, that I use a few words, the rather, to move your Majesty,
in this cause. A few words, (I say,) a very few, For neither need so great
Enormities any aggravating; Neither needs so great Grace, as uses of it
self, to flow from your Majesty's Princely Goodness, any Artificial
persuading. There be two Things only, which I think good, to set before your
Majesty. The one, the Example, of your most Noble Progenitors, Kings of this
Realm: who from the First King, that endowed this Kingdom, with the Great
Charters of their Liberties, until the last, have ordained, most of them, in
their several Reigns. some Laws, or Law against this kind of Offenders: And
specially the Example of one of them; That King, who for his Greatness, Wisdom,
Glory, and Union of several Kingdoms, resembles your Majesty most, both in
Virtue, and Fortune, King Edward the Third; who, in his time only, made ten
seve^rall Laws, against this Mischief. The second, is the Example, of God
himself; who has said and pronounced; That he will not hold them guiltless,
that take his Name in vain. For all these great Misdem^anours, are committed,
in, and under your Majesty's Name. And therefore we hope your Majesty, will
hold them twice guilty, that commit these offenses: Once for the Oppressing, of
the People: And once more, for doing it, under the Color, and abuse, of your
Majesty's most dreaded, and beloved, Name. So then, I will conclude, with the
saying of Pindarus; Optima Res Aqua: Not for the Excellency, but for the Common
use of it: And so contrary-wise, the Matter of Abuse of Purveyance, (if it be
not the most heinous Abuse,) yet certainly, it is the most common, and
general, Abuse, of all others, in this Kingdom.

It rests, that according to the Command laid upon me, I do, in all
Humbleness, present this writing, to your Majesty's Royal Hands; with most
humble Petition, on the Behalf, of the Commons; That, as your Majesty, has
been pleased, to vouchsafe, your Gracious Audience, to hear me speak: So you
would be pleased, to enlarge your Patience, to hear this writing read, which is
more Material.

A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacon in the Lower House of Parliament, 5o.
Jacobi, concerning the Article, of general Naturalization, of the Scottish
Nation.
IT may please you, (Mr. Speaker,) Preface will I use none, but put my Self,
upon your good Opinions, to which I have been accustomed beyond my Deservings.
Neither will I hold you in suspense, what way I will choose; But now, at the
first, declare my self, that I mean to counsel the House, to naturalize this
Nation. Wherein, nevertheless, I have a request to make unto you; which is of
more Efficacy, to the purpose, I have in Hand, then all that I shall say
afterward. And it is the same, which Demosthenes did, more then once, in great
Causes of Estate, make to the People of Athens; Vt cum Calculis Suffragiorum,
suman^ Magnanimitatem Reip. That when they took into their Hands, the Balls,
whereby to give their Voices, (according as the manner of them was;) They would
raise their Thoughts, and lay aside those Considerations, which their private
Vocations, and Degrees, might minister, and represent unto them: And would
take, upon them, Cogitations, and Minds, agreeable to the Dignity, and Honor,
of the Estate.

For, Mr. Speaker, as it was aptly, and sharply said, by Alexander, to
Parmenio; when upon the Recital, of the great offers, which Darius made,
Parmenio said unto him; I would accept these offers, were I as Alexander: He
Turned it upon him again; So would I, (says he) were I as Parmenio. So, in
this cause, if an honest English Merchant, (I do not single out that State, in
disgrace; For this Island ever held it Honorable; But only for an Instance,
of a private profession:) If an English Merchant should say, Surely I would
proceed no further in the union, were I as the King; It might be reasonably
answered; No more would the King, were he as an English Merchant. And the like
may be said of a Gentleman of the Country, be he never so worthy, and
sufficient; Or of a Lawyer, be he never so wise, and learned; Or of any other
particular Condition, in this Kingdom. For certainly, Mr. Speaker, if a Man
shall be only, or chiefly, sensible, of those Respects, which his particular
Vocation, and Degree, shall suggest, and infuse, into him; And not enter into
true, and worthy Considerations, of Estate, he shall never be able aright to
give Counsel, or take Counsel, in this Matter. So that if this Request be
granted, I account the Cause obtained.

But to proceed to the Matter it self. All Consultations, do rest, upon
Questions Comparative. For when a Question is, De Vero, it is simple. For there
is but one Truth: But when a Question is De Bono, it is for the most part
Comparative: For there be differing Degrees, of Good, and Evil; And the best,
of the Good, is to be preferred, and chosen; And the worst, of the Evil, is to
be declined, and avoided. And therefore, in a Question of this Nature, you may
not look for Answers, proper to every Inconvenience, alleged: For somewhat
that cannot be specially answered, may, nevertheless, be encountered, and
over-weighed, by matter of greater moment. And therefore the Matter, which I
shall set forth unto you, will naturally receive this Distribution of three
parts.

First, an Answer, unto those Inconveniences, which have been alleged, to
ensue, if we should give way to this Naturalization: which, I suppose, you will
find, not to be so great, as they have been made: But that much Dross, is put
into the Balance, to help to make weight.

Secondly, an Encounter against the Remain, of those Inconveniences, which
cannot properly be answered; By much greater Inconveniences, which we shall
incur, if we do not proceed, to this Naturalization.

Thirdly, an Encounter likewise, but of another Nature; That is, by the gain,
and benefit, which we shall draw, and purchase to our selves, by proceeding to
this Naturalization. And yet to avoid Confusion, which evermore follows of
too much Generality, it is necessary for me, before I proceed to persuasion, to
use some Distribution of the Points, or Parts of Naturalization: Which
certainly can be no better, nor none other, than the ancient Distribution, of
Ius Civitatis, Ius Suffragii, vel Tribus, and Petitionis, sive Honorum. For all
Ability, and Capacity, is either of private Interest, of Meum and Tuum, or of
public Service. And the public consists chiefly, either in Voice, or in
Office. Now it is the First of these, Mr. Speaker, that I will only handle at
this Time, and in this Place; And reserve the other two, for a Committee;
Because they receive, more Distinction, and Restriction.

To come therefore, to the Inconveniences, alleged on the other part. The
first of them is, that there may ensue of this Naturalization, a surcharge of
people upon this Realm of England; which is supposed already, to have the full
charge, and content: and therefore, there cannot be an admission of the
adoptive, without a Diminution, of the Fortunes, and Conditions, of those that
are Native Subjects of this Realm. A grave Objection, Mr. Speaker, and very
dutiful: For it proceeds not, of any unkindness, to the Scottish Nation, but
of a Natural Fastness to our selves. For that Answer of the Virgins; Ne forte
non sufficiat Vobis and Nobis, proceeded, not out of any Envy, or malign
humor, but out of providence, and that original charity, which begins with
our selves. And I must confess, Mr. Speaker, that, as the Gentleman said, when
Abraham, and Lot, in regard of the Greatness of their Families, grew pent, and
straitened; it is true, that (Brethren though they were) they grew to
difference, and to those words; Vade i^ ad Dextram, and ego ad sinistram, etc.
But certainly^ I should never have brought that Example on that side, For we
see what followed of it; How that this Separation, ad Dextram, and ad
Sinistram, cau^ed the miserable Captivity of the one Brother, and the
Dangerous, though prosperous War, of ^he other, for hi^ Rescous, and Recovery.

But to this Objection, Mr. Speaker, being so weighty, and so p^incipall, I
mean to give thre^ severa^l An^wers; every one o^ them, being, to mine
understanding by it self sufficient.

The first is that this Opini^n, of the Number, of the Scottis^ Na^ion, that
should be likely, to plant themselves, here amongst us, will be found, to be a
Thing, rather in Conceit, then in Event. For (Mr. Speaker) you shall find these
plausible Similitudes, of a Tree, that will thrive the better, i^ it be removed
in to the more fruitful Soil; And of Sheep, or Cat^ell, that, if they find a
Gap, or passage open, will leave the more barren Pasture, and get into the more
rich, and plenti^ull; To be but Arguments merely superficial, and to have no
sound Resemblance, wi^^ the Transplanting, or Transferring of Families. For the
Tree, we know, by nature, as soon as it is set in the better Ground, ca^ fasten
upon it, and take Nutriment from it: And a sheep, as soon as he gets, into the
better Pasture, what should let him to graze, and feed? But there longs more,
(I take it,) to a Family, or particular Person, that shall remove, from one
Nation, to another. For if (Mr. Speaker) they have not Stock, Means,
Acquaintance and Custom, Habitation, Trades, Countenance, and the like; I
hope, you doubt not, but they will starve, in the midst, o^ the rich Pasture;
And are far enough off, from grazing, at their pleasure. And therefore, in this
Point, which is conjectu^al^, Experience is the best Gu^de: For the Time past,
is a Pattern, o^ the Time to come. I think, no Man doubts, Mr. Speaker, bu^
his Majesty's first coming in, was as the greatest Spring-t^de, for the
Confluence, and En^rance, of that Nation. Now I would fain understand, in these
four years space, and in the Fullness, and Strength, of the Current, and Tide,
how many Families, of the Scottish Men, are planted, in the Cities, Eurroughs,
and Towns, of this Kingdom? For I do assure my self, that mo^e then some
Persons of Quality, about his Majesty's Person, here at the Court, and in
London, And some other inferior Persons, that have a Dependancy upon them; The
Return and Certificate, if such a Survey, should be made, would be, of a
Number, extremely small. I report me, to all your private knowledges, of the
places, where you inhabit.

Now (Mr. Speaker,) as I said; Si in Ligno viridi ita fit, quid fiet in arido?
I am sure there will be no more such Spring-T^des. But you will tell me, of a
multitude of Families, of the Scottish Nation^ in Polonia: And if they
multiply, in a Country, so far off, how much more here at hand? For that (Mr.
Speaker) you must impute it, of necessity, to some special Accident, of Time,
and place, that draws them thither. For you see, plainly, before your eyes,
that in Germany, which is much nearer; And in France, where they are invited
with privileges, And with this very privilege, of Naturalization, yet no such
Number can be found. So as it cannot be, either nearness of place, or
privilege of Person, that is the Cause. But shall I tell you (Mr. Speaker,)
what I think: Of all the places in the world, near or far of, they will never
take, that course of life, in this Kingdom, which they content themselves
with, in Poland. For we see it, to be the Nature of all men, that they will
rather discover Poverty abroad, then at home. There is never a Gentleman, that
has overreached himself in Expense, and thereby must abate his Countenance,
but he will rather travel, and do it abroad, then at home. And we know well,
they have good high Stomachs, and have ever stood, in some terms, and
Emulation, with us; And therefore they will never live here, except they can
live in good fashion. So as I assure you (Mr. Speaker,) I am of Opinion, that
the strife, which we now have to admit them, will have like Sequel, as that
Contention had, between the Nobility, and People of Rome, for the admitting of
a Plebeian Consul; which while it was in Passing, was very vehement, and
mightily stood upon: And when the People had obtained it; they never made any
Plebeian Consul; No, not in 60. years after. And so will this be for many
years, as I am persuaded, rather a Matter in Opinion, then in use, or effect:
And this is the First Answer, that I give to this main Inconvenience,
pretended, of Surcharge of People.

The Second Answer, which I give to this Objection, is this: I must have leave
to doubt, (Mr. Speaker,) that this Realm of England, is not yet peopled to the
full. For certain it is, that the Territories of France, Italy, Flaunders, and
some parts of Germany, do in equal space of Ground, bear and contain, a far
greater Quantity of People, if they were mustred by the Poll. Neither can I
see, that this Kingdom, is so much inferior, unto those sorrain Parts in
fruitfulness, as it is in population; which makes me conceive, we have not our
full charge. Besides, I do see manifestly among us, the Badges, and Tokens,
rather of Scarceness, then of Press of People; as Drowned Grounds, Commons,
Wastes, and the like: Which is a plain Demonstration, that howsoever there may
be, an overswelling throng, and press of People, here about London, which is
most in our Eye; yet the Body of the Kingdom, is but thin sown with People.
And whosoever shall compare, the Ruins, and Decays, of ancient Towns, in this
Realm, with the Erections, and Augmentations, of new; cannot but judge, that
this Realm, has been far better peopled in fo^mer times; It may be, in the
Heptarchy, or otherwise; For generally the Rule holds, The smaller State, the
greater Population, prorat^. And whether, this be true, or no, we need not seek
further, then to call to our remembrance, how many of us, serve here, in this
place, ^or desolate, and decayed, Buroughs. Again (Mr. Speaker,) whosoever
looks into the Principles of Estate, must hold it, that it is the Mediterrane
Countries, and not the Mari^^me, which need to fear surcharge of People. For
all Sea ^rovin^es, and specially Islands, have another Element, besides the
Earth, and Soil, for their Sustentation. For what an infinite, Number of
people, are, and may be sustained by Fishing, Carriage by Sea, and
Merchandising? wherein, I do again discover, that we are not at all pinched, by
Multitude of People. For if we were, it were not possible, that we should
relinquish, and resign, such an infi^ite Benefit, of Fishing, to the Flemmings,
as, it is well known, we do. And therefore, I see, that we have wastes by Sea,
as well as by Land: which still is an infallible Argument, that our Industry,
is not awaked, to seek maintenance, by any over great Press, or charge of
people.

And l^stly (Mr. Speaker) there was never any Kingdom, in the Ages of the
world, had, I think, so fair, and happy means, to issue, and discharge, the
Multitude of their People, (if it were too great,) as this Kingdom has; In
regard, of that desolate, and wasted, Kingdom of Ireland; which, (being a
Country, blessed, with almost all the Dow^ies of Nature; As Rivers, Havens,
Woods, Quarries, good Soil, and temperate Climate; And now at last, under his
Majesty, blessed also with obedience) Does, as it were, continually call unto
us, for our Colonies, and Plantations. And so I conclude, my second Answer, to
this p^etended Inconvenience, of surcharge of People.

The Third Answer, (Mr. Speaker,) which ^ give, is this. I demand, what is the
worst Effect, which can follow of Surcharge of People? Look into all Stories,
and you shall find it none other, th^n some Honorable War, for the Enlargement
of their Borde^s, which find themselves pent, upon Foreign parts. Which
Inco^venience, in a valourous, and Warlike, Nation, I know not, whether I
should term, an Inconvenience, or no? For the saying is most true, though in
another Sense; Omne solum Forti Patria. It was spoken, indeed, of the patience,
of an exiled Man: But it is no less true, of the valor, of a Warlike Nation.
And certainly, (Mr. Speaker,) I hope, I may speak it without offense: That if
we did hold our selves worthy, whenever just Cause should be given; Either to
recover our ancient Rights; Or to revenge our late wrongs; Or to attain the
Honor of our Ancestors; Or to enlarge the Patrimony of our Posterity; We would
never, in this manner, forget Considerations, of Amplitude, and Greatness, and
fall at variance, about profit, and Reckonings; Fitter, a great deal, ^or
private Persons, then for Parliaments, and Kingdoms. And thus, (Mr. Speaker,) I
leave this first objection, to such Satisfaction, as you have heard.

The second Objection is, that the Fundamental Laws of both these Kingdoms, of
England, and Scotland, are yet diverse, and several: Nay more, that it is
declared, by the Instrument, that they shall so continue; And that there is no
intent, in his Majesty, to make Innovation in them: And therefore, that it
should not be seasonable, to proceed to this Naturalization, whereby to endowe
them, with our Rights, and Privileges, except they should likewise receive,
and submit themselves, to our Laws. And this Objection, likewise, (Mr. Speaker)
I allow to be a weighty Objection, and worthy to be well answered, and
discussed.

The Answer, which I shall offer, is this. It is true, for mine own part, (Mr.
Speaker,) that I wish, the Scottish Nation, governed by our Laws: For I hold
our Laws, with some reducement, worthy to govern, if it were, the world. But
this is that which I say, and I desire therein your Attention; That, according
to true reason of Estate, Naturalization is, in Order, First, and precedent, to
union of Laws; In degree, a less Matter, then union of Laws; And, in Nature,
separable, not inseparable, from union of Laws. For Naturalization, does but
take out, the Marks of a Forrainer; But union of Laws, makes them entirely as
our selves: Naturalization takes away separation; But union of Laws does take
away Distinction. Do we not see, (Mr. Speaker,) that, in the Administation, of
the world, under the great Monarch, God himself, that his Laws are diverse; One
Law in Spirits, another in Bodies; One Law in Regions celestial, another in
Elementary? And yet the Creatures, are all one Mass, and Lump, without any
vacuum, or separation? Do we not see, likewise, in the State of the Church,
that amongst People, of all Languages, and Linages, there is one Communion of
Saints? And that, we are all Fellow Citizens, and naturalized, of the Heavenly
Jerusalem? And yet, nevertheless, diverse, and several, Ecclesiastical Laws,
Policies, and Hierarchies; According to the Speech, of that worthy Father; In
vest varietas sit, scissurae non sit. And therefore, certainly, (Mr. Speaker,)
the Bond of Law, is the more special, and private, Bond; And the Bond of
Naturalization, the more common, and general. For the Laws, are rather Figura
Reip, then Forma; And rather Bonds of Perfection, then Bonds of Entirenesse.
And therefore, we see, in the Experience, of our own Government, that in the
Kingdom of Ireland, all our Statute-Lawes, since Poynings Law, are not in
force; And yet we deny them not, the Benefit, of Naturalization. In Gersey,
Garnesey, and the Isle of Man, our Common-Lawes are not in force; And yet they
have the Benefit of Naturalization. Neither need any Man doubt, but that our
Laws, and Customs, must, in small time, gather, and win, upon theirs. For
here is the Seat of the Kingdom, whence come the supreme Directions of Estate;
Here is the Kings Person, and Example, of which the Verse says.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.
And therefore, it is not possible; Although not by solemn, and formal, Act
of Estates; yet by the secret Operation, of no long time, but they will come
under the yoke of our Laws; And so, Dulcis tractus pari jugo. And this is the
Answer, I give, to this second objection.

The third Objection, is, some Inequality, in the Fortunes, of these two
Nations, England and Scotland; By the Commixture whereof, there may ensue
Advantage to them, and Loss to us. Wherein, (Mr. Speaker) it is well, that this
Difference, or Dispaparity, con^isteth, but in external Goods, of Fortune. For
indeed, it must needs be confessed, that for the Goods of the Mind, and the
Body, they are Alteri Nos; Other our selves. For to do them but right, we know,
in their Capacity, and understanding they are a people Ingenious; In Labor,
Industrious; In Courage, Valiant; In Body, Hard, Active, and Comely. More might
be said, but in commending them, we do but, in effect, commend our selves: For
they are of one Piece, and Continent, with us: And Truth is, we are
participant, both of their Virtues, and Vices. For if they have been noted, to
be a people not so tractable in G^vernment, we cannot, without flatte^ing our
selves, free our selves, altogether, from that Fault; Being, indeed, a thing
incident, to all Martial People. As we see it evident, by the Example, of the
Romans, and others. Even like unto Fierce Horses, that though they be, of
better service then others, yet are they harder, to guide, and to manage.

But for this Objection, (Mr. Speaker) I purpose to answer it; Not by Authority
of Scripture, which says. Beatius est dare quam accipere: But by an Authority
framed, and derived, from the Judgment of our selves, and our Ancestors, in
the same case, as to this point. For, (Mr. Speaker,) in all the Line of our
Kings, none uses to carry, greater Commendation, then his Majesty's Noble
Progenitour, King Edward, the First of that Name: And amongst his other
Commendations, both of War, and Policy, none is more celebrated, then his
purpose, and Enterprise, for the Conquest of Scotland: As not bending his
Designs to glorious Acquests abroad, but to solid strength at home: which,
nevertheless, if it had succeeded well, could not, but have brought in, all
those Inconveniences, of the Commixture, of a more Opulent Kingdom, with a
less, that are now alleged. For it is not the Yoke, either of our Arms, or of
our Laws, that can alter the nature of the Climate, or the Nature of the Soil:
Neither is it, the Manner, of the Commixture, that can alter, the Matter, of
the Commixture. And therefore, (Mr. Speaker,) if it were good for us then, it
is good for us now; And not to be prised the less, because we paid not so dear
for it. But a more full Answer to this Objection, I refer over to that, which
will come after to be spoken, touching Surety, and Greatness.

The fourth Objection, (Mr. Speaker,) is not properly an Objection, but rather
a preoccupation, of an Objection, of the other side: For it may be said, and
very materially, whereabout do we contend? The Benefit of Naturalization is, by
the Law, in as many, as have been, or shall be born, since his Majesty's
Coming to the Crown, already settled, and invested. There is no more then, but
to bring the Ante-Nati, into the Degree of the Post-Nati; that Men grown, that
have well deserved, may be in no worse case, then children, which have not
deserved: And Elder Brothers, in no worse case, then younger Brothers. So as we
stand, upon Quiddam, not Quantum; Being but a little difference of Time, of one
Generation, from another.

To this, (Mr. Speaker,) it is said by some; That the Law is not so, but that
the Post-Nati, are Aliens, as well as the rest. A point, that I mean not much
to argue; Both because it has been well spoken to, by the Gentleman, that
spoke last before me; And because, I do desire, in this Case, and in this
place, to speak rather of Convenience, then of Law. Only this will I say; That
that Opinion, seems to me, Contrary to reason of Law; Contrary to form of
pleading in Law; And Contrary to Authority, and Experience, of Law. For Reason
of Law, when I meditate of it; Methinks, the wisdom, of the Common Laws of
England, well observed, is Admirable, in the Distribution, of the Benefit, and
protection, of the Laws; According to the several Conditions of Persons, in an
excellent Proportion. The Degrees are four, but bipartite. Two of Aliens, and
Two of Subjects. The first Degree, is of an Alien, born, under a King, or
State, that is an Enemy. If such an one, come into this Kingdom, without safe
Conduct, it is at his peril: The Law gives him no protection, neither for
Body, Lands, nor Goods: So as if he be slain, there is no Remedy, by any
Appeal, at the parties suit, although his wife were an English Woman: Marry at
the Kings suit, the Case may be otherwise, in regard of the offense to the
Peace. The Second Degree, is, of an Alien, that is born under the faith, and
Allegiance, of a King, or State, that is a friend. Unto such a Person, the Law
does impart, a greater Benefit, and protection; That is, concerning things
personal, Transitory, and Moveable; As Goods, and Chattels, Contracts, and the
like: But not concerning Freehold, and Inheritance. And the reason is, because
he may be an Enemy, though he be not. For the State, under the Obeisance of
which he is, may enter intoy Quarrel, and Hostility; And therefore, as the Law
has but a Transitory Assurance of him, so it rewards him, but with Transitory
Benefits. The third Degree, is, of a Subject, who having been an Alien, is, by
Charter made Denizen. To such an one, the Law does impart, yet, a more ample
Benefit: For it gives him power, to purchase Freehold, and Inheritance, to his
Own use: And likewise, enables the Children, born after his Denization, to
inherit. But yet, nevertheless, he cannot make Title, or convey Pedigree, from
any Ancestour Paramount. For the Law, thinks not good, to make him, in the same
Degree, with a Subject born: Because he was once an Alien, and so might once
have been an Enemy. And Nemo subito fingitur: Men's Affections, cannot be so
settled, by any Benefit, as when from their Nativity, they are inbred, and
inherent. And the fourth Degree, which is the perfect Degree, is, of such a
Person, that neither is Enemy, nor can be Enemy, in time to come; Nor could
have been Enemy, at any time past; And therefore, the Law gives unto him, the
full Benefit, of Naturalization. Now, (Mr. Speaker,) if these be the true
Steps, and Paces, of the Law, no Man can deny, but whosoever is born under the
Kings Obedience, never could, in Aliquo puncto temporis, be an Enemy; (A Rebel
he might be, but no Enemy;) And therefore, in Reason of Law, is naturalized.
Nay contrary-wise, he is bound, Iure Nativitatis, to defend this Kingdom of
England, against all Invaders or Rebels: And therefore, as he is obliged, to
the protection of Arms; And that perpetually, and universally; so he is to
have, the perpetual, and universal, Benefit, and protection of Law, which is
Naturalization.

For Form of Pleading, it is true, that has been said; That if a Man, would
plead another, to be an Alien; He must not only set forth, negatively, and
privatively, that he was born, out of the Obedience, of our Sovereign Lord the
King; But affirmatively, under the Obedience, of a foreign King, or State, in
particular; which never can be done in this case.

As for Authority, I will not press it; you know all what has been published,
by the Kings Proclamation.

And for Experience of Law, we see it in the Subjects of Ireland; In the
Subjects of Gersey, and Gernsey, parcels of the Duchy of Normandy; In the
Subjects of Calleis, (when it was English,) which was parcel of the Crown of
France. But, as I said, I am not willing, to enter into an Argument of Law, but
to hold my self, to point of Convenience.

So as, for my part, I hold all Post-Nati, Naturalized, ipso Iure. But yet, I
am far from Opinion, that it should be a thing superfluous, to have it done by
Parliament; Chiefly, in respect, of that true principle; Principum Actiones
praecipue ad Famam sunt componendae. It will lift up a Sign, to all the World,
of our Love toward them, and good agreement with them. And these are (Mr.
Speaker) the Material Objections, which have been made of the other Side,
whereunto you have heard mine Answers: Weigh them in your Wisdoms; And so I
conclude that General Part.

Now, (Mr. Speaker,) according as I promised, I must fill the other Balance,
in expressing unto you, the Inconveniences, which we shall incur, if we shall
not proceed, to this Naturalization. wherein, that Inconvenience, which of all
others, and alone by it self, if there were none other, does exceedingly move
me, and may move you, is a Position of Estate, collected out of the Records of
Time, which is this: That wheresoever several Kingdoms, or Estates, have been
united in Sovereignty; If that Union, has not been fortified, and bound in,
with a further Union; And namely that, which is now in Question, of
Naturalization; This has followed; That at one time, or other, they have
broken again, being upon all Occasions apt to revolt, and relapse, to the
former Separation.

Of this Assertion, the first Example, which I will set before you, is of that
memorable Union, which was between the Romans, and the Latins, which
continued, from the Battle, at the Lake of Regilla, for many years, until
the Consulships of T. Manlius, and P. Decius. At what time, there began, about
this very point of Naturalization, that War, which was called Bellum Soci^le;
Being the most Bloody, and Pernicious War, that ever the Roman State endured.
wherein after Numbers of Battles, and infinite Seiges, and Surprises of
Towns, the Romans, in the end, prevailed, and mastered the Latins. But as soon
as ever they had the Honor of the War, looking back into what Perdition, and
Confusion, they were near to have been brought, they presently naturalized them
all. You speak of a Naturalization in Blood; There was a Naturalization indeed
in Blood.

Let me set, before you, again, the Example of Sparta, and the rest of
Peloponnesus, their Associates. The State of Sparta, was a Nice, and Jealous,
State, in this point, of imparting Naturaliza^ion, to their Confederates, But
what was the issue of it? After they had held them, in a kind of Society, and
Amity, for diverse years: upon the first occasion given, (which was no more,
then the Surprise, of the Castle of Thebes, by certain desperate Conspiratours,
in the habit of Masquers; There ensued immediately, a general Revolt, and
Defection, of their Associats; which was the Ruin of their State, never
afterward to be recovered.

Of later time, let me lead your Consideration to behold, the like Events, in
the Kingdom of Arragon; which Kingdom was united with Castile, and the rest
of Spain, in the persons of Ferdinando and Isabella; And so continued many
years; But yet so, as it stood, a Kingdom, severed, and divided, from the
rest, of the Body, of Spain, in privileges; And directly, in this point of
Naturalization, or Capacity of Inheritance. What came of this? Thus much; That
now of fresh Memory, not past twelve years since, only upon the voice of a
Condemned Man, out of the Grate of a Prison, toward the Street, that cried
Fueros, (which is as much as Liberties, or Privileges;) There was raised a
dangerous Rebellion, which was suppressed, with Difficulty, with an Army
Royal; And their privileges disannulled, and they incorporated, with the rest
of Spain. Upon so small a Spark, notwithstanding so long continuance, were they
ready to break, and sever again.

The like may be said, of the States of Florence, and Pisa: Which City of Pisa,
being united unto Florence, but not endued with the Benefit of Naturalization,
upon the first light of foreign Assist^nce, by the Expedition, of Charles the
eighth, of France, into Italy, did revol^; Though it be since, again reunited,
and Incorporated.

The same Effect, we see, in the most Barbarous Government; which shows it,
the rather, to be an effect of Nature. For it was thought, a fit Policy, by
the Council of Constantinople, to retain the three Provinces, of Transylvania,
Valachia, and Moldavia, (which were, as the very Nurses of Constantinople, in
respect of their Provisions,) to the end, they might be the less wa^ted, only
under Vayvods, as Vassals and Homagers; And not under Bassa's, and Provinces of
the Turkish Empire; Which Policy, we see, by late Experience, proved
unfortunate; As appeared, by the Revolt, of the same three Provinces, under the
Arms and Conduct of Sigismund, Prince of Transylvania; A Leader, very famous,
for a time; which Revolt is, not yet, fully recovered. Whereas we seldom, or
never hear, of Revolts of Princes, incorporate, to the Turkish Empire.

On the other part, (Mr. Speaker,) because it is true, which the Logicians say;
Opp^sita, juxta se posita, magis elucescunt; let us take a view, and we shall
find; That wheresoever, Kingdoms, and States, have been united; And that union
Corroborate, by the Bond of mutual Naturalization; you shall never observe
them, afterward, upon any Occasion of Trouble, or otherwise, to break and
sever again: As we see, most evidently, before our ey^s, in diverse Provinces of
France; That is to say, Gu^en, Prov^nce, Normandy, Britain; which,
notwithstanding, the infinite infesting Troubles, of that Kingdom, never
offered to break again.

We see the like Effect, in all the Kingdoms, of Spain^ which are mutually
naturalized; As Leon, Castile, Valencia, Andaluzia, Granada, and the rest:
Except Aragon, which held the contrary Course, and therefore had the contrary
success, as we said: And Portugal, of which, there is not yet, sufficient
Tri^ll.

And lastly, we see the like effect, in our own Nation, which never rent
as^under, after it was once united; so as we now scarce know, whether the
Heptarchy, were a Story, or a Fable. And therefore, (Mr. Speaker,) when I
revolve with my Self, these Examples, and others, so lively expressing the
necessity of a Naturali^zation, to avoy'd a relapse into a Separation; And do
hear so many Arguments, and Scruples, made on the other side; It makes me think
on the old Bishop^ which upon a public Disputation, of certain Divines,
Christians, with some learned Men of the Heathen, did extremely press to be
heard; And they were loath to suffer him, because they knew he was unlearned,
though otherwise an Holy and well-meaning Man; But, at last, with much ado, he
got to be heard. And when he came to speak, instead of u^ing Argument, he did
only say over his Belief: But did it with such Assurance, and Constancy, as it
did strike the Minds, of those that hea^d him, more then any Argument had done.
And so, (Mr. Speaker,) against all these witty and subtle Arguments, I say,
that I do believe, and I would be sorry to be found a Prophet in it; That
except we proceed, with this Naturalization; (Though not perhaps in his
Majesty's time, who has such Interest in both Nations,) yet in the time of his
Descendants, these Realms will be in continual Danger, to divide, and break
again. Now if any Man, be of that careless mind, -- Maneat nostros ea Cura
Nepotes;


Or of that hard Mind, to leave things, to be tried, by the sharpest Sword;
sure I am, he is not of Saint Paul's Opinion; who affirms; That whosoever,
uses not Foresight, and Provision for his Family, is worse then an
unbeliever: Much more, if we shall not use foresight for these two Kingdoms,
that comprehend so many Families: But leave things open, to the peril of
future Divisions. And thus have I expressed unto you the Inconvenience, which,
of all other, sinketh deepest with me, as the most weighty.

Neither do there want, other Inconveniences, (Mr. Speaker,) the Ef^ect, and
Influence whereof, I fear, will not be adjourned to so long a D^y, as this,
that I have spoken of. For I leave it, to your wisdom, to consider; whether you
do not think, in case, by the denial o^ this Naturalization, any Pike of
Alienation, or unkindness; (I do not say,) should be, thought to be, or noised
to be, between these two Nations; whether it will not quicken, and excite, all
the Envious, and Malicious, Humors, wheresoever, (which are now covered,)
against us, either foreign, or at home; And so open the way to practices, and
other Engines, and Machinations, to the Disturbance, of this State. As for that
other Inconvenience, of his Majesty's Engagement, into this Action, it is too
binding, and pressing, to be spoken of; And may do better, a great deal, in
your Minds, then in my Mouth; Or in the mouth of any man else; because, as I
say, it does press, our Liberty, too far. And therefore, (Mr. Speaker,) I come
now, to the third general part, of my Division, concerning the Benefits, which
we shall purchase, by this knitting of the knot, surer, and streighter, between
these two Kingdoms, by the Communicating of Naturalization.

The Benefits may appear to be two; The one Surety; the other Greatness.
Touching Surety, (Mr. Speaker) it was well said by Titus Quiutius, the Roman,
touching the state of Peloponnesus; That the Tortois is safe within her shell:
Testudo intra Tegumen tuta est. But if there be any Parts, that lie open, they
endanger all the rest. We know well, that although the State, at this time, be
in a happy peace; Yet, for the time past, the more Ancient Enemy, to this
Kingdom, has been the French; and the more late, the Spaniard: And both
these, had, as it were, their several postern Gates; whereby, they might have
approach, and Entrance, to annoy us. France had Scotland, and Spain had
Ireland: For these were the two Accesses, which did comfort, and encourage,
both these Enemies, to assail, and trouble us. We see, that of Sco^land, is cut
off, by the Union, of both these Kingdoms; If that, it shall be now made
constant, and permanent. That of Ireland, is likewise cut off, by the
convenient situation, of the North of Scotland, toward the North of Ireland,
where the Sore was: Which, we see, being suddenly closed, has continued
closed, by means of this Salve^ So as now, there are no Parts, of this State,
exposed to Danger, to be a Temptation, to the Ambition of Forrainers, but their
approaches, and Avenues, are taken away. For, I do little doubt, but those
Forrainers, which had so little success^, when they had these advantages, will
have much less comfort now, that they be taken from them. And so much for
Surety.

For Greatness, (Mr. Speaker,) I think a Man may speak it soberly, and without
Bravery; That this Kingdom of England, having Scotland united, Ireland reduced,
the Sea Provinces of the Low Countries contracted, and Shipping maintained; Is
one of the greatest Monarchies, in Forces, truly esteemed, that has been in
the world. For certainly, the Kingdoms here on Earth, have a Resemblance with
the Kingdom of Heaven; which our Savior compares, not to any great Kernel,
or Nut, but to a very Small Grain; yet such an one, as is apt, to grow, and
spread. And such, do I take to be, the Constitution of this Kingdom; If
indeed, we shall refer our Counsels, to Greatness, and Power; And not quench
them, too much, with Consideration, of Utility, and Wealth. For (Mr. Speaker,)
was it not, think you, a true Answer, that Solon of Greece, made, to the Rich
King Craesus of Lydia, when he showed unto him, a great Quantity of Gold, that
he had gathered together, in Ostentation of his Greatness, and Might? But Solon
said to him^ contrary to his Expectation; Why Sir, if another come, that has
better Iron then you, he will be Lord, of all your Gold. Neither is the
Authority of Machiavell to be despised; who scorneth the Proverb of estate,
taken first from a Speech of Muciauus; That Moneys ^re the Sinews of War: And
says, There are no true Sinews of War, but the very Sinews, of the Arms, of
valiant Men. Nay more, (Mr. Speaker,) whosoever shall look, into the
Seminaries, and Beginnings, of the Monarchies, of the world, he shall find them
founded in Poverty. Persia, a Country barren, and poor, in respect of the
Medes, whom they subdued. Macedon, a Kingdom ignoble, and Mercenary, until
the Time, of Philip, the Son of Amyntas. Rome had poor, and pastoral
Beginnings. The Turks, a Band of Sarmatian Scythes, that, in a vagabond manner,
made Impression, upon that part of Asia, which is yet called Turcomania. Out of
which, after much variety of Fortune, sprung the Ottomon Family, now the
Terror of the world. So we know the Goths, Vandals, Alanes, Huns, Lombards,
Normans, and the rest of the Northern People, in one Age of the World, made
their Descent, or Expedition, upon the Roman Empire; And came not, as Rovers,
to carry away prey, and be gone again; But planted themselves, in a number, of
fruitful, and rich, Provinces; Where, not only their Generations, but their
Names, remain, till this Day: witness Lombardy; Catalonia, A name compounded of
Goth and Alane; Andaluzia, A name corrupted from Vandelicia; Hungary; Normandy;
and others. Nay, the Fortune of the Swizzes, of late years, (which are bred, in
a barren, and Mountanous Country,) is not to be forgotten; Who first ruined
the Duke of Burgundy; The same, who had almost ruined, the Kingdom of France:
what time, after the Battle of Granson, the Rich Jewel of Burgundy, prized at
many Thousands, was sold for a few pence, by a common Swizze, That knew no
more, what a Jewel meant, then did ^sops Cock. And again, the same Nation, in
revenge of a Scorn, was the Ruin of the French Kings Affairs in Italy, Jews
the 12th. For that King, when he was pressed somewhat rudely, by an Agent of
the Swizzes, to raise their Pensions, brake into Words of Choler; What, (said
he,) will these Villains of the Mountains, put a Tax upon me? which words,
lost him his Duchy of Millain, and chased him out of Italy. All which
Examples, (Mr. Speaker,) do well prove Solons opinion, of the Authority, and
Mastry, that Iron has over Gold. And therefore, if I shall speak, unto you,
mine own Heart; Me thinks, we should a little disdain, that the Nation of
Spain, (which, howsoever of late, it has grown to Rule, yet of ancient time
served many Ages; First under Carthage, then under Rome, after under Sarazens,
Goths, and others;) should, of late years, take unto themselves that Spirit,
as to dream, of a Monarchy, in the West, according to that Devise; Video Solemn
Ortentem in Occidente: Only, because they have ravished, from some wild, and
unarmed, People, Mines, and Store, of Gold: And, on the other side, that this
Island of Britanny, seated, and manned, as it is, and that has, (I make no
question,) the best Iron in the world; (That is, the best Soldiers of the
world;) should think of nothing, but Reckonings, and Audits, and Meum and Tuum,
and I cannot tell what.

Mr. Speaker,) I have, (I take it,) gone through the Parts, which I propounded
to my Self; Wherein, if any Man, shall think, that I have sung Placebo; For
mine own particular, I would have him know, that I am not so unseen in the
world, but that I discern, it were much alike, for my private fortune, to rest
a Tacebo, as to sing a Placebo, in this Business. But I have spoken, out of the
Fountain, of my Heart: Credidi, propter quod locutus sum; I believed, therefore
I spoke. So as my Duty is performed: The Judgment is yours; God direct it for
the best.

A Speech used by Sir Francis Bacons in the Lower House of Parliament, by
occasion, of a Motion, concerning the Union of Laws.
AND it please you, (Mr. Speaker,) were it now a time to Wish, as it is to
Advise; No Man should be more forward, or more earnest, then my self, in this
wish; That his Majesty's Subjects, of England and Scotland, were governed by
one Law; And that for many Reasons.

First, because it will be an infallible Assurance, that there will never be,
any Relapse, in succeeding Ages, to a Separation. Secondly, Dulcis tractus pari
Iugo: If the Draught lie most upon us, and the Yoke lightest upon them, it is
not equal. Thirdly, the Qualities, and, (as I may term it,) the Elements of
their Laws, and ours, are such, as do promise, an excellent Temperature, in the
compounded Body: For if the prerogative here be too ind^finite, it may be the
Liberty there is too unbounded: If our Laws, and proceedings, be too Prolixe,
and Formal; it may be theirs, are too informall, and Summary. Fourthly, I do
discern, to my understanding, there will be no great Difficulty, in this Work.
For their Laws, by that I can learn, compared with ours, are like their
Language, compared with ours. For as their Language, has the same Roots, that
ours has, but has a little more mixture of Latin, and French; So their Laws
and Customs, have the like Grounds, that ours have, with a little more
mixture, of the Civil Law, and French Customs. Lastly, the Mean to this work,
seems to me, no less excellent, then the Work it self: For if both Laws
shall be united, it is of necessity, for preparation, and Inducement thereunto,
that our own Laws, be reviewed, and recompiled, Then the which, I think, there
cannot be a work, that his Majesty can undertake, in these his times of Peace,
more Politic, more Honorable, nor more Beneficial to his Subjects, for all
Ages; Pace data Terris, Animum ad Civilia Vertit
Iura suum, Legesque tulit justissimus Auctor.

For this continual Heaping up, of Laws, without digesting them, makes but a
Chaos and Confusion: And turns the Laws, many times, to become but Snares for
the People, as is said, in the Scripture, Pluet super ^os Laqueos. Now, Non
sunt pejores Laquei, quam Laquei Legum. And therefore, this work, I esteem to
be, indeed, a work, (rightly to term it,) Heroical. So that, for this good
wish, of Union of Laws, I do consent to the full; And, I think, you may
perceive, by that which I have said, that I come not in this, to the Opinion of
Others, but that I was, long ago, settled in it, my Self. Nevertheless, as this
is moved out of zeal, so, I take it, to be moved out of Time; As commonly
zealous Motions are: while Men, are, so fast, carried on, to the End, as they
give no Attention to the Mean. For if it be Time, to talk of this now; It is,
either because the business, now in hand, cannot proceed without it; Or
because, in Time, and Order, this Matter should be precedent; Or because, we
shall leese some advantage, toward this Effect, so much desired, if we should
go on, in the course, we are about. But none of these three; in my judgment,
are true; And therefore, the Motion, as I said, unseasonable.

For first, that there may not be, a Naturalization, without an Union in Laws,
cannot be maintained. Look into the Example, of the Church; And the Union
thereof; You shall see several Churches, that join in one Faith, one Baptism,
(which are the points of spiritual Naturalization,) do, many times, in Policy,
Constitutions, and Customs, differ. And therefore, one of the Fa^hers, made an
excellent observation, upon the two Mysteries: The one, that in the Gospel;
where the Garment of Christ, is said to have been with out Seame; The other,
that in the Psalm, where ^he Garment, of the Queen is said, to have been of
diverse Colors; And concludes, In vest Varietas sit, Scissura non sit. So, in
this Case, (Mr. Speaker,) we are now in hand, to make this Monarchy of one
Piece, and not of one Color. Look again, into the Examples, of Foreign
Countries; And take, that next us, of France; And there, you shall find, that
they have this Distribution; Pais du droit Escript; and Pais du droit
Constumier. For Gascoigne, Languedock, Pr^vence, Daulphenie, are Countries,
governed by the Letter, or Text, of the Civil Law: But the Isle of France,
Tourain, Berry, Anjou, and the rest; And most of all Britain, and Normandy;
Are governed by Customs, which amount unto a Municipall Law; And use the
Civil Law, but only for Grounds; And to decide new, and rare, Cases; And yet,
nevertheless, Naturalization, passes through all.

Secondly, that this Union of Laws, should precede the Naturalization; Or that
it should go on, pari passu, hand in hand, I suppose, likewise, can hardly be
maintained: But the contrary, that Naturalization ought to precede. Of which my
Opinion, as I could yield many reasons, so because all this, is but a
Digression, and therefore ought to be-short; I will hold my self now, only to
one, which is briefly and plainly this: That the Union of Laws, will ask a
great Time, to be perfected, both for the Compiling, and for the Passing:
During all which time, if this Mark of Strangers, should be denied to be taken
away; I fear it may induce, such a Habit of Strangeness, as will rather be an
Impediment, then a preparation, to further proceeding. For he was a wise Man
that said; Opportuni Magnis Conatibus Transitus Rerum. And in those Cases, Non
progredi est Regredi. An like, as in a pair of Tables, you must put out the
former writing, before you can put in new; And again, that which you write in,
you write Letter by Letter; But that which you put out, you put out at once: So
we have now to deal with the Tables of Men's Hearts, wherein it is in vain, to
think you can enter, the willing Acceptance of our Laws, and Customs; except
you first put sorth, all Notes, either of Hostility, or Foreign Condition. And
these, are to be put out, simulet semel, at once, without Gradations; whereas
the other points, are to be imprinted, and engraven, distinctly, and by degrees.

Thirdly, whereas it is conceived by some, that the Communication, of our
Benefits, and privileges, is a good Hold, that we have over them, to draw them
to submit themselves to our Laws: It is an Argument, of some probability, but
yet to be answered, many ways. For first, the Intent is mistaken; Which is
not, as I conceive it, to draw them wholly, to a Subjection to our Law^; But to
draw, both Nations, to one uniformity, of Law. Again to think, that there
should be, a kind of Articulate, and Indented, Contract; That they should
receive our Laws, to obtain our privileges, it is a Matter in reason of Estate
not to be expected; Being that, which scarcely a private Man, will acknowledge,
if it come to that, whereof Seneca speaks; Beneficium accipere, est
Libertatem vendere: No, but Courses of Estate, do describe, and delineate,
another way; Which is, to win them, either by Benefit, or Custom. For we see,
in all Creatures, that Men do Feed them first, and Reclaim them after. And so,
in the first Institution of Kingdoms, Kings did first win People, by many
Benefits, and Protections, before they pressed any Yoke. And for Custome^ which
the Poets call, Imponere Morem: Who doubts, but that the Seat of the Kingdom,
and the Example of the King, resting here with us, our Manners will quickly be
there, to make all things ready for our Laws?

And lastly, the Naturalization, which is now propounded, is qualified, with
such Restrictions, as there will be enough kept back, to be used, at all times,
for an Adamant, of drawing them further on to our Desires. And therefore, to
conclude, I hold this Motion, of Union of Laws, very worthy, and arising from
very good Minds, but not proper for this Time.

To come therefore to that, which is now in Question: It is no more, but
whither, there should be a Difference made, in this privilege of
Naturalization, between the Ante-Nati, and the Post-Nati; Not in point of Law,
(for that will otherwise be decided,) but only in point of Convenience; [As if
a Law, were now to be made, de novo.] In which Question, I will, at this time,
only answer two Objections; And use two Arguments, and so leave it to your
Judgment.

The first Objection has been; That if a Difference, should be, it ought to be
in favor of the Ante-Nati; Because, they are Persons, of Merit, Service, and
Proof; whereas the Post-Nati are Infants, That, (as the Scripture says,) know
not the Right Hand from the Left.

This were good Reason, (Mr. Speaker,) if the Question were, of Naturalizing
some particular Persons, by a private Bill: But it has no proportion, with the
general Case. For now, we are not to look to respects, that are proper to
some, but to those, which are common to all^ Now then, how can it be imagined,
but that those, that took their first Breath, since this happy Union, inherent
in his Majesty's Person, must be more assured, and affectionate to this
Kingdom, then those generally can be presumed to be, which were sometimes
Strangers? For, Nemo subito fingitur: The Conversions of Minds, are not so
swift, as the Conversions of Times. Nay, in Effects of Grace, which exceed far
the Effects of Nature, we see, Saint Paul, makes a difference, between those he
calls Neophites; That is, newly grafted into Christianity; And those, that are
brought up, in the Faith. And so, we see, by the Laws of the Church, that the
Children of Christians, shall be Baptized, in regard, of the Faith, of their
Parents; But the Child of an E^hnick, may not receive Baptism, till he be able,
to make, an understanding Profession, of his Faith.

Another Objection has been made; That we ought, to be more provident, and
reserved, to restrain the Post-Nati, then the Ante-Nati: Because, during his
Majesty's time, being a Prince of so approved Wisdom, and Judgment, we need
no better Caution, then the Confidence, we may repose in Him: But in the Futu^e
Reigns, of succeeding Ages, our Caution must be in Re, and not in Persona.

But, (Mr. Speaker,) to this I answer; That as we cannot expect a Prince
hereafter, less like to err, in respect of his Judgment: so again, we cannot
expect a Prince, so like to exceed, (if I may so term it,) in this point of
Beneficence, to that Nation, in respect of the Occasion. For whereas all
Princes, and all Men are won, either by Merit, or Conversation, there is no
Appearance, that any of his Majesty's Descendants, can have either of these
Causes, of Bounty, toward that Nation, in so ample Degree, as his Majesty
has. And these be, the two Objections, which seemed to me most Material, why
the Post-Nati, should be left free, and not be concluded, in the same
Restrictions, with the Ante-Nati, whereunto you have heard the Answers.

The two Reasons, which I will use, on the other side, are briefly these. The
one, being a Reason, of Common Sense; The other, a Reason, of Estate. We see,
(Mr. Speaker,) the Time of the Nativity, is, in most Cases, principally
regarded. In Nature, the Time of planting, and setting, is chiefly observed.
And we see, the Astrologers, pretend to judge, of the Fortune of the Party, by
the Time of the Nativity. In Laws, we may, not unfitly, apply, the Case of
Legitimation, to the Case of Naturalization. For it is true, that the Common
Canon Law, does put the Ante-Natus, and the Post-Natus, in one Degree; But when
it was moved, to the Parliament of England; Barons una voce responderunt,
Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare. And though, it must be confessed, that the
Ante-Nati, and Post-Nati, are in the same Degree, in Dignities; yet were they
never so, in Abilities: For no Man doubts, but the Son, of an Earl, or Baron,
before his Creation, or Call, shall inherit the Dignity, as well as the Son
born after.

But the Son, of an Attainted Person, born before the Attainder, shall not
inherit, as the After born shall, notwithstanding Charter of Pardon.

The Reason of Estate is; That any Restriction, of the Ante-Nati, is Temporary;
And expireth with this Generation: But if you you make it in the Post-Nati
also, you do, but in substance, pen, a perpetuity of Separation.

(Mr. Speaker,) in this point, I have been short, because I little expected
this Doubt, as to point of Convenience: And therefore will not much labor,
where I suppose, there is no greater Opposition.

A Report, made by Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, in the House of Commons, of a
Speech, delivered by the Earl of Salisbury; And another Speech, delivered by
the Earl of Northampton, at a Conference, concerning the Petition of the
Merchauts, upon the Spanish gri^vances, Parliament 5o. Jacobi.
ANd it please you, (Mr. Speaker,) I do not find my self, any ways bound, to
report that, which passed, at the last conference, touching the Spanish
Grievances; Having been neither employed to speak, nor appointed to Report in
that Cause. But because it is put upon me, by a silent Expectation, grounded
upon nothing, (that I know,) more then that I was observed, diligently to take
notes; I am content, (if that Provision, which I made for mine own Remembrance,
may serve this House for a Report,) not to deny you that Sheafe, that I have,
in have, bound up. It is true, that one of his Majesty's, Principal
Counselors in Causes of Estate, did use a Speech, that contained a World of
Matter: But how, I shall be able to make a Globe, of that World, therein I fear
mine own strength.

His Lordship, took the occasion, of this, which I shall now report, upon the
Answer, which was by us made, to the Amendments, propounded, upon the Bill of
Hostile Laws; Quitting that Business, with these few words; That he would
discharge, our Expectation of Reply, because their Lordships had, no Warrant to
Dispute. Then, continuing his Speech, he fell into this other Cause, and said;
That being now, to make Answer, to a proposition of ours, as we had done to one
of theirs, he wished it could be passed over, with like Brevity. But he did
foresee his way, that it would prove, not only long, but likewise hard to
find, and hard to keep; This Cause, being so to be carried, as above all, no
wrong be done, to the Kings Sovereignty, and Authority; And in second place, no
Misunderstanding do ensue between the two Houses. And therefore, that he hoped,
his words should receive a benign Interpretation; Knowing well, that pursuit,
and Drift of Speech, and multitude of Matter, might breed words to pass from
him, beyond the Compass of his Intention: And therefore, he placed more
Assurance, and Caution, in the Innocence of his own meaning, and in the
Experience of his Favors, then in any his Wariness, or Watchfulness, over his
own Speech.

This respective preface used, his Lordship descended to the Matter it self;
which he divided into three Considerations: For, he said, he would consider of
the Petition.

First, as it proceeded, from the Merchants. Secondly, as from them, it was
offered, to the Lower House. And thirdly, as from the Lower House, it was
recommended to the Higher House.
In the First of these Con^iderations, there fell out naturally, a Subdivision,
into the Persons of the Petitioners; And the Matter, and Parts, of the
Petition. In the Persons of the Merchants, his Lordship made, (as I have
collected them,) in number, eight Observations: whereof, the three first,
respected the General Condition of Merchants; And the five following, were
applied, to the particular Circumstances, of the Merchants, now complaining.

His Lordships first, general Observation, was; That Merchants were of two
sorts: The one sought their Fortunes, (as the verse says,) per Saxa, per
Ignes: And, as it is said, in the same place, Extremos currit Mercator ad
Indos; Subjecting themselves, to Wether, and Tempest; To Absence, and, as it
were, Exile, out of their Native Countries; To Arrests, in Entrances of War; To
Foreign Injustice, and Rigor, in times of Peace; And many other Sufferances,
and Adventures. But that there were others, that took, a more safe, but a less
generous Course, in raising their Fortunes. He taxed none, but did attribute,
much more respect, to the former.

The second General Observation, which his Lordship made was, That the
Complaints of Merchants, were, usually, ^ubject, to much Error; In regard,
that they spoke, (for the most part,) but upon Information; And that carried
through many Hands; And of Matters done in Remote parts: So as, a false, or
factious, Factour, might, oftentimes, make great Tragedies, upon no great
Ground. Whereof, toward the End of his Speech, he brought an Instance, of one
trading the Levant; That complained, of an Arrest of his Ship; And possessed
the Counsell-Table, with the same Complaint, in a vehement, and bitter,
fashion; Desiring, and pressing, some present, and Expostulatory Letters,
touching the same. Whereupon, some Counselors, well acquainted with the like
Heates, and Forwardness, in Complaints, happened to say to him; Out of
Conjecture, and not out of any Intelligence; What will you say, if your Ship,
which you complain to be under Arrest, be now under Sail, in way homewards?
Which fell out accordingly: The same Person, confessing, six days after, to
the Lords, that she was indeed, in her way homewards.

The third general Observation, which his Lordship made, was this, in Effect:
That, although, he granted, that the Wealth, and Welfare of the Merchant, was
not, without a Sympathy, with the general Stock, and State of a Nation,
especially an Island; yet nevertheless, it was a Thing, too familiar, with the
Merchant, to make the Case of his Particular Profit, the public Case of the
Kingdom.

There follow, the particular Observations, which have a reference, and
application, to the Merchants, that trade to Spain, and the Levant. Wherein his
Lordship, did first, honorably, and tenderly, acknowledge, that their
Grievances were great, That they did multiply; And that they do deserve,
compassion, and help; But yet^ nevertheless, that he must use, that loving
plainness to them, as to tell them, that in many things, they were Authors, of
their own Miseries. For since the Dissolving of the Company, which was termed
the Monopoly; And was set free, by the special Instance, of this House; There
has followed, such a Confusion, and Relaxation, in Order, and Government,
amongst them; As they do not only incur, many Inconveniences; And commit many
Errors; But in the pursuites, of their own Remedies, and suites, they do it so
impolitiquely, and after such a Fashion; As Except, Legier Ambassadors, (which
are the Eyes, of Kings, in foreign Parts,) should leave their Centinell, and
become Merchants Factours, and Sollicitours, their Causes can hardly prosper.
And, which is more, such is now the Confusion, in the Trade; As Shop Keepers,
and Handy-Crafts-Men, become Merchants there; Who being bound, to no Orders,
seek base means, by Gifts, and Bribery, to procure favors, at the Hands, of
Officers there. So as the honest Merchant, that trades like a substantial
Merchant; And loves not to take Servile Courses, to buy the Right due to him,
by the Amity o^ the Princes; can have no Justice, without treading in their
steps.

Secondly, his Lordship did observe, some Improbability, that the wrongs should
be so great, considering Trading, into those parts, was never greater; whereas
if the wrongs, and griefs, were so intolerable, and continual, as they
propound them; It would work, rather, a general Discouragement, and Coldness,
of Trade, in Fact; Then an earnest, and hot Complaint, in Words.

Thirdly, his Lordship did observe; That it is a Course, (howsoever i^ may be
with a good Intent,) yet of no small presumption; for Merchants, upon their
particular Grievances, to urge things, tending to a direct War; Considering,
that nothing, is more usual, in Treaties, then that such particular Damages,
and Molestations of Subjects, are left to a Form of Justice, to be righted: And
that the more high Articles, do retain, nevertheless, their vigor inviolably;
And that the great Bargain, of the Kingdom, for War, and Peace, may, in no
wise, depend, upon such petty Forfeitures; No more, then in common Assurance,
between Man and Man, it were fit, that upon every breach of Covenants, there
should be limited a Re-entry.

Fourthly, his Lordship did observe; In the manner, of preferring their
Petition, they had inverted due order; Addressing themselves, to the Foot, and
not to the Head. For considering, that they prayed, no new Law, for their
Relief; And that, it concerned, Matter of Inducement, to War, or Peace; They
ought, to have begun, with his Majesty, unto whose Royal Judgment, Power, and
Office, did properly belong, the discerning of that, which was desired; The
putting in Act of that, which might be granted; And the Thanks for that, which
might be obtained.

F^fthly, his Lordship did observe; That, as they had not preferred their
Petition as it should be; So, they had not pursued their own Direction, as it
was. For, having directed their Petition to the King, the Lords spiritual, and
Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament assembled; It imported, as if they had
offered the like Petition, to the Lords; which they never did; Contrary, Not
only, to their own Direction, but, likewise, to our Conceit; who presupposed,
(as it should seem, by some Speech, that passed from us, at a former
Conference;) That they had offered, several Petitions, of like tenor, to both
Houses. So, have you now, those eight Observations, part General, part
Special, which his Lordship; made touching the Persons of those, which
exhibited the Petition, and the Circumstances of the same.

For the Matter, of the Petition, it self, his Lordship made this Division;
That it consists of three parts.

First, of the Complaints, of wrongs, in Fact. Secondly, of the Complaints, of
wrongs, in Law; As they may be truly termed; That is, of the Inequality of
Laws, which do regulate the Trade. And thirdly, the Remedy desired, by Letters
of Mart.
The wrongs, in Fact, receive a local Distribution, of three. In the Trade to
Spain; In the Trade to the West^Indies; And in the Trade to the Levant.

Concerning the Trade to Spain: Although his Lordship did use, much
signification, of Compassion, of the Injuries, which the Merchants received;
And attributed so much, to their Profession, and Estate; As from such a mouth
in such a Presence, they ought to receive, for a great deal, of Honor, and
Comfort; (which Kind of Demonstration, he did enterlace, throughout ^is whole
Speech, as proceeding, Ex Abundantia Cordis,) yet, nevertheless, he did
remember four Excusations, or rather Extenuations, of those wrongs.

The first was, that the Injustices, complained of, were not in the Highest
Degree; Because, they were Delays, and hard proceedings, and not Inique
Sentences, or definitive Condemnations. Wherein I called to mind, what I heard
a great Bishop, say; That Courts of Justice, though they did not turn Justice
into Wormwood, by Corruption; yet, they turned it, into Vinegar, by Delays,
which sowred it. Such a Difference did his Lordship make, which, no question,
is a Difference, secundum Magis, and Minus. Secondly, his Lordship ascribed
these Delays, not so much to Malice, or Alienation of Mind, toward us; As to
the Nature, of the People, and Nation; which is Proud, and therefore Dilatory:
For all proud Men are full of Delays, and must be waited on; And specially, to
the Multitudes, and Diversities, of Tribunals, and places of justice; And the
Number of the Kings Counsels, full of Referrings, which ever prove, of
necessity, to be Deferrings; Besides, the great Distance of Territories. All
which, have made, the Delays, of Spain, to come into a Byword, through the
World. Wherein, I think, his Lordship might allude, to the Proverb of Italy; Me
Venga la Morte di Spagna. Let my Death come from Spain: For then, it is sure,
to be long a coming. Thirdly, his Lordship did use, an Extenuation of these
wrongs, drawn from the Nature of Man; ( Nemo subito fingitur:) For that, we
must make an account; That, though the Fire of Enmity, be out, between Spain,
and us, yet it vapoureth: The utter Extincting whereof, must be the work of
Time. But lastly, his Lordship did fall, upon that Extenuation, which of all
the rest, was must forcible; which was; That many of these wrongs, were not
sustained, without some Aspersion, of the Merchants own Fault, in ministering
the Occasion, which grew chiefly in this manner.
There is contained, an Article, in the Treaty, between Spain, and us; That, we
shall not transport, any Native Commodities, of the Low Countries, into Spain:
Nay more, that we shall not transport, any Opificia; Manufactures, of the same
Countries. So that, if an English Cloth, take but a Dye, in the Low Countries,
it may not be transported by the English: And the Reason is, because even those
Manufactures, although the Material come from other Places, do yield unto
them, a Profit and Sustentation, in regard their People are set on work by
them: They have a gain, likewise, in the Price; And they have, a Custom, in
the Transporting. All which, the Policy of Spain, is, to debar them of; Being
no less desirous, to Suffocate the Trade of the Low Countries, then to reduce
their Obedience. This Article, the English Merchant, either does not, or will
not, understand: But being drawn, with his threefold Cord, of Love, Hate, and
Gain; They do adventure, to transport, the Low Country Commodities, of these
natures; And so, draw upon themselves, these Arrests, and Troubles.

For the Trade, to the Indies; His Lordship did discover unto us, the state of
it, to be thus. The Policy of Spain, does keep that Treasury of theirs, under
such Lock, and Key, as both Confederates, yea, and Subjects, are excluded, of
Trade, into those Countries.: Insomuch as the French King, who has reason to
stand, upon equal terms, with Spain, yet nevertheless, is, by express
Capitulation, debarred. The Subjects of Portugal, whom the State of Spain,
has studied, by all means, to content, are likewise debarred: Such a vigilant
Dragon is there, that keeps this Golden Fleece: yet nevertheless, such was
his Majesty's Magnanimity, in the Debate, and Conclu^ion, of the last Treaty;
As he would never condescend, to any Article, importing the Exclusion, of his
Subjects, from that Trade: As a Prince, that would not acknowledge, that any
such Right, could grow, to the Crown of Spain, by the Donative, of the Pope;
whose Authority he Disclaimeth: Or by the Title, of a dispersed, and punctual
Occupation, of certain Territories, in the name of the rest: But stood firm, to
reserve that point, in full Question, to further Times, and occasions. So as it
is left, by the Treaty, in Suspense, neither debarred, nor permitted. The
Tenderness, and Point of Honor whereof, was such, as they, that went thither,
must run their own Peril. Nay further, his Lordship affirmed; That if yet, at
this time, his Majesty would descend, to a Course of Entreaty, for the release,
of the Arrests, in those parts, And so confess an Exclusion; And quit the point
of Honor; his Majesty, might have them, forthwith released: And yet his
Lordship added; That the Offenses, and Scandalls, of some, had made this point
worse then it was: In regard, that this very last Voyage to Virginia, intended
for Trade and Plantation; Where the Spaniard, has no People, nor Possession,
is already become inflamed for Pyracy. Witness Bingley, who first, insinuating
his purpose, to be an Actour, in that worthy Action, of Enlarging Trade, and
Plantation, is become a Pyrate; And has been so pursued, as his Ship, is taken
in Ireland, though his Person, is not yet in hold.

For the Trade, to the Levant; His Lordship opened unto us, that the Complaint
consisted, in effect, but of two Particulars: The one, touching the Arrest of a
Ship, called the Trial, in Sicely; The other, of a Ship, called the Vineyard,
in Sardinia. The First, of which Arrests, was, upon pretense, of Pyracy: The
Second, upon pretense, of carrying Ordnance, and Powder, to the Turk. That
Process, concerning the Trial, has been, at the Merchants instance, drawn to
a Review, in Spain; which is a Favor, of exceeding rare President; Being
directly, against the Liberties, and Privileges of Sicely. That of the
Vineyard, notwithstanding it be of that nature, as, (if it should be true,)
tends, to the great Dishonor, of our Nation: (whereof, Hold has been
already taken, by the French Ambassador, residing at Constantinople; Who
entered, into a Scandalous Expostulation, with his Majesty's Ambassador there,
upon that, and the like, Transportations, of Munition, to the Turk); yet
nevertheless, there is an Answer given, by Letters, from the Kings,
Ambassador Legier, in Spain; That there shall be, some Course taken, to give
reasonable Contentment, in that Cause, as far as may be: In both which Ships,
(to speak truly,) the greatest Mass, of loss, may be included: For the rest are
mean, in respect of the value, of those two Vessels. And thus much his Lordship
Speech comprehended, concerning the wrongs in Fact.

Concerning the Wrongs, in Law; That is to say; the Rigor of the Spanish
Laws, extended upon his Majesty's Subjects, that traffic thither, his
Lordship gave this Answer. That they were no new Statutes, or Edicts, devised
for our People, or our Times; But were the ancient Laws, of that Kingdom:
Suus cuique Mos. And therefore, as Travelers, must endure the Extremities, of
the Climate, and Temper of the Air, where they travel: So Merchants, must bear
with the Extremities, of the Laws, and Temper of the Estate, where they trade.
Whereunto his Lordship added; that our own Laws, here in England, were not
exempted, from the like Complaints, in Foreign Parts; Especially, in point, of
Marine Causes, and Depredations; And that same swift Alteration, of Property,
which is claimed by the Admiralty, in case of Goods, taken, in Pirates hands.
But that, we were to understand, thus much, of the King of Spains Care, and
Regard, of our Nation; That he had written, his Letters, to all Corrigidors,
Officers of ^orts, and other his Ministers; Declaring his will, and pleasure,
to have his Majesty's Subjects, used, with all Freedom, and Favor: And with
this Addition, that they should have more Favor, when it might be showed, then
any other. Which words, howsoever the Effects prove, are not suddenly to be
requited, with peremptory Resolutions, till Time declare, the direct Issue.

For the third Part, of the Matter, of the Petition; which was, the Remedy,
sought by Letters of Mart; His Lordship seemed desirous, to make us capable, of
the Inconvenience, of that, which was desired, by setting, before us, two
notable Exceptions thereunto: The one, that the Remedy, was utterly
incompetent, and vain: There other, that it was dangerous, and pernicious, to
our Merchants; And, in Consequence, to the whole State.

For the weakness, of the Remedy; His Lordship, wished us, to enter into
Consideration, what the Remedy was, which the Statute of Henry the fifth,
(which, was now sought, to be put in Execution,) gave, in this Case; which was
thus: That the Party grieved, should first complain, to the Keeper, of the
private Seal; And from him, should take Letters unto the Party, that had
committed the Spoil, for Restitution. And in default of Restitution, to be made
upon such Letters, served; Then, to obtain of the Chanceller, Letters of Mart,
or Reprisall: which Circuit of Remedy, promised nothing, but endless, and
fruitless, Delay; In regard that the first Degree prescribed, was never likely
to be effected: It being so wild a Chase, as to serve Process, upon the
wrong-Doer, in Foreign Parts. Wherefore his Lordship said, that it must be, the
Remedy of Statute, that must do good, in this case: which uses to proceed, by
Certificats, Attestations, and other means of Information; Not depending upon a
privy Seal, to be served upon the Party, whom happily they must seek out, in
the West Indies.

For the Danger, of the Remedy; His Lordship directed our Considerations, to
take notice, of the proportions, of the Merchants Goods, in either Kingdom: As
that the Stock, of Goods, of the Spaniard, which is within his Majesty's Power,
and Distress, is a Trifle: Whereas the Stock of English Goods, in Spain, is a
Mass, of mighty value. So as, if this Course, of Letters of Mart, should be
taken, to satisfy, a few hot Pursuitours, here; All the Goods, of the English
Subjects, in Spain, shall be exposed, to Seizure, and Arrest; And we have
little, or nothing, in our Hands, on this side, to mend our selves upon. And
thus much, (Mr. Speaker,) is that, which I have collected, out of that
excellent Speech, concerning the First main part which was; The Consideration,
of the Petition as it proceeded, from the Merchant.

There follows now, the Second Part; Considering the Petition, as it was
offered in this House. Wherein his Lordship; after an affectionate
Commemoration, of the Gravity, Capacity, and Duty, which he generally found, in
the proceedings of this House; desired us, nevertheless, to consider with him,
how it was possible, that the Entertaining of Petitions, concerning private
Injuries, and of this Nature, could avoid, these three Inconveniences. The
First, of Injustice; The Second, of Derogation, from his Majesty's supreme, and
absolute Power, of concluding, War, or Peace; And the Third, of some
prejudice, in reason of Estate.

For Injustice, it is plain, and cannot be denied, that we hear but the one
Part: Whereas that Rule, Audi alteram Partem, is not, of the Formality, but of
the Essence, of Justice: Which is, therefore figured, with both Eyes shut, and
both Ears open. Because, she should hear both sides, and respect Neither: So
that, if we should hap, to give, a right Judgment, it might be Iustum, but
not Just, without hearing both Parties.

For the Point of Derogation; his Lordship said; He knew well, we were no less
ready, to acknowledge, then Himself; That the Crown of England, was ever
invested (amongst other Prerogatives, not disputable) of an absolute
Determination, and Power, of concluding, and making, War and Peace. Which, that
it was no new Dotation, but of an ancient Foundation, in the Crown, he would
recite unto us, a number of Presidents, in the Reigns, of several Kings; And
chiefly, of those Kings, which come nearest his Majesty's own worthiness:
Wherein He said, that he would not put his Credit, upon Ciphars, and Dates;
Because it was easy to mistake, the year of a Reign, or number of a Roll, but
he would avouch them, in substance, to be perfect and true, as they are taken,
out of the Records. By which Presidents, it will appear; That Petitions made in
Parliament to Kings, of this Realm, his Majesty's Progenitors; Intermedling,
with matter, of War, or Peace; Or inducement thereunto; Received small
Allowance, or Success; But were always put off, with Dilatory Answers:
Sometimes, referring the matter, to their Council; Sometimes, to their
Letters; sometimes to their further Pleasure, and Advice; And such other
Forms; Expressing plainly, that the Kings, meant to reserve, Matter of that
Nature, entirely to their own Power, and pleasure.

In the 18th. year of King Edward the First; Complaint was made, by the
Commons, against the Subjects, of the Earl of Flanders, with Petition, of
Redress: The Kings Answer was; Rex nihil aliud potest, quam eodem modo petere:
That is, The King could do ^o more, but make Request, to the Earl of Flanders,
as Request, had been made to him: And yet no Body will imagine, but King Edward
the First was potent enough, to have had his Reason, of a Count of Flaunders,
by a War? And yet, his Answer was; Nihil aliud potest; As giving them to
understand; That the Entering into a War, was a Matter Transcendent, that must
not depend, upon such Controversies.

In the 4th. year of King Edward the Third; The Commons Petitioned; That the
King would enter, into certain Covenants, and Capitulations, with the Duke of
Brabant: In which Petition, there was also inserted, somewhat touching a Money
Matter. The Kings Answer was; That for that, that concerned the Moneys, they
might handle it, and examine it; But touching the Peace, he would do, as to
himself seemed good.

In the 18th. year, of King Edward the Third; The Commons petitioned, that they
might have, the Trial, and proceeding, with certain Merchants Strangers, as
Enemies to the State. The Kings Answer was; It should remain, as it did, till
the King had taken further order.

In the 45th. year of King Edward the Third; The Commons complained; That
their Trade with the Easterlings, was not upon equal Terms; (which is one, of
the points, insisted upon in the present Petition;) And prayed an Alteration,
and Reducement. The Kings Answer was; It shall be so, as occasion shall require.

In the 50th. year, of the same King; The Commons petitioned to the King, for
Remedy, against the Subjects of Spain, as they now do. The Kings Answer was;
that he would write his Letter, for Remedy. Here is Letters of Request, no
Letters of Mart: Nihil potest nisi eodem modo petere.

In the same year, the Merchants of York, petitioned in Parliament, against
the Hollanders; And desired their Ships might be stayed, both in England, and
at Calais. The Kings Answer was: Let it be declared, to the Kings Council; And
they shall have such remedy, as is according to Reason.

In the 2d. year of King Richard the second, the Merchants of the Seacoast, did
complain, of diverse spoils upon their Ships, and Goods, by the Spaniard.
The Kings Answer was, that with the Advice of his Council, he would procure
remedy.

His Lordship cited two other Presidents; The one in the second year, of King
Henry the Fourth; of a Petition, Against the Merchants of Genova: The other, in
the 11th. year, of King Henry the 6th; Of a Petition, against the Merchants,
of the Stilliard; which I omit, because they contain, no variety of Answer.

His Lordship further cited, two Presidents, concerning other points of
Prerogative; Which are, likewise, Flowers of the Crown; The one; Touching the
Kings supremacy Ecclesiastical: The other; Touching the Order, of Waightes,
and Measures. The former of them, was, in the time, of King Richard the 2d. At
what time, the Commons complained, against certain Encroachments, and
Usurpations, of the Pope: And the Kings Answer was; The King has given Order,
to his Council, to treat with the Bishops, thereof. The other was, in the
18th. year of King Edward the First; At which time, Complaint was made, against
uneven Waights; And the Kings Answer was, Vocentur parts, ad placita Regis,
and fit Iustitia: Whereby it appeared, that the Kings of this Realm, still
used, to refer Causes, petitioned in Parliament, to the proper places, of
Cognizance, and Decision. But for the Matter, of War, and Peace; As appears
in all the former Presidents; The Kings, ever kept it, in Scrinio pectoris; In
the Shrines, of their own Breast; Assisted and advised, by their Counsel of
Estate.

His Lordship did conclude, his Enumeration of Presidents, with a notable
President, in the 17. year, of King Richard the Second. A Prince, of no such
glory, nor strength: And yet, when he made offer, to the Commons in Parliament;
That they should take into their Considerations, Matter of War, and Peace,
then in in hand; The Commons, in Modesty, excused themselves, and answered: The
Commons will not presume to treat of so high a charge. Out of all which
Presid^nts, his Lordship made this Inference, that as, Dies Di^m docet; So by
these Examples, Wise Men, will be admonished, to forbear those Petitions to
Princes, which are not likely, to have, either a Welcome Hearing, or an
effectual Answer.

And for prejudice, that might come, of handling, and debating, Matter of War,
and Peace, in Parliament; He doubted not, but that the Wisdom, of this House,
did conceive, upon what secret Consideration, and Motives, that point did
depend. For that, there is no King, which will providently, and Matu^ely, enter
into a War; But will first balance, his own Forces; Seek to anticipate,
Confederacies, and Alliances; Revoake his Merchants; Find an opportunity, of
the first Breach; And many other points: which if they once, do but take wind,
will prove vain, and frustrate. And therefore, that this Matter, which is
Arcanum Imperij, one of the highest Mysteries of Estate, must be suffered, to
be kept, within the Veil. His Lordship adding, that he knew not well, whether
in that, which he had already said^ out of an extreme Desire, to give us
satisfaction; He had not communicated, more particulars, then perhaps was
requisite. Nevertheless, he confessed^ that sometimes, Parliaments have been
made acquainted, with Matter of War, and Peace, in a generallity; But it was,
upon one of ^hese Two Motives: When the King, and Counsel, conceived; That
either it was Material, to have some Declaration, of the zeal, and Affection,
of the People: Or else, when the King needed, to demand Moneys, and Aides, for
the Charge, of the Wars: Wherein, if Things did sort to War, we were sure
enough, to hear of it. His Lordship hoping, that his Majesty, would find, in
us, no less readiness, to support it, then to persuade it.

Now, (Mr. Speaker,) for the last part; Wherein, his Lordship, considered the
Petition, As it was, recommended from us, to the upper House; His Lordship
delivered, thus much, from their Lor^ships; That they would make, a good
Construction, of our Desires; As those, which they conceived, did rather
spring, out of a Feeling, of the Kings Strength; And out of a Feeling of the
Subjects Wrongs; Nay more, out of a Wisdom, and Depth, to declare our
forwardness, if need were, to assist his Majesty's future Resolutions; (which
Declaration, might be of good use, ^or his Majesty's Service, when it should be
blown abroad;) Rather, I say, then that we did, in any sort, determine, by this
their Overture, to do that wrong to his Highness Supreme Power; Which happily,
might be inferred, by those, that were rather apt to make evil, then good
Illations, of our proceeding. And yet, that their Lordships, for the reasons,
before made, most plainly tell us; That they neither could, nor would, concur
with us, nor approve the course. And therefore concluded; That it would not be
amiss, for us, for our better Contentment, to behold the Conditions, of the
last Peace with Spain, which were, of a strange nature, to him that duly
observes them; No Forces recalled, out of the Low-Conntries; No new Forces, (as
to Voluntaries) restrained to go thither: So as the King, may be in peace, and
never a Subject in England, but may be in War: And then, to think thus with our
selves; That that King, which would give no ground, in making his Peace, will
not loose any Ground, upon just p^ovocation, to enter into an Honorable War.
And that, in the mean time, we should know thus much; that there could not be,
more forcible Negotiation, on the Kings part, but Blows, to procure Remedy, of
those wrongs; Nor more fair promises, on the King of Spaines part, to give
contentment, concerning the same: And therefore, that the Event, must be
expected.

And thus (Mr. Speaker,) have I passed over, the Speech, of this worthy Lord;
whose Speeches (as I have often said,) in regard of his place, and Judgment,
are extraordinary Lights, to this House; And have both the properties of Light;
That is Conducting, and Comforting. And although (Mr. Speaker) a Man would have
thought, nothing had been left, to be said; Yet I shall now, give you account,
of another Speech, full of excellent Matter, and Ornaments; And without
Iteration. Which, nevertheless, I shall report, more compendiously; Because, I
will not offer the Speech, that wrong, as to report it at large, when your
minds per-case, and Attentions, are already wearied.

The other Earl, who, usually, does bear a principal part, upon all important
Occasions; used a Speech, first of Preface, then of Argument. In his Preface,
he did deliver, that he was persuaded, that both Houses did differ, rather in
Credulity, and Belief, then in Intention, and Desire. For it might be, their
Lorships, did not believe, the Information so far, but yet desired, the
Reformation as much.

His Lordship said further^ that the Merchant was a State, and Degree of
persons; Not only to be respected, but to be prayed for; And graced them, with
the best Additions: That they were, the Convoyes, of our supplies; The Vents of
our Abundance; Neptunes Almesmen; and Fortunes Adventurers. His Lordship,
proceeded, and said; This Question, was new to us, but ancient to them:
Assuring us, that the King, did not bear, in vain, the Devise of the Thistle,
with the word; Nemo me lasce^cit impune; And that, as the Multiplying of his
Kingdoms, makes him feel his own Power; So the Multiplying of our Loves, and
Affections, made him to feel our Griefs.

For the Arguments, or Reasons, they were Five in number, which his Lordship
used, for satisfying us, why their Lordships, might not concur with us^ in this
Petition. The first was, the Composition of our House; which he took, in the
first foundation thereof, to be merely Democraticall; Consisting, of Knights of
Shires, and Burgesses of Towns; And intended to be of those, that have their
Residence, Vocation, and Employment, in the places, for which they serve: And
therefore, to have a private, and local wisdom, according to that Compass;
And so, not fit, to examine, or determine, Secrets of Estate^ which depend,
upon such Variety, of Circumstances; And therefore, added, to the President,
formerly vouched, of the 17. of King Richard the 2d; When the Commons
disclaimed, to intermeddle, in matter of War and Peace; That their Answer was,
that they would not presume, to treat, of so high, and variable a Matter. And
although, his Lordship acknowledged; That there be diverse Gentlemen, in the
Mixture, of our House; That are of good Capacity, and Insight, in Matters of
Estate; yet that was the Accident of the Person, and not the Intentention of
the place. And Things were to be taken, in the Institution, not in the Practice.

His Lordships second Reason, was; That both, by Philosophy, and Civil Law,
Ordinatio Belli, and pacis, est absoluti Imperij; A principal Flower of the
Crown. Which Flowers, ought to be so dear unto us, as we ought, if need were,
to water them with our Blood. For if those Flowers, should, by neglect, or upon
facility, and good affection, wither, and fall, the Garland would not be worth
the wearing.

His Lordships third Reason was; That Kings, did so love, to imitate Trimum
Mobile, as that, they do not like, to move in borrowed Motions: So that, in
those things, that they do, most willingly, intend; yet they endure not, to be
prevented, by Request. Whereof he did allege, a notable Example, in King
Edward the 3d. who would not hearken, to the Petition of his Commons, that
besought him, to make the Black Prince, Prince of Wales. But yet, after that
Repulse, of their Petition, out of his own mere Motion, he created him.

His Lordships fourth Reason, was; That it might be some scandal, to step,
between the King, and his own Virtue: And that it was the Duty of Subjects;
Rather, to take honors, from Kings Servants, and give them to Kings; then to
take honors from Kings, and give them to their Servants: Which, he did, very
elegantly, set forth, in the Example of Ioab; who lying at the Siege of Rabbah;
And finding, it could not hold out; writ to David, to come, and take the
Honor, of taking the Town.

His Lordships last Reason was, that it cast some aspersion upon his Majesty;
Implying, as if the King, slept, out the Sobbs of his Subjects, until he was
awaked, with the Thunderbolt of a Parlaament.

But his Lordships Couclusion, was very Noble; Which was, with a Protestation;
That what Civil Threats, Contestation, Art, and Argument, can do, has been
used, already, to procure Remedy, in this Cause: And a Promise; That if Reason,
of State, did permit, as their Lordships were ready, to spend their Breath, in
the pleading, of that we desire: so they would be ready, to spend their Bloods,
in the Execution thereof.

This was the Resolution, of that which passed.

A Speech, used to the King, by his Majesty's Solliciter, being chosen, by the
Commons, as their Mouth, and Messenger, for the presenting to his Majesty, of
the Instrument, or Writing, of their Grievances; In the Parliament 7o. Jacobi.
MOst gracious Sovereign; The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in
Parliament, in the House, of your Commons, in all humbleness do Exhibit, and
present, unto your Sacred Majesty, in their own Words, though by my hand, their
Petitions, and Grievances. They are here conceived, and set down in writing;
According to ancient Custom, of Parliament. They are also prefaced, according
to the Manner, and Taste, of these later Times. Therefore, for me, to make any
Additionall Preface, were neither warranted, nor convenient: Especially
speaking before a King; The Exactness of whose Judgment, ought to scatter, and
chase away, all unnecessary Speech as the Sun does a Vapor. This only I must
say: Since this Session of Parliament, we have seen your Glory, in the
Solemnity, of the Creation, of this most Noble Prince: We have heard your
Wisdom, in sundry excellent Speeches, which you have delivered amongst us. Now
we hope, to find, and feel, the Effects of your Goodness, in your Gracious
Answer, to these our Petitions. For this we are persuaded, that the Attribute,
which was given, by one of the wisest Writers, to Two, of the best Emperors;
Divus Nerva, and Divus Traianus; (So says Tacitus,) Res olim insociabiles
miscuerunt, Imperium, and Libertatem; May be truly applied, to your Majesty.
For never was there, such a Conservatour of Regality, in a Crown; Nor never,
such a Protector, of lawful Freedom, in a Subject.

Only this, ( Excellent Sovereign,) Let not the sound of Grievances, (though
it be sad,) seem harsh, to your Princely Ears: It is but Gemitus Columbae; The
Mourning of a Dove; With that Patience, and Humility of Heart, which
appertains, to loving and Loyal Subjects. And far be it from us; But that,
in the midst, of the Sense, of our Grievances, we should remember, and
acknowledge the infinite Benefits, which by your Majesty, next under God, we do
enjoy; Which bind us, to wish unto your life, Fullness of Days; And unto your
Line Royal, a Succession, and Continuance, even unto the worlds end.

It rests, that unto these Petitions, here included, I do add one more, that
goes to them all: Which is; That if, in the words, and frame, of them, there
be any Thing offensive; Or that we have expressed our Selves, otherwise then we
should, or would; That your Majesty would cover it, and cast the Veil, of your
Grace upon it; And accept of our good Intentions; And help them, by your benign
Interpretation.

Lastly, I am, most humbly, to crave, a particular pardon, for my self, that
have used these few words; And scarcely, should have been able, to have used
any at all, in respect of the Reverence, which I bear, to your Person, and
Judgment, had I not been somewhat relieved, and comforted, by the Experience,
which in my Service, and Access, I have had, of your continual Grace, and
Favor.

A Speech, of the Kings Sollicitour, used unto the Lords, at a Conference, by
Commission, from the Commons; Moving, and persuading the Lords to join with the
Commons, in Pet^tion to the King; To obtain Liberty, to treat, of a
Composition, with his Majesty, for Wards, and Tenures: In the Parliament, 7o.
Jacobi.
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of Commons, have commanded
me, to deliver to your Lordships, the Cau^es, of the Conference, by them
prayed, and by your Lordships assented, for the second Business, of this Day.
They have had Report, made unto them, faithfully, of his Majesty's Answer,
declared by My L. Treasurer, touching their humble Desire, to obtain Liberty,
from his Majesty^ to treat, of compounding for Tenures. And first, they think
themselves, much bound unto his Majesty; That, in Renova, in which case Princes
use to be apprehensive, he has made a gracious Construction, of their
Proposition. And so much they know of that, that belongs to the Greatness of
his Majesty, and the Greatness of the Cause; As themselves acknowledge, they
ought not, to have expected a present Resolution; Though the Wiseman says;
Hope deferred is the Fainting of the Soul. But they know, their Duty to be, to
attend his Majesty's Times, at his good pleasure. And they do it, with the more
comfort, because in that his Majesty's Answer, (Matching the Times, aad
weighing the Passages thereof,) they conceive, in their Opinion, rather Hope,
then Discouragement.

But the principal Causes, of the Conference, now prayed; (Besides these
significations of Duty, not to be omitted;) Are two Propositions. The one,
Matter of Excuse, of themselves: The other Matter of Petition. The former of
which grows thus. Your Lordship, (my L. Threasurer) in your last declaration,
of his Majesty's An^wer, (which according to the Attribute, then given unto it,
had Imaginem Caesaris, fair, and lively, graven,) made this true, and
effectual Distribution: That there depended upon Tenures, Considerations of
Honor; of Conscience; And of Vtility: Of these three, Vtility, as his Majesty
set it by, for the present, out of the Greatness of his Mind; So we set it by,
out of the Justness, of our Desires: For we never meant, but a goodly, and
worthy Augmentation, of the Profit, now received, and not a Diminution. But,
(to speak truly,) that Consideration falls naturally to be examined, when
Liberty of Treaty is granted: But the former Two, indeed, may exclude Treaty;
And cut it off, before it be admitted.

Nevertheless, in this that we shall say, concerning those Two, We desire to be
conceived rightly: We mean not, to dispute with his Majesty, what belongs to
Sovereign Honor, or his Princely Conscience; Because we know, we are not
capable, to discern them; Otherwise, then as Men use, sometimes, to see the
Image, of the Sun, in a Pail of Water. But this we say for our selves; God
forbid, that we, knowingly, should have propounded any thing, that might, in
our Sense, and persuasion, touch, either of both: And therefore her^in we
desire to be heard, not to enform, or persuade his Majesty, but to f^ee, and
excuse, our selves.

And first, in general, we acknowledge, that this Tree of Tenures, was
Planted, into the Prerogative, by the ancient common Law of this Land: That it
has been Fenced in, and Preserved, by many Statutes; And that it yields, at
this day, to the King, the Fruit, of a great Revenue. But yet notwithstanding,
if upon the Stem, of this Tree, may be raised a Pillar, of support to the
Crown, Permanent, and durable as the Marble, by investing the Crown, with a
more ample, more certain, and more loving, Dowry, then this of Tenures, we hope
we propound no Matter of Disservice.

But to speak, distinctly, of both, and first of Honor. Wherein, I pray your
Lordships, give me leave, in a Subject, that may seem, supra Nos, to handle it,
rather as we are capable, then as the Matter, perhaps, may require. Your
Lordships well know, the various Mixture, and Composition, of our House. We
have, in our House, learned Civilians, that profess a Law, that we reverence,
and sometimes consult wi^h: They can tell us, that all the Laws de Feodis, are
but Additionals, to the Ancient Civil Law; And that the Roman Emperors, in
the full Height of their Monarchy, never knew them; So that they are not
Imp^riall. We have grave Professors, of the Common Law, who will define unto
us, that those are Parts of Sovereignty, and of the Royal Prerogative, which
cannot be communicated with Subjects: But for Tenures, in substance, there is
none of your Lordships, but have them; And few of us, but have them. The King,
indeed, has a priority, or first Service, of his Tenures; which shows, that
they are not Regal, nor any point of Sovereignty. We have Gentlemen, of
honorable Service, in the Wars, both by Sea and Land; Who can enform us, that
when it is in question, who shall set his foot, foremost, toward the Enemy, it
is never asked, whether he hold in Knights Service, or in Socage. So have we
many Deputy Lievtenants, to your Lordships; And many Commissioners, that have
been for Musters, and Levies, That can tell us, that the Service, and Defense,
of the Realm, has, in these days, little dependence upon Tenures. So then we
perceive, that it is no Bond, or Ligament, of Government; No Spur of Honor; No
Bridle of Obedience: Time was, when it had other uses, and the Name of Knights
Service imports it: But, Vocabula manent, Res fugiunt. But all thi^, which we
have spoken, we confess to be, but in a vulgar Capacity; which, nevertheless,
may serve, for our Excuse; Though we submit, the Thing it self, wholly to his
Majesty's Judgment.

For Matter of Conscience, Far be it from us, to cast in any Thing, willingly,
that, may trouble, that clear Fountain, of his Majesty's conscience. We do
confess, it is a noble Protection, that these young Birds, of the Nobility, and
good Families, should be ga^hered, and clocked, under the wings of the Crown.
But yet, Natu^rae vis maxima: And suus cuique discretus sanguis. Your Lordships
will ^avour me, to observe my former Method. The Common Law it self, which is
the best Bounds of our wisdom, does even, in hoc Individuo, prefer the
prerogative of the Father, before the prerogative of the King: For if Lands
descend, held in chief, from an Ancestour, on the part of a Mother, to a Man's
eldest Son, the Father being alive; The Father, shall have the Custody of the
Body, and not the King. It is true, that this is only for the Father; And not,
any other Parent, or Ancestour: But then, if you look, to the high Law of
Tutelage, and Protection; And of Obedience, and Duty, which is the Relative
thereunto; It is not said; Honor thy Father alone; But, Honor thy Father, and
thy Mother, etc. Again, the Civilians can tell us, that there was a special
Use, of the Pretorian Power, for Pupills, and yet no Tenures. The Citizens of
London, can tell us; There be Courts of Orphants, and yet no Tenures. But, all
this while, we pray your Lordships, to conceive; That we think our selves, not
competent, to discern of the Honor, of his Majesty's Crown, or the Shrine of
his Conscience; But leave it, wholly, unto him, and allege these things, but in
our own Excuse.

For Matter of Petition, we do continue our most humble suit, by your Lordships
loving Conjunction, that his Majesty will be please^, to open unto us, this
entrance of his Bounty, and Grace; As to give us liberty, to treat. And lastly,
we know his Majestie^ Times, are not subordinate at all, but to the Globe
above: About this time, the Sun has got even with the Night, and will rise
apace; And we know, Solomon's Temple, (whereof your Lordship, my Lord Treasurer,
spoke) was not built in a day: And if We shall be so happy, as to take the Axe
to hew, and the Hammer to frame, in this Case; We know, it cannot be, without
Time; And therefore, as far, as we may, with Duty, and without Importunity, we
most humbly desire, an Acceleration of his Majesty's Answer, according to his
good time, and Royal Pleasure.

A Speech, of the Kings Solicitor, persuading the House of Commons, to desist
from further Question, of receiving the Kings Messages, by their Speaker; And
from the Body of the Council; As well as from the Kings Person; In the
Parliament 7o. Jac.
IT is my Desire, that if any the Kings Business, either of Honor or Profit,
shall pass the House; It may be, not only, with external prevailing; But with
satisfaction, of the Inward Man. For in Consent, where Tongue strings, not
Hart-strings, make the Music; That Harmony may end in Discord. To this I shall
always bend my Endeavors.

The Kings Sovereignty, and the Liberty of Parliament, are; as the two
Elements, and Principles of this Estate; which, though the one be more Active,
the other more Pas^ive, yet they do not cross, or destroy, the one the other;
But they strengthen, and maintain, the one the other. Take away Liberty of
Parliament, the Griefs, of the Subject, will bleed inwards. Sharp, and Eager,
Humors, will not evaporate; And then they must exulcerate, and so may
endanger, the Sovereignty, it self. On the other side, if the Kings
Sovereignty, receive Diminution, or any Degree of Contempt, with us^ that are
born under an Hereditary Monarchy; (So as the Motions of our Estate, cannot
work, in any other Frame, or Engine;) It must follow, that we shall be a
Meteore, or Corpus imperfecte mistum; which kind of Bodies, come speedily to
Confusion, and Dissolution. And herein, it is our Happiness, that we may make,
the same Judgment of the King, which Tacitus made of Nerva; Divus Nerva, res
olim Dissociabiles miscuit, Imperium, and Libertatem. Nerva did temper things,
that before were thought incompatible, Sovereignty, and Liberty. And it is not
amis^e, in a great Council, and a great Cause, to put the other part of the
Difference; which was significantly expressed, by the Judgment, which
Apollonius made of Nero; which was thus. When Vespasian came out of Judea,
toward Italy, to receive the Empire: As he passed by Alexandria, he spoke with
Apollonius. A Man much admired; And asked him a Question, of State. What was
Nero's Fall, or overthrow? Apollonius said, Nero could tune the Harp well, but
in Government, he always, either wound up the Pinns too high, and strained the
strings too far; or let them down too low, and slackened the strings too much.
Here we see the Difference, between Regular, and Able, Princes; And Irregular,
and Incapable; Nerva, and Nero. The one tempers, and mingles, the Sovereignty,
with the Liberty, of the Subject, wisely; And the other, does interchange it,
and vary it unequally, and absurdly. Since therefore, we have a Prince of so
excellent Wisdom, and Moderation; Of whose Authority, we ought to be tender, as
he is, likewise, of our Liberty; Let us enter, into a true, and indifferent,
consid^ration, how far forth the Case in Question, may touch his Authority, and
how far forth our Liberty. And to speak clearly; In my Opinion, it concerns his
Authority, much; And our Liberty nothing at all.

The Questions are Two. The one, whither our Speaker, be exempted, from
Delivery, of a Message from the King; without our License. The other, whither
it is not all one, whither he received it from the Body of the Counsel, as if
he received it immediately from the King. And I will speak of the last First,
because it is the Circumstance, of the present Case.

First, I say, let us see, how it concerns the King, and then how it concerns
Us? For the King; certainly, if it be observed, it cannot be denied, but if you
may not receive his pleasure, by his Repre^entative Body, which is his Counsel
of his Estate; you both streighten his Majesty, in point of Convenience; And
weaken the Reputation, of his Counsel. All Kings, though they be Gods on
Earth, yet (as he said) they are Gods of Earth: They may be of Extreme Age;
they may be indisposed in Health; They may be absent. In these Cases, if their
Counsels may not supply their Persons, to what infinite Accidents, do you
expose them? N^y more, sometimes in Policy, Kings will not be seen, but cover
themselves, with their Council; And if this be taken from them, a great part
of their saf^ty, is taken away. For the other point, of weakening the Council:
you know they are nothing, without the King. They are no Body Politic: They
have no Commission under Seal. So as, if you begin, to distinguish, and disjoyn
them, from the King, they are Corpus Opacum; For they have Lumen de Lumine; And
so, by distinguishing, you extinguish, the principle Engine, of the Estate. For
it is truly affirmed; That Cousilium non habet po estatem delega^am, sed in
haerentem: And i^ is, but Rex in Cathedra; The King in his Chair, or
Consistory, where, his Will and Decrees, which are, in privacy, more
changeable, are settled and fixed.

Now for that which concerns our selves. First for Dignity, no man must think
this a Disparagement for us. For the greatest Kings in Europe, By their
Ambassadors, receive Answers and Directions, from the Council, in the Kings
absence; And if that Negotiation be fit, for the Fraternity, and Party, of
King^; It may much less, be excepted to, by Subjects.

For Use or Benefit, no Man can be so Raw, and Unacquainted in the Affairs of
the World^ as to conceive, there should be any Disadvantage in it; As if such
Answ^rs, were less Firm and Certain. For it cannot be supposed, that Men of so
great Cau^^^n, as Counselors of Estate, commonly are; (whether you take
Caution, for Wisdom, or Providence; Or for Pledges, of Estate, or Fortune;)
Will ever err, or adventure so far, as to exceed their Warrant. And therefore,
I conclude, that, in this point, there can be, unto us, neither Disgrace, nor
Disadvantage.

For the Point, of the Speaker. First, on the Kings Part, it may have a shrewd
Illation: For it has a show, as if, there could be a stronger Duty, then the
Duty, of a Subject, to a King. We see, the Degrees, and Differences, of Duties,
in Families, between Father, and Son; Master, and Servant; In Corporate Bodies,
between Communalties, and their Officers; Recorders, Stewards, and the like;
yet all these, give place, to the Kings commandments. The Bonds are more
special, but not so Forcible. On our Part, it concerns us nothing. For first
it is, but de Canali, of the Pipe; How the Kings Message shall be conveyed to
us, and not of the Matter. Neither has the Speaker, any such Dominion; As
that, coming out of his mouth, it presses us more, then out of a Privy
Councillors. Nay, it seems to be, a great Trust, of the Kings, toward the
House; When the King, doub^eth not, to put his Message, into their Mouth; As
if, he should speak to the City, by the Recorder: Therefore, me thinks, we
should not entertain, this unnecessary Doubt. It is one use of wit, to make
clear Things Doubtful; But it is a much better, use of wit, to make Doubtful
Things clear; And to that, I would, Men would bend themselves.

A brief Speech, in the End, of the Session, of Parliament, 7o. Jac. Persuading
some Supply, to be given, to his Majesty; which seemed then, to stand, upon
doubtful terms; And passed upon this Speech.
THe proportion, of the Kings Supply, is not now in question: For when that
shall be, it may be, I shall be of Opinion, that we should give so now, as we
may the better give again. But as Things stand for the present, I think, the
point of Honor, and Reputation, is that, which his Majesty stands most upon,
That our Gift, may, at least be like those showers that may serve, to lay the
Winds; Though they do not, sufficiently, Water the ^arth.

To labor, to persuade you, I will not; For I know not, into what Form, to
cast my Speech. If I should enter, into a Laudative, (though never so due, and
just,) of the Kings great Merits it may be taken for Flattery: If I should
speak, of the strait Obligations, which intercede, between the King, and the
Subject, in case of the Kings want, it were a kind of concluding the House: If
I should speak, of the dangerous Consequence, which Want may reverberate upon
Subjects, it might have a show, of a secret Menace.

These Arguments, are, (I hope,) needless; And do better, in your Minds, then
in my Mouth. But this, give me leave to say; That, whereas the Example, of
Cyrus, was used; Who sought his Supply, from those, upon whom he had bestowed
his Benefits; We must always, remember; That there are, as well Benefits of the
Sc^pter, as Benefits of the Hand; As well of Government, as of Liberality.
These, I am sure we will acknowledge, to have come, plena manu, amongst us All;
And all those, whom we represent; And therefore, it is every Man's Head, in this
Case, that must be his Counselor; And every Man's Heart, his Orator; And those
inward Powers, are more forcible, then any Man's Speech; I leave it, and wish,
it may go to the Question.

A Speech, delivered by the Kings Attorney, Sir Francis Bacon, in the Lower
House; When the House was in great heat, and much troubled, about the
undertakers; which were thought to be, some able, and forward Gentlemen; Who,
to ingratiate themselves, with the King, were said, to have undertaken, that
the Kings Business, should pass in that House, as his Majesty could wish. In
the Parliament, 12o. Jac.
(Mr. Speaker,)
I Have been hither^o silent, in this Matter of undertaking; wherein, as I
perceive, the House, is much enwrapped.

First, because, (to be plain with you,) I did not well understand, what it
meant, or what it was; And, I do not love, to offer at that, that I do not
thoroughly conceive. That Private Men, should undertake, for the Commons of
England: Why? A Man might as well undertake, for the four Elements: It is a
thing, so giddy^ and so vast, as cannot enter, into the Brain, of a sober Man.
And specially, in a new Parliament; When, it was impossible to know, who should
be of the Parliament; And when all Men, that know never so little, the
Constitution of this House, do know it to be so open to Reason; As Men, do not
know, when they enter into these Doors, what mind themselves will be of, until
they hear Things argued, and debated. Much less, can any Man make, a policy,
of Assurance; what Ship, shall come safe home, into the Harbor, in these Seas.
I had heard, of undertakings, in several kinds: There were undertakers, for
the Plantations, of Derry, and Colerane, in Ireland, the better to command, and
bridle, those Parts: There were, not long ago, some undertakers, for the
North-West Passage. And now, there are some undertakers, for the Project, of
Died, and Dressed, Clothes. And, in short, every Novelty uses to be
strengthened, and made good, by a kind of undertaking. But, for the Ancient
Parliament of England, which moves, in a certain Manner, and Sphere; To be
undertaken, it passes my reach, to conceive, what it should be. Must we be all
Died, and Dressed; And no pure Whites amongst us? Or must there be, a new
passage found, for the Kings Business, by a point of the Compass, that was
never sailed by, before? Or must there be, some Forts built, in this House,
that may command, and contain the rest? (Mr. Speaker) I know, but two Forts, in
this House, which the King ever has; The Fort of Affection, and the Fort of
Reason; The one, Commands the Hearts, and the other, Commands the Heads; And
others, I know none. I think Aesop was a Wise Man; that described, the nature,
of the ^ly, tha^ sat upon the Spoke, of the Chariot Wheel, and said to her
self; What a Dust do I raise? So, for my part, I think, that all this Dust, is
raised, by light Rumors, and Buzzes, and not upon any solid Ground.

The second Reason, that made me silent, was, because this Sus^icion, and
Rumor, of undertaking, settles upon no Person certain. It is like, the Birds of
Paradise, that they have in the Indies, that have no Feet, and therefore, they
never light upon any place, but the wind, carries them away^ And such a Thing,
do I take, this Rumor to be.

And lastly, when that the King, had in his two several speeches, freed us,
from the main of our Fears, In affirming, directly, that there was no
undertaking to him; And that, he would have taken it, to be no less derogation,
to his own Majesty, then to our Merits; To have the Acts, of his people,
transferred, to particular persons; That did quiet me, thus far; That these
Vapors, were not gone up to the Head, howsoever, they might glow, and estuate,
in the Body.

Nevertheless, since I perceive, that this Cloud, still hangs over the House;
And that it may do hurt, as well in Fame abroad, as in the Kings Ear, I
resolved with my self, to do the part, of an honest voice, in this House, to
counsel you, what I think, to be for the best.

Wherein first, I will speak plainly, of the pernicious Effects of the
Accident, of this Brute, and Opinion, of undertaking; Toward Particulars;
Toward the House; Toward the King; And wards the People.

Secondly, I will tell you, in Mine Opinion, what undertaking, is tolerable;
And how far, it may be justified, with a good mind; And on the other side, this
same Ripping up, of the Question, of Undertakers; How far it may proceed, from
a good Mind; And in what kind, it may be thought Malicious, and Dangerous.

Thirdly, I will show you, my poor advice, what Means there are, to put an
end, to this Question of Undertaking; Not falling, for the present, upon a
precise Opinion; But breaking it, how many ways there be, by which you may get
out of it; And leaving, the choice of them, to a Debate, at the Committee.

And Lastly, I will advise you, how things, are to be handled, at the Commitee,
to avoid distraction, and loss of Time.

For the First of these, I can say to you, but as the Scripure says, Si
invicem mordetis, ab invicem consumemini. If ye Fret, and Gall, one another
Reputation; The end will be, that every Man shall go hence, like Coin cried
down; Of less price, than he came hither. If some, shall be thought, to fawn
upon the Kings Business openly; And others, to cross it secretly; Some shall
be thought Practicers, that would pluck the Cards; And others, shall be
thought Papists, that would shuffle the Cards; what a Misery is this, that we
should come together, to foul one another, instead of procuring the public
good?

And this ends not in particulars, but will make, the whole House,
Contemptible: For now, I hear Men say; That this Question, of undertaking, is
the predominant Matter of this House. So that we are now, according to the
Parable of Iotham, in the Case, of the Trees of the Forest; That when Question
was, whether the Vine should reign over them? That might not be: And whether
the Olive should reign over them? That might not be; But we have accepted the
Bramble, to reign over us. For it seems, that the good Vine, of the Kings
Graces, that is not so much in esteem: And the good Oil, whereby we should
salve, and relieve, the wants, of the Estate, and Crown, that is laid aside
too: And this Bramble, of Contention, and Emulation; This Abimelech, which (as
was truly said, by an understanding Gentleman,) is a Bastard: (For every Fame,
that wants a Head, is Filius populi;) This must Reign, and Rule amongst us.

Then for the King nothing can be more opposite, Ex diametro, to his Ends and
Hopes, then this. For you have heard him profess like a King; and like a
gracious King, that he does not, so much, respect, his present supply; As this
demonstration, that the Peoples Hearts are more knit to him, then before. Now
then, if the Issue shall be this, that whatsoever shall be done for Him, shall
be thought to be done, but by a number of Persons, that shall be labored, and
packt; This will rather be a sign of Diffidence, and Alienation, then of a
natural Benevolence, and Affection, in his People, at home; And rather Matter,
of Disreputation, then of Honor, abroad. So that to speak plainly to you; The
King were better call, for a new Pair of Cards, then play upon these, if they
be packt.

And then for the People; It is my manner, ever, to look, as well beyond a
Parliament, as upon a Parliament; And if they abroad, shall think themselves,
betrayed by those, that are their Deputies, and Atturnies here; it is true, we
may bind them, and conclude them, But it will be, with such Murmur, and
Insatisfaction^ as I would be loath to see.

These Things might be dissembled; And so things left, to bleed inwards; But
that is not the way, to cure them. And therefore I have searched the Soar, in
hope, that you will endeavor the Medecin.

But this to do more thoroughly, I must proceed, to my Second Part; To tell you
clearly, and distinctly, what is to be set on the Right hand, and what on the
left, in this business.

First, if any Man, has do^ good Offices, to advise the King, to call a
Parliament; And to increase, the good Affection, and Confidence of his
Majesty, toward his People; I say, that such a Person, does rather Merit
well, then commit any Error; Nay further, if any Man, has out of his own good
mind, given an opinion, touching the Minds of the Parliament, in general; How
it is probable, they are like to be found; And that they will have, a due
feeling of the Kings wants; And, will not deal drily, or illiberally, with him;
This Man, that does but think, of other Men's minds, as he finds his own, is not
to be blamed. Nay fur^her, if any Man, has coupled this, with good wishes, and
Propositions; That the King do comfort, the Hearts of his People, and testify
his own love to them, by filing off, the harshness of his Prerogative;
Retaining the substance, and strength; And to that purpose, like the good
Householder in the Scripture, That brought forth old store and new, has
revolved the Petitions, and Propositions, of the last Parliament, and added
new; I say, this Man has sown good seed; And he that shall draw him, into Envy
for it, sowes Tares. Thus much of the Right hand. But on the other side, if any
shall mediatly, or immediately, infuse into his Majesty, or to others; That the
Parliament, is as Cato said of the Romans, like Sheep; That a Man, were better
drive a Flock of them, then one of them; And however, they may be wise Men
severally, yet, in this Assembly, they are guided by some few, which if they be
made, and assured, the rest will easily follow: This is a plain Robbery, of the
King of Honor, and his Subjects of Thanks; And it is to make the Parliament
vile, and servile, in the eyes of their Sovereign; And I count it no better,
than a supplanting, of the King and Kingdom. Again, if a Man shall make this
Impression; that it shall be enough for the King to send us some things of
show, that may serve, for colors; And let some Eloquent Tales, be told of
them; And that will serve, Ad faciendum populum; any such Person, will find,
that this House can well skill, of false Lights: And that it is, no wooing
Tokens, but the true Love, already planted, in the Breast of the Subjects, that
will make them do for the King. And this is my Opinion, touching those that may
have persuaded a Parliament. Take it on the other side, (for I mean in all
things to deal plainly) If any Man has been diffident touching the Call of a
Parliament, Thinking, that the best Means, were first for the King, to make
his utmost trial, to subsist of himself, and his own Means; I say, an Honest,
and Faithful Heart, might consent to that Opinion; And the event, it seems
does, not greatly discredit it hitherto. Again, if any Man, shall have been of
Opinion, that it is not a particular Party, that can bind the House; Nor, that
it is not Shows or Colors, can please the House; I say, that Man, though his
speech tend to discouragement, yet it is coupled with Providence. But by your
leave, if any Man since the Parliam^nt was called, or when it was in speech,
shall have laid Plots, to cross the good will of the Parliament, to the King;
By possessing them, that a few shall have the thanks; And that they are (as it
were) Bought and Sold, and betrayed; And that, that which the King offers them,
are but Baits, prepared by particular persons; Or have raised rumors, that it
is a packt Parliament; To the end, nothing may be done, But that the Parliament
may be dissolved (as Gamesters use to call for new Cards, when they mistrust a
Pack:) I say, These are Engines, and Devises, Naught, Malign, and Seditious.

Now for the Remedy; I shall rather break the Matter, (as I said in the
Beginning,) then advise positively. I know but three ways. Some Message of
Declaration to the King. Some Entry, or protestation, amongst our selves: Or
some, strict and punctual Examination. As for the last of these, I assure you,
I am not against it, if I could tell where to begin, or where to end. For
certainly, I have often seen it, that Things, when they are in smother, trouble
more, then when they break out. Smoke blinds the Eyes, but when it blazeth
forth into Flame, it gives light to the Eyes. But then, if you fall to an
Examination, some Person must be charged; some Matter must be charged: And the
Manner, of that Matter, must be likewise charged; For it may be in a Good
Fashion, and it may be in a Bad; In as much difference as between Black, and
White: And then, how far Men will ingenuously confess; How far they will
politickly deny; And what we can Make, and gather, upon their Confession; And
how we shall prove, against their Denial, It is an endless piece of Work; And,
I doubt, that we shall grow, weary of it.

For a Message to the King; It is the Course, I like best; so it be carefully,
and considerately, handled: For if, we shall represent to the King, the Nature
of this Body, as it is; Without the vayles, or shadows, that have been cast
upon it; I think, we shall do him Honor, and our selves Right.

For any Thing, that is to be done, amongst our selves, I do not see much
gained by it; Because it goes no further then our selves: Yet if any thing, can
be wisely conceived, to that end, I shall not be against it; But, I think, the
purpose of it, is fittest to be; Rather, that the House conceives, that all
this, is but a Misunderstanding; Then to take knowledge, that there is,
indeed, a Just Ground; And then, to seek, by a Protestation, to give it a
Remedy. For Protestations, and Professions, and Apologies, I never found them
very Fortunate; But they rather increase suspicion, then clear it.

Why then the Last Part is, that these things, be handled at the Committee,
seriously, and temperately: Wherein I wish, that these four Degrees, of
Questions, were handled, in order.

First, whether we shall do any thing, at all, in it; Or pass by it, and let
it sleep? Secondly, whether we shall enter, into a particular Examination, of
it? Thirdly, whether we shall content our selves, with some Entry, or
Protestation, amongst our selves? And Fourthly, whether we shall proceed, to a
Message, to the King; And what?
Thus I have told you mine Opinion. I know, it had been more safe, and
politic, to have been silent; But it is, perhaps, more honest, and loving^ to
speak. The old Verse is: Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. But, by
your leave, David says; Silui a bonis, and Dolor meus renovatus est. When a
Man speaks, He may be wounded by Others; but if He holds his peace, from Good
Things, he wounds Himself. So I have done my part, and leave it to you, to do
that, which you shall judge, to be the best.

The Charge, of Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General,
against William Talbot, a Counselor at Law, of Ireland, upon an Information,
in the Star Chamber, Ore tenus; For a writing, under his Hand, whereby, the
said William Talbot being demanded, whether the Doctrine of Suarez, touching
Deposing, and Killing, of Kings Excommunicated, were true, or no? He answered,
that he referred himself, unto that, which the Catholic Roman Church, should
determine thereof. Ultimo die Termini Hilarij, undecimo Iacobi Regis.
My Lords,
I Brought before you, the first sitting, of this Term, the Cause of Duels: But
now, this last sitting, I shall bring before you, a Cause, concerning the
greatest Duel, which is in the Christian World; The Duels, and Conflicts,
between the lawful Authority, of Sovereign Kings, which is Gods Ordinance, for
the comfort of Humane Society; And the swelling pride, and usurpation, of the Sea of Rome, in Temporalibus; Tending, altogether, to Anarchy, and Confusion.
Wherein, if this pretense, by the Pope of Rome, by Cartels, to make Sovereign
Princes, as the Banditi; And to proscribe their Lives; and to expose their
Kingdoms to prey; If these pretenses, (I say,) and all Persons, that submit
themselves, to that part of the Popes Power, be not, by all possible Severity,
repressed, and punished; The State of Christian Kings, will be no other, then
the ancient Torment, described by the Poets, in the Hell of the Heathen: A man
sitting, richly roabed, solemnly attended, delicious fare etc. With a Sword
hanging over his Head, hanging by a small thread, ready every moment to be cut
down, by an accursing, and accursed, hand. Surely, I had thought, they had been
the Prerogatives, of God alone, and of his secret Judgments; Solvam Cingula
Regum; I will loosen the Girdles of Kings; Or again; He powers contempt upon
Princes; Or, I will give a King in my wrath, and take him away again, in my
displeasure. And the like: but if these be the Claims, of a Mortal Man,
certainly, they are but the Mysteries, of that Person, which exalts himself,
above all that is called God: Supra omne quod dicitur Deus; (Note it well:) Not
above God, (though that, in a sense, be true, in respect of the Authority, they
claim over the Scriptures;) But, Above all that is called God; That is, Lawful
Kings, and Magistrates.

But, my Lords, in this uel, I find this Talbot that is now before you, but a
Coward: For he has given ground; He has gone backward, and forward; But in
such a fashion, and with such Interchange, of Repenting, and Relapsing, as I
cannot tell, whether it does extenuate, or aggravate, his Offense. If he shall,
more publicly, in the face of the Court, fall, and settle, upon a right mind,
I shall be glad of it; And he that would be against the Kings Mercy, I would he
might need the Kings Mercy; But, nevertheless, the Court will proceed, by
Rules of Justice.

The Offense, wherewith I charge this Talbot, Prisoner at the Bar, is this, in
brief, and in Effect: That he has maintained, and maintains, under his hand,
a power in the Pope for the Deposing, and Murdering, of Kings. In what sort he
does this, when I come, to the proper, and particular, charge, I will deliver
it, in his own words, without Pressing, or Straining.

Bu^ before I come to the particular charge, of this Man; I cannot proceed so
coldly, but I must express, unto your Lordships, the extreme, and imminent
Danger, wherein our Dear, and Dread, Sovereign, is; And, in him, we all; Nay,
and wherein, all Princes of both Religions, (For it is a common Cause,) do
stand at this day; By the spreading, and Enforcing, of this furious, and
pernicious, Opinion, of the Popes Temporal Power: which though, the modest
Sort, would blanch, with the Distinction of; In ordine ad Spiritualia, yet that
is but an Elusion; For he that makes the Distinction, will also make the Case.
This peril, though it be, in it self, notorious, yet because there is a kind
of Dullness, and, almost, a Lethargy, in this Age; Give me leave to set before
you, two Glasses; Such as, certainly, the like, never met, in one Age; The
Glasses of France, and the Glass of England. In that of France, the Tragedies
acted, and executed, in two Immediate Kings; In the Glass of England, the
same, or more horrible, attempted, likewise, in a Queen, and King, immediate;
But ending, in a happy Deliverance. In France, H. 3. in the face of his Army,
before the walls of Paris, stabbed, by a wretched Iacobine Friar: H. 4. (a
Prince, that the French do surname the Great;) One, that had been a Savior,
and Redeemer, of his Country from infinite Calamities; And a Restorer of that
Monarchy, to the ancient State, and Splendor; And a Prince, almost, Heroical;
(except it be, in the Point, of Revolt, from Religion;) At a time, when he was,
as it were to mount on Horseback, for the Commanding, of the greatest, Forces,
that, of long time, had been levied in France; This King, likewise, stilletted,
by a Rascal votary; which had been enchanted and conjured, for the purpose.

In England, Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory; A Queen comparable, and to be
rankt, with the greatest Kings; Oftentimes attempted, by like votaries;
Sommervile, Parry, Savage, and others; But still protected, by the Watchman,
that Slumbreth not. Again, our excellent Sovereign, King James; The Sweetness,
and Clemency, of whose nature, were enough, to quench, and mortify, all
Malignity; And a King shielded, and supported, by Posterity: Yet this King, in
the Chair of Majesty, (his Vine and Olive Branches about him;) Attended, by his
Nobles, and Third Estate, in Parliament; Ready, in the Twinkling of an Eye;
(As if it had been, a particular Doomesday;) To have been brought to Ashes,
dispersed to the four Winds. I noted, the last day my Lord Chief Justice, when
he spoke, of this Powder Treason, he labored for words; Though they came from
him, with great Efficacy, yet he truly confessed, and so must all Men; That,
that Treason, is above the Charge, and Report, of any Words whatsoever.

Now, my Lords, I cannot let pass, but in these Glasses, which I spoke of,
besides the Facts themselves, and Danger, to show you two Things. The one, the
Ways of God Almighty, which turns the Sword of Rome, upon the Kings, that
are the Vassals of Rome; And over them, gives it power; But protecteth those
Kings, which have not accepted, the Yoke of his Tyranny, from the Effects of
his Malice. The other, that, (as I said at first,) this is a common Cause, of
Princes; It involveth Kings, of both Religions; And therefore, his Majesty, did
most worthily, and prudently, ring out the Alarm Bell, to awaken all other
Princes, to think of it, seriously, and in Time. But this is a miserable case,
the while; That these Roman Soldiers, do, either thrust the Spear, into the
Side of Gods Anointed; Or, at least, they Crown them with Thorns; That is,
piercing, and pricking, Cares, and Fears, that they can never be quiet, or
secure, of their Lives, or States. And as this Peril, is common to Princes, of
both Religions: So Princes of both Religions have been, likewise, equally
sensible, of every Injury, that touched their Temporal.

Thunaus reports in his Story; That when the Realm of France was interdicted
by the violent proceedings of Pope Julius the 2d. the King, Lewis the 12th.
otherwise noted for a Moderate Prince, caused Coyns of Gold to be stamped with
his own Image, and this Superscription; Perdam nomen Babylonis e terra. And
Thuanus says, Himself has seen, diverse pieces thereof. So as this Catholic
King was so much incensed at that time, in respect of the Popes Usurpation; As
he did fore-run Luther, in applying Babylon to Rome. Charles ^he 5th. Emperor,
who was accounted, one of ^he Popes best Sons; yet proceeded, in matter
temporal, toward Pope Clement, with strange Rigor; Never regarding the
Pontificality, but kept him Prisoner 18. Months, in a Pestilent Prison; And
was h^rdly dissuaded by his Council, from having sent him, Captive into Spain;
And made sport with the Threats of Frosberg, the German; who wore a silk
Rope, under his Cassock, which he would show in all Companies; Tell^ng them,
that he carried it, to strangle the Pope with his own hands. As for Philip the
Fair; I^ is the ordinary Example, how he brought Pope Boniface the 8th. to an
ignominious End; Dying Mad and Enraged; And how he styled hi^ Rescript, to the
Popes Bull, whereby he challenged his Tempo^all; Sciat Fatuitas Vestra; Not
your Beatitude, but your Stultitude; A Style, worthy to be continued, in like
Cases. For certainly, that claim is merely Folly, and Fury. As for Native
Examples here, it is too long a Field to enter into them. Never Kings of any
Nation, kept the Partition wall, between Temporal, and Spiri^uall, better in
times of greatest Superstition: I report me, to King Edward I. that set up so
many Cross^s; And yet crossed that part of the Popes Jurisdiction, no Man more
strongly. But these things, have passed better Penns and Speeches: Here I end
them.

But now to come to the particular Charge, of this Man: I mus^ enform your
Lordships the Occasion, and Nature, of this Offence^ The^e ha^h been published,
lately, to the World^ a Work of Su^rez a Portugese; A Professor in the
University of Coimbra; A Confiden^^ and da^ing Writer; such an one, as Tully
describes in derision, Nihil tam verens, quam ne dubitare, aliqua de re,
videretur: One that fears nothing but this, least he should seem to doubt of
any thing. A Fellow, that thinks^ with his Magistrallity, and Goose-quill, to
give Laws, and Mannages, to Crowns and Scepters. In this Man's writin^ this
Doctrine of Deposing, and Murdering, Kings, seems to com^ to a higher
Elevation, then heretofore; And it is more artted, and positived, then in
others. For in the passages, which your Lordships shall hear read anon, I find
three Assertions, which run, not in the vulgar Track, But are such, as
wherewith M^ns Ears (as I suppose) are not much acquainted. Whereof the first
is, That the Pope has a superiority over Kings, as Subjects to depose them;
Not only, for Spiritual Crimes, as Heresy, and Schism; But for Faults, of a
Tempo^rall Nature; Forasmuch, as a Tyrannical Government, tends ever, to the
Destruction of Souls. So by this Position, Kings of either Religion, are alike
comprehended, and none exempted. The Second, that after a Sentence, given by
the Pope, this Writer, has defined, of a Series, or Succession, or
Substitution, of Hangmen, or Burreo's, to be su^e, least an Executioner should
fail. His Assertion is; That when a King, is sentenced, by the Pope, to
Deprivation, or Death; The Executioner, who is first in place, is He, to whom
the Pope shall commit the Authority; Which may^ be a Foreign Pr^nce; It may
be, a Particular Subject; It may be, in general, to the first undertaker. But
if there be no Direction, or Assignation, in the Sentence, special, nor
general, then, de Jure, it appertains to the nex^ Successor: (A natural, and
pious, Opinion; For, commonly, they are Sons, or Brothers, or near of Kin, all
is one:) So as the Successor be Apparent, and also that he be a Catholic.
But, if he be Doubtful, or that he be no Catholic, then it devolves, to the
Commonalty, of the Kingdom; So as, he will be sure, to have it done, by one
Minister, or other. In the Third, he distinguisheth^ of two kinds, of Tyrants;
A Tyrant in Title, and A Tyrant in Regiment, ^he Tyrant in Regiment, cannot be
resisted, or killed, without a Sentence,, precedent, by the Pope: But a Tyrant
in Title, may be killed, by any private Man, whatsoever. By which Doctrine, he
has put the Judgment, of Kings Titles; (which, I will undertake, are never so
clean, but that some vain Quarrel, or Exception, may be made unto them;) upon
the Fancy, of every ^rivate Man; And also couples, the Judgment, and
Execution, together; That he may judge him, by a Blow, without any other
Sentence.

Your Lordships see, what Monstrous Opinions, these are; And how, both these
Beasts, the Beast with seven Heads, and the Beast with Many Heads, Pope, and
people, are, at once, let in, and set upon the sacred Persons of Kings.

Now, to go on, with the Narrative. There was an Extract made, of certain
Sentences, and Portions, of this Book; (Being, of this nature, that I have set
forth;) By a great Prelate, and Councellor, upon a just Occasion; And, there
being some Hollowness, and Hesitation, in these Matters, (wherein, it is a
thing impious, to doubt,) discovered, and perceived, in Talbot; He was asked,
his Opinion, concerning these Assertions, in the Presence of his Majesty: And
afterward, they were delivered to him; That, upon advise, and Sedato animo, he
might declare himself; Whereupon, under his hand, he subscribes thus. May it
please your Honorable good Lordships: Concerning this Doctrine of Suarez, I do
perceive, by what I have read, in his Book, that the same, does concern, Matter
of Faith; The Controversy growing, upon Exposition of Scriptures, and
Councels; Wherein, (being ignorant, and not studied,) I cannot take upon me, to
judge: But I do submit mine Opinion therein, to the Judgment, of the Catholic
Roman Church, as in all other Points, concerning Faith, I do. And for Matter,
concerning my Loyalty, I do acknowledge, my Sovereign Liege Lord King James, to
be lawful, and undoubted, King, of all the Kingdoms, of England, Scotland,
and Ireland; And I will bear, true faith, and Allegiance, to his Highness,
during my life.

NOw, (my Lords,) upon these words, I charge William Talbot, to have committed
a great Offense; And such an one, as if he had entered, into a voluntary, and
malicious, Publication, of the like writing; It would have been, too great an
Offense, for the Capacity of this Court. But because, it grew from a Question,
asked by a Council of ^state; And so, rather seems, in a favorable
Construction, to proceed, from a kind of Submission to answer, then from any
malicious, or insolent Will, it was fit, according to the Clemency, of these
Times, to proceed in this manner, before your Lordships. And yet, let the
Hearers, take these things right; For certainly, if a Man be required, by the
Lords o^ the Council, to deliver his Opinion, whether King James, be King, or
no? And He deliver his Opinion, that He is not; This is, High Treason. But, I
do not say, that these words, amount to that^ And therefore, let me open them,
truly, to your Lordships; And therei^, open also, (it may be,) the Eyes, of the
Offender Himself, how far they reach.

My Lords, a Man's Allegiance, must be Independent, not provisionall, and
conditional. Elizabeth Barton, that was called, the Holy Maid of Kent,
affirmed; That if K. H. 8. Did not take, Katherine of Spain, again, to his
Wife, within a twelve month, he should be no King; And this was judged
Treason. For though this Act, be Contingent, and Future; yet Treason, of
compassing, and imagining, the Kings Destruction, is present.

And in like manner, if a Man should, voluntarily publish, or maintain; That
whenever a Bull, or Deprivation, shall come forth against the King, that from
thenceforth, he is no longer King: This is of like Nature: But with this, I do
not charge you neither: But this, is the true Latitude of your Words; That if
the Doctrine, touching the Killing of Kings, be Matter of Faith, that you
submit your self, to the Judgment, of the Catholic Roman Church: So as now,
(to do you right,) your Allegiance, does not depend simply, upon a Sentence, of
the Popes Deprivation, against the King; But upon another point also; If these
Doctrines be already, or shall be declared, to be Matter of Faith. But my
Lords, there is little won in this: There may be some Difference, to the
guiltiness, of the Party; But there is little, to the Danger of the King. For
the same Pope of Rome, may with the same breath, declare both. So as still,
upon the matter, the King is made, but Tennant at will, of his Life, and
Kingdoms; And the Allegiance of his Subjects, is pinned upon the Popes Act.
And Certainly, it is Time, to stop the Current of this Opinion, of
Acknowledgement of the Popes power, in Temporalibus; Or el^e, it will supplant,
the Seat of Kings. And let it not be mistaken, that Mr. Talbots Offense, should
be no more, then the Refusing the Oath of Allegiance. For it is one thing to be
silent, and another thing to affi^m. As for the Point of Matter of Faith, or
not of Faith; To tell your Lordships plain, it would astonish a Man, to see the
Gulf of this employed ^eliefe. Is nothing excepted from it? If a Man should ask
Mr. Talbot, whether he do condemn Murder, or Adultery, or Rape, or the
Doctrine of Mahomet, or of Arius, in stead of Zuarius; Must the Answer be, with
this exception, that if the Question concern matter of Faith, (as no question,
it does, for the Moral Law is matter of Faith) That therein, he will submit
himself, to what the Church shall determine? And no doubt, the Murder of
Princes, is more then Simple Murder. But to conclude, ( Talbot,) I will do you
this Right; and I will no^ be reserved in this, but to declare that, that is
true; That you came afterward to a better mind; Wherein, if you had been
constant, the King, out of his great goodness, was resolved, not to have
proceeded with you, in Course of Justice: But then again, you Started aside,
like a Broken Bow. So that, by your Variety, and Vacillation, you lost, the
acceptable time, of the first Grace; which was, Not to have convented you.

Nay, I will go farther with you. Your last Submission, I conceive to be
Satisfactory and Complete; But then it was too late; The Kings Honor was upon
it; It was published, and the Day appointed, for Hearing: Yet, what
preparation, that may be, to the Second Grace of Pardon; that I know not: But I
know, my Lords, out of their accustomed favor, will admit you, not only to
your Defense, concerning that, that has been Charged; But to extenuate, your
Fault, by any Submission, that now, God shall put, into your mind, to make.

The Charge given, by Sr. Francis Bacon, his Majesty's Attorney General,
against Mr. I.S. for Scandalizing, and Traducing, in the public Sessions,
Letters sent, from the Lords of the Council, touching the Benevolence.
MY Lords, I shall inform you, ore tenus, against this Gentleman, Mr. I. S. A
Gentleman, (as it seems) of an ancient House, and Name; But for the present, I
can think of him, by no other Name, then the Name of a great Offender. The
Nature, and Quality^ of his Offense, in sum, is this. This Gentleman, has,
upon advice, not suddenly, by his Pen; Nor by the Slip of his Tongue; Not
privately, or in a Corner, but publicly; As it were, to the face of the Kings
Ministers, and Justices; Slandered and Traduced; The King, our Sovereign; The
Law of the Land; The Parliament; And infinite Particulars, of his Majesty's
worthy, and loving Subjects. Nay, the Slander is, of that Nature, that it may
seem, to interest, the People, in Grief, and Discontent, against the State;
whence might have ensued, Matter of Murmur, and Sedition. So that it is not a
Simple Slander, but a Seditious Slander; like to that, the Poet speaks of; --
Calamosque armare Veneno.

A Venomous Dart, that has both Iron, and Poyson^

To open, to your Lordships, the true State, of this Offense, I will set before
you; First, the Occasion, whereupon Mr. I. S. wrought: Th^n the Offense, it
self, in his own words: And lastly, the Points, of his Charge.

My Lords, you may remember, that there was the last Parliament, an
Expectation, to have had the King, supplied, with Treasure, although the Event
failed. Herein, it is not fit for me to give opinion, of an House of
Parliament: But I will give testimony of Truth, in all places. I served, in the
Lower House, and I observed somewhat. This I do affirm; That I never could
perceive, but that there was, in that House, a general Disposition to give;
And to give, largely. The Clocks in the House, perchance, might differ; Some
went too fast, some went too slow: But the Disposition to give, was general;
So that I think, I may truly say; Solo tempore lapsus Amor.

This Accident, happening thus, besides expectation: It stirred up, and awaked,
in diverse of his Majesty's worthy Servants, and Subjects; of the Clergy, the
Nobility, the Court, and others here nea^ at hand, an Affection loving, and
cheerful; To present the King, some with Plate, some with Money, as a Freewill
offering; (A Thing, that God Almighty loves; A Cheerful Giv^r; what an Evil
Eye does, I know not.) And (my Lords) let me speak it, plainly unto you; God
forbid, any Body should be so wretched, as to think, that the Obligation of
Love, and Duty, from the Subject, to the King, should be Joint, and not
several: No, my Lords it is both. The Subject petitioneth, to the King, in
Parliament. He Petitioneth likewise, out of Parliament. The King, on the other
side, gives Graces, to the Subjects, in Parliament: He gives them likewise, and
pours them, upon his People, out of Parliament: And so, no doubt, the
Subject, may give, to the King, in Parliament, and out of Parliament. It is
true, the Parliament, is Intercursus Magnus; The great Intercourse, and main
Current, of Graces, and Donatives, from the King, to the People; from the
People, to the King: But Parliaments are held, but at certain times: Whereas
the Passages, are always open, for Particulars: Even as you see, great Rivers,
have their Tides; But particular Springs, and Fountains, run continually.

To proceed therefore; As the Occasion, (which was the failing of Supply, by
Parliament,) did awake the Love, and Benevolence, of those, that were at hand,
to give: So it was apprehended, and thought fit, by my Lords of the Council,
to make a proof, whether the occasion, and Example both, would not awake, those
in the Country, of the better sort, to follow. Whereupon, their Lordships
devised, and directed Letters, unto the Sheriffs, and Justices, which declared
what was done here above, and wished, that the Country might be moved,
especially Men of value.

Now, My Lords, I beseech you, give me favor, and attention, to set forth, and
observe, unto you, five Points: (I will number them, because other Men may note
them; And I will but touch them, because they shall not be drowned, or lost in
discourse;) which I hold worthy, the observation, for the Honor of the State,
and Confusion of Slanders: Whereby, it will appear, most evidently; What care
was taken, that that, which was then done, might not have the effect, no nor
the show, no nor so much as the shadow, of a Tax: And that it was, so far, from
breeding, or bringing in, any ill president, or Example, As, contrary wise, it
is a Corrective, that does correct, and allay, the Harshness, and Danger, of
former Examples.

The first is; That what was done, was done, immediately after such a
Parliament, as made general Profession to give, and was interrupted by
Accide^t; So as, you may truly, and justly esteem it; Tanquam Posthuma Proles
Parliamenti; As an After Child of the Parliament; And in pursuit, (in some
small measure,) of the firm Intent, of a Parliament past. You may take it also,
if you will, as an Advance, or Provisionall Help, until a Future Parliawent:
Or, as a Gratification simply, without any Relation, to a Parliament; you can,
no ways, take it amiss. The Second is, That it wrought, upon Example; As a
Thing, not devised; Or projected; Or required; No, nor so much as recommended,
until many, that were never moved, nor dealt with, Ex mero motu, had freely
and frankly, sent in their presents. So that, the Letters, were rather like
Letters of News, what was done a^ London, then otherwise: And we know, Exempla
ducun^, non tra^unt; Examples, they do but Lead, they do not Draw, nor Drive.
The Third is, That it was not done, by Commission, under the Great Seal; A
Thing warranted, by a Multitude of Presidents, both ancient, and of late time,
as you shall hear anon; And no doubt, warranted by Law; So that, the
Commissions, be of that Style, and Tenor, as that they be to move, and not to
levy: But this was done, by Letters of the Council, and no higher Hand, or
Form. The Fou^th i^, That these Letters, had no manner of Show, of any Binding
Act, of State. For they contai^^ not any special Frame of Direction, how the
Business should be Managed; But were written, as upon trust; Leaving the
matter, wholly, to the Industry, and Confidence, of those in the Country; So
that it was, an absque Compoto; Such a form of Letter, as no Man could, fitly,
be called to account upon. The Fifth, and last Point is; That the whole Carriage
of ^he Business, had no Circumstance compulsory. There was no Proportion, Or
Rate, ^et down, not so much as by way of a Wish: There was no Menace of any
that should deny: No Reproof of any that did deny, No certifying, of the Names
of any, that had denied. Indeed, if Men could not content themselves to deny,
but that they must censure, and inveigh; Nor to excuse themselves, but they
must accuse the State, that is another Case. But, I say, for Denying, no Man
was apprehended, no nor noted. So that, I verily think, that there is none so
subtle a Disputer, in the Controversy of Liberum Arbitrium, that can, with
all his Distinctions, fasten, or carp, upon the Act, but that there was Free
Will, in it.
I conclude therefore, (My Lords,) that this was a True, and pure, Benevolence;
Not an Imposition, called a Benevelence, which the Statute speaks of; As you
shall hear, by one of my Fellows. There is a great Difference, I tell you,
(though Pilate would not see it,) between Rex Iudaeorum and se d^cens Regem
Iudaeorum; And there is a great difference, between a Benevolence, and an
Exaction, called a Benevolence, which the Duke of Buckingham, speaks of, in his
Oration to the City: And defines it, to be, not what the Subject, of his good
will, would give, but what the King, of his good will, would take. But this, I
say, was a Benevolence, wherein every man, had a Princes Prerogative; A
Negative Voice: And this word, (Excuse moy,) was a Plea peremptory. And
therefore, I do wonder, how Mr. I. S. could foul, or trouble, so clear a
Fountain; Certainly, it was but his own Bitterness, and unsound Humors.

Now to the particular Charge. Amongst other Countries, these Letters, of the
Lords, came to the Justices of D -- shire, Who signified, the Contents thereof;
And gave Directions, and Appointments, for meetings, concerning the Business,
to several Towns, and Places, within that County: And amongst the rest, notice
was given, unto the Town, of A: The Majour of A; conceiving, that this Mr. I.
S. (being a Principal Person, and a Dweller, in that Town;) was a Man, likely
to give, both money, and good Example: Dealt with him, to know his mind. He,
intending, (as it seems,) to play prizes, would give no Answer, to the Majour,
in private, but would take Time. The next day then, being an Appointment of the
Justices to meet, he takes occasion, or pretends occasion, to be absent,
because he would bring his Papers, upon the Stage: And thereupon, takes Pen in
hand, and, in stead, of excusing himself, sets down, and contriveth, a
seditious, and libellou^, Accusation, against the King, and State; which your
Lordships shall now hear; And sends it to the Majour: And wit^all, because the
Feather of his Quill, might fly abroad, he gives authority, to the Majour, to
impart it to the Justices, if he so thought good. And now, my Lords, because I
will not mistake, or mis-repeat, you shall hear the Seditious Libell, in the
proper terms, and words thereof.

Here the Papers were read.

MY Lords, I know, this Paper, offends your Ears, much, and the Ears of any
good Subject: And sorry I am, that the Times, should produce Offenses, of this
nature: But since they do, I would be more sorry, they should be passed,
without severe punishment: Non tradite factum, (as the Verse says, altered a
little;) Aut si tradatis, Facti quoque tradite poenam. If any man, have a mind,
to discourse, of the Fact; let him likewise, discourse, of the punishment, of
the Fact.

In this Writing, ( my Lords,) there appears, a Monster, with four Heads; Of
the progeny, of him, that is the Father of Lies, and takes, his Name, from
Slander.

The first is, a wicked, and seditious, Slander; Or, (if I shall use the
Scripture phrase,) a Blaspheming^ of the King himself; Setting him forth, for a
Prince, perjured, in the great, and solemn, Oath, of his Coronation; which is,
as it were, the Knot of the Diadem: A Prince, that should be a Violatour, and
Infringer, of the Liberties, Laws, and Customs, of the Kingdom: A mark, for
an H. the 4th. A Match, for a R. the 2d.

The Second is, a Slander, and Falsification, and wresting, of the Law, of the
Land, gross, and palpable: It is truly said, by a Civilian; Tortura Legum
pessima: The Torture of Laws, is worse, then the Torture of Men.

The Third is, a slander, and false charge, of the Parliament; That they had
denied, to give to the King: A Point, of notorious untruth.

And the last is, a Slander, and Taunting, of an infinite Number, of the Kings
loving Subjects, that have given, toward this Benevolence, and free
Contribution: Charging them, as Accessory, and Coadjutours, to the Kings
Perjury. Nay, you leave us not there; But you take, upon you, a Pontifical
Habit; And couple, your Slander, with a Curse: But thanks be to God, we have
learned sufficiently, out of the Scripture; That, as the Bird flies away, so
the causeless Curse shall not come.

For the first of these, which concerns the King, I have taken to my self, the
opening, and Aggravation, thereof: The other three, I have distributed, to my
Fellows.

My Lords, ^ cannot, but enter, into this part, with some Wonder and
Astonishment; How it should come, into the Heart, of a Subject, of England to
vapor forth, such a wicked, and venomous slander against the King; whose
Goodness, and Grace, is comparable (if not incomparable,) unto any the Kings,
his Progenitors. This therefore, gives me a Just, and necessary, occasion, to
do two things. The one to make, some Representation, of his Majesty; Such as
truly he is found to be, in his Government, which Mr. I. S. charge, with
Violation of Laws, and Liberties. The other, to search, and open the Depth of
Mr. I.S. his Offense. Both which, I will do briefly; Because, the one, I cannot
express, sufficiently; And the other, I will not press, too far.

My Lords, I mean to make, no Panegyric, or Laudative: The Kings delights not
in it, neither am I fit for it: But if it were, but a Councellor, or Nobleman,
whose Name had suffered, and were to receive, some kind of Reparation, in this
High Court, I would do him that Duty, as not to pass his Merits, and just
Attributes, (especially, such as are limited with the present Case) in
silence: For, it is fit, to burn Incense, where evil Odours, have been cast,
and raised. Is it so, that King James shall be said to be a Violater, of the
Liberties, Laws, and Customs of his Kingdoms? Or is he not, rather, a noble,
and Constant, Protector, and Conservator, of them all? I conceive, this
consists, in maintaining Religion, and the true Church; In maintaining the
Laws of the Kingdom which is the Subjects Birthright; In temperate use, of
the Prerogative; In due, and free, Administration of Justice; And Conservation,
of the Peace, of the Land.

For Religion, we must ever acknowledge, in first place, that we have a King,
that is, the Principal Conservator of true Religion, through the Christian
World. He has maintained it, not only, with Scepter and Sword; But likewise by
his Pen, wherein also he is Potent.

He has Awaked, and Reauthorized, the whole Party, of the Reformed Religion,
throughout Europe; which through the Insolency, and diverse Artifices, and
Enchantments, of the advers part, was grown, a little Dull, and Dejected. He
has summoned, the Fraternity of Kings, to infranchise Themselves, from the
Usurpation, of the sea of Rome. He has made himself a Mark, of Contradiction
for it.

Neither can I omit, when I speak of Religion, to remember, that excellent Act
of his Majesty; which though it were done, in a Foreign Country, yet the
Church of God is one; And the Contagion of these things, will soon pass Seas,
and Lands: I mean, in his constant, and holy, proceeding against the Heretic
Vorstius; whom, (being ready, to enter into the Chair, and there to have
authorized, one of the most pestilent, and Heathenish Heresies, that ever was
begun;) His Majesty, by his constant opposition, dismounted, and pulled down.
And I am persuaded, there sits, in this Court one, whom God does the rather
bless, for being his Majesty's Instrument, in that Service.

I cannot remember Religion, and the Church, but I must think, of the
seed-plots of the same, which are the Universities. His Majesty, as for
Learning amongst Kings, he is incomparable, in his Person; So likewise, has he
been in his Government, a benig^, or benevolent planet, toward Learning. By
whose influence, those Nurseries, and Gardens of Learning, (the Universities)
were never, more in Flower, nor Fruit.

For the Maintaining, of the Laws, which is the Hedge, and Fence, about the
Liberty of the Subject, I may truly affirm, it was never in better repair. He
does concur, with the Votes, of the Nobles; Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare. He is
an Enemy of Innovation. Neither does the Universality, of his own Knowledge,
carry him, to neglect, or pass over, the very Forms of the Laws, of the Land.
Neither was there ever King, (I am persuaded) that did consult, so often, with
his Judges; As my Lords, that sit here, know well. The Judges, are a kind of
Council, of the Kings, by Oath, and ancient Institution; But he uses them so
indeed. He confers regularly, with them, upon their Ret^rnes, from their
Visitations, and Circuits. He gives them Liberty, both to enform him, and to
debate matters with him; And in the Fall, and Conclusion, commonly, relyeth, on
their Opinions.

As for the use, of the Prerogative, it runs within the ancient Channels, and
Banks; Some Things, that were conceived, to be in some Proclamations,
Commissions, and Pattents, as Overflowes, have been, by his Wisdom, and Care,
reduced; whereby, no doubt, the Main Channel, of his Prerogative, is so much
the stronger. For evermore, Overflowes, do hurt the Channel.

As for Administration of Justice, between Party and Party, I pray observe
these points. There is no News, of Great Seal, or Signet, that flies abroad,
for Countenance, or Delay of Causes: Protections rarely granted, and only upon
great Ground, or by Consent: My Lords, here of the Council, and the King
himself, meddle not, (as has been used in former times) with Matters, of Meum
and Tuum; except they have apparent mixture with Matters of Estate, but leave
them to the Kings Courts of Law, or Equity. And for Mercy, and Grace, (without
which, there is no standing, before Justice;) we see, the King now has reigned
12. years, in his White Robe, without, almost any Asp^rsion^ of the Crims^n
Die, of blood. There sits my Lord Hob^rt, that served At^urney seven years. I
served with him. We were so happy, as there passed not, through our hands, any
one Arraignment for Treason; And but one, for any Capital Offense; which was
that, of the Lord Sanquier; The Noblest piece of Justice, (one of them) that
ever came ^orth in any Kings Times.

As for Penal Laws, which lie, as Snares, upon the Subjects: And which were,
as a Nemo seit, to King Henry 7. It yields a Revenue, that will scarce pay, for
the Parchment, of the Kings Records, at W^stminster.

And lastly for Peace; we see, manifestly, his Majesty, bears some Resemblance,
of that great Name; A Prince of Peace: He ha^h preserved his Subjects, during
his Reign, in Peace, both within, and without. For the Peace, with States
abroad, We have it, usque ad Satietatem: And for Peace, in the Lawyers phrase,
which count Trespasses, and Forces, and Riots, to be Contra pacem; Le^ me give
your Lordships, this Token, or Taste; That this Court, where they should appear,
had never less to do. And certainly, there is no better Sign, of Omnia been,
then when this Court, is in a Still.

But, (my Lords,) this is a Sea of Matter; And therefore, I must give it over,
and conclude; That there was never King, reigned, in this Nation, that did
better keep Covenant, in preserving the Liberties, and procuring the Good, of
his People. So that, I must needs say, for the Subjects of England; O
Fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint: As, no doubt, they do, both know, and
acknowledge it: Whatsoever, a few turbulent Discoursers, may, through the
Lenity of the time, take Boldness to speak.

And as for this particular, touching the Benevolence, wherein, Mr. I.S. does
assign, this breach of Covenant; I leave it, to others, to tell you; what the
King may do; Or what other Kings, have done: But I have told you, what our
King, and my Lords, have done: Which, I say, and say again, is so far, from
introducing, a new President; As it does, rather, correct, and mollify, and
qualify, former presidents.

Now, (Mr. I. S.) let me tell you your fault in few words; For that, I am
persuaded, you see it already; Though I woo no Man's Repentance; But I shall,
as much as in me is, cherish it, where I find it. Your Offense has three parts
knit together, Your Slander; Your Menace; and Your Comparison.


For your Slander, it is no less, then that the King is perjured, in his
Coronation Oath. No greater Offense then Perjury: No greater Oath, then that of
a Coronation. I leave it; It is too great to aggravate.

Your Menace, that if there were a Bulling-broke, or I cannot tell what, there
were Matter for him, is a very seditious Passage. You know well, that howsoever
Henry the fourths Act, by a secret Providence of God, prevailed, yet it was but
an Usurpation: And, if it were possible, for such a one, to be, this day,
(wherewith, it seems, your Dreams are troubled,) I do not doubt, his End
would be upon the Block; And that he would, sooner, have the Ravens, sit upon
his Head, at London Bridge, then the Crown at Westminster. And it is not your
interlacing, of your ( God forbid,) that will salve these seditious Speeches;
Neither could it be a Fore-warning, because the Matter was past, and not
revocable; But, a very Stirring up, and Incensing, of the People. If I should
say to you, (for Example,) if these times, were like some former times, of King
H. 8; Or some other times, which God forbid, Mr. I. S, it would cost you your
life. I am sure, you would not think this, to be a gentle warning, but rather,
that I incensed the Court against you.

And for your Comparison, with R. the 2. I see you follow the Example of them,
that brought him upon the Stage, and into Print, in Queen Elizabeth's time; A
most prudent; and admirable, Queen; But let me entreat you, that when ^ou will
speak, of Queen Elizabeth, or King James; you would compare them to K. H. the
7th, or K. Ed. 1. Or some other Paralels, to which they are like. And this I
would wish, both you, and all, to take heed of; How you speak seditious Matter^
in Parables, or by Tropes, or Examples. There is a thing, in an Indictment,
called an Innuendo; You must beware, how you becken, or make Signs upon the
King, in a Dangerous sense: But I will contain my self, and Press this no
further: I may hold you, for Turbulent, or Presumptuous, but I hope you are not
Disloyal: You are graciously, and mercifully, dealt with. And therefore having
now o^ened to my Lords, and, (as I think,) to your own Heart, and Conscience,
the principal part of your Offense, which concerns the King;) I leave the
rest, which concerns the Law, Parliament, and the Subjects that have given, to
Mr. Sergeants, and Mr. Sollicitour.

The Charge of Owen, indicted of High Treason, in the Kings Bench, by Sir
Francis Bacon, Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General.
THe Treason, wherewi^h, this Man stands Charged, is, for the Kind, and
Nature, of it, Ancient; As Ancient, as there is, any Law of England: But, in
the particular, Late, and Upstart: And again, in the Manner, and Boldness, of
the present Case, New, and almost unheard of, till this Man. Of what mind he is
now, I know not, but I take him as he was, and as he stands charged. For High
Treason, is not written in Ice; That when the Body relenteth, the Impression
should go away.

In this Cause, the Evidence it self, will spend little Time: Time therefore,
will be best spent, in opening, fully, the Nature of thi^ Treason, with the
Circumstances thereof; Because the Example, is more then the Man. I think good,
therefore, by way of Inducement, and Declaration, in this Cause, to open unto
the Court, Jury, and Hearers, five Things.

The first is, the Clemency, of the King; Because, it is News, and a kind of
Rarety, to have a proceeding, in this place, upon Treason: And perhaps, it may
be marvelled by some, why after, so long an Intermission, it should light upon
this Fellow: Being a person, but contemptible; A kind of venomous fly; And a
Hang by of the Seminaries. The Second is, the Nature of this Treason, as
concerning the Fact; which, of all kinds, of compassing the Kings Death, I hold
to be the most perilous; And as much differing from other Conspiracies, as the
lifting up of a 1000 Hands, against the King, (like the Giant Briareus,)
differs, from lifting up one, or a few Hands. The Third Point, that I will
speak unto, is, the Doctrine, or Opinion; Which is the Ground of this Treason;
Wherein, I will not argue, or speak, like a Divine, or Scholar; But, as a Man,
bred, in a Civil Life: And to speak plainly, I hold the Opinion to be such,
that deserves, rather, Detestation, then Contestation. The Fourth Point, is
the Degree, of this Man's Offense; which is more presumptuous, then I have
known, any other, to have fallen into, in this kind: And has, a greater
Overflow, of Malice^ and Treason. And Fifthly, I will remove somewhat, that may
seem to qualify, and extenuate, this Man's Offense; in that, he has not
affirmed, simply; That it is lawful to kill the King, but conditionally; that
if the King be Excommunicate, it is lawful to kill him; which makes little
Difference, either in Law, or Peril.
For the Kings Clemency, I have said it, of late, upon a good Occasion; And I
still speak it, with comfort: I have now, served his Majesty, Solliciter, and
Attorney, eight years, and better: yet, this is the first time, that ever I
gave in Evidence, against a Traitor, at this Bar, or any other. There has not
wanted Matter, in that Party, of the Subjects, whence this kind of Offense
flows, to irritate the King: He has been irritated, by the Powder Treason,
which might have turned Judgment, into Fury: He has been irritated, by
wicked, and monstrous, Libels; Irritated, by a general Insolency, and
presumption, in the Papists, throughout the Land; And yet, I see, his Majesty
keeps Caesar's Rule: Nil malo, quam ^os esse similes sui, and memei. He
leaves them, to be like themselves; And he remains, like Himself; And
striveth, to overcome Evil, with Goodness. A strange thing, Bloody Opinions,
Bloody Doctrines, Bloody Examples, and yet the Government, still, unstained
with Blood. As for this Owen, that is brought in question, though his Person
be, in his Condition, contemptible; yet we see, by miserable Examples; That
these Wretches, which are but the Scum of the Earth, have been able, to stir
Earthquakes, by Murdering of Princes: And, if it were, in case of Contagion;
(As this is a Contagion, of the Heart, and Soul;) A Rascal, may bring in a
Plague, into the City, as well as a great Man: So it is not the Person, but
the Matter, that is to be considered.

For the Treason it self, which is the second Point, my Desire is, to open it,
in the Depth thereof, if it were possible, But it is bottomless: And so the
Civil Law says: Conjurationes, omnium p^oditionum, odiosissimae, and
perniciosissimae. Against Hostile Invasions, and the Adherence of Subjects, to
^nemies, Kings can arm: Rebellions, must go over, the Bodies, of many good
Subjects, before they can hurt the King: but Conspiracies, against the Persons
of Kings are like Thunderbolts, that strike upon the sudden, hardly to be
avoided: Major metus a singulis, (says he,) quam ab universis. There is no
Preparation against them. And that Preparation, which may be, of Guard, or
Custody, is a perpetual Misery. And therefore, they that have written, of the
Privileges of Ambassadors, and of the Amplitude of Safe^Conducts, have
defined; That if an Ambassador, or a Man, that comes in, upon the highest
safe-Conducts, do practice, Matter of Sedition, in a State, yet, by the Law of
Nations, he ought to be remanded: But, if he conspire, against the Life of a
Prince, by violence, or Poison, he is to be justiced: Quia odium est omni
Privilegio Majus. Nay, even amongst Enemies, and in the most deadly Wars, yet,
nevertheless, Conspiracy, and Assassinate of Princes, has been accounted
villainous, and execrable.

The Manners, of Conspiring, and compassing the Kings Death, are many: But it
is most apparent, that amongst all the rest, this surmounteth. First, because
it is grounded, upon pretenced Religion; which is a Trumpet, that enflameth the
Heart, and Powers of a Man, with Daring, and Resolution, more than any Thing
else. Secondly, it is the Hardest to be avoided; For when a particular
Conspiracy, is plotted, or Attempted, against a King, by some one, or some few
Conspiratours, it meets with a Number of Impediments. Commonly, he that has
the Head to devise it, has not the Heart to undertake it: And the Person, that
is used, sometime fails in Co^rage, sometime fails in Opportunity,
sometimes is touched with Remorce. But to publish, and maintain, that it may be
lawful, for any Man living, to attempt the Life of a King; this Doctrine, is a
Venomous Sop; Or, as a Legion of Malign Spirits; Or an universal Temptation;
Does enter, at once, into the Hearts of all, that are any way prepared, or of
any Predisposition, to be Traitors: So that whatsoever fails in any one, is
supplied in Many: If one Man faint, another will dare: If one man has not the
Opportunity, another has: If one Man Relent, another will be Desperate. And
Thirdly, particular Conspiracie^, have their Periods of Time, within which, if
they be not taken, they vanish. But this is endless, and imports, Perpetuity,
of springing Conspiracies. And so much, concerning the Nature, of the Fact.

For the Third Point, which is the Doctrine; That upon an Excommunication of
the Pope, with sentence of Deposing; A King by any Son of Adam, may be
slaughtered; And that, it is Justice, and no Murder; And that their Subjects,
are absolved, of their Allegiance; And the Kings themselves, exposed to spoil
and Prey. I said before, that I would not argue, the subtilty of the Question:
It is rather, to be spoken too, by way of Accusation of the Opinion, as
Impious; then by way of Dispute of it, as Doubtful. Nay, I say, it deserves,
rather, some Holy-war, or League, amongst all Christian Princes, of either
Religion; for the Extirpating and Razing of the Opinion, and the Authors
thereof, from the face of the Earth; Then the Style of Pen, or Speech.
Therefore in thi^ kind I will speak to it, a few words and not otherwise. Nay.
I protest, if I were a Papist, I should say as much. Nay, I should speak it,
perhaps with more ^ndignation, and Feeling. For this Horrible Opinion, is our
Advantage; And it is their Reproach; And will be their Ruin.

This Monster of Opinion, is to be accused, of Three most evident, and most
miserable Slanders.

First, of the Slander, it brings, to the Christian Faith; Being a plain
plantation, of Irreligion and Atheism. Secondly, the Subversion, which it
introduces, into all Policy, and Government. Thirdly, the great Calamity, it
brings, upon Papists themselves; Of which, the more Moderate sort, as Men
misled, are to be pitied.
For the First, if a Man does visit, the foul, and polluted Opinions, Customes^
or Practices, of Heathenism, Mahometism, and Heresy, he shall find they do not
attain to this Height. Take the Examples of damnable Memory, amongst the
Heathen. The Proscriptions, in Rome, of Sylla; And afterward of the Triumvirs,
what were they? They were, but of a finite Number of Persons, and those not
many, that were exposed, unto any Man's Sword. But what is that, to the
proscribing of a King, and all that shall take his Part? And what was the
Reward of a Soldier that amongst them, killed one of the proscribed? A small
piece of Money: But what is now the reward of one, that shall kill a King? The
Kingdom, of Heaven. The Custom, among the Heathen, that was most scandalized
was, that sometimes the Priest sacrificed Men; But yet, you s^all not read, of
any Priesthood, that sacrificed Kings.

The Mahomet^ns, make it, a part of their Religion, to propagate their Sect, by
the Sword: But yet still, by Honorable Wars never by Villainies, and secret
Murders. N^y, I find, that the Saracen Prin^e of whom, the Name, of the
^ssassins, is derived; which had diverse Vota^ies at Commandment; which he
sent, and employed, to the Killing, of diverse Princes, in the East; (By one of
whom, Amurath the First was slain; And Edward the First of England, was
woun^ed;) was put down, and rooted out, by common Consent^ of the Mohammedan
Princes.

The Anabaptists (it is true) come nearest. For they profess, the pulling down
of Magistrates; And they can chaunt, the Psalm; To bind their Kings in Chains,
and their Nobles in fetters of Iron. This is, the Glory of the Saints, much
like, the Temporal Authority, that the Pope Challenges over Princes. But this
is the difference; That that is a Furious, and Fanaticall, Fury; And this is a
sad, and solemn Mischief. He imagines Mischief as a Law; A Law-like Mischief.

As for the Defense, which they do make, it does aggravate the sin; And turns
it from a Cruelty toward Man to a Bla^phemy toward God. For to say, that all
this, is, in ordine ad spirituale; And to a good End; And for the salvation of
Souls; It is, directly, to make God, Author of Evil; And to draw him, into
the likeness, of the Prince, of Darkness; And to say with those^ that Saint
Paul speaks of; Let us do Evil, that good may come thereof. Of whom, the
Apostle says d^finitively; That their damnation is Just.

For the Destroying of Government, universally, it is most evident; That it is
not the Case, of Protestant Princes, only, But of Catholic Princes likewise:
As the King has excellently set forth. Nay, it is not the Case of Princes
only, but of all Subjects, and private Persons. For touching Princes, let
History be perused, what has been the Causes of Excommunication; And namely,
this Tumor of it; (the Deposing of Kings;) It has not been for Heresy, and
Schism, alone, but for Collation, and Investitures, of Bishoprics, and
Benefi^es, Intruding upon Ecclesiastical Possessions, violating of any
Ecclesiastical Person, or Liberty. Nay, generally, they maintain it, that it
may be for any sin: So that, the Difference, wherein their Doctors vary; That
some hold; That the Pope, has his Temporal power, immediately; And others, but
in ordine ad spiritude, is but a Delusion, and an Abuse. For all comes to
one. What is there, that may not be made, spiritual, by Consequence?
specially, when He, that gives the Sentence, may make the Case? And
accordingly, has the miserable Experience followed. For this Murdering of
Kings, has been put in practice, as well against Papist Kings, as Protestants.
Save that, it has pleased God, so to guide it by his admirable providence; As
the Attempts, upon Papist Princes, have been executed, And the Attempts, upon
Protestant Princes, have failed: Except that of the Prince Aurange. And not
that neither, until such time, as he had joined, too fast, with the Duke of
Anjou, and the Papists.

The rest is wanting.
The Charge, of Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney General, against M. L.
S. W. and H. I. for Scandal, and Traducing, of the Kings Justice, in the
proceedings against Weston: In the Star Chamber, 10. November. 1615.
THe Offense, wherewith I shall charge, the three Offenders, at the Bar, is a
Misdemeanour, of a High Nature; Tending, to the Defacing, and Scandal, of
Justice, in a great Cause Capital. The particular Charge is this.

The King, amongst many his Princely virtues, is known, to excel, in that
proper virtue, of the Imperial Throne, which is Justice. It is a Royal
Virtue, which does employ, the other three Cardinal Virtues, in her Service.
Wisdom, to discover, and discern, Nocent, or Innocent: Fortitude, to
prosecute, and execute: Temperance, so to carry Justice, as it be not
passionate, in the pursuit, nor confused, in involving persons, upon light
suspicion; Nor precipitate in time. For this his Majesty's Virtue of Justice,
God has of late raised an occasion, and erected, as it were, a Stage, or
Theater, much to his Honor, for him to show it, and act it, in the pursuit, of
the untimely Death of Sir Thomas Overbury; And therein cleansing the Land from
Blood. For, ( my Lords) if Blood spilt, Pure, does cry to Heaven, in Gods
Ears, much more Blood defiled with Poison.

This Great Work, of his Majesty's Justice, the more excellent it is, your
Lordships will soon conclude, the greater is the Offense of any, that have
sought, to Affront it, or Traduce it. And therefore, before I descend, unto the
Charge, of these Offenders, I will set, before your Lordships, the weight of
that, which they have sought to impeach: Speaking somewhat of the general
Crime of Impoysonment; And then, of the particular Circumstances, of this Fact,
upon Overbury: And thirdly, and chiefly, of the Kings great, and worthy, Care,
and Carriage, in this Business.

This Offense of Impoysonment, is most truly figured, in that Devise, or
Description, which was made, of the Nature, of one, of the Roman Tyrants; That
he was Lutum Sanguine maceratum; Mire, mingled, or cymented, with Blood: For,
as it is, one of the highest Offences^ in Guiltiness; So it is, the Basest, of
all others, in the Mind of the Offenders. Treasons, Magnum aliquid spectant:
They aim at great thing^^ But this, is vile, and base. I tell your Lordships,
what I have noted; That in all Gods Book, (both of the Old, and New Testament,)
I find Examples, of all other Offenses, and Offenders, in the world, but not
any one, of an Impoy^onment, or an Impoysoner. I find mention, of Fear, of
casual Impoysonment, when the Wild Vine, was shred, into the Pot, they came
complaining, in a fearful manner; Master; Mors in olla. And, I find mention,
of Poisons, of Beasts, and Serpents; The Poison of Aspes is under their Lips.
But I find no Example, in the Book of God, of Impoysonment. I have, sometime,
thought, of the Words, in the Psalm; Let their Table be made a Snare: Which
certainly, is most True of Impoysonment: For the Table, the Daily Bread, for
which we pray, is turned to a deadly Snare: But I think rather, that that was
meant, of the Treachery of Friends, that were participant, of the same Table.

But let us go on. It is an Offense, ( my Lords,) that has the two Spurs, of
Offending: Spes Perficiendi, and Spes Celandi. It is easily committed, and
easily concealed.

It is an Offense, that is, Tanquam Sagitta nocte volans; It is the Arrow that
flies by Night. It discerns not, whom it hits: For, many times, the Poison is
laid for one, and the other takes it: As in Sanders Case, where the Poisoned
Apple was laid for the Mother, and was taken up by the Child, and killed the
Child. And so, in that notorious case, whereupon the Statute, of 22o H. 8, Cap.
9o, was made; where the Intent, being to poison, but one, or two; Poison was
put, into a little Ve^sell, of Barm, that stood, in the Kitchen, of the Bishop
of Rochesters House; Of which Barm, Pottage, or Gruell, was made, wherewith 17,
of the Bishops Family were Poisoned: Nay, Diverse of the Poor, that came to the
Bishops Gate, and had the broken Pottage, in Alms, were likewise Poisoned; And
therefore, if any Man, will comfort himself, or think with himself, Here is
great Talk of Impoysonment, I hope I am safe, For I have no Enemies; Nor, I
have nothing, that any Body, should long for; why? that is all one, For he may
sit, at Table, by one, for whom Poison is prepared, and have a Drench, of his
Cup, or of his Pottage. And so, as the Poet says; Concidit infelix alieno
vulnere; He may die another Man's Death. And therefore, it was most, gravely,
and judiciously, and properly, provided by that Statute; That Impoysonment
should be High Treason; Because, whatsoever Offense, tends, to the utter
Subversion, and Dissolution, of Human Society, is, in the nature, of High
Treason.

Lastly, it is an Offense, that I may truly say of it; Non est nostri Generis,
nec Sanguinis. It is, (Thanks be to God,) rare, in the Isle of Brittanny: It is
neither of our Country, nor of our Church; you may find it, in Rome, or Italy.
There is a Region, or perhaps a Religion, for it: And if it should come amongst
us, certainly, it were better living in a Wilderness, than in a Court.

For the particular Fact, upon Overbury^ First for the Person, of Sir Thomas
Overbury: I knew the Gentleman. It is true, his Mind was great, but it moved
not, in any good Order; yet, certainly, it did, commonly, fly, at good Things.
And the greatest Fault, that I ever heard by him, was, that he made, his
Friend, his Idol. But I leave him, as Sir Thomas Overbury.

But then, take hi^, as he was the Kings Prisoner, in the Tower; And then see,
how the Case stands. In that place, the State is, as it were, Respondent; to
make good, the Body, of a Prisoner: And, if any thing, happen to him there, it
may, (though not in this Case, yet in some others,) make an Aspersion, and a
Reflection, upon the State it self. For the Person is utterly out of his own
Defense; His own Care, and Providence, can serve him nothing. He is in Custody,
and Preservation, of Law. And, we have a Maxim, in our Law, (as my Lords, the
Judges, know,) that when a State is, in preservation of Law, nothing can
destroy it, or hurt it. And God forbid, but the like should be, for the Persons
of those, that are in Custody, of Law; And therefore, this was a Circumstance,
of great Aggravation.

Lastly, to have a Man, chaced to Death, in such manner, (as it appears now by
Matter of Record; For other Privacy, of the Cause, I know not;) By Poison after
Poison; first Roseaker, then Arsenick, then Mercury Sublimate, then Sublimate
again; It is a Thing, would astonish, Man's Nature, to hear it. The Poets faign,
that the Furies had whips, and that they were corded, with Poisonous Snakes;
And a Man would think, that this were the very Case; To have a Man, tied to a
Poast, and to scourge him to Death, with Snakes: For so, may truly be termed,
Diversity of ^oysons.

Now, I will come unto that, which is the Principal; That is, his Majesty's
Princely, yea, and as I may truly term it, Sacred proceeding, in this Cause.
Wherein, I will first Speak, of the Temper of his Justice, and then of the
Strength thereof.

First, it pleased my Lord Chief Justice, to let me know; (That, which I heard,
with great Comfort;) Which was, the Charge, that his Majesty gave to Himself
first; And afterward, to the Commissioners, in this Case; worthy, certainly,
to be written in Letters of Gold; wherein, his Majesty did fore-rank, and make
it his prime Direction, that it should be carried, without touch, to any, that
was innocent. Nay more, not only without Impeachment, but without Aspersion:
which was a most Noble, and Princely Caution, from his Majesty: For Men's
Reputations, are tender Things; And ought to be, like Christ's Coat, without
Seam. And it was, the more to be respected, in this Case, because it met, with
two great Persons; A Noble Man, that his Majesty, had favored, and advanced;
And his Lady, being of a Great, and Honorable House: Though, I think it be
true, that the Writers say, that there is no Pomgranate, so fair, or so sound,
but may have a perished Kernel. Nay, I see plainly, that in those excel^lent
Papers, of his Majesty's, own Hand writing; Being, as so many Beams of Justice,
issuing from that Virtue, which does shine in him; I say, I see it was so
evenly carried, without prejudice^; (whither it were a true Accusation, of the
one part, or a Practice, of a false Accusation on the other;) As showed
plainly, that his Majesty's, Judgment, was tanquam Tabula Rasa, as a clean
pair of Tables; And his Ear, tanquam Ianua aperta; As a Gate, not side open,
but wide open, to Truth, as it should be, by little and little, discovered. Nay
I see plainly, that at the first, (till further Light did break forth,) his
Majesty, was little moved, with the First Tale; which he vouchsafes not so
much, as the Name of a Tale; But calls it a Rumor, which is an Headless Tale.

As for the Strength, or Resolution, of his Majesty's Justice, I must tell your
Lordships plainly. I do not marvel, to see Kings, thunder out Justice, in
Cases of Treason, when they are touched Themselves; And that, they are Vindices
Doloris Proprij: But that a King, should, pro Amore Iustitiae, only; Contrary
to the Tide of his own Affection, for the preservation of his People, take such
Care^ of a Cause of Justice; That is rare, and worthy, to be celebrated, far,
and near^ For, I think, I may truly affirm, that there was never, in this
Kingdom, nor in any other Kingdom, the Blood of a private Gentleman,
vindicated, Cum tanto Mo^u Regni; or to say better, Cum tanto Plausu Regni. If
it had concerned, the King, or Prince, there could not have been, Greater, nor
Better, Commissioners, to examine it. The Term, ^ath been, almost, turned, into
a Iustitium, or Vacancy: The People themselves, being more willing, to be
Lookers on, in this Business, then to follow their own. There has been, no
Care of Discovery omitted, no Moment of Time lost. And therefore, I will
conclude this Part, with the Saying of Solomon; Gloria Dei celare rem, and
gloria Regis Scrutari rem. And his Majesty's Honor, is much the greater, for
that, he has showed, to the World, in this Business, as it has Relation to
my Lord of Sommerset; (whose Case, in no sort I do prejudge, being ignorant of
the Secrets, of the Cause, but taking him, as the Law takes him, hitherto, for
a Suspect;) I say, the King has, to his great Honor, showed; That were any
Man, in such a Case of Blood, as the Signet upon his Right Hand, (as the
Scripture says,) yet would He put him off.

Now will I come, to the particular Charge, of these Gentlemen, whose
Qualities, and Persons, I respect, and love: For they are all my particular
Friends: But now, I can only do, this Duty, of a Friend, to them, to make them
know, their Fault to the full.

And therefore first, I will, by way of Narrative, declare to your Lordships,
the Fact, with the occasion of it; Then you shall have their Confessions read,
upon which you are to proceed; Together, with some Collateral Testimonies, by
way of Aggravation: And lastly, I will note, and observe to your Lordships, the
Material points, which I do insist upon, for their Charge; And so leave them
to their Answer. And this I will do, very briefly, for the Case is not
perplexed.

That wretched Man Weston, who was the Actor, or Mechanical Party, in this
Impoysonment, at the first day, being indicted, by a very substantial Jury, of
Selected Citizens, to the number of 19. who fo^nd ^illa vera; yet
nevertheless, at the first, stood mute. But, after some days Intermission, it
pleased God, to cast out the Dumb Devil; And that he did put himself, upon his
Trial; And was, by a Jury also, of great Value, upon his Confession, and other
Testimonies, found guilty. So as 31. sufficient Jurors, have passed upon him;
whereupon Judgment, and Execution, was awa^ded against him. After this, being
in preparation for another World, he sent for Sr. Thomas Overburies Father, and
falling down upon his knees, with great Remorce, and Compunction, asked him
forgiveness. Aft^rwards, again, of his own Motion, desired, to have his like
prayer of forgivenesse^ recommended to his Mother, who was ab^ent. And at both
times, out of the abundance of his Heart, Conf^ss^d that he was to die justly,
and that he was wo^thy of Death. And after again, at his Execution (which is a
kind, of sealing t^me, of Confessions) ev^n at the point of Death; (Although
there were Tempters about him, as you shall hear by and by) yet he did again,
confirm publicly, that his Examinations we^e ^rue; And that, he had been,
justly, and honorably, dealt with. Here is the Narrative, which enduceth the
Charge. The Change it self is this.

M. L. Whose Offense stands alone single, (the Offense of the other two, being
in consort; And yet, all three, meeting^ in their End, and Center, which was to
interrupt, or deface, this Excellent piece of Justice) M. L. (I say) mean
while, between Westons standing mute, and his Trial; Takes upon him, to m^ke a
most False, Odious, and Libellous, Relation; Containing, as many Untruths, as
Lines; And sets it down, in writing, with his own Hand; And delive^s it, to Mr.
Henry Gibb, of the Bedchamber, to be put into the Kings Hand. In which
writing, he does falsify, and pervert, all that was done, the first day, at
the Arraignment of Weston; Turning the Pike, and Point, of his Imputations,
principally, upon my Lord Chief Justice of England. Whose Name, (thus
occurring) I cannot pass by, And yet, I can, not skill to flatter. But this I
will say of him, and I would say as much to Ages, if I should write a Story:
That never Man's Person, and his place, were better met, in a Business, then my
Lord Cook, and my Lord Chief Justice, in the Cause of Overbury.

Now, My Lords, in this Offense, of M. L; For the particulars, of these
slanderous Articles, I will observe them unto you, when the Writings, and
Examinations, are read, For, I do not love, to set the Gloss, before the Text.
But, in general^, I no^e to your Lordships; First the Person of M. L. I know,
he is a Scottish Gentleman, and thereby, more ignorant, of our Laws, and
Forms. But, I cannot tell, whither this does extenuate his Fault, in r^spect
of Ignorance; Or aggravate it much, in respect of Presumptiou; That he would
meddle in that, that he understood not: But I doubt, it came not out, of his
Quiver; Some other Man's Cunning wrought upon this Man's Boldness. Secondly, I
may note unto you, the Greatness of the Cause; Wherein, he being a private
mean Gentleman, did presume to deal. M. L could not but know, to what great,
and grave Commissioners, the King had committed this Cause: And that, his
Majes^y, in his Wi^edom, would expect, return of all things, from them, to
whose trust he had committed this Business. For it is the part of
Commissioners, as well to report the Business, as to manage the Busin^sse;
And then his Majesty, might have been sure, to have had, all things, well
weighed, and truly informed: And therefore, it should have been far from M. L.
to have presumed, to have put f^rth his Hand, to so high, and tender a
Business; which was not to be touched, but by Employed Hands. Thirdly, I note
to your Lordships, that this Infusion, of a Slander, into a Kings Ear, is, of
all Forms of Libells, and Slanders, the worst. It is true, that King^ may keep
secret their Informations, and then no Man ought to enquire after them, while
they are shrined in their Breast. But where a King is pleased, that a Man shall
answer, for his false Information; There, I say, the false Information, to a
King; ^xceeds in Offense, the false Information, of any other kind; Being a
kind (since we are in matter of Poison,) of Impoysonment, of a Kings Ear. And
thus much, for the Offense, of M. L.

For the Offense, of S. W. and H. I. which I said was in consort, it was
shortly this. At the ^ime, and Place, of the Execution of Weston; To ^upplant
his Christian Resolution, and to Scandal^ze ^he Justice, already past; and
perhap^, to cut off the thread of th^t^ which is to come; These Gentlemen, with
others, came mounted on Horseback; And in a Ruffling, and Facing manner, put
themselves forward to re-examine Weston, upon Questions; And what Questions?
Directly, cross to that, that had been tried, and judged: For what was the
point tried? That Weston had poisoned Overbury: What was S. W. Question;
Whether Weston, did poison Ov^rbury or no? A Contradictory directly: Weston
answered only, that he did him wrong: And turning to the Sheriff, said; You
promised me, I should not be troubled, at this time. Nevertheless, He pressed
him to answer; saying; He desired to know it, that he might pray with him. I
know not that S. W. is an Ecclesiastic, that he should cut any Man, from
Communion of Prayer: And yet, for all this vexing, of the Spirit, of a poor
Man, now in the Gates of Death; Weston, nevertheless, stood constant, and
said; I die not unworthily: My Lord Chief Justice, has my mind, under my hand,
and he is an Honorable and just Judge. This is S. W. his Offense.

For H. I. he was not so much a Questionist; but wrought upon the others
Questions; And like a kind of Confessor, wished him to discharge his
Conscience, and to satisfy the World. What World I marvel? It was sure the
World at Tyburn: For the World at Guild Hall, and the World at London was
satisfied before; Test the Bells that rang: But men have a got fashion, now a
days, that two or three busy Bodies, will take upon them the Name of the
World; And broach their own Conceits, as if it were, a general Opinion: Well,
what more? When they could not work upon Weston, then H.I. in an Indignation,
turned abont his Horse, (when the other, was turning over the Ladder;) And
said, he was sorry of such a Conclusion: That was, to have the State, honored,
or justified; But others took, and reported his words, in another degree: But
that I leave, seeeing it is not Confessed.

H. I. his Offense, had another Appendix, before this, in time; which was,
that, at the day, of the Verdict given up, by the Jury, He also, would needs
give his Verdict; Saying openly that if he were of the Jury, he would doubt
what to do. Marry (he says,) he cannot tell well, whether he spoke this,
before the Jury, had given up the Verdict, or after; Wherein there is little
gained. For whether, H. I. were a Pre-Jurour, or a Post-Jurour; The one was as
to prejudge the Jury, the other, as to taint them.

Of the Offense, of these two Gentlemen, in general, your Lordships must give
me leave, to say, that it is an Offense, greater, and more dangerous, then is
conceived. I know well, that as we have no Spanish Inquisitions, nor Justice in
a Corner; So we have, no Gagging, of Men's Mouths, at their Death; But that they
may speak freely, at the last Hour; But then, it must come, from the free
Motion, of the Party, not by Temptation of Questions. The Questions, that are
to be asked, ought to tend, to fur^her Revealing, of their own, or others
Guiltiness; But to use, a Question, in the Nature, of a false Interrogatory, to
falsify that, which is Res Iudicata, is intolerable. For that were, to erect
a Court, or Commission, of Review, at Tyburn, against the Kings Bench, at
Westminster. And besides, it is a Thing, vain, and idle: For if they an^swer,
according to the Judgment past, it adds no Credit; Nor if it be contrary, it
derogateth nothing. But yet, it subjecteth, the Majesty of Justice, to popular,
and vulgar Talk, and opinion.

My Lords, these are great, and dangerous, Offenses; For if we do not maintain
Justice, Justice will not maintain us.

But now, your Lordships shall hear, the Examinations themselves; upon which, I
shall have occasion, to note, some particular Things, etc.

The Effect of that, which was spoken, by the Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal of
England, at the taking, of his place, in Chancery; In performance of the
Charge, his Majesty had given him, when he received the Seal, 1617.
BEfore I enter, into the Business, of the Court, I shall take advantage, of so
many Honorable witnesses, to publish, and make known, summarily, what charge
the Kings most excellent Majesty, gave me, when I received the Seal; And what
Orders, and Resolutions, my Self have taken, in Conformity, to that charge;
That the King may have, the Honor of Direction; And I the part of Obedience:
Whereby, Your Lordships, and the Rest, of the Presence, shall see, the whole
Time, of my sitting in the Chancery^ (which may be, longer, or shorter, as
please God, and the King;) contr^cted into one Hour. And this I do, for three
Causes.

First, to give Account, to the King, of his Commandment. Secondly, that I may
be a Guard, and Custody, to my self, and mine own Doings; That I do not swerve,
or recede, from any Thing, that I have professed, in so Noble Company. And
thirdly, that all men, that have to do, with the Chancery, or the Seal, may
know, what they shall expect; And both set their Hearts, and my Ears, at rest;
Not moving me, to any Thing, against these Rules: Knowing, that my Answer, is
now turned, from a Nolumus, into a Non possumus. It is no more, I will not;
But, I cannot; After this Declaration.
And this, I do also, under three Cautions.

The first is, that there be some Things, of a more Secret, and Counsel like,
Nature, which are rather, to be Acted, then Published. But these Things, which
I shall speak of, to day, are of a more public Nature. The second is, that I
will not trouble this Presence, with every Particular; which would be too long;
But select, those Things, which are of greatest efficacy, and conduce most, ad
summas Rerum: Leaving ma^y other Particulars, to be set down, in a Public
Table; According, to the good Example, of my last Predecessor, in his
Beginning. And lastly, that these Imperatives, which I have made, but to my
Self, and my Times, be without prejudice, to the Authority of the Court, or
Wiser Men, that may succeed me: And chiefly, that they are wholly submitted,
unto the great Wisdom, of my Soveraign^ (The absolutest Prin^e, in Judicature,
that has been, in the Christian World:) For if any of these Things, which I
intend, to be Subordinate, to his Directions, shall be thought by his Majesty,
to be Inordinate, I shall be, most ready, to reform them. These things, are
but, tanquam Alb^m Praetoris; For so did the Roman Praetors; (which have the
greatest Affinity, with the Jurisdiction, of the Chancellor here;) who used to
set down, at their Entrance, how they would use their Jurisdiction. And this I
shall do, ( my Lords,) in verbis Masculis; No flourishing, or Painted, Words,
but such, as are fit, to go before Deeds.
The Kings Charge, which is my Lanthorn, rested upon four Heads.
THe first was, that I should contain, the Jurisdiction of the Court, within
his true, and due, Limits, without Swelling, or Excess. The second, that I
should think, the putting, of the Great Seal to Letters Patents, was not a
Matter of Course after precedent Warrants; But that I should take it to be, the
Maturity, and Fullness, of the Kings Intentions: And therefore, that it was one,
of the greatest Parts, of my Trust, if I saw, any Scruple, or Cause of stay,
that I should acquaint him; Concluding with a, Quod dubites, ne feceris. The
third was, that I should retrench, all unnecessary delays; That the Subject
might find, that he did enjoy, that same Remedy, against the Fainting of the
Seal, and against the Consumption of the Means, and estate; which was speedy
Justice. Bis dat, qui cito dat. The fourth was, that Justice might pass, with
as easy charge, as might be: And that those same Brambles, that grow about
Justice, of needless Charge, and Expense; And all manner, of Exactions, might
be rooted out, so far as might be.
These Commandments, (my Lords,) are Righteous; And, (as I may term them,)
Sacred; And therefore, to use a Sacred Form: I pray God, bless the King, for
his great care, over the Justice of the Land; And give me, his poor Servant,
Grace, and Power, to observe his Precepts.

Now for a Beginning toward it, I have set down, and applied, particular
Orders, to every one of these four General Heads.

For the Excess, or Tumor, of this Court of Chancery, I shall divide it, into
five Natures.

The first is, when the Court, does embrace, or retain, Causes, both in Matter,
and Circumstance, merely Determinable, and Fit, for the Common Law. For, (my
Lords,) the Chancery, is ordained, to supply the Law, and not to subvert the
Law. Now to describe unto you, or delineate, what those Causes are, (and upon
what differences,) that are fit for the Court, were too long a Lecture. But I
will tell you, what Remedy, I have prepared. I will keep the Keys of the
Court, my self, and I will never refer, any Demurrer, or Plea, (tending to
discharge, or dismiss the Court, of the Cause,) to any Mr. of the Chancery;
But judge o^ it^ my self, or, at least, the Mr. of the Rowles. Nay further, I
will appoint regularly, that on the Tuesday, in every week; (which is the Day
of Orders,) first to hear all Motions, of that Nature, before any other; That
the Subject, may have his Vale, at first, without further attending; And that
the Court, do not keep, and accumulate, a Miscellany, and Confusion, of Causes,
of all Natures. The second Point, concerns the time of the Complaint; And the
late Comers into the Chancery: which stay, till a Judgment be passed against
them, at the Common Law, and then complain: Wherein your Lorships, may have
heard, a great Rat^le, and a Noise, of a Praemunire, and I cannot tell what. But
that Question the King has settled, according to the ancient president^, in all
times continued. And this I will say, that the Opinion, not to relieve any
Case, after Judgment would be a guilty Opinion: Guilty, of the Ruin, and
Naufrage, and perishing, of infinite Subjects: And as the King found it well
out; why should a Man fly, into the Chancery, before he be Hurt? The whole need
not the Physician, but the sick. But (My Lords,) the Power would be preserved,
but then, the Practice would be moderate. My Rule, shall be, therefore, that in
Case of Complaints, after Judgment; (except the Judgments be upon Nihil
dicit, which are but Disguises of judgment; Obtained, in Contempt, of a
preceding Order, of this Court;) yea, and after Verdicts also, I will have the
Party Complainant, enter into good Bo^d, to prove his Suggestion: So that if he
will be relieved, against a Judgment, at Common Law, upon Matter of Equity; He
shall do it, Tanquam in Vinculis, at his Peril. The Third Point of Excess,
may be, the over Frequent, and Facile Granting of Injunctions for the staying
of the Common Laws; Or the Altering Possessions; wherein these shall be my
Rules.

I will grant no Injunction, mereely, upon, Priority of suit: That is to say;
Because this Court, was first possessed: A Thing, that was well reformed in the
late Lord Chancellers time, but used in Chanceller Broomeleyes time; Insomuch,
as I remember, that Mr. Dalton, the Councellor at Law, put a Pasquill upon the
Co^rt, in Nature of a Bill; For seeing it was no more, but, My Lord, the Bill
came in on Monday, and the Arrest at Common Law, was on Tuesday; I pray the
Injunction, upon Priority of Suite; He caused his Cl^ent, that had a Loose
Debte^, to put a Bill into the Chancery, b^for^ the Bond, due to him, was
forfeited, to desire an Order, that he might have his Money, at the Day;
Because he would be sure, to be before the other. I do not mean to make it, a
Matter of an Horse-Race, or Poasting, who shall be first, in Chancery, or in
Courts of Law.

Neither will I grant an Injunction, upon Mat^er, con^ained, in the Bill only,
be it never so smooth, and Specious: But upon Matter confessed, in the
Defendants Answer; Or Matter pregnant in Writing, or of Record; Or upon
Contempt, of the Defendant, in not Appearing, or not Answering, or Trifling,
with the Court by insufficient Answering. For then, it may be thought, the
Defendant stands out, upon purpose, to get the start, at the Common Law; And
so, take Advantage of his own Contempt, which may not be suffered.

As for Injunctions for possession, I shall maintain possessions, as they
were, at the time, of the Bill, exhibited; And for the space, of a year before:
Except the possession, were gotten by Force, or by any Trick.

Neither will I alter Possession, upon Interlocutory Orders, until a Decree:
Except, upon Matter, plainly confessed, in the Defendants Answer, joined, with
a plain Disability, and Insolvency of the Defendants to answer the Profits.

As for taking the Possession away, in respect of Contempts, I will have all
the proceedings of the Court, spent first, and a Sequestration of the Profits,
before I come to an Injunction.

The Fourth Part of Excess, is, concerning the Communicating of the Authority,
of the Chanceller too far; And making, upon the matter, too many Chancellors,
by relying too much, upon Reports of the Masters of the Chancery, as
concludent. I know, my Lords, the Masters of the Chancery, are Reverend Men;
And the great Mass, of Business, of the Court, cannot be sped, without them;
And it is a Thing, the Chanceller may soon fall into, for his own Ease, to rely
too much upon them. But the Course, that I will take, generally, shall be this:
That I will make no Binding Order, upon any report of the Masters, without
giving a seven nights day, at the least, to show cause, against the Report;
(which nevertheless, I will have done modestly, and with due reverence, toward
them:) And again, I must utterly discontinue, the Making, of an Hypotheticall,
or Conditional Order; That if a Master of the Chancery, do certify thus, that
then it is Ordered, without further Motion: For that is a Surprise, and gives
no time, for Contradiction. The last Point of Excess, is: If a Chanceller,
shall be so much of himself, as he should neglect, Assistance of Reverend
Judges, in Cases of Difficulty, (especially if they touch upon Law:) or Calling
them, shall do it, but Pro forma tantum, and give no due respect, to their
Opinions: Wherein, (my Lords) preserving the Dignity, and Majesty, of the
Court; (which I count, rather increased, then diminished, by grave, and due
Assistance) I shall never be found so Sovereign, or abundant, in mine own
sense, but I shall both desire, and make true use, of Assistants. Nay I assure,
your Lordships, if I should find, any main Diversity of Opinion, of my
Assistants, from mine own; Though I know well the Judicature, wholly resides in
my self; yet, I think, I should have Recourse, to the Oracle of the Kings own
Judgment, before I should pronounce. And so much, for the temperate use, of
the Authority, of this Court; wherein, the Health of the Court, does much
consist, As that of the Body, consists in Temperance.
For the Second Commandment of his Majesty, touching staying of Grants, at the
Great Seal: There may be just Cause of Stay: Either, in the Matter of the
Grant: Or, in the Manner of p^ssing the same. Out of both which, I extract,
these 6. principal Cases, which I will now make known. All which,
nevertheless, I understand, to be wholly submitted, to his Majesty's Will, and
Pleasure, after by me, he shall have been informed? For if Iteratum Mandatum do
come, Obedience is better then sacrifice.

The First Case is, where any Matter of Revenew, or Treasure, or Profit,
passes from his Majesty; My First Duty shall be, to examine, whether the
Grant, has passed, in the due, and natural Course, by the Great Officers of
the Revenew; ( The Lord Treasurer, and Chanceller of the Exchequer;) And with
their privity: which if I find it not to be, I must presume it, to have passed,
in the dark, and by a kind of surreption; And will make stay of it, till his
Majesty's pleasure, be further known. Secondly, if it be a Grant, that is not
merely vulgar, And has not, of Course, passed at the Signet, by a Fac Simile;
But needs Science, my Duty shall be, to examine, whether it has passed, by
the Learned Counsel; and had their Dockets: which is that, which his Majesty
reads, and that leads him. And if I find it otherwise, (although the Matter,
were not, in it self inconvenient) yet I hold it, Just Cause of Stay, (for
Presidents sake,) to keep Men, in the right way. Thirdly, if it be a Grant,
which I conceive, (out of my little knowledge) to be against the Law; Of which
nature, Theodosius was wont to say, when he was pressed; I said it, but I
granted it not, if it be unlaw^ull: I will call the learned Counsel to it; (As
well him, that drew the Book, as the Rest) or some of them; And if we find
cause, I will enform his Majesty, of our Opinion, either by my self, or some of
them. For as for the Judges, they are Judges of Grants past, but not of Grants
to come, except the King call them. Fourthly, if the Grants be against the
Kings Book, of Bounty; I am expressly Commanded, to stay them; until the King,
either Revise his Book in General, or give Direction in the particular.
Fifthly, if as a Counselor of Estate, I do foresee inconvenience, to ensue by
the Grant, in reason of Estate, in respect of the Kings Honor, Or Discontent,
or Murmur of the People; I will not trust mine own Judgment, but I will either
acquaint his Majesty with it, or the Counsel Table, or some such of my Lords
as I shall think fit. Lastly, for Matter of Pardons; If it be of Treason,
Misprision of Treason, Murder, either expressed, or involute, by a non
Obstante; Or of a Pyracy, or Praemunire, or of Fines, Or Exemplary punishment,
in Star Chamber; Or of some other natures; I shall, by the grace of God stay
them, until his Majesty, (who is the Fountain of Grace) may resolve, between
God, and him, (understanding the Case,) how far Grace shall abound, or
superabound.
And if it be of Persons, attainted, and Convicted, of Robbery, Burglary^ etc.
Then will I examine, whether the Pardons, pas^ed the Hand, of any Justice of
Assise; Or other Commissioners, before whom the Trial was made; And if not, I
think it my duty, also, to stay them.

Thus your Lordships see, in this Matter of the Seal, agreeable to the
Commandment, I have received, I mean to walk in the Light; So that Men, may
know, where to find me; And this publishing, thereof, plainly, I hope, will
save the King, from a great deal of Abuse; And Me from a great deal of Envy;
When Men shall see that no particular Turn, or end, leads me, but a General
Rule.

For the Third General Head, of his Majesty's Precepts, concerning Speedy
Justice, I am resolved, that my Decree, shall come speedily, (if not instantly)
after the Hearing; And my signed Decree pronounced. For it has been a Manner,
much used of late in my last Lords time (o^ whom, I learn much to Imitate; and
with due reverence, to his memory, let me speak it, Much to avoid;) That upon
the Solemn, and Full, Hearing, of a Cause, nothing is pronounced in Court; But
Breviates, are required to be made: Which I do not dislike, in it self, in
Causes perplexed. For I confess, I have somewhat of the Cunctative; And I am of
Opinion, that whosoever is not wiser, upon Advice, then upon the sudden; The
same Man, is no wiser at 50. years old, then he was at 30. And it was my
Fathers ordinary Word; You must give me time. But yet I find, that when such
Breviates were taken, the Cause was, sometimes, forgotten, a Term or two; And
then set down, for a New hearing, or a Rehearing, three or four Terms after.
Of which kind, of Intermission, I see no Use; And therefore I will promise,
regularly, to pronounce my Decree, within few days, after my Hearing; And to
sign my Decree, at least, in the Vacation, after the pronouncing. For fresh
Justice, is the sweetest. And besides Justice ought not to be delayed; And it
will also avoid, all Meanes-making, or Laboring; For there ought to be, no
Laboring in Causes, but the Laboring of the Counsel, at the Bar.

Again, because Justice is a Sacred Thing; And the end, for which I am called,
to this place; And therefore is my way to Heaven; (And if it be shorter, it is
never a whit the worse,) I shall by the grace of God, (as far as God will give
me strength) add the Afternoon, to the Forenoon; And some Fourth night, of the
Vacation, to the Term; For the expediting, and clearing, of the Causes, of the
Court: Only, the depth of the Three long Vacations, I would reserve, in some
measure, free, for Business of Estate; And for Studies of Arts and Sciences,
to which, in my Nature, I am most inclined.

There is another Point, of true Expedition, which rests much in My self; And
that is, in the Manner of giving Orders. For I have seen, an Affectation of
Dispatch, turn utterly to Delay, and Leng^h: For the manner of it, is, to take
the Tale, out of the Counselor, at Bar, his Mouth, and to give a Cursory
Order; nothing tending, or conducing, to the end, of the Business. It makes me
remember, what I heard one say, of a Judge, that sa^e in the Chancery; That he
would make, 80. Orders, in a Morning, out of the way; And it was out of the
way, indeed; For it was nothing, to the End of the Business; And this is that,
which makes 60, 80, 100. Ord^rs, in a Cause, too and fro, begetting one
another; and like, Penelopes Web, doing and undoing. But, I mean not, to
purchase, the Praise, of Expeditive, in that kind: But as one, that have a
Feeling of my Duty, and of the Case of others, my Endeavor shall be, to hear
patiently; And to cast my Order, into such a mould, as may soonest bring the
Subject to the End of his Journey.

As for such Delays, as may concern Others; the great Abuse is, that if the
Plaintiff have got an Injunction, to stay suits at Common Law, then he will
Spin on his Cause, at length. But, by the grace of God, I will make
Injunctions, an hard Pillow, to sleep on: For if I find, that he prosecutes not
with effect, he may hap, when he is awake, find, not only his Injunction
dissolved, but his Cause dismissed.

There be other particular Orders, I mean to take, for Non Prosecution, or
faint Prosecution, wherewith I will not trouble you now, Because, Summa sequar
Fastigia Rerum. And so much for Matt^r of Expedition.

Now for the fouth, and last Point, of the King^ Commandment; For the cutting
off, of unnecessary charge, of the Subject; A great part of it, is fulfilled,
in the precedent Article, touching Expedition: For it is, the Length of Suits,
that does multiply Charge, chiefly: But yet, there are some other Remedies,
that conduce thereunto.

First therefore, I shall maintain strictly, and with Severity, the Former
Orders, which I find, made, by my Lord Chanceller, for the immoderate, and
needles prolixity, and length of Bills, and Answers, and so forth; As well in
punishing the party, as fining the Counsel, whose hand I shall find, at such
Bills, Answers, etc. Secondly, for all the Examinations, taken in the Court, I
do give charge, unto the Examiners, (upon peril of their places,) that they do
not, use idle Repetitions, or needless Circumstances, in setting down, the
Depositions, taken by them; And I would, I could help it, likewise, in
Commissions, in the Country; But that is almost unpossible. Thirdly, I shall
take a diligent Survey, of the Ceppies in Chancery; That they have their just
number of Lines, and without open, or wastfull, writing. Fourthly, I shall be
careful, that there be no Exaction, of any new Fees, but according, as they
have been, heretofore, set, and Tabled.

As for Lawyers Fees, I must leave, to the Conscience, and Merit, of the
Lawyer; And the Estimation, and Gratitude, of the Client; But yet this I can
do. I know, there have used to attend this Bar, a Number of Lawyers, that have
not been heard, sometimes, scarce once, or twice, in a Term; And that, makes
the Client, seek to Great Counsel, and Favorites, (as they call them: A Term,
fitter for Kings, then Judges;) And that, for every Order, that a mean Lawyer
might dispatch, and as well. Therefore, to help the Generality of Lawy^rs; And
therein, to ease the Client; I will, constantly, observe, that every Tuesday,
and other Days of Orders, after nine a Clock stricken, I will hear the Bar,
until 11, or half an Hour, after 10, at the least. And since, we are upon the
point, whom I will hear, your Lordships will give me leave, to tell you a
Fancy. It falls out, that there be three of us, the Kings servants, in great
place, that are Lawyers by Descent: Mr. Attorney, Son of a Judge; Mr.
Solliciter, likewise, Son of a Judge: And my self, a Chancellers Son.

Now because, the Law, roots so well, in my time, I will water it at the Root,
thus far; As besides these great Ones, I will hear any Judges Son, before a
Sergeant, And any Sergeants Son, before a Reader.

Lastly, for the better Ease, of the Subjects; And the Brideling of contentious
Suits, I shall give better, (that is greater,) Costs, where the Suggestions are
not proved then has been hitherto used.
There be diverse other Orders, for the better Reiglement, of this Court; And
for Granting of Writs; And for Granting of Benefices; And other Things, which I
shall set down in a Table. But I will deal with no other, to day, but such, as
have a proper Relation, to his Maj^sties Commandment: It being my Comfort,
that I serve such a Master, that I shall need to be but a Conduit, for the
conveying only, of his Goodness, to his People. And it is true, that I do
affect, and aspire, to make good that Saying; That Optimu^ Magistratus praestat
optimae Legi; which is true in his Majesty. But for my self, I doubt, I shall
not attain it. But yet, I have, a Domestical Example, to follow. My Lords, I
have no more to say, but now, I will go on, to the Business, of the Court.

The Speech, which was used, by the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, in the
Star Chamber, before the Summer Circuits, the King being then in Scotland, 1617.
THe King, by his perfect Declaration, published in this place, concerning
Judges, and Justices; Has made the Speech of his Chanceller, accustomed before
the Circuits, rather of Ceremony, than of use. For, as in his Book to his Son,
he has set forth a true Character, and Platform, of a King; So, in this his
Speech, he has done, the like, of a Judge, and Justice: Which shows, that as
his Majesty, is excellently able, to Govern, in chief; So, he is likewise well
seen, and skillful, in the inferior Offices, and Stages, of Justice, and
Government: which is a Thing, very rare in Kings.

Yet, nevertheless, somewhat must be said, to fulfill an old Observance; But
yet, upon the Kings Grounds, and very briefly: For as Solomon says, in another
Case; In these things, who is he, that can come, after the King.

First, you that are the Judges of Circuits, are, as it were, the Planets of
the Kingdom; (I do you no Dishonor, in giving you that name;) And, no doubt,
you have a great stroke, in the Frame, of this Government; As the other have,
in the great Frame, of the World. Do therefore, as they do; Move always and be
carried, with the Motion of your first Mover, which is your Sovereign. A
popular Judge is a Deformed Thing: And Plaudite's, are fitter for Players, then
for Magistrates. Do good to the people; Love them, and give them Justice. But
let it be, as the Psalm says, Nihil inde Expectantes; Looking for nothing,
neither Praise, nor Profit.

Yet my Meaning is not, when I wish you, to take heed of Popularity, that you
should be imperious, and Strange, to the Gentlemen, of the Country: You are,
above them, in Power, but your Rank is not much unequal: And learn this; That
Power, is ever of greates^ strength, when it is civilly carried.

Secondly, you must remember, that besides your ordinary Administration, of
Justice, you do carry the two Glasses, or, Mirrours, of the State: For it is
your Duty, in these your Visitations; To represent, to the people, the Graces,
and Care, of the King. And again, upon your Return; To present, to the King,
the Distastes, and Griefs, of the People.

Mark, what the King says, in his Book: Procure reverence to the King and the
Law: Inform my people truly of me; (which we know is, hard to do, according to
the Excellency of his Merit, but yet Endeavor it;) How zealous I am for
Religion; How I desire, Law may be maintained, and flourish; That every Court,
should have his Jurisdiction; That every Subject, should submit himself, to the
Law. And of this, you have had, of l^te, no small Occasion of Notice, and
Remembrance, by the great, and strait Charge, that the King ha^h given me, as
Keeper of his Seal, for the Governing of the Chancery, without Tumor, or
Excess.

Again, e re natae, you, at this present, ought to make the People know, and
consider, ^he Kings Bl^ssed Care, and Providence, in gove^ning this Realm, in
his Absence. So that, sitting at the Helm, of another Kingdom; Not without
great Affairs, and Business; yet, he governs all things, here, by his Letters,
and Directions, as punctually, and perfectly, as if he were present.

I assure you, my Lords of the Counsel and I, do much admire, the Extention,
and Latitude of his Care, in all Things.

In the High Commission, he did conceive, a Sinn^w of Government, was a little
shrunk; He recommended the care of it.

He has called, for the Accounts, of the last Circuit, from the Judges, to be
transmitted unto him, into Scotland.

Touching the Infestation of Pirates, he has been careful, and is, and has
put things, in way.

All things that concern the Reformation, or the Plantation, of Ireland; He
has given, in them, punctual, and resolute, Di^ections. All this in Absence.

I give but a few Instances, of a public Nature; The Secrets of Counsel, I
may not enter into; Though, his Dispatches into France, Spain, and the
Low Countries, now in his absence, are also Notorious, as to the outward
sending. So that, I must conclude, that his Majesty, wants but more Kingdoms;
For I see, he could suffice, to all.

As for the other Glass, I told you of; Of representing to the King, the
Griefs, of his People; without doubt, it is properly your Part: For the King,
ought to be informed, of any thing, amiss in the state, of his Countries, from
the Observations, and Relations, of the Judges; (That, indeed, know the Pulse
of the Country;) Rather then from Discourse. But for this Glass, (thanks be to
God,) I do hear, from you all; That there was never greater Peace, Obedience,
and Contentment, in the Country: Though the best Governments, be, always, like
the fairest Crystals; wherein, every little Isicle, or Grain, is seen; which in
a Fouler Stone, is never perceived.

Now to some Particulars, and not Many. Of all other things, I must begin, as
the King begins; That is, with the Cause of Religion; And especially, the
Hollow Church Papist. Saint Aug. has a good Comparison, of such Men,
affirming; That ^hey are like the Roots of Nettles, which themselves sting not,
but yet ^hey bear all the Stinging Leaves. Let me know of such Roots, and I
will root them, out of the Country.

Next, for the Matter of Religion: In the principal place, I recommend, both
to you, and the Justices, the Countenancing, of Godly, and Zealous, Preachers.
I mean, not Sectaries, or Novellists; But those, which are sound, and conform;
But yet pious, and Reverend. For there will be a perpetual Defection, except
you keep Men in, by Preaching, as well as Law does, by punishing: And commonly,
Spiritual Diseases, are not Cured, but by Spiritual Remedies.

Next, let me commend unto you, the Repressing, (as much as may be,) of Faction
in the Countries; of which ensue, infinite Inconveniences, and perturbations, of
all good Order; And Crossing, of all good Service, in Court, or Country, or
wheresoever. Cicero, when he was Consul, had devised, a fine Remedy; (A Mild
one, but an effectual, and an apt one;) For he says, Eos qui otium
perturbant, reddam otiosos. Those, that trouble, others Quiet, I will give them
Quiet; They shall have nothing to do; Nor no Authority, shall be put into their
Hands. If I may know, from you, of any who are in the Country, that are Heads,
or Hands, of Faction; Or Men, of turbulent Spirits; I shall give them Cicero's
Reward, as much as in me is.

To conclude; study the Kings Book; And study your selves, how you profit by
it; And all shall be well. And you, the Justices of Peace, in particular; Let
me say this to you; Never King, of this Realm, did you so much Honor, as the
King has done you, in his Speeeh; By being, your immedi^te Directors; And by
sorting you, and your se^vice, with the Service of Ambassadors, and of his
nearest Attendants. Nay more, it seems his Majesty, is willing to do, the state
of Justice of Peace, Honor, actively also; By bringing in, with time, the like
Form of Commission, into the Government of Scotland, As that Glorious King,
Edward the third, did plant this Commission, here in this Kingdom. And
therefore, you are not fit to be Coppies, except you be Fair Written, without
Blots, or Blurs, or any thing, unworthy your Authority. And so, I will trouble
you no longer, for this time.

The Speech, used by Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal of
England, to Sir William Jones, upon his calling, to be Lord Chief Justice, of
Ireland. 1617.
Sir WILLIAM JONES,
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, being duly informed, of your sufficiency,
every way; Has called you, by his Writ, now returned, to the State, and
Degree, of a Sergeant, at Law; But not to stay there, but being so qualified,
to serve him, as his Chief Justice, of his Kings Bench, in his Realm of
Ireland. And therefore, that which I shall say to you, must be applied, not to
your S^rjeants place, (which you take but in passage,) But to that great place,
where you are to settle; And because, I will not spend Time, to the Delay, of
the Business, of Causes, of the Court, I will lead you the short Journey by
Examples, and not the Long by Precepts.

The Place, that you shall now serve in, has been fortunate, to be well served
in, four successions before you. Do but take unto you, the Constancy, and
integrity, of Sir Robert Gardener: The Gravity, Temper, and Direction, of Sir
James Lea: The Quicknes^e, Industry, and Dispatch, of Sir Humphry Winch: The
Care, and Affection, to the Commonwealth, and the Prudent, and Politic
Administration, of Sir John Denham; And you shall need no other Lessons. They
were all Lincolns Inn Men, as you are; You have known them, as well in their
Beginnings, as in their Advancement.

But because, you are to be there, not only Chief Justice, but a Counselor of
Estate, I will put you in mind, of the great Work, now in hand; that you may
raise your thoughts, according unto it, Ireland is the last, Ex Filiis
Europae, which has been reclaimed, from Desolation, and a Desert, (in many
parts,) to Population, and Plantation; And from Savage, and Barbarous,
Customs, to Humanity, and Civility. This is the Kings Work in chief. It is his
Garland, of Heroical Virtue, and Felicity; Denied to his Progenitors, and
Reserved to his Times. The Work, is not yet conducted, to perfection, but is in
fair Advance. And this I will say confidently, that if God bless this Kingdom
with Peace, and Justice; No Usurer, is so sure, in seven years space, to double
his Pr^ncipall with Interest; And Interest upon Interest; As that Kingdom is,
within the same time, to double the stock, both of Wealth, and People. So as
that Kingdom; which once within these Twenty years, Wise men were wont to
doubt, whether they should wish it, to be in a Poole; Is like now to become,
almost a Garden; And younger Sister, to Great Britain. And therefore, you must
set down with your self, to be, not only a just Governer, and a good Chief
Justice (as if it were in England;) But under the King, and the Deputy, you are
to be a Master Builder, and a Master Planter, and Reducer, of Ireland. To which
end, I will trouble you, at this time, but with Three Directions.

Plantations. That of the North, which is in part acted: That of Weshford,
which is now in Distribution: And that of Longford, and Letrim, which is now in
survey. And take this from me; That the Bane, of a Plantation, is, when the
Undertakers, or Planters, make such have, to a little Mechanical present
profit, as disturbeth the whole Frame, and nobleness of the work, for Times to
come. Therefore, hold them to their Covenants, and the strict Ordinances of
Plantation.

The Second is, that you be careful, of the Kings Revenew; And by little and
little, constitute him, a good Demeasn, if it may be; Which hitherto is little,
or none. For the Kings Case is hard, when every Man's Land, shall be improved,
in value, with increase manifold; And the King shall be tied, to his Dry Rent.

My last Direction, (though first in weight,) is, that you do all good
Endeavors, to proceed resolutely, and constantly (and yet with due Temparance,
and Equality) in Matters of Religion; least Ireland Civil, become more
dangerous to us, then Ireland Savage. So God give you Comfort of your Place.

After Sir William Jones Speech.

I had forgotten one Thing, which was this. You may take, exceeding great
Comfort, that you shall serve, with such a Deputy: One, that (I think) is a
Man, ordained of God, to do great Good, to that Kingdom. And this, I think
good, to say to you; That the true Temper, of a Chief Justice, toward a
Deputy, is; Neither servilly to second him, nor factiously to oppose him.

The Lord Keepers Speech, in the Exchecquer; to Sir John Denham; when he was
called to be one of the Barons of the Exchecquer.
SIR John Denham; the King, of his grace, and favor, has made choice of you,
to be one of the Barons, of the Exchecquer; To succeed, to one of the gravest,
and most Reverend Judges, of this Kingdom; For so I hold Baron Altham was. The
King takes you not upon Credit, but Proof, and great Proof of your former
Service; And that, in both those kinds, wherein you are now to serve: For as
you have showed your self a good Judge beween party and party; so you have
showed your self a good Administer, of the Revenue; Both when you were Chief
Baron; And since as Counselor of Estate, there in Ireland; where the Counsel
(as you know) does in great part, manage, and message, the Revenew.

And to both these Parts, I will apply some Admonitions; But not vulgar, or
discursive; But apt for the Times, and in few words: For they are best
remembered.

First therefore, above all, you ought to maintain, the Kings Prerogative, And
to set down with your self that the Kings Prerogative, and the Law, are not two
Things; But the Kings Prerogative is Law; And the Principal Part of the Law:
The Firstborn, or Pars Prima, of the Law: And therefore, in conserving, or
maintaining that, you conserve and maintain, the Law. There is not, in the Body
of Man, one Law of the Head, and another of the Body, but all is one Entire Law.

The next Point, that I would now advise you, is, that you acquaint your self,
diligently, with the Revenew; And also with the Ancient Record^, and
Presidents, of this Court. When the famous Case, of the Copper Mines, was
argued in this Court; And judged for the King; It was not, upon the fine
Reasons, of Wit; As that, the Kings Prerogative, drew to it, the chief, in
quaque specie: The Lion is the chief of Beasts; The Eagle the chief of Birds;
The Whale, the chief of Fishes; And so Copper, the chief of Minerals; For these
are but Dalliances of Law, and Ornaments; But it was the grave Records, and
Presidents, that grounded, the Judgment, of that Cause: And therefore, I would
have you, both guide, and arm, your self with them, against these Vapors, and
Fumes, of Law; which are extracted, out of Men's Inventions, and Conceits.

The third Advice, I will give you, has a large Extent: It is, that you do
your Endeavor, in your place, so to manage the Kings Justice, and Revenue, as
the King may have most Profit, and the Subject, least vexation: For when there
is much vexation to the Subject, and little Benefit to the King then the
Exchecquer is Sick: And when there is, Much Benefit to the King, with less
Trouble, and vexation, to the Subject, then the Exchecquer is sound: As for
Example; If there shall be much Racking, for the Kings old Debts; And the more
Fresh, and Late Debts shall be, either more negligently called upon, or over
easily discharged, or over indulgently stalled: Or if the Number of
Informations be many; and the Kings Part, or Fines for Compositions, a Trifle:
Or if there be, much ado, to get the King new Land, upon Concealments, and that
which he has already, be not well known, and surveyed; Nor the woods
preserved; (I could put you many other Cases,) this false within that, which I
term, the sick Estate of the Exchecquer. And this is that, which makes every
Man ready, with their Undertakings, and their Projects, to disturb, the ancient
Frame of the Exchecquer; (Then the which, I am persuaded, there is not a
better;) This being the Burden of the Song; That much goes out of the
Subjects Purse; And little comes, to the Kings Purse. Therefore, give them
not, that Advantage, so to say. Sure I am, that besides your own Associates,
the Barons; you serve, with two superior, Great Officers, that have
Honorable, and true, Ends; And desire, to serve the King, and right the
Subject.

There rests, that I deliver you, your Patent.

His Lordships Speech, in the Common Pleas, to Justice Hutton, when he was
called, to be one of the Judges, of the Common Pleas.
Mr. Sergeant Hutton;
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, being duly informed, of your Learning,
Integrity, Discretion, Experience, Means, and Reputation in your Country;
Has thought fit not to leave you these Talents, to be employed upon your self
only; But to call you, to serve Himself, and his People, in the place, of one
of his Justices, of the Court, o^ Common Pleas.

This Court, where you are to serve, is the Local Center, and Heart, of the
Laws, of this Realm: Here the Subject has his assurance, By Fines, and
Recoveries: Here he has his Fixed, and Invariable, Remedies by Precipes, and
Writs of Right: Here Justice opens not, by a By-gate of Privilege, but by the
great Gate of the Kings original Writs, out of the Chancery. Here issues
Process of Utlawry; If men will not answer Law, in this Center of Law, they
shall be cast out. And therefore, it is proper for you, by all means, with your
Wisdom, and Fortitude, to maintain, the Laws of the Realm: Wherein,
nevertheless, I would not have you Headstrong, but Heart-strong; And to
weigh, and remember, with your self, that the 12. Judges, of the Realm, are, as
the 12. Lions, under Salomons Throne; They must show their Stoutnesse, in
Elevating, and Bearing up the Throne. To represent unto you, the Lines, and
Portraitures, of a Good Judge.

The 1. is, That you should draw your Learning, out of your Books, not out of
your Brain. 2. That you, should mix well, the Freedom, of your own Opinion,
with the Reverence, of the Opinion, of your Fellows. 3. That you should
continue, the Studying of your Books, and not to spend on, upon the old Stock.
4. That you should fear no Man's Face; And yet, not turn Stoutness, into
Bravery. 5. That you should be truly Impartial, and not so, as Men may see
Affection, through fine Carriage. 6. That you be a Light, to Jurors, to open
their Eyes; But not a Guide, to Lead them, by the Noses. 7. That you affect not,
the Opinion, of Pregnancy, and Expedition, by an impatient, and Catching,
Hearing, of the Counselors at the Bar. 8. That your Speech, be with
Gravity, as one of the Sages of the Law; And not Talkative, nor with
impertinent Flying out, to show Learning. 9. That your Hands, and the Hands of
your Hands; (I mean, those about you,) Be Clean, and Vncorrupt, from Gifts;
From Meddling in Titles; And from Serving of Turns; Be they, of Great Ones, or
Small Ones. 10. That you contain, the Jurisdiction of the Court, within the
ancient Meere-stones, without Removing the Mark. 11. Lastly, that you carry
such a Hand, over your Ministers, and Clarks, as that they may rather be in awe
of you, then presume upon you.
These, and the like Points, of the Duty, of a Judge, I forbear to enlarge; For
the longer, I have lived with you, the shorter shall my speech be to you;
Knowing, that you come so Furnished, and Prepared, with these Good Virtues, as
whatsoever I shall say, cannot be New unto you. And therefore, I will say no
more unto you, at this time, but deliver you your Patent.

His Lordships Speech, in the Parliament, being Lord Chanceller, To the
Speakers Excuse.
Mr. Sergeant Richardson;
THe King has heard, and observed, your grave, and decent, Speech; Tending, to
the Excuse, and Disablement, of your self, for the place of Speaker. In answer
whereof, his Majesty, has commanded me, to say to you; That he does, in no
sort, admit of the same.

First, because, if the Parties own Judgment, should be admitted, in case of
Elections, Touching himself, it would follow, that the most confident, and
overweening, Persons, would be received; And the most considerate Men, and
those that understand themselves best, should be rejected.

Secondly, his Majesty, does so much rely, upon the Wisdoms, and Discretions,
of those, of the House of Commons, that have chosen you, with an unanimous
consent, that his Majesty thinks not good, to swerve, from their Opinion, in
that, wherein themselves, are principally interessed.

Thirdly, you have disabled your Self, in so good, and decent, a Fashion; As
the Manner, of your Speech, has destroyed, the Matter of it.

And therefore, the King, does allow of the Election, and admits you for
Speaker.

To the Speakers Oration.
Mr. Speaker;
THe King has heard, and observed, your eloquent Discourse, containing, much
good Matter, and much good will: Wherein, you must expect from me, such an
Answer, only, as is pertinent to the Occasion, and compassed, by due respect
of Time.

I may divide, that which you have said, into four parts.

The first was, a Commendation, or Laudative, of Monarchy.

The second was, indeed, a large Field; Containing, a thankful
Acknowledgement, of his Majesty's, Benefits, Attributes, and Acts of Government.

The third was, some Passages, touching the Institution, and Use of Parliaments.

The fourth, and last was, certain Petitions, to his Majesty; on the behalf, of
the House, and your self.

For your Commendation of Monarchy, 1. Part.
and preferring it, before other Estates, it needs no Answer. The Schools may
dispute it; But Time has tried it; And we find it to be the Best. Other
States, have curious Frames, soon put out of order; And they, that are made fit
to last, are not, commonly, fit to grow, or spread: And contrariwise, those
that are made fit to spread, and enlarge, are not fit, to continue, and endure.
But Monarchy, is like a Work of Nature, well composed, both to grow, and to
continue. From this I pass.

For the second part, 2. Part.
of your Speech, wherein you did, with no less Truth, then Affection,
acknowledge, the great Felicity, which we enjoy, by his Majesty's Reign, and
Government; His Majesty, has commanded me, to say unto you: That Praises, and
Thanks-givings, he knows, to be the true Oblations, of Hearts, and loving
Affections: But that, which you offer him, he will join with you, in offering
it up to God, who is the Author of all Good; who knows also, the
uprightness, of his Heart; who, He hops, will continue, and increase, his
Blessings, both upon Himself, and his Posterity; And likewise, upon his
Kingdoms, and the Generations of them.

But I, for my part, must say unto you, as the Grecian Orator said, long since,
in the like case: Solus dignus harum rerum Laudator Tempus. Time, is the only
Commender, and Encomiastique, worthy of his Majesty, and his Government.

Why Time? For that, in the Revolution, of so many years, and Ages, as have
passed over this Kingdom; Notwithstanding, many Noble, and excellent, Effects,
were never produced, until his Majestys days; But have been reserved, as
proper, and peculiar, unto them.

And because, this is no part of a Panegyric, but merely Story, and that they
be, so many Articles of Honor, fit to be recorded, I will only mention them;
extracting part of them, out of that, you, Mr. Speaker, have said. They be, in
Number, Eight.

1. His Majesty, is the first, (as you noted it well,) that has laid Lapis
Angularis, the Corner Stone, of these two mighty Kingdoms, of England, and
Scotland; And taken away, the Wall of Separation: Whereby his Majesty, is
become, the Monarch, of the most puissan^, and Militar, Nations, of the World:
And if one, of the Ancient wise Men, was not deceived, Iron commands Gold.
Plantation, and Reduction, to Civility, of Ireland, (the second Island, of the
Ocean Atlantique,) did, by Gods Providence, wait, for his Majesty's Times:
Being a work, resembling, indeed, the Works of the ancient Heroes: No new
piece, of that kind, in Modern Times. Kingdom, now first, in his Majesty's
Times, has gotten a Lot, or Portion, in the New World, by the Plantation of
Virginia, and the Summer Islands. And certainly, it is with the Kingdoms on
Earth, as it is, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Sometimes, a Grain of Mustardseed,
proves a great Tree. Who can tell? Majesty, has made that Truth, which was
before Titulary; In that he has verified the Style, of De^ender of the Faith;
Wherein, his Majesty's Pen, has been so happy, as though, the Deaf Adder, will
not hear, yet he is charmed, that he does not Hiss. I mean, in the graver sort
of those, that have answered, hi^ Majesty's Writings. Conquest, ye cannot
assign Twenty years, (which is the Time, that his Majesty's Reign, now draws
fast upon,) of Inward, and Outward Peace. Insomuch, as the Time of Queen Eliz.
of happy memory; And always magnified, for a peaceable Reign, was,
nevertheless, interrupted, the first Twenty years, with a Rebellion, in
England. And both first, and last, Twenty years, with Rebellions, in Ireland.
And yet, I know, that his Majesty will make good, both his Words; As well that,
of Nemo me lascesset impune As that other, of Beati pacifici. Office, of Kings,
which is, t^ sit in the Gate, and to judge the People, was never performed, in
like perfection, by any of the Kings Progenitors: Whereby, his Majesty has
showed himself, to be Lex loquens; And to sit upon the Throne, not as a dumb
statua, but as a Speaking Oracle. Majesty's Mercy, (as you noted it well,) show
me a time, wherein a King, of this Realm, has Reigned, almost 20. years, (as I
said,) in his White Robes, without the Blood, of any Peer, of this Kingdom: The
Axe, turned, once or twice, toward a Peer, but never struck. Flourishing, of
Arts, and Scienc^s, recreated by his Majesty's Countenance, and Bounty, was
never in that Height; especially, that Art of Arts, Divinity: For that, we
may, truly, to Gods great glory, confess; That since the Primitive times, there
were never, so many Stars, (for so the Scripture calls them,) in that
Firmament.
These Things, Mr. Speaker, I have, partly, chosen, out of your Heap; and are
so far, from being vulgar, as they are, in effect, singular, and proper, to his
Majesty, and his Times. So that, I have made good, as I take it, my first
Assertion; That the only worthy Commender of his Majesty is Time: Which has so
set off, his Majesty's Merits, by the Shadows of Comparison, as it passes the
Luster, or Commendation, of Words.

How then shall I conclude? Shall I say, O Fortunatos nimium sua si Bona
norint: No, For I see, ye are happy, in enjoying them, and happy again, in
knowing them. But, I will conclude, this part, with that Saying, turned to the
Right Hand; Si gratum dixeri^, omnia dixeris. Your gratitude contains, in a
word, all that I can say to you, touching this Parliament.

Touching the Third Point, of your Speech, concerning Parliaments, 3. Part.
I shall need to say little: For there was never, that Honor done, to the
Institution of Parliament, that his Majesty did it, in his last Speech; making
it, in effect, the perfection of Monarchy: For that, although Monarchy, was the
more Ancient, and be independent; yet by the Advice, and Assistance of
Parliament, it is the stronger, and the surer built.

And therefore, I shall say no more, of this Point, but as you, (Mr. Speaker,)
did well note: That when the King sits in Parliament, and his Prelates, Peers,
and Commons, attend him, he is in the Exaltation of his Orb: So, I wish things,
may be so carried, that he may be then, in greatest Serenity, and Benignity, of
Aspect; shining upon his People, both in Glory, and Grace. Now you know well,
that that the shining of the sun, fair upon the ground, whereby all things
exhilarate, and do fructify; is either hindered by Clouds above, or Mists
below; perhaps by Brambles, and Briars, that grow upon the Ground it self. All
which, I hope, at this time, will be dispelled, and removed.

I come now, to the last part of your Speech, concerning the Petitions: 4. Part.
But before, I deliver, his Majesty's Answer, respectively, in particular; I am
to speak unto you, some few words in general: Wherein, in effect, I shall but
glean; His Majesty, having so excellently, and fully, expressed himself.

For that, that can be spoken, pertinently, must be, either touching the
Subject, or Matter, of Parliament Business; Or of the Manner, and Carriage of
the same; Or lastly, of the Time, and the Husbanding, and Marshalling, of Time.

For the Matters, to be handled, in Parliament, they are, either of Church,
State, Laws, or Grievances.

For the First two, concerning Church, or State^ ye have heard, the King
himself speak, and as the Scripture says; Who is he, that in such things shall
come after the King? For the other two, I shall say somewhat, but very shortly.

For Laws, they are Things proper, for your own Element: And therefore
therein, ye are rather to lead, then to be led. Only, it is not amiss, to put
you in mind, of two Things: The one, that you do not multiply, or accumulate,
Laws, more then ye need. There is a Wise, and Learned, Civilian, that applies,
the Curse of the Prophet, Pluet super eos Laqueos, To Multiplicity of Laws;
For they do but ensnare, and entangle the People. I wish rather, that ye should
either revive good Laws, that are fallen, and discontinued; Or provide,
against the slack execution, of Laws, which are already in Force; Or meet,
with the subtle Evasion^, from Laws, which Time, and Craft, has undermined;
then to make, Novas Creaturas Legum, Laws upon a new Mould.

The other Point, touching Laws, is; That ye busy not your selves, too much,
in private Bills; except it be in Gases, wherein the Help, and Arm, of ordinary
Justice, is too short.

For Grievances, his Majesty, has with great Grace, and Benignity, opened
himself. Nevertheless, the Limitations, which may make up your Grievances, not
to beat the Air only, but to sort, to a desired effect, are^ principally, two.
The one, (to use his Majesty's term,) that ye do not Hunt after Grievances;
Such as may seem, rather, to be stirred here, when ye are met, then to have
sprung, from the desires of the Country: Ye are to represent the People; ye are
not to personate them.

The other, that ye do not, heap up Grievances, as if Numbers^ should make a
show, where the Weight is small; Or as if, all things amiss, (like Plato's
Common wealth,) should be remedied at once. It is certain, that the best
Governments, yea and the best Men, are like the best precious Stones, wherein
every Flaw, or Isickle, or Grain, are seen, and noted more, then in those, that
are, generally, foul, and corrupted.

Therefore, contain, your selves, within that Moderation, as may appear to
bend, rather to the Effectual Ease of the People, then to a Discursive Envy,
or scandal upon the State.

As for the Manner, of Carriage, of Parliament Business, ye must know, that ye
deal with a King, that has been longer King, then any of you, have been
Parliament Men; And a King, that is no less sensible, of Forms, then of
Matter; And is as far, from enduring Diminution, of Majesty, as from regarding
^lattery, or Vain Glory; And a King, that understands, as well, the Pulse, of
the Hearts, of People, as his own Orb. And therefore, both let your Grievances,
have a decent, and Reverent Form, and Style; And (to use the words of former
Parliaments,) let them be, Tanquam Gemitus Columbae, without Pique, or
Harshnesse; And on the other side, in that ye do for the King, Let it have a
Mark, of Unity, Alacrity, and Affection; which will be of this Force; That
whatsoever ye do, in substance, will be doubled in Reputation abroad, as in a
Crystal Glass.

For the Time, if ever Parliament was to be measured by the Houre-glass, it is
this; In regard of the instant Occasion, flying away irrecoverably. Therefore
let your Speeches, in the House, be the Speeches of Counselors, and not of
Orators: Let your Committees, tend to dispatch, not to dispute; And so
marshall the Times, as the public Business, especially the proper Business,
of the Parliament be put first; And private Bills be put last, as time shall
give leave, or within the spaces, of the Public.

For the Four Petitions, his Majesty is pleased to grant them all, as
liberally, as the Ancient, and true Custom, of Parliament, does warrant; And
with the cautions, that have ever gone with them; That is to say; That the
privilege, be not used, for Defrauding of Creditours, and Defeating of
ordinary Justice: That Liberty of, Speech, turn not into License; but be
joined, with that Gravity, and Discretion, as may taste of Duty, and Love, to
your Sovereign, Reverence to your own Assembly, and Respect to the Matters ye
handle. That your Accesses, be at such fit Times, as may stand best with his
Majesty's pleasure, and Occasions. That Mistakings, and Misunderstandings, be
rather avoided, and prevented, (as much as may be,) then salved, or cleared.

CERTAIN TREATISES Written, or Referring, TO Queen Elizabeth's TIMES: BEING,
OBSERVATIONS UPON A LIBELL, Published in Anno, 1592.

A true Report of Doctor LOPEZ his TREASON.

An Advertisement, touching the Controversies, of the Church of ENGLAND.

A Collection, of the Felicities, of Queen ELIZABETH.

By the Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban.

LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, near the Mitre Tavern, 1657.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS, UPON A LIBELL, Published this present year, 1592.
ENTITLED; A DECLARATION Of the TRVE CAUSES, OF THE GREAT TROUBLES, Presupposed
to be intended, against the REALM, of ENGLAND.
IT were Just, and Honorable, for Princes, being in Wars together, that
howsoever, they prosecute their Quarrels, and Debates, by Arms, and Acts of
Hostility; yea, though the Wars be such, as they pretend the utter Ruin, and
Overthrow, of the Forces, and States, one of another; yet they so limit their
Passions, as they preserve, two Things, Sacred, and Inviolable; That is, The
Life, and good Name, each of other. For the Wars, are no Massacres, and
Confusions; But they are, the Highest Trials of Right; when Princes, and
States, that acknowledge no Superior upon Earth, shall put themselves, upon the
Justice of God, for the Deciding of their Controversies, by such Success, as
it shall please him, to give, on either side. And as, in the Process, of
particular Pleas, between private Men, all things, ought to be ordered, by the
Rules, of Civil Laws: So, in the Proceedings, of the War, nothing ought to
be done, against the Law of Nations, or the Law of Honor; Which Laws, have
ever pronounced, those two Sorts, of Men; The one, Conspiratours, against the
Persons of Princes; The other, Libellers, against the^r good Fame, to be such
Enemies, of common Society, as are not to be cherished, no not by Enemies. For,
in the Examples, of Times, which were less corrupted, we find, that when, in
the greatest Heats, and Extremities of Wars, there have been made Offers of
Murderous, and Traitorous, Attempts, against the Person, of a Prince, to the
Enemy, they have been, not only Rejected, but also Revealed. And, in like
manner, when Dishonorable Mention, has been made, of a Prince, before an
Enemy Prince, by some, that have thought, therein, to please his Humor, he
has showed himself, contrariwise, utterly distasted therewith, and been ready,
to contest, for the Honor, of an ^nemy.

According to which Noble, and Magnanimous, Kind of Proceeding, it will be
found, that, in the whole Course, of her Majesty's Proceeding, with the King of
Spain; since the Amity inter^upted; There was never any project, by her
Majesty, or any of her Ministers, either moved, or assented unto, for the
Taking away, of the Li^e, of the said King: Neither, has there been, any
Declaration, or Writing, of ^state; No, nor Book allowed, wherein his Honor,
has been touched, or taxed, otherwise then for his Ambition; A point, which
is, necessarily, interlaced, with her Majesty's, own Justification. So that no
Man, needs to doubt, but that those Wars, are grounded, upon her Majesty's
part, upon just, and Honorable Causes, which have so Just, and Honorable, a
prosecution; Considering, it is a much harder Matter, when a Prince is entered
into Wars, to hold respect then, and not to be transported with Passion; than,
to make Moderate, and Just Resolutions, in the Beginnings.

But now, if a Man look, on the other part, it will appear, that rather, as it
is to be thought, by the Solicitation of Traitorous Subjects, (which is the
only Poison, and Corruption, of all Honorable War, between Forrainers;) Or
by the Presumpt^on of his Agents, and Ministers, then, by the proper
Inclination, of that King, there has been, if not plotted, and practiced, yet,
at the least, comforted, Conspiracies, against her Majesty's Sacred Person;
which, nevertheless, Gods Goodness, has used, and turned, to show by such
miraculous Discoveries, into how near, and precious, Care, and Custody, it has
pleased him, to receive her Majesty's Life, and Preservation. But, in the other
Point, it is strange; what a number, of Libellous, and Defamatory, Books, and
Writings, and in what Variety, with what Art, and cunning, handled, have been
allowed to pass through the World, in all Languages, against her Majesty, and
her Government; Sometimes, pretending, the Gravity, and Authority, of Church
Stories, to move Belief; sometimes, formed into Remonstrances, and
Advertisements of ^state, to move Regard; Sometimes, presented, as it were, in
Tragedies, of the Persecutions of Catholics, to move Pity; Sometimes,
contrived, into pleasant Pasquils and Satyrs, to move sport: So as, there is
no shape, whereinto, these Fellows, have not transformed themselves; Nor no
Humor, nor affection, in the mind of Man, to which they have not applied
themselves; Thereby, to insinuate, their Untruths, and abuses, to the World.
And, indeed, let a Man look into them, and he shall find them, the only
Triumphant Lies, that ever were confuted, by Circumstances, of Time, and Place;
Confuted by Contrariety, in themselves; Confuted, by the Witness, of infinite
Persons, that live yet, and have had, particular Knowledge, of the Matters: But
yet avouched, with such Asseveration, as if, either they were fallen, into that
strange Disease of the Mind, which a Wise Writer, describes, in these words;
Fingunt simul creduntque; Or as if, they had received it, as a principal
Precept, and Ordinance, of their Seminaries; Audacter calumniare, semper
aliquid haeret; Or as if, they were of the Race, which in old time, were wont,
to help themselves, with Miraculous Lies; But, when the Cause of this, is
entered into; Namely, that there passes over, out of this Realm, a number of
Eager, and Unquiet, Scholars, whom, their own Turbulent, and Humourous,
Nature, presses out, to seek their Adventures abroad; And that, on the other
side, they are nourished, rather in Listening after News, and Intelligences,
and in Whisperings, then in any Commendable Learning; And after a time, when
either their Necessitous Estate, or their Ambitious Appetites, importune them,
they fall on devising, how to do, some acceptable service, to that side, which
maintains them; So as ever, when their Credit, waxes Cold with Foreign
Princes; Or that their Pensions, are ill paid; Or some Preferment, is in
sight, at which they level; Straitwayes, out comes a Libell, pretending
thereby, to keep in life the party, which within the Realm, is contrary to the
State: (Wherein, they are as wise, as he, that thinks, to kindle a Fire, by
blowing the dead Ashes;) When, I say, a man looks into the Cause, and Ground,
of ^his plentiful yield of Libells, he will cease, to marvel, considering
the Concurrence, which is, as well, in the Nature of the ^eed, as in the
travel of Tilling, and dressing; yea, and in the Fitness, of the Season, for
the Bringing up of those infectious weeds.

But, to verefie, the Saying, of our Savior, Non est Discipulus super
Magistrum; As they have sought to deprave, her Majesty's Government, in her
self; So, have they not forgo^ten, to do the same, in her principal Servants,
and Counselors; Thinking belike, that as the Immediate Invectives, against her
Majesty, do best satisfy, the Malice, of the Forreiner; So the slander, and
Calumniation, of her principal Counselors, agreed best, with the Humors, of
some Malcontents, within the Realm; Imagining also, that it was like, they
should be more scattered here, and freelier dispersed; And also should be less
odious, to those Forrainers, which were not merely partial, and passionate;
who have, for the most part^ in detestation, the Traitorous Libellings, of
Subjects, directly against their Natural Prince.

Amongst the Rest, in this kind, there h^th been publis^^d, this present year,
of 1592. a Libel, that gives place, to none of the Res^, in Malice, and
untruths; Though inferior, to most of them, in penning, and S^ile; The Author,
having chosen, the vain of a Luci^nist; And yet, being a Counterfeit, even in
that kind. The Libell, is intitul^d; A Declaration, of the true Causes, of the
great Troubles, presupposed to be intended, against the Realm of England. And
has a Semblance, as if it were bent, against the Doings, of her Maj^sties,
Ancient, and Worthy Counselor, the Lord ^urghley; Whose Carefu^ness, and
Pains, her Majesty, has used, in her Counsels, and Actions, of this Realm,
for these 34. years space, in all dangerous Times; And amidst many, and mighty,
practices; And with such succ^sse, as our Enemies, are put still, to their
Paper-shot, of such Libels, as these: The memory, of whom, will remain, in this
Land, when all these Libels, shall be extinct, and forgot^en; According to the
Scripture; Memoria Iusti cum landibus, at Impiorum Nomen putrescet. But it is
more then evident, by the parts of the same Book, that the Authors Malice, was
to her Majesty, and her Covernment; As may especially appear, in this, That he
charged not, his Lordship, with any particular Actions, of his private Life;
(Such power had Truth;) whereas, the Libels, made against other Counselors
have, principally, insisted upon that part: ^ut has only, wrested, and
detorted, such Actions of Sat, as in Times, of his Service, have been
Managed; And depraving them, has ascribed, and imputed to him, the Effects,
that have followed; Indeed, to the Good of the Realm, and the Honor of her
Majesty; Though, sometimes, to the Provoking of the Mali^e, but Abridging of
the Power, and Means, of Desperate, and Incor^igible, Subjects.

All which Slanders, as his Lordship, might justly despise; Both, for their
Manifest Untruths, and for the Baseness, and Obscurity, of the Author; So
nevertheless, according to the Moderation, which his Lordship uses, in all
Things; Never claiming the Privilege, of his Authority, when it is Question,
of satisfying the World; He has been content, that they be not passed over,
altogether, in Silence: Whereupon, I have, in particular Duty, to his Lordship,
amongst others, that do Honor, and Love, his Lordship; And that have,
^iligently, observed his Actions; And in Zeal of Truth, collected upon the
Reading, of the said Libell, certain Observations; Not in Form, of a just
Answer, lest, I should fall into the Error, whereof Solomon, speaks thus;
Answer not a Fool, in his own kind, least thou also be like him; But only, to
discover the Malice, and to reprove, and convict the Untruths, thereof.

The Points, that I have observed, upon the Reading, of this Libell, are these
following.
1. Of the Scope, or Drift, of the Libeller. 2. Of the present Estate, of this
Realm, of England; whether it may be, truly avouched, to be Prosperous, or
Afflicted. 3. Of the Proceedings, against the pretended Catholics, whether
they have been Violent; or Moderate, and necessary. 4. Of the Disturbance, of
the Quiet, of Christendom; And to what Causes, it may be, justly, imputed. 5.
Of the Cunning, of the Libeller, in Palliation, of his Malicious Invective,
against her Majesty, and the State, with pretense, of taxing only, the
Actions, of the Lord Burleigh. 6. Certain true General Notes, upon the
Actions, of the Lord Burleigh. 7. Of diverse particular Vntruhs, and Abuses,
dispersed through the Libell. 8. Of the Height, of Impudency, that these Men,
are grown unto, in Publishing, and Avouching, Untruths; with particular
Recital, of some of them, for an Assay.
1. Of the Scope, or Drift of the Libeller.
It is good Advice, in dealing, with Cautelous, and Malicious, persons; Whose
Speech, is ever at distance, with their Meanings; Non quid dixerint, sed quo
spectarint, videndum: A Man, is not to regard, what they affirm, or what they
hold; But, what they would convey, under their pretended Discovery, and what
turn they would serve. It sounds strangely, in the Ears, of an English Man;
That the Miseries, of the present State, of England, exceed them, of former
times, whatsoever. One would, strait-way, think with himself; Does this Man
believe what he says? Or not believing it, does he think it possible, to make
us believe it? Surely, in my conceit, neither of both; But his End, no doubt,
was, to round the Pope, and the King of Spain, in the Ear, by seeming, to tell
a Tale, to the People of England. For such Books, are ever wont, to be
translated, into diverse Languages: And, no doubt, the Man, was not so simple,
as to think, he could persuade, the People of England, the Contrary, of what
they taste, and feel. But he thought, he might better abuse, the States,
abroad, if he directed his Speech to them, who could best convict him, and
disprove him, if he said untrue: So that, as Livy says, in the like case;
AEtolos, magis, coram quibus verba facerent, quam ad quos, pensi habere: That
the Aaetolians, in their Tale, did more respect those, which did over-hear
them, then those, to whom they directed their Speech: So, in this matter, this
Fellow, cared not, to be counted a Lier, by all English, upon Price, of
Deceiving, of Spain, and Italy: For it must be understood, that it has been,
the general Practice, of this kind of Men, many years, of the one side, to
abuse, the foreign Estates, by making them believe, that all is out of Joint,
and Ruinous, here in England. And that, there is a great part ready, to join
with the Invader: And, on the other side, to make, the Evil Subjects, of
England, believe, of great Preparations abroad, and in great readiness, to be
put in Act; And so to deceive, on both sides: And this, I take to be, his
Principal Drift. So again, it is an extravagant, and incredible, Conceit, to
Imagine, that all the Conclusions, and Actions, of Estate, which have passed,
during her Majesty's Reign, should be ascribed, to one Counselor alone; And to
such an one, as was never noted, for an Imperious, or Overruling, Man: And to
say, that though, He carried them, not by Violence, yet he compassed, them by
Devise; There is no Man of Judgment, that looks into the Nature of these
Times, but will easily descry, that the Wits, of these Days, are too much
refined, for any Man, to walk Invisible: Or to make, all the World, his
Instruments; And therefore, no not in this point, assuredly, the Libeller
spoke, as he thought; But this he foresaw; That the Imputation, of Cunning,
does breed Suspicion; And the Imputation, of Greatness, and Sway, does breed
Envy: And therefore, finding, where he was most wrung, and by whose pollicy^
and Experience, their plots were most crossed, the mark he shot at, was to see,
whether he could heave, at his Lordships Authority, by making him suspected, to
the Queen; or generally odious, to the Realm: Knowing well enough, for the one
point, that there are not only Iealousies, but certain Revolutions, in Princes
Minds: So that, it is a rare Virtue, in the Rarest Princes, to continue
constant to the End, in their Favors, and Employments. And knowing, for the
other point, that Envy, ever accompanies Greatness, though never so well
deserved: And that his Lordship, has always marched, a Round, and a Real
Course, in service: And as, he has not moved Envy, by Pomp, and Ostentation;
so, has he never extinguished it, by any Popular, or Insinu^tive, Carriage of
Himself: And this, no doubt, was his Second Dri^t,

A Third Drift, was, to assay, if he could supplant, and weaken, (by this
violent kind of Libelling, and turning the whole Imputation, upon his
Lordship,) his Resolution, and Courage; And to make him proceed^ more
cautelously, and not so thoroughly, and strongly, against them; Knowing his
Lordship, to be a Politic Man, and one, that has, a great Stake to leese.

Lastly, least while I discover Cunning, and Art, of this Fellow, I should make
him wiser then he was, I think, a great part of this Book, was Passion;
Difficile est tacere, cum doleas. The Humors, of these Men being, of
themselves, eager, and Fierce, have, by the Abort, and Blasting, of their
Hopes; been blinded and enraged. And surely, this Book, is, of all that Sort,
that have been written, of the meanest work-man-ship; Being fraughted, with
sundry base Scoffs, and cold Amplifications, and other Characters, of Despite;
But void, of all Judgment, or Ornament.

2. Of the presents Estate, of this Realm, of England; whether it may be,
truly, avouched, to be prosperous, or Afflicted.
THe Benefits, of Almighty God, upon this Land, since the time, that in his
singular providence, he led, as it were, by the hand, and placed, in the
Kingdom, his Servant, our Queen Elizabeth, are such, as not in Boasting, or in
Confidence of our selves, but in praise of his Holy Name, are worthy, to be,
both considered, and confessed; yea, and registered, in perpetual Memory:
Notwithstanding, I mean not, after the manner of a Panegyrique, to Extol the
present Time. It shall suffice only, that those Men, that through the Gall,
and Bitterness, of their own Heart, have lost their Taste, and Judgment; And
would, deprive God, of his Glory, and us, of our senses, in affirming our
Condition, to be Miserable, and ^ull of Tokens, of the Wrath, and Indignation
of God, be reproved.

If then, it be true, that, Nemo est Miser, aut Felix, nisi comparatus; Whether
we shall, (keeping our selves, within the Compass, of our own Island,) look,
into the Memories, of Times past; Or, at this present time, take a view, of
other States, abroad, in Europe; We shall ^ind, that we need not give place, to
the Happiness, either of Ancestors, or Neighbours^ For, if a Man weigh well,
all the Parts, of State, and Religion, Laws, Aministration of Justice, Policy
of Government, Manners, Civility, Learning and Liberal Sciences, Industry and
Manual Arts, Arms and Provisions of Wars, for Sea, and Land, Treasure,
Traffic, Improvement of the Soil, Population, Honor and Reputation: It will
appear, that taking, one part, with Another, the State, of this Nation, was
never more Flourishing.

It is easy, to call to Remembrance, out of Histories, the Kings, of England,
which have, in more ancient times, enjoyed greatest Happiness; Besides her
Majesty's Father, and Grand father, that reigned in rare Felicity, as is fresh
in Memory. They have been, K. Henry 1. K Hen 2. K. Hen. 3. King Edw the 1. K.
Edw. the 3. K. Henry the 5. All which, have been Princes, of Royal Virtue,
Great Felicity, and Famous Memory. But it may be truly affirmed, without
derogation, to any of these worthy Princes, that whatsoever we find in Libels,
there is not to be found, in the English Chronicles, a King, that has, in all
respects, laid together, reigned with such Felicity, as her Majesty has done.
For as for the First 3. Henry's; The First, came in, too soon, after a
Conquest: The Second, too soon, after an Usurpation; And the Third, too soon,
after a League, or Barons War; To reign, with Security, and Contentation. King
H. 1. also, had unnatural Wars, with his Brother Robert, wherein much Nobility
was consumed: He had therewithal, tedious Wars, in Wales; And was not, without
some other Seditions, and Troubles; As namely, the great Contestation, of his
Prelates. King Henry 2. his Happiness, was much deformed, by the Revolt of his
son Henry, after he had associated him, and of his other Sons. King Hen. 3,
besides his continual Wars, in Wales, was after 44. years reign, unquieted,
with Intricate Commotions, of his Barons; As may appear, by the Mad Parliament,
held at Oxford, and the Acts thereupon ensuing. His Son, King Ed. 1. had a more
flourishing Time, then any of the other; Came to his Kingdom, at ripe years,
and with great Reputation, after his voyage, into the Holy Land; And was much
loved, and obeyed; contrived his Wars, with great Judgment; First, having
reclaimed Wales, to a settled Allegiance; And being, upon the point, of Uniting
Scotland. But yet, I suppose, it was more honor, for her Majesty, to have, so
important a piece of Scotland, in her hand; And the same, with such Justice, to
render up; Then it was, for that worthy King, to have advanced, in such
Forwardness, the Conquest, of that Nation. And for King Edward 3. his Reign
was visited, with much Sickness, and Mortality, So as they reckoned, in his
days, 3. several Mortalities: One in the 22. year: Another in the 35. year:
And the last, in the 43. year, of his Reign: And being otherwise, Victorious,
and in Prosperity, was by that only Cross, more afflicted, then he was, by
the other Prosperities, comforted. Besides, he entered hardly: And again,
according to the Verse; Cedebant ultima primis: His Latter Times, were not so
prosperous. And for King Henry 5. as his Success was wonderful, so he wanted
Continuance; Being extinguished, after 10. years Reign, in the Prime, of his
Fortunes.

Now for her Majesty, we will, first, speak, of the Blessing of Continuance,
Conti^uance
as that, which wanted, in the Happiest, of these Kings: And is not only, a
great favor of God, unto the Prince, but also, a singular Benefit, unto the
People: For that Sentence of the Scripture: Misera Natio, cum multi sunt
principes eius: is interpreted, not only, to extend, to Divisions, and
Distractions, in Government, but also, to Frequent Changes, in Succession:
Considering, that the Change of a Prince, brings in, many Charges, which are
Harsh, and Unpleasant, to a great part of Subjects. It appears then, that of
the Line, of Five hundred, and fourscore years, and more, containing the
Number of 22. Kings, God has already prolonged, her Majesty's Reign, to exceed
sixteen, of the said Two and Twenty: And, by the end, of this present year,
(which God prosper,) she shall attain, to be equal, with two more: During
which time, there have deceased, four Emperors; As many French Kings; Twice so
many Bishops of Rome. Yea, every State, in Christendom, except Spain, have
received sundry Successions: And, for the King of Spain, he is waxed so infirm,
and thereby so Retired, as the Report of his Death, serves for every years
News: whereas her Majesty, (Thanks be given to God,) being nothing decayed, in
vigor of Health, and strength, was never more able, to supply, and sustain, the
weight of her Affairs; And is, as far as stands, with the Dignity, of her
Majesty's Royal State, continually to be Seen, to the great comfort, and
Hearty Ease, of her People.

Secondly, we will mention, the Blessing of Health: I mean, Health.
generally, of the People, which was wanting, in the Reign, of another of these
Kings: which else deserved, to have the second place, in Happiness; which is
one, of the great Favors, of God, toward any Nation. For, as there be three,
Scourges of God, War, Famine, and Pestilence; so are there three Benedictions,
Peace, Plenty, and Health. Whereas therefore, this Realm, has been visited, in
times past, with sundry kinds of Mortalities; (as Pestilences, Sweats, and
other Contagious Diseases;) it is so, that in her Majesty's Times, being of the
continuance, aforesaid, there was only, toward the Beginning of her Reign,
some Sickness, between June, and February, in the City, but not dispersed,
into any other part, of the Realm, as was noted; which we call yet, the Great
Plague; Because, that though it was nothing so Grievous, and so Sweeping, as it
has been, sundry times heretofore; yet it was great, in respect of the Health,
which has followed since; Which has been such, (especially of late years,) as
we began to dispute, and move Questions, of the Causes, whereunto it should be
ascribed; Until such time, as it pleased God to teach us, that we ought, to
ascribe it, only to his Mercy; By touching us, a little, this present year;
but with a very Gentle Hand; And such, as it has pleased him, since, to
remove. But certain it is, for so many years together, notwithstanding, the
great Pestering of people, in Houses; The great Multitude of Strangers, and the
sundry Voiages by Seas; ( All which, have been noted, to be Causes of
Pestilence.) The Health Universal, of the People, was never so good.

The third Blessing is that, which all the Politic, and Fortunate Kings,
before recited, have wanted; That is, Peace: Peace.
For there was never Forreiner, since her Majesty's Reign, by Invasion, or
Incursion of Moment, that took any footing, within the Realm of England. One
Rebellion, there has been only, but such an one, as was repressed, within the
space, of seven weeks; And did not wast, the Realm, so much, as by the
Destruction, or Depopulation, of one poor Town. And for wars abroad, taking in
those of Leeth, those of New Haven, the second Expedition into Scotland, the
wars of Spain, which I reckon, from the year 86, or 87; (before which time,
neither had the King of Spain, withdrawn his Ambassadors, here residing;
neither had her Majesty, received into protection, the united Provinces, of the
Low Countries;) And the Aid of France; They have not occupied, in time, a third
part of her Majesty's R^ign; Nor consumed, past two, of ^y Noble House; whereof
France took one, and Flanders another: And very few, besides, of Quality, or
Appearance. They have scarce, mowed down, the overcharge of the People, within
the Realm. It is therefore true, that the Kings aforesaid, and others her
Mai^sties Progenitors, have been Victorious, in their Wars; And have made,
many Famous, and Memorable, Voyages, and Expedi^tions, into sundry parts; And
that her Majesty, contrariwise, from the bginning, put on, a firm Resolution,
to content her self, within those Limits of her Dominions, which she received;
And to entertain Peace, with her Neighbor princes; which Resolution, she has
ever since, (notwithstanding, she has ha^ Rare Opportunities, Just Claims, and
pretenses, and great, and mighty Means,) sought to continue. But if, this be
objected, to be the less Honorable Fortune; I answer, that ever, amongst the
Heathen, who held not, the Expense of Blood, so precious, as Christians ought
to do; The peaceable Government of Augustus Caesar, was ever, as highly
esteemed, as the Victories, of Iuliu^, his Uncle; and that the Name, of Pater
Patriae, was ever as Honorable, as that of propagator Imperii. And this, I
add further, that during this inward Peace of so many years, in the Actions of
War, before mentioned, which her Majesty, either in her own Defense, or in
Just, and Honorable Aides, has undertaken; The Service has been such, as
has carried, no Note, of a People, whose Militia, were degenerated, through
Long Peace; But has, every way, answered, the ancient Reputation, of the
English Arms.

Plen^y and Wealth.
The fourth Blessing, is Plenty, and Abundance: And first^ for Grain, and all
Victuals, there cannot be, more evident Proof, of Plenty, then this. That,
whereas England, was wont, to be ^ed, by other Countries, from the East, it
suffices now, to feed, other Countries. So as we do, many times, transport,
and serve, sundry Foreign Countries; And yet, there was never, the like
Multitude of People, to eat i^, within the Realm. Another evident Proof
there^f, may be, that the good yields of Corn, which have been, together with
some Tolleration of Vent, has, of late time, invited, and enticed Men, to
break up more Ground, and to convert it to Tillage, then all the Penal Laws,
for that purpose, made, and enacted, could ever, by Compulsion, effect. A third
Proof may be, that the Prices of Grain, and Victual, were never, of late
years, more Reasonable. Now for Arguments of the great wealth, in all other
Respects, let the Points following be considered.

H^uses, as have been built, and set up, from the Ground, since her Majesty's
Reign: Insomuch, that there have been reckoned, in one Shire, that is not
great, to the Number, of 33; Which have been all, new built, within that time:
And whereof the Meanest, was never built, for two Thousand pounds.

There were never, the like Pleasures, of goodly Gardens, and Orchards, Walks,
Pooles, and Parks, as do adorn, almost, every Mansion House.

There was never, the like Number, of Beautiful, and Costly, Tombs, and
Monuments, which are erected, in sundry Churches, in Honorable Memory, of the
Dead.

There was never, the like Quantity of Plate, Jewels, Sumptuous and Stuff, as
is now, within the Realm.

There was never, the like Quantity, of Wast, and unprofitable and Improved.

There was never, the like Husbanding, of all Sorts of Ground^, Fencing,
Manuring, and all kinds, of good Husbandry.

The Towns, were never better built, nor peopled; Nor the Faires, and Markets,
never better customed, nor frequented.

The Commodities, and Ease, of Rivers, cut by hand, and Channel; Of Peers,
that have been built; Of Waters, that have been forced, and brought, against
the Ground, were never so many.

There was never, so many excellent Artificers, nor so many Handy-Crafts, used,
and exercised; Nor new Commodities, made wit^in the Realm; Sugar; Paper;
Glass; Copper; diverse Silks; and the like.

There was never, such Complete, and Honorable Provision, Horse; Armor,
Weapons, Ordnance of the War.

The Fifth Blessing, Increase o^ People.
has been, the great Population, and Multitude, of Families, increased within
her Majesty's days: For which Point, I refer my Self, to the Proclamations, of
Restraint, of Building, in London; The Inhibition, of Inmates, of sundry
Cities; The Restraint, of Cottages, by Act of Parliament; And sundry other
Tokens, of Record, of the Surcharge, of People.

Besides these parts of a Government, blessed from God, Reformation in Religion.
wherein, the Condition of the People, has been more happy, in her Majesty's
Times, then in the Times, of her Progenitors; There are certain Singularities,
and Particulars, of her Majesty's Reign, wherei^, I do not say, that we have
enjoyed them, in a more ample Degree, and Proportion, then in former Ages; (As
it has fallen out, in the Points, before mentioned;) But such, as were, in
Effect, unknown, and untasted, heretofore. As first, the Purity of Religion,
which is a Benefit Inestimable; And was, in the time, of all former Princes,
until the days, of her Majesty's Father, of Famous Memory, unheard of. Out of
which Purity of Religion, have since ensued, beside the principal Effect, of
the true Knowledge, Worship of God, The special (...) es^^^lished among u^ by
^he pu^ity of Religion.
three Points, of great Consequence, unto the Civil Estate.

One, the stay of a mighty Treasure, within the Realm, which, in foretimes, was
drawn sorth, to Rome. Another, the Dispersing^ and Distribution^ of those
Revenues; (Amounting, to a Third part, Land, of the Realm;) And that, of the
goodliest, and the richest sort, which heretofore, was unpro^itably spent, in
Monasteries; Into such Hands, as by whom, the Realm, receives, at this day,
Service, and Strength; And many Great Houses, have Mannaging, and
Enfr^nchising, of the Regal Dignity, from the Recognition, of a Foreign
Superior: All which Points, though begun by her Father, and continued by her
Brother, were yet, nevertheless, after an Eclipse, or Inte^mission, Restored,
and Reestablished, by her Majesty's Self.

Finenesse o^ Money.
Secondly, the Fineness of Money: For as the Purging away, of the Dross of
Religion, the Heavenly Treasure, was common to her Majesty, with her Father,
and her Brother: So the Purging, of the Ba^e Mon^y, the ^arthly Treasure, has
been, altogether, proper, to her Majesty's own Times; Whereby our Moneys,
bearing the Natural Estimation, of the Stamp, or Mark, both every Man rests
assured of his own vallew, and free from the losses, and Deceits, which fall
out in other places, upon the Rising, and Falling, of Moneys.

The Might o^ the Nav^.
Thirdly, the Might of the Navy, and Augmentation, of the Shipping, of the
Realm: which, by politic Constitutions, for Maintenance of ^ishing; And the
Encouragement, and Assistance, given, to the undertakers, of New Discoveries,
and Trades by Sea, is so advanced, as this Island is become, (as the Natural
Site thereof deserves,) the Lady of the Sea.

Now to pass, from the Comparison, of Time, to the Comparison, of place; We
may find, in the States abroad; Cause of Pity, and Compassion in some; But of
Envy, or Emulation, in none; Our Condition being, by the good Favor of God,
not Inferior to an^.

Compa^ison of the state of England with the state^ abroad.
The Kingdom of France, which, by reason, of the Seat of the Empire, of the
West, was wont, to have the precedence, of the Kingdoms of Europe, is now
fallen, into those Calamities, that as the Prophet says; From the Crown of the
Head, to the Soal of the Foot, there is no whole place. Afflicted in France.
The Divisions, are so many, and so intricate, of Protestants, and Catholics;
Royalists, and Leaguers; Burbonists, and Lorainists; Patriots, and Spanish; As
it seems, God has some great Work, to bring to pass, upon that Nation: yea,
the Nobility divided, from the Third Estate; And the Towns, from the Field: All
which Miseries, truly to speak, have been wrought by Spain, and the Spanish
Faction.

Low Countries.
The Low Countries, which were, within the Age of a young Man, the Richest, the
best Peopled, and the best Built, Plots of Europe, are in such Estate, as a
Country is like to be in, that has been the Seat, of thirty years War; And
although, the Sea-Provinces, be rather increased, in Wealth, and Shipping, then
otherwise; yet, they cannot but mourn, for their Distraction, from the rest of
their Body.

The Kingdom of Portugal, Portugal.
which, of late times, through their Merchandising, and places in the East
Indies, was grown, to be an Opulent Kingdom, is, now at the last, after the
unfortunate journey of Afric, in that State, as a Country is like to be,
that is reduced, under a Forreiner, by Conquest; And such a Forreiner, as has
his Competitour in Title, being a Natural Portugal, and no Stranger; And
having been once in possession, yet in Life: whereby his Jealousy, must
necessarily be increased, and through his Jealousy, their Oppression: which is
apparent, by the Carrying, of many Noble Families, out of their Natural
Countries, to live in Exile: And by putting to Death, a great Number of
Noblemen, naturally born, to have been principal Governers, of their
Countries. These are three Afflicted, parts of Christendom; The Rest of the
States, enjoy, either Prosperity, or tolerable Condition.

The Kingdom of Scotland, Prosperou^ as Scotland.
though at this present, by the good Regiment, and wise proceeding, of the
King, they enjoy good quiet; yet, ^ince our Peace, it has passed, through no
small Troubles; And remains, full of Boiling, and Swelling, Humors; But
like, by the Maturity, of the said King, every day increasing, to be repressed.

The Kingdom of Poland, Poland.
is newly recovered, out of great Wars, about an Ambiguous Election. And
besides, is a State, of that Composition, that their King being Elective, they
do, commonly, choose, rather a Stranger, then one of their own Country. A great
Exception, to the Flourishing Estate, of any Kingdom.

The Kingdom of Swedeland, Sweden.
besides their Foreign Wars, upon their Cousins, the Muscovites, and the
Danes; Has been, also, subject, to diverse Intestine Tumults, and Mutations, as
their Stories do record.

The Kingdom of Denmark, Denmark.
has had good Times, specially, by the good Government, of the late King, who
maintained, the profession, of the Gospel; But yet, greatly, gives place, to
the Kingdom of England, in Climate, Wealth, Fertility, and many other Points,
both of Honor, and Strength.

The Estates of Italy, Italy.
which are not, under the Dominion of Spain, have had peace, equal in
continuance with ours; Except, in regard of that, which has passed between
them, and the Turk; Which has sorted, to their Honor, and Commendation: But
yet, they are so brideled, and overawed, by the Spaniard, that possesses the
two principal Members thereof; And that, in the two extreme parts, as they be
like Quillets of Freehold, being intermixed, in the midst, of a great Honor or
Lordship. So as their Quiet, is intermingled, not with Jealousy alone, but
with Restraint.

The States of Germany, Germany,
have had, for the most part, peaceable Times; But yet they yield, to the State
of England; Not only, in the great Honor, of a great Kingdom, (they being, of
a mean Style, and Dignity,) but also in many other Respects, both of Wealth,
and Policy.

The State of Savoy, Savoy.
having been, in the old Dukes Time, governed, in good Prosperity, has since,
notwithstanding, their new great Alliance, with Spain, whereupon they waxed
insolent, to design, to snatch up, some piece of France; After the
dishonorable Repulse, from the Seige of Geneva; deen often distres^ed, by a
particular Gentleman of Daulph^ny; And at this present day, the Duke feels,
even in Piedmont, beyond the Mountains, of the weight, of the same Enemy: Who
has lately shut up his Gates, and common Entries, between Savoy, and Piedmont.

So as hitherto, I do not see, but that we are, as much bound, to the Mercies
of God, as any other Nation; Considering, that the Fires of Dissension, and
Oppression, in some Parts of Christendom, may serve us, for Lights; to show us
our Happiness: And the good ^states, of other places, which we do congratulate
with them for, is such, nevertheless, as does not stain, and exceed ours: But
rather, does still leave somewhat, wherein we may acknowledge, an ordinary
Benediction, of God.

Lastly, we do not much emulate, the Grea^nesse, and Glory, of the Spaniards;
Sp^i^
Who, having not only Excluded, the Purity of Religion, but also Fortified
against it, by their Devise, of the Inquisition; which is a Bulwark, against
the Entrance, of the Truth of God: Having, in recompense, of their new Purchase
of Por^ugal, lost, a great part, of their ancient Patrimonies, of the
Low Countries; (Being of far greater Commodity, and Value;) or, at the least,
holding part thereof, in such sort, as most of their other Revenewes, are spent
there, upon their own: Having lately, with much Difficulty, rather smoothed,
and skinned over, then Healed, and extinguished, the Commotions of Arragon;
Having rather sowed Troubles in France, then reaped Assured Fruit thereof, unto
themselves: Having, from the Attempt, of England, received Scorn, and
Disreputation; Being, at this time, with the States of Italy, rather suspected,
then either Loved, or Feared: Having, in Germany, and else where, rather much
practice, then any Sound intelligence, or Amity: Having no such clear
succession, as they need object, and Reproach, the Incertainty thereof, unto
another Nation: Have, in the end, won a Reputation, rather of Ambition, then
Justice; And in the pursuit, of their Ambition, rather of Much Enterprising,
then of Fortunate Atchieving; And, in their Ent^rprising, rather, of Doing
Things, by Treasure, and Expense, then by Forces, and Valor.

Now, that I have given the Reader, a Taste of England, respectively, and in
Comparison, of the Times past, and of the States abroad; I will descend, to
examine, the Libellers, own Divisions; Whereupon, let the World judge, how
easily, and clean, this Ink, which he has cast in our faces, is washed off.

The First Branch, of the pretended Calamities, of England, is the great, and
wonderful, Confusion, which, he says, is in the State, of the Church; which
is subdivided, again, into two parts: The one, the Prosecutions, againg the
Catholics; The other, the Discords, and Controversies, amongst our selves: The
former, of which 2. parts, I have made, an Article by it self; Wherein, I have
set down, a clear, and simple, Narration, of the proceedings, of State, against
that sort of Subjects; Adding this by the way: That there are 2. Extremities,
in State, concerning the Causes, of ^aith, and Religion: That is to say, the
Permission, of the Exercises, of more R^ligions, then one, which is a dangerous
Indulgence, and Toleration; the other, is the Entering, and Sifting, into Men's
Consciences, when no Overt Scandal is given; which is Rigorous, and
Straineable, Inquisition: And I avouch, the proceedings, toward the intended
Catholics, to have been a Mean, between these two Extremities; Referring, the
Demonstration thereof, unto the aforesaid Narra^ion, in the Articles following.

Touching the Divisions, in our Church, C^^c^rning the Con^ro^ in our Church.
the Libeller affirms, that the Protestanticall Caluinism, (For so it
pleases him, with very good grace, to term the Religion, with us established;)
is grown, Contemp^ible, and Detected, of Idolatry, Heresy, and many other
superstitious Abuses, by a Purified sort of Professors, of the same Gospel.
And this Con^ention is yet grown, to be more intricate, by reason of a Third
Kind, of Gospellers, called Brownists. Who, being directed, by the great
Fervor, of the Unholy Ghost, do expressly affirm, that the Protestanticall
Church of England, is not gathered, in the name of Christ, but of Antichrist:
And that, if the Prince, or Magistrate, under her, do refuse, or defer, to
reform the Church, the people may, without her Consent, take the Reformation,
into their own Hands: And hereto, he adds, the Fanaticall Pageant of Hacket:
And this is the Effect, of this Accusation, in this point.

For Answer whereunto; First, it must be remembered, that the Church of God,
has been, in all Ages, subject to Contentions, and Schisms. The Tares were
not sown, but where the Wheat was sown before. Our Savior Christ, delivers
it, for an Ill Note, to have Outward Peace, Saying; When a strong Man, is in
possession, of the House, ( meaning the Devil,) all Things are in Peace. It is
the Condition, of the Church, to be, ever, under Trials: And there are, but Two
Trials: The one, of Persecution; The other, of Scandal, and Contention: And
when the One cease, the other succeeds: Nay, there is scarce, any one
Epistle, of St. Paul's, unto the Churches, but containeth^ some Reprehension, of
unnecessary, and Schismatic, Controversies. So likewise, in the Reign, of
Constantine the Great, after the time, that the Church, had obtained Peace^
from persecution, strait entered, sundry Questions, and Controversies, about no
less Matters, then the Essential Parts, of the Faith, and the High Mysteries
of the Trinity. But Reason teaches us, that in Ignorance, and Employed Belief,
it is easy, to agree, as Colors agree in the Dark: Or if any Country decline
into Atheism, then Controversies, wax dainty, because Men do think Religion,
scarce worth, the Falling out for: So as, it is weak Divinity, to account
Controversies, an ill Sign, in the Church.

It is true, that certain Men, moved with an inconsiderate Detestation, of all
Ceremonies, or Orders, which were in use, in the time, of the Roman Religion;
(As if, they were, without difference, superstitious, or polluted;) And led,
with an affectionate Imitation, of the Government, of some Protestant Churches,
in Foreign States; Have sought, by Books, and Preaching, indiscreetly, and
sometimes undutifully, to bring in, an Alteration, in the Extern Rites, and
Policy, of the Church; But neither, have the Grounds, of the Controversies,
extended unto any Point of Faith; Neither has the Pressing, and Prosecution,
exceeded, in the generality, the Nature of some Inferior Contempts; So as,
they have been, far from Heresy, and Sedition; And therefore, rather
Offensive, then Dangerous, to the Church, or State.

And as for Those, which we call Brownists, being, when they were at the most,
a very small Number, of very silly, and base, people, here and there, in
Corners, dispersed; They are now, (thanks be to God,) by the good Remedies,
that have been used, suppressed, and worn out; So as, there is scarce, any
News of them. Neither, had they been, much known, at all, had not Brown, their
Leader, Written a Pamphlet; Wherein, as it came into his Head, he inveighed
more, against Logic, and Rhetoric, then against the State, of the Church;
(which Writing was much read;) And had not, also, one Barrow, (being a
Gentleman, of a good House, but one that lived in London, at Ordinaries; And
there learned, to argue, in Table-Talk; And so, was very much known, in the
City, and abroad;) made a Leap, from a vain, and Libertine, youth, to a
preciseness, in the Highest Degree; The strangeness, of which Alteration, made
him very much spoken off; The Matter, might long before, have breathed out. And
here I note, an Honesty, and Discretion, in the Libeller, which I note, no
where else; In that, he did forbear, to lay, to our charge, the Sect, of the
Family of Love: For about 12. years since, there was creeping, in some secret
places, of the Realm, indeed, a very great Heresy, derived from the Dutch, and
named, as before was said: which since, by the good Blessing of God, and by the
good strength, of our Church, is banished, and Extinct. But so much we see,
that the Diseases, wherewith our Church has been visited, whatsoever these Men
say, have, either, not been, Malign, and Dangerous; Or else, they have been as
Blisters, in some small Ignoble part of the Body, which have soon after fallen,
and gone away. For such also, was the Phreneticall, and Fanaticall, (For I mean
not to determine it,) Attempt of Hackett; Who must needs have been thought, a
very Dangerous Heretic, that could never get, but two Disciples; And those, as
it should seem, perished in their Brain; And a Dangerous Commotioner, that in
so great, and populous, a City, as London is, could draw, but those same two
Fellow^, whom the People, rather laughed at, as a May game, then took a^y heed,
of what they did, or said: So as it was very true, that an honest Poor Woman
said, when she saw Hackett, out of a Window, pass to his Execution: Said she
to her Self; It was foretold, that, in the latter days, there should come
those, that have deceived many; but, in faith, thou have deceived, but a Few.

But it is manifest Untruth, which ^he Libeller, sets down, that there has
been no Punishment, done upon those, which, in any, of the foresaid kinds, have
broken the Laws, and disturbed, the Church, and State; And that the Edge of
the Law, has been, only, turned, upon the pretended Catholics: For the
Examples are very many, where, according to the Nature, and Degree, of the
Offense, the Correction of such Offenders, has not been neglected.

These be the great Confusions, whereof he has accused our Church; which I
refer, to the Judgment, of an indifferent, and understanding, person, how true
they be: My Meaning is not, to blanch, or excuse, any Fault of our Church; Nor,
on the other side, to enter into Commemoration, how flourishing it is, in
Great, and Learned Divines; or painful, and excellent Preachers: Let Man, have
the Reproof, of that, which is amiss, and God, the Glory, of that, which is
good. And so much, for the First Branch.

In the Second Branch, He makes great Musters, and Shows, of the strength,
and Multitude, of the Enemies, of this State; Concerning the Foreign Enemies of
this State.
Declaring, in what evil Terms, and Correspondence, we stand, with Foreign
States; And how desolate, and destitute, we are, of Friends, and Confederates^
Doubting^ belike, how he should be able, to prove, and justify his Assertion,
touching the present Miseries: And therefore, endeavoring, at the least, to
maintain; That the good Estate, which we enjoy, is yet, made somewhat bitter,
by reason, of many Terrors, and Fears. Whereupon, entering into Consideration,
of the Security, wherein, not by our own Policy, but by the good Providence,
and Protection, of God, we stand at this Time; I do find it, to be a Security,
of that Nature, and Kind, which Iphicrates, the Athenian, did commend; who
being, a Commissioner, to treat, with the State of Sparta, upon Conditions of
Peace; And hearing, the other side, make many Propositions, touching Security;
Interrupted them, and told them; There was but one manner of Security, whereupou
the Athenians could rest; which was, if the Deputies of the Lacedaemonians,
could make it plain unto them, that after these and these things parted
withal, the Lacedaemonians should not be able, to hurt them, though they would.
So it is with us; As we have not, justly provoked, the Hatred, or Enmity, of
any other State; so, howsoever that be, I know not, at this time, the Enemy,
that has the Power, to offend us, though he had the Will.

And whether, we have given, just Cause of Quarrel, or Offense, it shall be
afterward touched, in the feurth Article; Touching the true Causes, of the
Disturbance of the Quiet, of Christen^ome; As far, as it is fit, to justify
the Actions, of so High a Prince, upon the Occasion, of such a Libell, as this.
But now, concerning the Power, and Forces, of any Enemy, I do find, that
England, has sometimes apprehended with Jealousy, the Confederation, between
France and Scotland: The one, being upon the same Continent that we are, and
breeding, a Soldier, of Puissance, and Courage, not much differing from the
English; The other, a Kingdom very Opulent, and thereby able, to sustain Wars,
though at very great Charge; And having a brave Nobility; And being a Near
Neighbor. And yet, of this Conjunc^ion, there never came, any Offense, of
Moment. But Scotland, was ever, rather used by France, as a Diversion, of an
English Invasion, upon France, then as a Commodity, of a French Invasion, upon
England. I confess also, that since the Unions, of the Kingdom of Spain: and
during the time, the Kingdom of France, was in his Entire; A Conjunction, of
those two potent Kingdoms, against us, might have been, of some Terror to us.
But now it is evident, that the State of France is such, as both those
Conjunctions, are become Impossible: It rests, that either Spain, with
Scotland, should offend us, or Spain alone; For Scotland, (thanks be to God,)
the Amity, and Intelligence, is so sound, and secret, between the the two
Crowns; Being strengthened, by Consent in Religion, Nearness of Blood, and
Continual good Offices, reciprocally, on either side; as the Spaniard himself,
in his own Plot, ^hinketh it easier, to alter, and overthrow, the present State
of Scotland, then to remove, and divide it, from the Amity of England. So, as
it must be, Spain alone, that we should fear: which should seem, by reason, of
his Spacious Dominions, to be, a great Overmatch. The Conceit whereof, makes
me call to mind, the Resemblance, of an Ancient writer, in Physic; who
laboring, to persuade, that a Physician, should not doubt, sometimes, to purge
his Patient, though he see him very weak; Enters into a Distinction, of
Weakness, and says; there is a Weakness of Spirit; and a Weakness of Body: The
latter whereof, he compares, unto a man, that were otherwise very strong, but
had a great pack on his Neck: So great^ as made him double again; So as one,
might thrust him down, with his Finger: Which Similitude, and Distinction,
both, may be fitly applied, to matter of State: For some States, are Weak,
through want of Means; and some VVeak, through Excess of Burden: In which
rank, I do place, the State of Spain, which having, outcompassed it self in
embracing too much; And being, it self, but a barren Seed-plot of Soldiers;
And much Decayed, and Exhausted, of Men, by the Indies, and by continual wars:
and, so to the State of their Treasure, being endebted, and engaged, before
such times, as they waged, so great Forces in France; (And therefore, much more
since;) Is not, in brief, an Enemy to be feared, by a Nation, Seated, Manned,
Furnished, and Pollyced, as is England.

Neither, is this spoken by guess; For the Experience, was Substantial
enough, and of Fresh Memo^y, in the late Enterprise of Spain, upon England:
What Time, all that Goodly Shipping, which, in that Voyage, was consumed, was
Complete; what Time, his Forces, in the Low Countries, was also full, and
Entire, which now, are wasted, to a fourth part: What time also, he was not
entangled, with the Matters of France; But was, rather like to receive
Assistance, then Impediment, from his Friends there; In respect, of the great
Vigor, wherein the League, then was, (while the Duke of Guise then lived: and
yet, nevertheless, this great preparation, passed away like a Dream. The
Invincible Navy, neither took, any one Barque of ours; Neither yet, once
offered, to land; But after, they had been well Beaten, and Chased, made a
Perambulation, about the Northern Seas; Ennobling, many Coasts, with VVracks,
of Mighty ships; and so, returned home, with greater Derision, then they set
forth, with Expectation.

So as, we shall not need, much Confederacies, and Succors; (which, he says,
we want, for the breaking, of the Spanish Invasion;) No, though the Spaniard,
should nestle in Britain, and supplant the French, and get some Port-Townes
into their hands there, (which is yet far off;) yet, shall he, never, be, so
commodiously seated, to annoy us, as if he had kept, the Low Countries; And we
shall rather fear Him, as a wrangling Neighbor, that may Trespass, now and
then, upon some Straggling ships of ours, then as an Invader. And as for our
Confederacies, God has given us, both Means, and Minds, to tender, and
relieve, the States, of others. And therefore, our Confederacies, are rather of
Honor, then such as we depend upon. And yet, nevertheless the Apostata's, and
Huguonets, of France, on the one part; (For so he terms, the whole Nobility,
in a manner, of France; Among the which, a great part, is of his own Religion;
which maintain the clear, and unblemished Title, of their Lawful, and Natural
King, against the seditious popular;) And the Beere-Brewers, and Basket-Makers,
of Holland, and Zealand, (As he also terms them) on the other, have, almost,
banded away, between them, all the Duke of Parma's Forces: And, I suppose, the
very Mines, of the Indies, will go low, or ever the one be Ruined, or the other
recovered. Neither, again, desire we, better Confederacies, and Leagues, then
Spain it self, has provided for us: Non enim verbis faedera confirmantur, sed
jisdem vtilitatibus: We know, to how many States, the King of Spain, is odious,
and suspected; And for our selves, we have incensed none, by our Injuries; Nor
made, any Jealous, of our Ambition: These are, in Rules of Policy, the Firmest
Contracts.

Let thus much be said, in Answer, of the Second Branch, concerning the Number,
of Exterior Enemies: Wherein, my Meaning, is nothing less, then to attribute,
our Felicity, to our Policy; Or to nourish our selves, in the Humor of
Security. But, I hope, we shall depend upon God, and be vigilent; And then, it
will be seen, to what end, these False Alarums will come.

In the Third Branch, of the Miseries of England, he takes upon him, to play
the Prophet, as he has, in all the rest, played the Poet: And will needs
Divine, or Prognosticate, the great Troubles, whreunto this Realm shall fall,
after her Majesty's Times: As if he, that has so singular a Gift, in Lying, of
the present Time, and Times past, had, nevertheless, an extra-ordinary Grace,
in telling Truth, of the Time to come: Or as if, the Effect, of the Popes
Curses, of England, were, upon better Ad-vise, adjourned, to those days. It is
true, it will be Misery enough, for this Realm, (whenever it shall be,) to
leese, such a Sovereign: But for the rest, we must repose our selves, upon the
good pleasure, of God: So it is, an unjust Charge, in the Libeller, to impute,
an Accident of State, to the Fault, of the Government.

It pleaeth God, sometimes, to the end, to make Men depend, upon him, the more,
to hide, from them, the clear sight, of future Events; And to make them, think,
that full of Uncertainties, which proves, Certain, and Clear: And, sometimes,
on the other side, to cross Men's expectations, and to make them, full of
Difficulty, and Perplexity, in that, which they thought, to be Easy, and
Assured. Neither is it, any New Thing, for the Titles, of Succession, in
Monarchies, to be, at Times, less, or more declared. King Sebastian, of
Portugal, before his Journey into Afric, declared no Successor. The
Cardinal, though he were of extreme Age, and were much importuned, by the King
of Spain, and knew, directly, of 6. or 7. Competitours, to that Crown; yet he
rather established, I know not, what Interims, then decided the Titles, or
designed any certain Successor. The Dukedom of Ferrara, is, at this Day, after
the Death, of the Prince, that now lives, uncertain, in the point of
Succession: The Kingdom of Scotland, has declared no Successor. Nay, it is
very rare, in Hereditary Monarchies, by any Act of State, or any Recognition,
or Oath of the People, in the Collateral Line, to establish a Successor. The
Duke of Orleans, succeeded, Charles the 8th. of France, but was never declared,
Successor, in his time. Monsieur d' Angoulesme, also succeeded him, but without
any Designation. Sons of Kings, themselves, oftentimes, through desire to
reign, and to prevent their Time, wax dangerous to their Parents: How much
more, Cousens, in a more Remote Degree? It is lawful, no doubt, and
Honorable, if the Case require, for Princes, to make an establishment. But, as
it was said, it is rarely practiced, in the Collateral Line. Trajan, the best
Emperor of Rome, of an Heathen, that ever was; At what time, the Emperors, did
use, to design Sucessours; Not so much, to avoid, the Uncertainty of
Succession, as to the end, to have Participes Curarum, for the present Time,
because their Empire, was so vast; At what Time also, Adoptions were in use,
and himself had been Adopted, yet never designed a Successor, but by his Last
Will, and Testament; Which also, was thought, to be suborned by his Wife
Plotina, in the Favor, of her Lover, Adrian.

You may be sure; That nothing has been done, to prejudice the Right; And
there can be, but one Right. But one thing, I am persuaded of, that no King of
Spain; nor Bishop of Rome, shall umpire, nor promote, any Beneficiary, or
Feodatory, King, as as they designed to do; Even when the Scottish Queen lived,
whom they pretended to cherish. I will not retort, the matter of Succession
upon Spain, but use that Modesty, and Reverence, that belongs, to the
Majesty, of so great a King, though an Enemy. And so much, for this Third
Branch.

The Fourth Branch, he makes to be, touching the Overthrow, of the Nobility;
And the Oppression, of the People: wherein, though he may, percase, abuse, the
Simplicity, of any Forreiner; yet to an English Man, or any, that hears, of
the present Condition, of England, he will appear, to be a Man, of singular
Audacity, and worthy to be employed, in the defense of any Paradox. And surely,
if he would needs, have defaced, the general State of England, at this time,
he should, in wisdom, rather have made, some Friarly Declamation, against the
Excess of Superfluity, and Delicacy of our Times; then to have insisted, upon
the Misery, and Poverty, and Depopulation, of the Land; as may sufficiently
appear, by that which has been said.

But nevertheless, to follow this Man, in his own steps: First, concerning the
Nobility: Concerning the State of the Nobility.
It is true, that there have been, in Ages past, Noblemen, (as I take it,) both
of greater Possessions, and of greater Command, and Sway, then any are, at this
day. One Reason, why the possessions are less, I conceive to be, because
certain Sumptuous Veins, and Humors of Expense; (As Apparel, Gaming,
Maintaining of a kind of Followers, and the like;) Do reign, more, then they
did, in times past. Another Reason is, because Noblemen, now a days, do deal
better, with their younger Sons, then they were accustomed to do, heretofore;
whereby, the principal House, receives many Abatements. Touching the Command,
which is not, indeed, so great, as it has been, I take it, rather, to be a
Commendation of the Time, then otherwise: For Men, were wont, factiously, to
Depend upon Noblemen; whereof ensued, many Partialities, and Divisions, besides
much Interruption of Justice, while the great Ones, did seek to bear out Those,
that did depend upon them. So as the Kings of this Realm, finding, long since,
that kind of Commandment, in Noblemen, Unsafe unto their Crown, and
Inconvenient unto their People, thought meet, to restrain the same, by
Provision of Laws: whereupon grew the Statute of Reteiners: So as men, now,
depend upon the Prince, and the Laws, and upon no other: A Matter, which has
also a Congruity, with the Nature; of the Time; As may be seen in other
Countries; Namely in Spain, where their Grandees, are nothing so Potent, and so
absolute, as they have been, in Times past. But otherwise, it may be truly
affirmed, that the Rights, and preheminences, of the Nobility, were, never,
more duly, and exactly, preserved unto them, then they have been, in her
Majesty's Times; The Precedence of Knights, given to the younger Sons of
Barons; No Subpena's, awarded against the Nobility, out of the Chancery, but
Letters; No Answer upon Oath, but upon Honor; Besides, a Number of other
Privileges, in Parliament, Court, and Country. So likewise, for the
Countenance of her Majesty, and the State, in Lieutenancies, Commissions,
Offices, and the like, there was never, a more Honorable, and Graceful,
Regard, had of the Nobility; Neither was there, ever, a more Faithful
Remembrancer, and exacter, of all these particular preheminences, unto them;
Nor a more Diligent Searcher, and Register, of their Pedegrees, Alliances, and
all Memorialls, of Honor, then that MAN, whom he charge, to have overthrown
the Nobility; Because, a few of them, by immoderate Expense, are decayed,
according to the Humor of the time, which he has not been able, to resist, no
not, in his own House. And as for Attainders, there have been, in 35 years, but
Five, of any of the Nobility, whereof, but Two, came to Execution, and one of
them, was accompanied, with Restitution of Blood, in the Children: Yea, all of
them, except Westmerland, were such, as whether it were, by Favor of Law, or
Government, their Heirs have, or are like to have, a great Part of their
Possession. And so much, for the Nobility.

Concerning the State o^ the Common subject.
Touching the Oppression, of the People, he mentions four points. 1. The
Con^umption, of People, in the Wars. 2. The Interruption, of Traffic. 3. The
Corruption, of Justice. 4. The Multitude, of Taxations: Unto all which points,
there needs no long Speech. For the first, (thanks be to God;) the
Benediction of Crescite and Multiplicamini, is not so weak, upon this Realm of
^ngland, but The Population thereof, may afford, such Loss of Men, as were
sufficient, for the Making our late Wars; and were, in a perpetuity, without
being seen, either in City, or Country. We ^ead, that when the Romans, did
take Cense, of their People, whereby the Citizens, were numbered, by the Poll,
in the beginning of a great War, and afterward, again, at the ending, there,
sometimes, wanted a Third Part, of the Number: But let our Muster Books be
perused, (those, I say, that certify, the Number, of all Fighting Men, in
every Shire,) of vicesimo of the Queen; At what time, except a Handful of
Soldiers, in the Low Countries, we expended no Men in the Wars; And now
again, at this present time, and there will appear, small Diminution. There be
many Tokens, in this Realm, rather of Press, and Surcharge, of People, then of
Want, and Depopulation, which were before recited. Besides, it is a better
Condition, of Inward Peace, to be accompanied, with some Exercise, of no
Dangerous War, in Foreign parts, then to be, utterly, without Apprentisage, of
War; whereby, People grow Effeminate, and unpractised, when Occasion shall be.
And it is, no small strength, unto the Realm, that in these Wars of Exercise,
and not of Peril, so many of our People, are trained; And so many, of our
Nobility, and Gentlemen, have been made, Excellent Leaders, both by Sea, and
Land. As for that he objecteth, we have no Provision, for Soldiers, at their
Return; Though that Point, has not been, altogether neglected; yet I wish,
with all my Heart, that it were more Ample, then it is; Though, I have read,
and heard, that in all Estates, upon Casheering, and Disbanding, of Soldiers,
many have endured Necessity.

For the Stopping of Traffic, as I referred my Self, to the Muster-Books, for
the First; So I refer my Self, to the Custome-Books, upon this; which will not
lie; And do make Demonstration, of no Abatement, at all, in these last years,
but rather of Rising, and Increase. We know, of many in London, and other
places, that are, within a small time, greatly come up, and made Rich, by
Merchandising: And a Man, may speak, within his Compass, and affirm; That our
Prizes, by Sea, have countervailed, any Prizes, upon us.

And as to the Justice, of this Realm, it is true, that Cunning, and Weal^h,
have bred, many Suits, and Debates, in Law: But let those Points be considered:
The Integrity, and Sufficiency, of those, which supply, the Judicial places,
in the Queens Courts; The good Lawe^, that have been made, in her Majesty's
time, against Informers, and Promoters; And for the bettering of Trialls; The
Example, of Severity, which is used, in the Star Chamber, in oppressing Forces,
and Fra^des; The Diligence, and Stoutness, that is used, by Justices of
Assizes, in Encountering, all Countenancing, and Bearing of Causes, in the
Country, by their Authorities, and Wisdom; The great Favors, that have been
used, toward Coppy-holders, and Customary Tenants, which were, in ancient
times, merely, at the Discretion, and Mercy, of the Lord; And are now,
continually, relieved, from hard Dealing, in Chancery, and other Courts of
Equity: I say, let these, and many other Points, be considered; and Men will,
worthily, conceive, an Honorable Opinion, of the Justice, of England.

Now to the Points, of Levies, and Distributions, of Money, which he calls
Exactions. First, very coldly, he is not abashed, to bring in, the Gathering,
for Paul's Steeple, and the Lottery Trifles: Whereof, the former, being but a
Voluntary Collection, of that, Men were freely disposed, to give, never grew,
to so great a Sum, as was sufficient, to finish the Work, for which it was
appointed: And so, I imagine, it was converted, into some other use; like to
that Gathering, which was, for the Fortifications of Paris, save that, the
Gathering, for Paris, came, to a much greater, though, (as I have heard,) no
competent Sum. And for the Lottery, it was but a Novelty, devised, and
followed, by some particular persons, and only allowed by the State, being as
a Gain of Hazard: Wherein, if any Gain was, it was, because many Men, thought
Scorn, after they had fallen, from their greater hopes, to fetch their odd
Money. Then he mentions Loanes, and Privy Seals; Wherein, he shows great
Ignorance, and Indiscretion, considering the Payments, back again, have been,
very Good, and Certain; And much, for her Majesty's Honor. Indeed, in other
Princes Times, it was not wont, to be so: And therefore, though the Name, be
not so pleasant, yet the Use of them, in our Times, have been, with small
Grievance. He reckons also, new Customs upon Clothes, and new Impost upon
Wines. In that of Clothes, he is deceived; For the ancient Rate of Custom,
upon Clothes was not raised, by her Majesty, but by Queen Mary, a Catholic
Queen: And has been, commonly, continued by her Majesty; Except, he mean, the
Computation, of the odd yards, which, in strict Duty, was ever answerable;
Though the Error, were but lately, looked into, or rather, the Tolleration,
taken away. And to that of Wines, being a Foreign Merchandise, and but a
Delicacy, and of those which might be forborne, there has been, some Increase
of Imposition, which can rather make, the Price of Wine Higher, ^hen the
Merchant poorer. Lastly, touching the Number of Subsidies, it is true, that her
Majesty, in respect, of her great Charges, of her Wars, both by Sea, and Land,
against such a Lord of Treasure, as is the King of Spain: Having, for her part,
no Indies, nor Mines; And the Revenues, of the Crown, of England, being such,
as they less grate, upon the People, then the Revenues, of any Crown, or State
in Europe; Has, by the Assent, of Parliament, according to the ancient
Customs, of this Realm, received, diverse Subsidies, of her People; which, as
they have been employed, upon the Defense, and preservation, of the Subject;
Not upon Excessive Buildings, nor upon Immoderate Donatives, Nor upon Triumphs
and Pleasures; Or any the like veins, of Dissipation, of Treasure; which have
been Familiar, to many Kings: So have they been yielded, with great good will,
and cheerfulness; As may appear, by other kinds of Benevolence, presented to
her, likewise, in Parliament; which her Majesty, nevertheless, has not put in
Ure. They have been Taxed also, and Asseissed, with a very Light, and Gentle
Hand; And they have been spared, as much, as may be; As may appear, in that,
her Majesty, now twice, to spare the Subject, has sold, of her own Lands. But
he, that shall look, into other Countries, and con^ider the Taxes, and
Tallages, and Impositions, and Assizes, and the like, that are every where in
use; Will find, that the English Man, is the most Master, of his own Valuation,
and the least bitten in his Purse, of any Nation, of Europe. Nay, even at this
Instant, in the Kingdom of Spain, notwithstanding the Pioners, do still work,
in the Indian Mines, the Jesuits, most, play the Pioners, and Mine, into the
Spaniards Purses; And under the Color, of a Ghostly Exhortation, contrive the
greatest Exaction, that ever was, in any Realm.

Thus much, in Answer, of these Calumniations, I have thought good to note,
touching the present state, of England: which state is such, that whosoever,
has been, an Architect, in the Frame thereof, under the Blessing of God, and
the Virtues of our Sovereign, needed not, to be ashamed, of his Work.

3. Of the Proceedings, against the pretended Catholics; Whether they have
been Violent, or Moderate, and Necessary.
I Find, her Majesty's Proceedings, generally, to have been grounded, upon two
Principles: The one; That Consciences, are not to be Forced, but to be Wonn,
and reduced, by the Force of Truth, by the Aid of Time, and the Use, of all
good Means, of Instruction, or Persuasion.

The other; That Causes of Conscience, when they exceed their Bounds, and prove
to be Matter of Faction, leese their Nature; And that Sovereign Princes, ought,
distinctly, to punish the Practice, or Contempt, though colored, with the
Pretenses, of Conscience, and Religion.

According to these two Principles, her Majesty, at her Coming, to the Crown,
utterly disliking, of the Tyranny, of the Church of Rome, which had used, by
Terror, and Rigor, to seek Commandment, over Men's Faiths, and Consciences,
Although, as a Prince, of great Wisdom, and Magnanimity, she suffered, but the
Exercise of one Religion, yet her Proceedings, toward the Papists, was with
great Lenity; Expecting the good Effects, which Time might work in them.

And therefore, her Majesty, revived not the Laws, made in 28o, and 35o, of
her Fathers Reign; Whereby, the Oath of Supremacy, might have been, offered,
at the Kings Pleasure, to any Subject, though he kept his Conscience, never so
modestly to himself; And the Refusal, to take the same Oath, without Further
Circumstance, was made Treason: But, contrariwise, her Majesty, not liking, to
make Windows, into Men's Hearts, and Secret Thoughts, Except the Abundance of
them, did overflow, into Ouvert, and Express, Acts, and Affirmations; Tempered
her Law so, as it restrains, only manifest Disobedience, in impugning, and
impeaching, advisedly, and ambitiously, her Majesty's supreme power; And
Maintaining, and Extolling, a Foreign Iurisd^ction. And as ^or the Oath, it was
altered, by her Majesty, into a more grat^^ull Form; the Harsh^esse, of the
Name, and Appellation, of Supr^^m Head was removed; And the Penalty, of the
Re^usall thereof, ^urned, into a Disablement, to take any Promotion, or to
exercise any charge; And yet that, with a Liberty, of being Revested, therein,
if any Man shall accept thereof, during his Life.

But after many years Toleration, of a Multitude, of Factio^s Papists; When
Pius Quintus, had Excommunicated her Majesty; And the Bill, of Excommunication,
was published in London; Whereby, her Majesty, was, in a sort, proscribed, and
all her Subjects, drawn, upon pain of Damnation, from her Obedien^e; And that,
ther^ upon, as upon a Principal Motive, or Preparative, followed, the
Rebellion, in the North; yet, notwithstanding, because many, of those Evil
Humors, were, by that Rebellion, partly, purged; And that she feared, at that
time, no Foreign Invasion; And much les^, the Attempts, of any, within the
Realm, not back^d, by some Fo^rain Succors, from without; she contented her
self, to make a Law, against that special Case, of Bringing in, or publishing,
of Bulls, or the like Instruments: Whereunto was added, a Prohibition, not upon
Pain of Treason, but of an Inferior Degree of ^unishment, against bringing in,
of Agnus Dei's, Hallowed Beads, and such other Merchandise, of Rome; As are
well known, not to be any Essential Part of the Roman Religion; but only to be
used, in practice, as Love Tokens, to enchant, and bewitch, the people^
Affections, from their Allegiance, to their Natural Sovereign. In all other
Points, her Majesty continued^ her former Leni^y.

But, when about the 20th. year of her Reign, she had discovered, in the King
of Spain, an Intention, to Invade her Dominions; And that a principal Point,
of the Plot, was, to prepare, a Party, within the Realm, that might adhere to
the Forrainer: And that the Seminaries, began to blossom, and to send forth,
daily, Priests, and professed Men, who should, by vow, taken at Shrif^,
reconcile her Subjects, from her Obedience; yea, and bind, many of them, to
attempt, against her Majesty's, Sacred Person; And tha^, by the Poison they
spread, the Humors, of most Papists, were altered; And that, they were no more
Papists in Custom, but P^pists, in Treasonable Faction: Then were there, New
Laws made, for the punishment of such, as should submit themselves, to
Reconcilements, or Renunciations, of Obedience. For it is to be understood,
that this Manner of Reconcilement, in Confession, is of the same Nature, and
Operation, that the Bull, it self, was of, with this only difference; That
whereas, the Bull, assoyled the Subjects, from their Obedience, at once, the
other does it, one by one. And therefore it is, both more Secret, and more
Insinuative, into the Conscience, being joined with no less Matter, then an
Absolution, from Mortal Sin. And because, it was a Treason, carried in the
Clouds, and in wonderful Secrecy, and came seldom to Light; And that there
was no Presumption, thereof so great, as the Recusants, to come to Divine
Service, because it was set down, by their Decrees; That to come to Church,
before Reconcilement, was to live in Schism; but to come to Church, after
Reconcilement, was, absolutely, Heretical, and Damnable. Therefore there were
added new Laws, containing a Punishment pecuniary, against the Recusants; Not
to enforce Consciences, but to Enfeeble those, of whom it rested Indifferent,
and Ambiguous, whether they were reconciled, or no? For there is no doubt, but
if the Law, of Recusancy, (which is challe^ged, to be so Extreme, and
Rigorous,) were thus qualified; That any Recusant, that shall, voluntarily,
come in, and take his Oath, that He, or She, were never reconciled, should,
immediately, be discharged, of the Penalty, and Forfeiture, of the Law; They
would be so far, from liking well, of that Mitigation, as they would cry out,
it was made to entrap them. And when, notwithstanding, all this provision, this
Poison was dispersed so secretly, as that there was no Means to stay it, but
to restrain the Merchants, that brought it in; Then was there lastly added, a
Law, whereby such Seditious Priests, of the New Erection, were exiled; And
those, that were, at that time, within the Land, shipped over; And so
commanded, to keep hence, upon Pain, of Treason.

This has been the Proceeding, with that Sort, though intermingled, not only,
with sundry Examples, of her Majesty's Grace, toward such, as, in her wisdom,
she knew to be Papists, in Conscience, and not in Faction; But, also, with an
extraordinary Mitigation, toward the Offenders, in the Highest Degree,
convicted by Law, if they would protest: That, in Case, this Realm, should be
invaded, with a Foreign Army, by the Popes Authority, for the Catholic Cause,
(as they term it,) they would, take part, with her Majesty, and not adhere, to
her enemies.

And whereas he says, no Priest dealt in matter of State, ( Ballard only
excepted,) it appears by the Records, of the Confession, of the said Ballard,
and sundry other Priests; That all Priests, at that time, generally, were made
acquainted, with the Invasion then intended, and afterward put in Act; And had
received Instructions, not only, to move an Expectation, in the People, of a
Change; But also, to take their Vows, and Promises, in Shrift, to adhere to the
Forrainer. Insomuch, that one, of their Principal Heads, vaunted himself, in a
Letter, of the Devise, saying^ That it was a Point, the Counsel of England,
would never dream of; Who would imagine, that they should practice, with some
Nobleman, to make him Head, of their Faction; whereas they took a Course,
only, to deal, with the People; And them so severally, as any One apprehended,
should be able to appeal, no more then Himself, except the Priests; who, he
knew, would reveal nothing, that was u^tered in Confession. So Innocent, was
this Princely, Priestly, Function, which thi^ Man takes, to be, but a matter
of Conscience; and thinks it Reason, it should have free Exercise, throughout
the Land.

4. Of the Disturbance, of the Quiet, of Christendom; And, to what Causes, it
may be justly assigned.
IT is indeed a Question, (which those, that look into Matters of State, do
well know, to fall out very often; though this Libeller, seems to be more
ignorant thereof;) whether the Ambition of the more Mighty State, or the
Jealousy, of the Less Mighty State, be to be charged, with Breach of Amity.
Hereof, as there be many Examples, so there is one, so proper, unto the present
Matter; As though it were, many years since, yet it seems, to be a Parable,
of these Times; and namely, of the Proceedings, of Spain, and England.

The States, Then, which answered, to these two, Now, were Macedon, and Athens.
Consider therefore the Resemblance, between the two Philips, of Macedon, and
Spain. He of Macedon, aspired, to the Monarchy, of Greece, as He of Spain,
does, of Europe: But more apparently then the First; Because, that Design, was
discovered in his Father, Charles the fifth, and so left him by Descent:
whereas Philip of Macedon, was the first, of the Kings, of that Nation, which
fixed, so great Conceits, in his Breast. The Course, which this King, of
Macedon, held, was not, so much, by great Armies, and Invasions; (Though these
wanted not, when the Case required;) But by Practice; By sowing, of Factions,
in States, and by Obliging, sundry particular persons, of Greatness. The State
of Opposition, against his Ambitious procedings, was only the State of Athens,
as now is, the State of England, against Spain. For Lacedemon and Thebes, were
both low, as France is now; And the rest, of the States of Greece, were, in
Power, and Territories, far inferior. The People of Athens, were exceedingly,
affected to Peace; And weary of Expense. But the Point, which I chiefly make
the Compa^ison, was, that of the Orators, which were, as Counselors, to a
Popular State; Such as were sharpest fighted, and looked deepest, into the
Projects, and and spreading, of the Macedonians, (doubting still, that the
Fire, after it licked up, the Neighbor States, and made it self Opportunity to
pass, would at last, take hold, of the Dominions, of Ath^ns, with so great
Advantages, as they should not be able to remedy it;) were ever charged, both
by the Declarations, of the King of Macedon, and by the Imputation, of such
Athenians, as were corrupted, to be of his Faction, as the Kindlers of
Troubles, and Disturbers, of the Peace, and Leagues: But, as that Party, was,
in Athen^, too Mighty, so as it discountena^ced, the true Counsels, of the
Orators; And so bred, the Ruin, of that St^te; And accomplished^ the Ends, of
that Philip: So, it is to be hoped, that i^ a Monar^hy, where there are,
commonly, better Intelligences, and Resolutions, then in a popular State, those
Plots, as they are d^tected already, So they will be resisted, and made
Frustrate.

But, to follow the Libeller, in his own C^urse, the Sum, of that, which he
delivers, concerning the Imputation; As well, of the Interruption, of the
Amity, between the Crowns, of England, and of Spain; As the Disturbance, of the
general Peace, of Christendom; Unto the English Proceedings, and not, to the
Ambiti^us Appetites of Spain, may be reduced, into Three Points.

1. Touching the P^oceeding, of Spain, and England, toward their Neighbor
States. 2. Touching the Proceeding, of Spain, and England be^w^en themselves.
3. Touching the Articles, and Conditions, which it pleases him, as it were, in
the behalf of England, to Pen, and propose, for the treating, and Concluding,
o^ an Universal Peace.
In the First, he discovers, how the King, of Spain, n^^er offered
Molestation; Neither, unto the States of Italy, upon which he confineth, by
Naples, and Millaine; Neither, unto the States of ^ermany, unto whom ^e
confineth, by a part of ^urgundy, and the Low Countries; Nor unto Portugal,
till it was devolved, to him, in Title, upon which he confine^h, by Spain: But,
contrariwise, as one, that had, in precious rega^d, the Peace of Christendom,
he designed, from the beginning, to turn his whole Forces, upon the Turk.
Only, he confesses, that agreeable to his Devotion, which apprehended, as
well the purging of Christendom, from Heresies, as the Enlarging thereof, upon
the Infidels; He was ever ready, to give Succors, unto the French King^,
against the Huguonotts, especially being their own Subjects; Whereas, on the
other side, England, (as he affirms,) has not only sowed, T^oubles, and
Dissentions, in France, and Scotland; (The one, their Neighbor, upon the
Continent; The other, divided, only, by the Narrow Seas;) But also, has
actually invaded both Kingdoms. For, as for the Matters, of the Low Countries,
they belong to the Dealings, which have passed by Spain.

In Answer whereof, it is worthy the Consideration, how it pleased God, in that
King, to cross, one Passion, by another; And namely, that Passion, which might
have proved dangerous, unto all ^urope (which was his Ambition,) by another,
which was only hurtful to himself, and his own; Which was, Wrath, and
Indignation, toward his Subjects, the Netherlands. For after that, he was
settled in his Kingdom, and freed from some Fear of the Turk; Revolving his
Fathers design, in aspiring to a Monarchy of ^urope; casting his Eye,
principally, upon the two Potent Kingdoms, of France, and England; And
remembering, how his Father, had once promised unto himself, the Conquest of the
one; And how himself, by Marriage, had, lately, had some Possession of the
other; And seeing, that Diversity, of Religion, was entered, into both these
Realms; And that France, was fallen unto Princes weak, and in Minority; And
England, unto the Government of a Lady, In whom, he did not expect, that
Policy, of Government, Magnanimity, and Felicity, which since he has proved;
Concluded, (as the Spaniards are great Waiters upon Time, and ground their
Plots deep;) upon two Points: The one, to profess an extraordinary Patronage,
and Defense, of the Roman Religion; making account thereby, to have Factions,
in both Kingdoms; (In England, a Faction, directly against the State; In
France, a Faction, that did consent, indeed in Religion, with the King, and
therefore, at first show, should seem unproper, to make a Party for a
Forreiner. But he foresaw well enough, that the King of France, should be
forced, (to the end, to retain Peace, and Obedience,) to yield, in some things,
to those of the Religion; which would, undoubtedly, alienate, the Fiery, and
more violent, sort of Papists: Which Preparation, in the People, added, to the
Ambition, of the Family, of Guise, (which he nourished ^or an Instrument,)
would, in the end, make a Party for him against, the State, as since, it
proved, and might well have done, long before: As may well appear, by the
Mention, of League, and Associations, which is above 25. years old in France.

The other Point, he concluded upon, was; That his Low Countries, was the
aptest place, both for Ports and Shipping; in respect of England; And for
Sci^uation, in respect of France; having goodly Frontier Towns, upon that
Realm; And joining, also, upon Germany, whereby they might receive in, at
Peasure, any Forces, of Almaines; To annoy, and offend, either Kingdom. The
Impediment was, the Inclination of the People; which receiving, a wonderful
Commodity, of Trades, out of both Realms, especially of England; And having
been, in ancient League, and Confederacy, with our Nation; And having been,
also, Homagers unto ^rance; He knew, would be, in no wise, disposed, to either
War. Whereupon, he resolved, to reduce them, to a Martial Government; Like
unto that, which he had established in Naples, and Millain; upon which
suppression of their Liberties, ensued the Defection, of those Provinces. And
about the same time, the Reformed Religion, found ent^ance, in the same
Countries; So as the King, enflamed, with the Resistance, he found, in the
first Part, of his Plots; And also, because, he might not dispense, with his
other Principle, in yielding, to any Toleration, of Religion; And withal,
expecting, a shorter work of it, then he found; Became, passionatly bent, to
Reconquer those Countries; Wherein, he has, consumed, infinite Treasure, and
Forces. And this is the true Cause, if a Man will look into it, that has made
the King of Spain so good a Neigbbour; Namely, that he was so entangled, with
the Wars, of the Low Countries, as he could not intend, any other Enterprise.
Besides, in Enterprizing upon Italy, he doubted, first, the Displeasure, of the Sea of Rome; with whom, he meant, to run, a Course, of strait Conjunction:
Also, he doubted, it might invite, the Turk, to return. And for Germany, he had
a fresh Example, of his Father; who, when he had annexed, unto the Dominions,
which he now possesses, the Empire of Almaign, nevertheless, sunck in that
Enterprise: whereby, he perceived, that the Nation, was, of too strong a
Composition, for him, to deal withal: Though, not long since, by practice, he
could have been contented, to snatch up, in the East, the Country of Emden.
For Portugal, first, the Kings thereof, were good Sons, to the Sea of Rome;
Next he had no Color, of Quarrel, or pretense; Thirdly, they were Officious
unto him: yet, i^ you will believe, the Genuese, (who, otherwise, writes, much
to the Honor, and Advantage, of the Kings of Spain;) It seems, he had a good
mind, to make himself a way, into that Kingdom; seeing that, for that purpose,
(as he reports,) he did, artificially, nourish, the young King S^bastian, in
the Voyage of Afric, expecting that overthrow which followed.

As for his Intention, to war upon the In^idels, and Turks, it makes me
think, what Francis Guicciardiue, a wise writer of History, speaks, of his
great Grand^ Father; Making, a Judgment of him, as Historiographers use: That
he did, always, mask, and vail, his Appetites, with a Demonstration, of a
Devout, and Holy, Intention, to the Advancement, of the Church, and the Public
Good. His Father, also, when he received Advertisement, of the taking of the
French King, prohibited, all Ringings, and Bonfires, and other Tokens of Joy,
and said; Those were to be reserved, for Victories, upon Infidels; On whom, he
meant, never, to war. Many a Cruzada, has the Bishop of Rome, granted to
him, and his Predecessors, upon that Color; Which all, have been spent, upon
the Effusion, of Christian Blood: And now, this year, the Levies of Germans,
which should have been made, under hand, for France, were colored, with the
pretense, of War, upon the Turk; Which the Princes of Germany, descrying, not
only brake the Levies, but threatened the Commissioners, to hang the next, that
should offer, the like Abuse: So that this Form, of Dissembling, is Familiar,
and, as it were, Hereditary, to the King of Spain.

And as for his Succors, given to the French King, against the Protestants, he
could not choose, but accompany the Pernicious Counsels, which still he gave to
the French Kings, of breaking their Edicts, and admitting of no Pacification,
but pursuing their Subjects with Mortal War, with some Offer of Aides; which
having promised, he could not, but in some small Degree, perform; whereby also,
the Subject of France, (namely, the violent Papist,) was enured, to depend upon
Spain. And so much, for the King of Spaines, proceedings, toward other States.

Now for ours, And first, touching the Point, wherein, he char^^th us, to be
the Authors, of Troubles, in Scotland, and France: It will appear to any, that
have been well informed, of the Memo^i^s of these Affairs; That the Troubles,
of those Kingdoms, were, indeed, chiefly kindled, by one, and the same Family,
of the Guise: A Family, (as was partly touched before) as particularly d^voted,
now for many years together, to Spain, as the Order, of the I^sui^es, is. This
House of Guise, ^aving, of late years, extraordinarily flourished, in the
eminent Ver^ue, of a few Persons whose Ambition, nevertheless, was nothing
inferior to their virtue; But being of a House, notwithstanding, which the
Princes, of the Blood, of France, reckoned but as strangers; Aspired, to a
Greatness, more then Civil, and proportionable to their Cause, wheresoever
they had Authority: And accordingly, under Color of Consanguinity, and
Religion, they brought into Scotland, in the year 1559, and in the Absence, of
the King, and Queen, French Forces, in great numbers: whereupon, the Ancient
Nobility, of that Realm, seeing the imminent danger, of Reducing that Kingdom,
under the Tyranny of Strangers, did pray, (according to the good Intelligence,
between the two Crowns,) her Majesty's Neigh ^ourly ^orces. And so it is true,
that the Action, being very Just, and Honorable, her Majesty undertook it,
expelled the Strangers, and restored the Nobility, to their Degrees, and the
State to Peace.

After when Certain Noblemen of Scotland, of the same Faction of ^u^se; had,
during the Minority of the King, possessed themselves, of his Person, to the
end, to abuse his Authority, many ways; And namely, to make a Breach, between
Scotland, and England, her Majesty's Forces, were again, in the year, 1582. by
the Kings best, and truest Servants, sought, and required; And, with the Forces
of her Majesty, prevailed so far, as to be possessed, of the Castle of
Edenborough, the principal part of that Kingdom; which, nevertheless, her
Majesty, incontinently, with all Honor, and Sincerity, restored; After she had
put the King, into good, and faithful, Hands; And so, ever since, in all the
Occasions, of Intestine Troubles, whereunto that Nation has been ever subject,
she has performed unto the King, all possible good Offices, and such, as he
does, with all good Affection, acknowledge.

The same House of Cuise, under Color of Alliance, during the Reign, of
Francis the second, and by the Support, and pract^^^, of the Queen Mother; who
desiring, to retain the Regency, under her own Hands during the Minority of
Charles the ninth, used those of ^uise as a Counterpoise, to the Princes, of
the Blood; obtained also, great Authority, in the Kingdom, of France;
whereupon, having raised, and moved, Civil Wars, under pre^ence of Religion;
But indeed, to enfeeble, and depresse, the Ancient Nobility, of that Realm; The
contrary Part, being compounded, of the Blood Royal, and the Greatest
Officers, of the ^rown; opposed themselves, only, against their Insolency;
And, to their Aides, called in, her Majesty's Forces, giving them, for
security, the Town of New Haven: which nevertheless, when as afterward,
having by the Reputation, of her Majesty's Confederation, made their Peace, in
Effect, as they would themselves; They would, without observing any Conditions,
that had passed, have had it back again; Then, indeed, it was held by force,
and so had been long, but for the great Mortality, which it pleased God, to
send amongst our Men. After which time, so far was her Majesty, from seeking,
to sow, or kindle, New Troubles; As continually, by the Solicitation, of her
Ambassadors, she still persuaded, with the Kings, both Charles the 9th, and
Hen. the 3d, to keep, and observe, their Edicts of Pacification, and to
preserve their Authority, by the Union, of their Subjects: which Counsel, if
it had been as happily followed, as it was prudently, and sincerely, given,
France, had been, at this day, a most Flourishing Kingdom, which is now, a
Theater of Misery. And now, in the end, after that the Ambitious Practices, of
the same House, of Guise, had grown to that Ripeness, that gathering further
strength, upon the weakness, and Misgovernment, of the said King Hen. 3d; He
was fain, to execute, the Duke of Guise, without Ceremony, at Bloys: And yet,
nevertheless, so many Men were embarked, and engaged, in that Conspiracy, as
the Flame thereof, was nothing assuaged; But, contrariwise, that King Hen. grew
distressed, so as he was enforced, to implore, the Succors of England, from
her Majesty; Though no way, interessed, in that Quarrel; Nor, any way,
obliged, for any good offices, she had received of that King; yet she accorded
the same. Before the Arrival of which Forces, the King, being, by a
sacrilegious Iacobine, murdered, in his Camp, near Paris, yet they went on,
and came, in good time, for the Assistance, of the King, which now reigns;
The Justice of whose Quarrel, together with the long continued Amity, and good
Intelligence, which her Majesty had with him, has moved her Majesty, from time
to time, to supply with great Aides; And yet, she never, by any Demand, urged
upon him, the putting into her Hands, of any Town, or Place. So as, upon this,
that has been said, let the Reader judge, whether has been, the more Just,
and Honorable, Proceeding; And the more free, from Ambition, and Passion,
toward other States; That of Spain, or that of England? Now, let us examine
the proceedings, reciproque, between themselves.

Her Majesty, at her Coming to the Crown, found her Realm, entangled, with the
Wars of France, and Scotland, her nearest Neighbors: which Wars were grounded,
only, upon the Spaniards Quarrel; But, in the pursuit of them, had lost
England, the Town of Calice. Which, from the 21. year, of King Edward 3, had
been possessed, by the Kings of England. There was a meeting near Bordeaux,
toward the end, of Queen Mary's Reign, between the Commissioners, of France,
Spain, and England; and some Overture, of Peace was made; But broke off, upon
the Article, of the Res^itution, of Callice. After Queen Mary's Death, the King
of Spain, thinking himself, discha^ged, of that Difficulty, (though in ho^our,
he was no less bound to it, then before,) renewed the like Treaty, wherein her
Majesty concurred: so as the Commissioners, for the said Princes, met at
Chasteau Cambra^ssi, near Cambray. In the proceedings, of which Treaty, it is
true, that at the first, the Commissioners, of Spain, for form, and in
Demonstration only, pretended to stand firm, upon the Demand of Callice^ but
it was discerned, indeed, that the Kings Meaning was, after ^ome Ceremonies,
and perfunctory Insisting thereupon, to grow, apart, to a ^eace, with the
French, excluding her Majesty; And so to leave her, to make her own Peace,
after her People, Had made his Wars. Which Covert Dealing, being politickly
looked into, her Majesty had reason, being newly invested in her Kingdom; And,
of her own Inclination, being affected to Peace; To conclude the same, with
such Conditions as she might: And yet, the King of Spain, in his
Dissimulation, had so much Advantage, as she was fain, to do it, in a Treaty,
apart, with the Fr^nch; whereby to one, that is not informed, of the Counsels,
and Treaties of State, as they passed, it should seem to be, a voluntary
Agreement, of her Majesty, whereto the King of Spain, would not be party,
whereas, indeed, he left her no other choice. And this was the first Assay, or
Earnest penny, of that Kings, good affection, to her Majesty.

About the same time, when the King was solicited, to renew, such Treaties,
and Leagues, as had passed, between the two Crowns, of Spain, and England, by
the Lord Cobham, sent unto him, to acquaint him, with the Death of Queen Mary;
And afterward, by Sir Thomas Challenor, and Sir Thomas Chamberlain,
successively, Ambassadors, Resident in his Low Countries; Who had order;
diverse times, during their Charge, to make Overtures thereof, both unto the
King, and certain principal persons about him, And lastly, those former
Motions, taking no effect; By Viscount Montacute, and Sir Thomas Chamberlain,
sent unto Spain, in the year 1560; no other Answer, could be had, or obtained,
of the King, but that, the Treaties did stand, in as good Force, to all
Intents, as new Ratification, could make them. An Answer strange at that time,
but very conformable, to his Proceedings since; which belike, even then, were
closely smothered, in his own Breast. For had he not, at that time, some hidden
Alienation, of Mind, and Design, of an Enemy, toward her Majesty; So wise a
King, could not be ignorant; That the Renewing, and Ratifying, of Treaties,
between Princes, and States, do add great Life, and Force, both of Assurance,
to the parties themselves, and Countenance, and Reputation to the World
besides; And have, for that cause, been commonly, and necessarily, used, and
practiced.

In the Message, of Viscount Montacute, it was also contained, that he should
crave, the Kings Counsel, and Assistance, accor^ing to Amity, and good
Intelligence, upon a Discovery, of certain pernicious Plots, of the House of
Guise, to annoy this Realm, by the way of Scotland: whereunto the Kings Answer,
was so Dark, and so cold, as Nothing could be made of it; Till he had made, an
Exposition of it, himself, by effects, in the express Restraint, of Munition,
to be carried, out of the Low Countries, unto the Siege of Leith; Because our
Nation, was to have supply, thereof, from thence. So as, in all the
Negotiations, that passed, with that King, still, her Majesty, received no
satisfaction, but more and more suspi^ious, and Bad Tokens, of evil affection.

Soon after, when upon that Project, which was disclosed, before the King had
resolved, to disannull the Liberties, and Privileges, unto his Subjects, the
Netherlands, anciently belonging; And to establish amongst them, a Marshall
Government; which the People, being very Wealthy; And inhabiting Towns, very
strong, and Defensible, by Fortifications, both of Nature, and the Hand, could
not endure; there followed the Defection, and revolt, of those Countries. In
which Action, being the greatest, of all those, which have passed, between
Spain, and England, the Proceeding, of her Majesty, has been so Just, and
mingled, with so many Honorable Regards, as Nothing, does so much clear, and
acquit, her Majesty, not only from Passion, b^t also, from all Dishonorable
Policy. For first, at the beginning of the Troubles, she did impart, unto Him,
faithful, and sincere, Advise, of the Course, that was to be taken, for the
quietting, and appeasing them; And, expressly, forewarned, both himself, and
such as were, in principal Charge, in those Countries, during the Wars^ of the
danger like to ensue, if he held, so heavy a Hand, over that People; le^^, they
should cast themselves, into the Arms, of a Stranger. But finding, the Kings
Mind, so exulcerate, as he rej^cted all Counsel, that tended, to Mild, and
Gracious, proceeding, her Majesty, nevertheless, gave not over her Honorable
Resolution; (which was, if it were possible, to reduce, and reconcile, those
Countries, unto the obedience, of their Natural Sovereign, the King of Spain:
And if that, might not be, yet to preserve them, from alienating themselves,
to a Ferrain Lord; As namely, unto the French, with whom they much treated; And
amongst whom the Enterprise of Flanders, was ever propounded, as a Mean to
unite, their own Civil Dissensions;) B^t, patiently, temporizing, expected the
good effect, which Time might breed: And whenever, the States grew, into
Extremitie^, of Despair, and thereby ready, to embrace the Offer, of any
Forrainer; Then would her Majesty, yield them, some Relief of Money^ or permit,
some Supply of Forces, to go over unto them; To the end, to interrupt, such
violent Resolution: And still continued, to mediate, unto the King, some Just,
and Honorable, Capitulations, of Grace, and Accord; Such, as whereby, always,
should have been preserved, unto him, such Interest, and Authority, as He, in
Justice, ^ould claim; Or a Prince, moderately minded, would seek to have. And
this Course she held, interchangeably, seeking to mitigate, the Wrath of the
King, and the Despair of the Countries; Till such Time, as, after the Death, of
the Duke of Anjou; (Into whose Hands, according to her Majesty's prediction,
but against her good liking, they had put themselves;) The Enemy pressing them,
the united Provinces, were received, into her Majesty's Protection: which was,
after such Time, as the King of Spain, had discovered himself, not only an
Implacable Lord to them, but also, a pro^essed Enemy, unto her Majesty; having,
actually, invaded Ireland, and designed the Invasion of England. For it is to
be noted, tha^ the like Offers, which were then made unto her Majesty; had been
made to her, long before; but as long, as her Majesty conceived, any Hope,
either of Making, their Peace; Or entertaining her own, with Spain, she would
never hearken thereunto. And yet now, even at last, her Majesty retained, a
singular, and evident Proof, to the World, of her Justice, and Moderation; In
that, she refused, the Inheritance, and Sovereignty, of those Goodly ^rovinces;
which by the States, with much Instance, was pressed upon her; and being
accepted, would h^ve wrought, greater Contentment, and Satisfaction, both to
her People, and theirs; Being Countries, for the Site; Wealth; Commodity of
Traffic; Affection to our Nation; Obedience of the Subjects, (well used,) most
convenient, to have been annexed, to the Crown of England; And withal, one
Charge, Danger, and Offense of Spain; only, took upon her, the Defense, and
Protection, of their Liberties: Which Liberties, and Privileges, are of that
Nature, as they may justly, esteem themselves, but Conditional Subjects, to
the King of Spain; More justly then Aragon: And may make her Majesty, as justly
esteem, the ancient Confederacies, and Treaties, with Burgundy, to be, of
Force, rather, with the People, and Nation, then, with the Line, of the Duke;
because it was, never, an Absolute Monarchy. So as, to sum up, her Majesty's
Proceedings, in this great Action, they have but this; That, they have sought,
first, to restore them to Spain; Then, to keep them from Strangers; And never,
to purchase them, to Her Self.

But during all that time, the King of Spain, kept one tenor, in his
Proceedings, toward her Majesty; Breaking forth, more and more, into Injuries,
and Contempts: Her Subjects, trading into Spain, have been, many of them,
Burned; Some cast into the Galleys; Others have died in Prison, without any
other Crimes committed, but upon Quarrels, picked upon them, for there Religion,
here at home. Her Merchants, at the Sack of Antwerpe, were, diverse of them,
spoiled, and put to their Ransomes^ though they could not be charged, with any
Part-taking: Neither, upon the Complaint, of Doctor Wilson, and Sir Edward
Horsey, could any Redress be had. A general Arrest, was made, by the Duke, of
Alva, of English men's, both Goods, and Persons, upon pretense, that certain
Ships, stayed in this Realm, laden with Goods, and Money, of certain Merchants,
of Genoa, belonged to that King: which Money, and Goods, was, afterward, to
the uttermost value, restored, and paid back: Whereas our Men, were far, from
receiving, the like Justice, on their side. Doctor Man, her Majesty's
Ambassador, received, during his Legation, sundry Indignities, himself, being
Removed, out of Madrid, and Lodged, in a Village; As they are accustomed, to
use, the Ambassadors of Moors: His Son, and Steward, forced, to assist, at a
Mass, with Tapers in their Hands; Besides sundry other Contumelies, and
Reproaches. But the Spoiling, or Damnifying, of a Merchant; Vexation, of a
Common Subject; Dishonor of an Ambassador; Were rather, but Demonstrations of
ill Disposition, then Effects; If they be compared, with Actions of State;
Wherein He, and his Ministers, have sought the Overthrow, of this Government:
As in the year 1569. when the Rebellion, in the North part of England, brake
forth; Who but the Duke of Alva, (then the Kings Lieutenant, in the
Low Countries,) and Don Guerres, of Espes, then his Ambassador Lieger here,
were discovered, to be chief Instruments, and Practisers; Having complotted,
with the Duke of Norfolk, at the same time; As was proved, at the same Dukes
Condemnation, that an Army, of 20000. Men, should have landed at Harwich, in
aid of that Part, which the said Duke had made, within the Realm; And the said
Duke, having spent, and employed, 150000. Crowns, in that Preparation.

Not contented thus, to have consorted, and assisted, her Majesty's Rebels, in
England; He procured, a Rebellion, in Ireland: Arming, and Sending thither, in
the year 1579, an Arch-Rebell, of that Country, James Fitz Morris, which
before was fled: And truly to speak, the whole course of Molestation, which her
Majesty has received, in that Realm, by the Rising, and Keeping on, of the
Irish, has been nourished, and fomented, from Spain^ but afterward, most
apparently, in the year, 1580, he invaded, the same Ireland,, with Spa^ish
Forces, under an Italian Colonel, By Name San Iesopho, being but the
Forerunners, of a greater Power; Which, by Treaty, between Him, and the Pope,
should have followed: But that, by the speedy Defeat, of those former, they
were discouraged, to pursue the Action: Which Invasion, was proved, to be done,
by the Kings, own Orders; both by the Letters, of Secretary Escouedo, and of
Guerres, to the King: And also, by diverse other Letters, wherein, the
particular Conferences, were set down, concerning this Enterprise, between
Cardinal Riario, the Popes Legate, and the Kings Deputy in Spain; Touching the
General, the Number of Men, the Contribution of Money, and the Manner, of the
Prosecuting, of the Action; And by the Confession, of some of the Chiefest, of
those, that were taken Prisoners, at the Fort: Which Act, being an Act, of
Appa^rent ^ostility, added, unto all the Injuries, aforesaid; And accompanied,
with a continual Receipt, Comfort, and Countenance, by Aud^ences, Pensions, and
Employments, which he gave to Traitors, and Fugitives, both English, and
Irish; As Westmerl^nd, Paget, Engl^field, Baltinglasse, and Numbers of others;
Did, sufficiently, jus^ifie, and warrant, that pursuit of Revenge, which,
(either in the Sp^yl of Carthagena, and San Domingo, in the Indies, by Mr
Drak^; Or, in the undertaking, the protection, of the Low-Coun^reys^ when the
Earl of Leicester was sent over;) afterward foll^wed. For before that time,
her Majesty, though she stood upon her Guard, in respect, of the just Cause of
Jealousy, which, the Sundry Injuries of that King, gave her, yet had entered,
into no O^^ensi^e Ac^ion, against Him. For ^oth, the Voluntary Forces, which
Don Antonio, had collected, in this Realm, were, by express command^ment,
restrained; And Offer was made, of Restitution, to the Spanish Ambassador, of
such Treasure, as had been b^ought, into this Realm; upon Proof, that it had
been taken by ^rong; And the Duke of Anjou, was, (as much as could stand, with
the near Treaty, of a Marriage, which then, was very fo^wa^d, between her
Majesty, and the said Duke;) Diverted, from the Enterprise, of ^landers.

But to conclude this Point; when that, some years after; the Invasion, and
Conquest, of th^s Land; Intended long before, but through many Crosses, and
Impediments, which the King o^ Spain, found in his Plots, deferred; Was, in the
year 1588, attempted; Her Majesty, not forgetting her own Nature, was content,
at the same Instant, to Treat of a Peace; Not ignorantly, as a Prince, that
knew not, in what forwardness, his preparations were; (For she had discovered
them long before;) Nor fearfully, as may appear, by the Articles, whereupon her
Majesty, in that Treaty, stood; which were not, the Demands, of a Prince
afraid; But only, to spare the shedding, of Christian Blood; And to show, her
constant Desire, to make her Reign Renowned, rather by Peace then victories:
which Peace, was, on her part, treated sincerely; But, on his part, (as it
should seem,) was but an Abuse; Thinking thereby, to have taken us more
unprovided: So that the Duke of Parma, not liking, to be used as an Instrument,
in such a Case, in regard of his particular Honor, would, sometimes, in
Treating, interlace; That the King, his Master, meant to make his Peace, With
his Sword in his Hand; Let it then be tried, upon an indifferent view, of the
proceedings, of England, and Spain; Who it is, that Fisheth, in Troubled
Waters; And has disturbed, the Peace, of Christendom; And has written, and
described, all his Plots, in Blood.

There follow the Articles, of an Universal Peace, which the Libeller, as a
Commissioner, for the Estate of England, has propounded, and are these: First,
that the King of Spain; should recall such Forces, as of great compassion, to
the Natural People of France, he has sent thither, to defend them, against a
Relapsed Huguonott. Secondly, that he suffer, his Rebels, of Holland and
Zeland, quietly, to possess the places, they hold; And to take unto them, all
the Rest, of the Low Countries also; Conditionally, that the English, may still
keep, the possession, of such Port-Towns, as they have, and have some half a
dozen more, annexed unto them. Thirdly, that the English Rovers, might,
peaceably, go, to his Indies; And there, take away his Treasure, and his Indies
also.


And th^se Articles, being accorded, (he says,) might follow that Peace, which
passes all understanding; As he calls it, in a scurrile, and profane
Mockery, of the Peace, which Christians, enjoy with God, by the Atonement,
which is made, by the Blood of Christ; whereof the Apostle says; That it
passes all understanding: But these his Articles, are, sure, mistaken; And
indeed corrected, are briefly these: 1. That the King of France, be not
impeached, in Reducing his Rebels, to obedience. 2. That the Netherlands, be
suffered, to enjoy their Ancient Liberties, and Privileges; And so Forces of
Strangers, to be withdrawn, both English, and Spanish. 3. That all Nations,
may trade, into the East, and West, Indies; yea discover, and occupy, such
parts, as the Spaniard, does not actually possess; And are not, under Civil
Government, notwithstanding any Donation, of the Pope.


5. Of the Cunning, of the Libeller, in Palliation, of his malicious
Invectives, against her Majesty, and the State, with pretense, of Taxing, only
the Actions, of the Lord Burghley.
I Cannot, rightly, call this Point, Cunning, in the Libeller, but rather, good
will to be Cunning, without skill, indeed, or Judgment: For finding, that it
had been, the Usual, and Ready, practice, of Seditious Subjects, to plant, and
bend their Invectives, and Clamours; Not against the Sovereigns themselves, but
against some such, as had Grace with them, and Authorities under them; He put,
in ure, his Learning, in a wrong, and unproper, Case. For this has some
Appearance, to cover undutifull Invectives, when it is used, against
Favorites, or New Vpstarts, and suddain-risen Counselors: But, when it shall
be practiced, against One, that has been Counselor, before her Majesty's
Time; And has continued longer Counselor, then any other Cou^s^ll^ur in
Europe; One, that must needs have, been Great, if it were but by Surviving
alone, though he had no other Excellency; One, that has passed the Degrees of
Honor, with great Travel, and long Time, which quenche^h always Envy, except
it be joined, with extreme Malice; Then, it appears, manifestly, to be but a
Brick wall, at Tennis, to make the Defamation, and Hatred rebound, from the
Counselor, upon the Prince. And assuredly, they be very simple, to think, to
abuse the World, with those Shifts; Since, every Child, can tell the Fable;
That the VVolfs Malice, was not to the Shepherd, but to his Dog. It is true,
that these Men, have altered their Tune, twice, or thrice: when the Match, was
in Treating, with the Duke, of Anjou, they spoke Honey, as to her Majesty: All
the Gall was uttered, against the Earl of Leicester. But, when they had gotten
Heart, upon the Expectation, of the Invasion, they changed style, and
disclosed, all the Venom in the World, immediately, against her Majesty: what
New Hope, has made them return, their Sinons Note, in teaching Troy, how to
save it self; I cannot tell. But, in the mean time, they do his Lordship, much
Honor: For, the more despitefully, they inveigh, against his Lordship, the
more Reason, has her Majesty, to trust him, and the Realm to honor him. It
was wont, to be a Token, of scarce a good Liedgeman, when the Enemy, spoiled
the Country, and left, any particular Men's Houses, or Fields, unwasted.

6. Certain true general Notes upon the Actions of the Lord Burleigh.
BUT above all the rest, it is a strange Fancy, in the Libeller, that he makes
his Lordship, to be, the Primum Mobile, in every Action, without Distinction.
That to him, her Majesty is Accomptant, of her Resolutions. That to him, the
Earl of Leic^ster, and Mr. Secretary Walsingham, both Men, of great Power, and
of great wit, and understanding, were but as Instruments; whereas, it is well
knownn, that as to her Majesty, there was never a Counselor, of his Lordships
long Continuance, that was so applyable, to her Majesty's, Princely
Resolutions; Endeavoring, always, after Faithful Propositions, and
Remonstrances, and these in the best words, and the most Grateful Manner; to
rest upon such Conclusions, as her Majesty, in her own wisdom, determines,
and them to execute to the best: So far, has he been, from Contestation, or
drawing her Majesty, into any his own Courses. And as, for the Forenamed
Counselors, and others, with whom his Lordship, has consorted, in her
Majesty's service; It is rather true, that his Lordship, out of the Greatness,
of his Experience, and Wisdom; And, out of the Coldness, of his Nature, has
qualified, generally, all Hard, and Extreme, Courses, as far, as the Service
of her Majesty, and the Safety, of the State, and the Making himself,
compatible, with those, with whom he served, would permit. So far, has his
Lordship been, from inciting others, or running a full Course with them, in
that kind. But yet, it is more strange, that this Man, should be so absurdly
Malicious, as he should charge his Lordship, not only, with all Actions of
State, but also, with all the Faults, and Vices, of the Times; As if Curiosity,
and Emulation, have bred some Controversies, in the Church; Though, (thanks be
to God,) they extend, but to outward Things; As if Wealth, and the Cunning of
Wits, have brought forth, Multitudes of Suits, in Law; As If, Excess in
Pleasures, and in Magnificence, joined with the unfaithfulness of Servants,
and the Greediness of Monied Men, have decayed, the Patrimony, of many Noble
Men, and others; That all these, and such like, Conditions of the Time, should
be put, on his Lordships account; who has been, as far, as to his Place,
appertains, a most Religious, and Wise, Moderator in Church Matters, to have
Unity kept; who with great Justice, has dispatched, infinite Causes in Law,
that have orderly, been brought before him; And, for his own Example, may say
that, which few Men can say, but was sometime said, by Cephalus, the Athenian,
so much Renowned, in Plato's Works; who having lived, near to the age, of an
100 years; And in continu^ll, Affairs, the Business, was wont to say of
Himself; That he never sued any, neither had been sued by any: Who by reason,
of his Office, has preserved, many Great Houses, from Overthrow, by relieving
sundry Extremities, toward such, as in their Minority, have been circumvented;
And toward all such, as his Lordship, might advise, did ever persuade, Sober,
and Limited, Expense. Nay, to make Proof, further, of his Contented Manner of
Life, free from Suits, and Covetousness; as he never sued, any Man, so did he
never raise, any Rent, or put out, any Tenant, of his own; Nor ever gave
consent, to have the like done, to any of the Queens Tenants; Matters,
singularly, to be noted, in this Age.

But however, by this Fellow, as in a False, Artificial, Glass, which is
able, to make the best Face Deformed, his Lordships Doings be set forth; yet,
let his Proceedings, (which be indeed his own,) be indifferently weighed, and
considered; And let Men call to Mind, that his Lordship was never a violent,
and Transported Man, in Matters of State, but ever Respective, and Moderate;
That he was never Man, in his particular, a Breaker of Necks, no heavy Enemy,
but ever Placable, and Mild; That he was never a Brewer, of Holy water in
Court, no Dallier, no Abuser, but ever Real, and Certain; That he was never, a
Bearing Man, nor Carrier of Causes, But ever gave way, to Justice, and Course
of Law; That he was never, a Glorious, Wilful, Proud Man, but ever Civil, and
Familiar, and good to deal withal; That in the Course, of his Service, he
has, rather, sustained the Burden, then sought the Fruition, of Honor, or
Profit; Scarcely sparing any time, from his Cares, and Travailes, to the
Sustentation of his Health; That he never had, nor sought to have, for Himself,
and his Children, any Pennyworth of Lands, or Goods, that appertained to any,
attainted, of any Treason, Felony, or otherwise; That he never had, or sought,
any kind of Benefit, by any Forfeiture, to her Majesty; That he was never, a
Factious Commender, of Men, as he, that intended, any ways, to besiege Her, by
bringing in, Men at his Devotion; But was ever, a true Reporter, unto her
Majesty, of every Man's Deserts, and Abilities; That he never took ^he Course,
to unquiet, or offend, no nor exasperate her Majesty, but to content her mind,
and mitigate her Displeasure; That he ever bare Himself reverently, and without
Scandal, in Matters of Religion, and without blemish in his Private Course, of
Life; Let Men, I say, without Passionate Malice, call to mind, these Things;
And they will think it Reason, that, though he be not canonized for a Saint, in
Rome, yet he is, worthily, celebrated, as Pater Patriae, in England; And though
he be Libelled against, by Fugitives, yet he is prayed for, by a Multitude, of
good Subjects: And lastly, though he be envied, whilst he lives, yet he shall
be deeply wanted, when he is gone. And assuredly, many P^inces, have had, many
Servants of Trust, Name, and sufficiency; But where there have been great
parts, there has often wanted, Temper of Affection; Where there have beeu,
both Ability, and Moderation, there have wanted, Diligence, and Love of
Travail; Where all Three have been, there have, sometimes, wanted, Faith, and
Sincerity; Where some few, have had, all these Four, yet they have wanted Time,
and Experience: But where there is a Concurrence, of all these, there is no
marvel, though a Prince of Judgment, be constant, in the Employment, and
Trust, of such a Servant.

7. Of diverse par^icular Untruths, and Abuses, dispersed through the Libel.
THE Order which this Man keeps, in his Libell is such, as it may appear,
that he meant but to empty some Note Book, of the Matters of England; To bring
in, (whatsoever came of it,) a Number of Idle Jests: which he thought might fly
abroad; And intended nothing less, then to clear the Matters, be handled, by
the Linht of Order, and Distinct Writing. Having therefore, in the Principal
Points, namely the Second, Third, and Fourth, Articles, ranged his Scattering,
and wandering, Discourse, into some Order, such as may help, the Judgment of
the Reader, I am now content, to gather up, some of his By-Matters, and
Straggling Untruths, and very briefly, to censure them.

Page 9. he says; That his Lordships could, neither by the Greatness, of his
Beads; creeping to the Cross; Nor exterior show to Devotion, before the High
Altar; find his entrance, into high Dignity, in Queen Mary's Time. All which,
is a mere Fiction, at Pleasure: For Queen Mary, bare that Respect unto him, in
regard, of his constant standing, for her Title; As she desired to continue his
Service; The Refusal thereof, growing from his own Part: He enjoyed,
nevertheless, all other Liberties, and Favors, of the time; Save only, that it
was put, into the Queens Head, that it was dangerous, to permit him, to go
beyond the Sea, because he had a great Wit of Action, and had served, in so
Principal a Place; Which nevertheless, after, with Cardinal Poole, he was
suffered to do

Page Eadem, he says; Sir Nich. Bacon, that was Lord Keeper, was a Man of
exceeding crafty wit; Which shows, that this Fellow, in his Slanders, is no
good Marks-Man; But throws out his Words, of Defaming, without all Level.
For all the World, noted, Sir Nich. Bacon, to be a Man, Plain, Direct, and
Constant, without all Finenesse, and Doubleness; And one that was, of the
mind, that a Man, in his private Proceedings, and Estate, and in the
Proceedings, of State, should re^t, upon the Soundness, and Strength, of his
own Courses, and not upon Practice, to Circumvent others^ According, to the
Sentence of Solomon; Vir Prudens aduertit ad Gressus suos, stultus autem
divertit ad Dolos: Insomuch, that the Bishop of Rosse, a Subtle, and
Observing, Man, said of him; That he could fasten, no words upon him, and that
it was impossible to come within him, because he offered no play. And Queen
Mother of France, a very politic Princess, said of him; That he should have
been, of the Council of Spain, because he despised the Occurrents, and rested
upon the First Plot; So that, if He were Crafty, it is hard to say, who is wise.

Page 10. he says; That the Lord Burleigh, in the Establishment, of Religion,
in the Beginning of the Queens Time, prescribed a Composition, of his own
Invention; Whereas the same Form, not fully six years before, had been
received, in this Realm, in King Edwards Time: So as his Lordship, being a
Christian, Politic, Counselor, thought it better, to follow a President, then
to innovate; And chose the President, rather at Home, then Abroad.

Page 41. he says; That Catholics, never attempted, to murder, any
principal person, of her Majesty's Court, as did Burchew, (whom he calls a
Puritan) In wounding, of a Gentleman, instead, of Sir Christopher Hatten; But
by their great Virtue, Modesty, and Patience, do manifest, in themselves, a far
different Spirit, ^^om the other Sort. For Burchew, it is certain he was Mad;
As appeare^h, not only by his Mad Mistaking, but by the violence, ^h^t he
^ff^ed after, to his Keeper; And most evidently, by his b^haviour, at his
Ex^cution: But of Catholics, (I mean, the ^ra^l^rus sort, of them, a Man may
say, as Cato, said, sometimes, of Cae^ar; Fum ad ev^rtendam Remp. sobrium
accessisse: They came sober, and well advised, to their Treasons and
Conspiracies; And commonly, they look not so low, as the Counselors, but have
bent, their murd^r^ur Attempts, immediately, against her Majesty's sacred
Person; (Which God have in his precious Custody;) As may appear, by the
Conspiracy, of Sommervile, Parry, Savadge, and Six, and othe^s; Nay, they have
defended it, in Thesi, to be a Law^ull Act.

Page 43. he says; That his Lordship, whom he calle^h the Arch^Politick, has
fraudulently provided, that when any Pries^, is arraigned, the Indictment, is
enforced, with many odious Matt^r^: Wherein he shows great Ignorance, if it
be not Malice: For the Law, permits not, the Ancient Forms of Indic^ments,
to be al^ered; Like as in an Action of Trespass, although a M^n, take away
another Goods, in the peaceablest manner, in the World, yet the Writ has;
Quare vi, and Armis; And if a Man enter, upon another Ground, and do no more,
the Plantife mentions; Quod Herbam suam ibidem crescentem, cum Equis, Bobus,
porcis, and Bidentibus, depastus sit, conculcavit, and consumpsit. Neither is
this any Absurdity; For, in the Practice, of all Law, the Formularies, h^ve
been Few, and Certain; And not varied, according to every ^articular Case. And
in Indictmeuts, also, of Treason, it is not so far fetched, as in that of
Trespass; For the Law, ever presumes in Treason, an Intention, of subverting
the State, and Impeaching, the Majesty Royal.

Page 45. and in other places, speaking of the persecuting, of Catholics, he
still mentions, Bowellings, and Consuming Men's Entra^les, by Fire; As if
this, were a Torture, newly devised; Wherein he does Cau^elously, and
Maliciously, suppress, that the Law, and Custom, of this Land, from all
Antiquity, has ordained that Punishment, in Case of Treason, and permits no
other. And a Punishment, surely, it is, though of great Terror, ye^ by reason,
of the quick Dispatching, of less, Torment far, then either the Wheel or
Forcipation, yea, then Simple Burning.

Page 48. he says; England, is confederate, with the Great Turk. Wherein, if
he mean it, because the Merchants, have an Agent, in Constantinople; How will
he answer, for all the Kings, of France, since Francis the First, which were
good Catholics? For the Emperor? for the King of Spain, Himself? for the
Senate of Venice, and other States, that have had, long time, Ambassadors
Liedgers, in that Court? If he mean it, because the Turk, has done, some
special Honor, to our Ambassador, (if he be so to be termed,) we are
beholding, to the King of Spain for that; For that, the Honor, we have won
upon Him, by Opposition, has given us, Reputation, through the World: If he
mean it, because the Turk, seems to affect us, for the Abolishing of Images;
Let him consider then, what a Scandal, the Matter of Images, has been, in the
Church: As having been, one of the principal Branches, whereby Mahumetisme
entered.

Page 65. he says; Cardinal Allen, was, of late, very near, to have been
elected Pope. Whereby, he would put, the Catholics here, in some hope, that
once, within Five or Six years, (For a Pope, commonly, sits no longer,) he
may obta^n that, which he m^ssed narrowly. This is a direct Abuse; For it is
certain, in all the Conclaves, since Sixtus Quintus, who gave him his Hat, he
was never in possibility: Nay, the King of Spain, that has patronized, the
Church of Rome, so long, as he is become a right Patron of it; In that, he
seeks to present, to that See, whom he likes; yet never durst, strain, his
Credit, to so desperate a Point, as once, to make a Canvass, for him: No, he
never nominated him, in his Inclusive Narration. And those that know any Thing,
of the Respects, of Conclaves, know, that he is not Papable; First, because he
is, an Vltramontane, of which sort, there has been none, these Fifty years:
Next, because he is a Cardinal, of Alms, of Spain, and wholly, at the
Devotion, of that King: Thirdly, because he is like to employ, the Treasure,
and Favors, of the Popedom, upon the Enterprises of England; And the Relief,
and Advancement, of English Fugitives, his Necessitous Country^men; So as, he
presumed much, upon the Simplicity, of the Reader, in this point, as in many
more.

Page 55. and again Page 70. he says; His Lordship, (Meaning the Lord
Burleigh,) Intends to match, his Grandchild, Mr. William Cecill, with the
Lady Arbella. Which being a mere Imagination, without any Circumstance at all,
to enduce it; More then that, they are both unmarried; And that their years,
agree well; Needs no Answer. It is true, that his Lordship, being no
Stoicall, Unnatural Man, but loving toward his Children; For Charitas Reip.
incipit a Familia;) Has been glad, to match them, into Honorable, and Good
Blood; And yet not so, but, that, a private Gentleman, of Northampton shire,
that lived altogether, in the Country, was able to bestow his Daughters,
higher, then his Lord. has done. But yet, it is not seen by any Thing past,
that his Lordship, ever thought, or affected, to match his Children, in the
Blood Royal: His Lordships Wisdom, which has been so long of Gathering,
teaches him, to leave to his Posterity, rather Surety, then Danger. And, I
marvel, where be the Combinations, which have been, with Great Men; And the
Popular, and Plausible, Courses, which ever accompany such designs, as the
Libeller speaks of: And therefore, this Match, is but like unto that, which
the same Fellow, concluded, between the same Lady Arbella, and the Earl of
Leicesters Son, when he was, but a Twelve-Moneth old.

Page 70, he says; He labors, incessantly, with the Queen, to make, his
Eldest Son, Deputy of Ireland. As if, that were such a Catch; Considering, all
the Deputi^^, since her Majesty's times, (except the Earl of Sussex, and the
Lord Gray,) have been persons, of meaner Degree, then Sir Thomas Cecillis: And
the most, that is gotten, by that place, is but the Saving, and putting up, of
a Man's own Revenue's, during those years, that he serves their; And this
perhaps, to be saved, with some Displeasure, at his Return.

Page eadem, he says; He has brought in, his Second Son, Sir Robert Cecill,
to be of the Counsel, who has, neither Wit, nor Experience. Which Speech, is
as notorious an untruth, as is, in all the Libell: For it is confessed, by all
Men, that know the Gentleman, that he has one, of the Rarest, and most
Excellent, Wits, of England; with a singular Delivery, and Application, (...)
the same; whether it be, to use a Continued Speech, Or to Negotiate, Or to
touch in Writing, or to make Report, Or discreetly to consider, of the
Circumstances, And aptly, to draw Things, to a Point; And all this, joined,
with a very good Nature, and a great Respect to all Men, as is daily, more and
more, revealed. And for his Experience, it is easy to think, that his
Trayning, and Helps, has made it already such, as many, that have served, long
prentishood for it, have not attained the like: So as, if that be true; Qui
Beneficium Digno dat, omnes obligat; Not his Father only, but the State, is
bound unto her Majesty, for the choice, and Employment, of so sufficient, and
worthy, a Gentleman.

There be many other Follies, and Absurdities, in the Book: which, if an
Eloquent Scholar, had it in Hand, he would take Advantage thereof, and justly
make the Author, not only Odious, but Ridiculous, and Contemptible, to the
World. But I pass them over, and even this, which has been said, has been
vouchsafed, to the vallue, and Worth of the Matter, and not the worth, of the
Writer; who has handled a Theme, above his Compass.

8. Of the Height, of Impudency, that these Men, are grown unto, in publishing,
and Avouching, untruths; with a particular Recital of some of them, for an
Assay.
THese Men, are grown, to a singular Spirit, and Faculty, in Lying, and Abusing
the world; such, as it seems, although they are, to purchase a particular
Dispensation, for all other Sins; yet they have a Dispensation Dormant, to lie,
for the Catholic Cause; which moves me, to give the Reader, a Taste, of their
Untruths, such as are written, and are not merely gross, and palpable;
Desiring him, out of their own Writings, when any shall fall, into his Hands,
to increase the Roll, at least, in his own Memory.

We retain, in our Calenders, no other Holy Days, but such, as have their
Memorials, in the Scriptures: And therefore, in the Honor of the Blessed
Virgin, we only receive, the Feasts, of the Annunciation, and the
Purification; Omitting the other, of the Conception, and the Nativity; Which
Nativity, was used to be celebrated, upon the 8th. of September; the Vigill
whereof, happened to be, the Nativity of our Queen: which though we keep not
Holy, yet we use therein, certain Civil Customs, of Joy, and Gratulation; As
Ringing of Bells, Bonfires, and such like; And likewise, make a Memorial, of
the same Day, in our Calender: whereupon they have published; That we have
expunged, the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, and put in stead thereof, the
Nativity of our Queen. And further, that we sing, certain Hymns, unto her,
used to be sung, unto our Lady:

It happened, that upon some Bloodshed, in the Church of Paul's, according to
the Canon Law, yet with us in force, the said Church was interdicted, and so,
the Gates shut up, for some few Days; whereupon, they published, that, because
the same Church, is a place, where People use to meet, to walk and confer, the
Queens Majesty, after the manner, of the Ancient Tyrants, had forbidden, all
Assemblies, and Meetings, of People, together; And for that Reason, upon
extreme Jealousy, did cause, Paul's Gates, to be shut up.

The Gate of London, called Lud-Gate, being in decay, was pulled down; And
built anew: And on the one side, was set up, the Image, of King Lud, and his
two Sons; who, according to the Names, was thought, to be the First Founder, of
that Gate: And, on the other side, the Image of her Majesty, in whose time, it
was reedified: whereupon, they published, that her Majesty, after all the
Images, of the Saints, were long beaten down, had now, at last, set up her own
Image, upon the Principal Gate, of London, to be adored; And that all Men,
were forced, to do reverence to it, as they passed by; And a watch, there
placed, for that purpose.

Mr. Jewel, the Bishop of Salisbury, who, according to his Life, died most
godly, and patiently; At the Point of Death, used, the Versicle, of the Hymn,
Te Deum; Oh Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded;
Whereupon, suppressing the rest, they published, that the principal Champion,
of the Heretics, in his very last words, cried, he was confounded.

In the Act; of Recognition, of primo, whereby, the Right, of the Crown, is
acknowledged, by Parliament, to be in her Majesty; (The like whereof, was used,
in Queen Mary's time;) The words, of Limitation, are; In the Queens Majesty,
and the Natural Heirs, of her Body, and her lawful Successors. Upon which
word, ( Natural,) they do, maliciously, and indeed villanously, g^osse; That
it was, the Intention, of the Parliament, in a Cloud, to convey the Crown, to
any Issue, o^ her Majesty's, that were Illegitimate; Whereas ^he word, (Heir,)
does, with us, so necessarily, and pregnantly, import Lawfulness; As it had
been, Indecorum and uncivil speaking, of the Issues, of a Prince, to have
expressed it.

They set forth, in the year a Book, with Tables, and Pictures, of the
Persecutions, against Catholics; Wherein, they have, not only stories, of
50. years old, to supply their Pages; But also, taken all the persecutions, of
the Primitive Church, under the Heathen, and translated them, to the practice
of England. As that, of Worrowing Priests, under the Skins, of Bears, by Dogs,
and the like.

I conclude then, that I know not, what to make, of this Excess, in Avouching
untruths, save this; That they may truly Chaunt, in their Quires; Linguam
nostram magnificabimus, Labia nostra nobis sunt: And that they, that have long
ago, forsaken, the Truth of God, which is the Touc^-stone, must now hold by the
Whet-stone; And that their Ancient Pillar, of Lying wonders, being decayed,
they must now hold, by Lying Slanders; And make, their Libells, Successors to
their Legend.

A TRUE REPORT, Of the detestable TREASON, INTENDED, By Doctor RODERIGO LOPEZ,
A Physician, attending upon the Person of the QVEENES MAJESTY, Whom He, for a
Sum of Money, promised, to be paid him, by the King of Spain, did undertake, to
have destroyed, by Poison; with certain Circumstances, both of the Plotting,
and Detecting, of the same TREASON. Penned, during the Queens Life.
THe King of Spain, having found, by the Enterprise of 88, the Difficulty, of
an Invasion, of England; And having also, since that time, embraced the Matters
of France; (Being a Dessigne, of a more easy nature, and better prepared, to
his Hand;) Has, of necessity, for a time^ laid aside, the Prosecution of his
Attempts, against this Realm, by open Forces; As knowing, his Means unable, to
wield both Actions, at once; As well, that of England, as that of France. And
therefore, casting at the Fairest, has, (in a manner,) bent his whole
strength, upon France, making, in the mean time, only a Defensive War, upon
the Low Countries. But finding again, that the Supports, and Aides, which her
Majesty has continued, to the French King, are a principal Impediment, and
Retardation, to his prevailing there, according to his Ends; He has now, of
late, by all means, project^ed, to trouble the Waters, here, and to cut us out,
some work at home; That by practice, without Diverting, and Employing, any
gre^^ ^orce^, he might, nevertheless, divert, our Succors from France.

According to which purpose, he first proved, to move some Innovation in
Scotland; Not so much, in hope, to alienate the King, from the Amity, of her
Majesty, as practizing, to make a Party, there, against the King himself;
Whereby, he should be compelled, to use her Majesty's Forces, for his
A^^istance. Then^ he solicited a Subject, within this Realm, (being a Person
of great Nobility,) to rise in Arms, and levy War, against her Majesty; which
practice was, by the same Nobleman, loyally, and prudently, revealed. And
lastly, (rather (as it is to be thought) by the Instigation, of our Traitorous
Fugitives, in Foreign pa^ts; And the corrupter Sort, of his Counselors, and
Ministers; then of his own nature, and Inclination;) either of himself, or his
said Counselors, and Ministers, using his name, have descen^ed to to a
course, against all Honor; All Society, and Humanity; Odious to God, and Man;
Detested by the Heathen themselves; which is, to take away the Life, of her
Majesty, (which God have in his p^ecious Custody,) by violence, or poison. A
Matter, which might be proved to be, not only against all Christianity, and
Religion, but against Nature, the Law of Nations, the Honor of Arms, The Civil
Law, The Rules of Morality, and Policy: Finally, to be the most Condemned,
Barbarous, and Ferine, Act, that can be imagined: yea, (supposing the
Quarrels, and Hostility, between the Princes, to be never so Declared, and so
Mortal,) yet, were it not, that it would be a very Reproach, unto the Age, that
the Matter should be once disputed, or called in question; it could never be
defended. And therefore, I leave it to the Censure, which Titus Livius gives,
in the like case, upon Perseus, the last King of the Macedons, afterward
overthrown, taken with his Children, and led in Triumph by the Romans; Quem,
non justu^ Bellum gerere, Regio Animo, sed per omnia clandestina grassari
scelera, Latrocinioru^, ac veneficiorum, cernebant.

But to proceed, certain it is, that even about this present time, there have
been suborned, and sent, into this Realm, diverse persons, some English, some
Irish, corrupted by Money, and Promises; And resolved, and Conjured, by
Priests, in Confes^ion, to have executed, that most wretched, and horrible
Fact: Of which Number certain have been Taken, and some have suf^fered, and
some are spared, because they have, with great sorrow, confessed these
Attempts, and detested their Suborne^s. And, if I should conjecture, what the
reason is, why this cursed enterprise, was at this time so hotly, and with such
diligence, pursued; I take it to be, chiefly because the Matters of France,
wax ripe; And the King of Spain, made himself ready, to unmask himself, and to
reap that in France, which he had been long in sowing; In regard, that there
being like to be, a Divulsion, in the League, by the Reconciliation, of some of
the Heads, to the King; the more passionate Sort, being desti^uted by their
Associates, were like, to cast themselves, wholly, into the King of Spains
Arms; And to dismember, some important Piece, of that Crown; Though now, upon
this fresh Accident, of Receiving the King into Paris, it is to be thought,
that both the worst affected, of the League, will ^ubmit themselves, upon any
tolerable Conditions, to their Natural King, thus advanced, in strength, and
Reputation; And the King of Spain, will take take a second Advise, ere he
embarque himself too far, in any new Attempt, against France. But taking the
Aff^irs, as they then stood, before this Accident unexpected; Especially, of
the Council of Spain, during this his supposed Harvest in France; His Counsel
had reason, to wish, that there were no Disturbance from hence; Where they make
account, that if her Majesty, were removed, (upon whose person, God continue,
his extraordinary Watch, and Providence;) here would be nothing but Confusion;
Which they do not doubt, but with some, no great Treasure, and Forces, from
without may be nourished, till they can more fully, intend the Ruin, of this
State, according to their ancient malice.

But howsoever that be, amongst the Number of these execrable Undertakers,
there was none, so much built, and relied upon, by the Great Ones, of the other
side, as was this Physician Lopez; Nor, (indeed,) None so dangerous: whether
you consider the Aptness of the Instrument; Or the subtilty, and secrecy, of
those, that practiced with him; Or the Shift, and Evasion, which he had
provided, for a Color of his Doings, if they should happen, to come into
Question. For first, whereas others were to find, and encounter, infinite
Difficulties, in the very obtaining, of an Opportunity, to execute this
Horrible Act; And besides, cannot but see, present, and most assured Death,
before their eyes; And therefore must be, (as it were,) damnable Votaries, if
they undertake it; This Man, in regard of his Faculty, and of his private
Access, to her Majesty, had both Means, to perpetrate, and Means to conceal;
whereby, he might reap the fruit, of his wicked Treason, without evident
peril. And for his Accomplices, that practiced with him, being Portugeses, and
of the Retinue of King Antonio, the King of Spains Mortal Enemy, they were
Men, thereby freed, and discharged from Suspi^cion; And might send Letters,
and receive Letters, out of Spain, without Jealousy; As those, which were
thought, to entertain, Intelligences there, for the good of their Master: And
for the Evasion, and Masq^e, that Lopez had prepared, for this Treason, if it
had not been searched, and sifted to the bottom, It was, that he did intend,
but to cousin the King of Spain, without ill Meaning: somewhat in the nature,
of that Stratagem, which Parry, a most Cunning, and Artificial Traitor, had
provided for Himself.

Nevertheless, this Matter, by the great Goodness of God, falling into good
Hands, of those Honorable, and sufficient, persons, which dealt therein; Was,
by their great, and worthy, Industry, so handled, and followed; As this Proteus
of a disguised, and Transformed, Treason, did at last, appear, in his own
Likeness, and Colors; which were as Foul, and Monstrous, as have been known,
in the world. For some of her Majesty's Council, long since, entered into
consideration; That the Retinew of King Antonio, (I mean some of them,) were
not unlike, to hatch, these kind^ of Treasons; In regard, they were Needy
Strangers, entered into despair of their Masters Fortune, and like enough, to
aspire, to make their Peace at home, by some such wicked Se^vices, as these.
And therefore grew, to have, an extraordinary vigilant Eye upon them. Which
Prudent, and Discreet, Presumption, or Conjecture; Joined with some
Advertisements, of Espialls abroad, and some other Industry; Was, the first
Cause, (next under the great Benediction of God, which gives unto Princes,
zealous Counselors; And gives to Counselors, Policy, and Discerning
Thoughts;) of the Revealing, and Discovering, of ^hese Treasons, which were
contrived, in Order, and Form, as hereafter is set down.

This Lopez, of Nation, a Portugeze, and suspected, to be in sect, secretly, a
Jew; (Though here he conformed Himself, to the Rites of Christian Religion;)
For a long time, professed physic in this Land; By occasion whereof, (being
withal a Man very Observant, and Officious, and of a pleasing, and applyable,
behavior; In that regard, rather then for any great Learning, in his Faculty;)
He grew known, and favored in Court; And was, some years since, sworn
Physician, of her Majesty's Household; And by her Majesty's Bounty, of whom he
had received, diverse Gifts, of good commodity, was grown, to good Estate of
Wealth.

This Man, had insinuated himself, greatly, (in regard he was of the same
Nation,) with the King Antonio; Whose Causes, he pretended, to solicit at the
Court; Especially while he supposed, there was any Appearance, of his Fortune:
of whom also, he had obtained, (as one that reserved all his doings to Gain,)
an Assignation of 50000 Crowns, to be levied, in Portugal. Bu^ being a Person,
wholly, of a Corrupt, and Mercenary, Nature; And finding his Hopes cold, from
that part; He cast his Eyes, upon a more able Paymaster; And secretly, made
offer, long since, of his service, to the King of Spain: And accordingly, gave
sundry Intelligences, of that which passed here, and imported most, for the
King of Spain to know; Having no small Means, in regard of his continual
Attendance at Court, Nearness, and Access, to learn, many particulars, of
great weight. Which Intelligences, he maintained, with Bernardine Mendoza,
Antonio Vega, Roderigo Marquez, and diverse others.

In the Conveyance, of which his Intelligences, and in the making known of his
Disposition, to do the King of Spain service, he had, (amongst others,) one
Manuel Andrada, a Portugeze, revolted from Don Antonio, to the King of Spain:
One, that was discovered, to have practiced the Death, of the said Don Antonio,
and to have betrayed him, to Bernardine Mendoza. This Man coming hither, was,
for the same his practice, appearing by Letters, intercepted, apprehended, and
committed to Prison. Before which time also, there had been, by good diligence,
intercepted, other Letters; whereby, the said Andrada, adververtised Mendoza,
that he had won, Dr. Lopez, to the Kings service: But Lopez, having
understanding thereof; And finding means, to have secret conference, with
Andrada, before his examination; Persuaded with him, to take the Matter upon
himself, as if he had invented, that Advertisement, touching Lopez, only to
procure himself credit, with Mendoza; And to make him conceive well, of his
Industry, and Service. And to move him hereunto, Lopez set before Andrada, that
if he did excuse him, he should have credit, to work his Deliverie; Whereas, if
he did impeach him, he was not like, to find, any other Means, of Favor. By
which subtle persuasion, Andrada, when he came to be examined, answered,
according to the Direction, and Lessoning, which Lopez had given him. And
having thus acquitted himself of this suspicion, became Suitour, for Andrada's
Delivery, craftily suggesting, that he was to do, some notable Service, to Don
Antonio: In which his suit, he accordingly prevailed. When Lopez had thus got
Andrada, out of prison, he was suffered, to go out of the Realm, into Spain: In
pretense, (as was said,) to do some service to Don Antonio; But, in truth, to
continue Lopez Negotiation, and Intelligences, with the King of Spain: which he
handled so well, as at his Return hither, for the comforting of the said Lopez,
he brought to him, from the King, besides thanks, and words of encouragement,
and an Abrazo, (which is the Complement of Favor,) a very good Jewel,
garnished, with sundry stones, of good value. This Jewel, when Lopez had
accepted, he cunningly cast with himself; That if he should offer it, to her
Majesty, first, He was assured, she would not take it; Next, that thereby, he
should lay her asleep, and make her Secure of him, for greater Matters;
According to the saying; Fraus sibi fidem in parvis praestruit, ut in magnis
opprimat; which accordingly he did, with Protestations of his Fidelity: And her
Majesty, as a Princess of Magnanimity, not apt to fear, or suspicion, returned
it to him, with Gracious words.

After Lopez, had thus abused her Majesty, and had these Trialls of the
Fidelity of Andrada; they fell in conference, (the matter being first moved by
Andrada, as he that came freshly out of Spain,) touching the empoysoning of the
Queen. Which Lopez; (who saw that Matter of Intelligence, without some such
particular service, would draw no great Reward, from the King o^ Spain: such as
a Man, that was not Needy, but wealthy, as h^ was, could find any Taste in;)
assented unto. And to that purpose, procured again this Andrada, to be sent
over; As well, to ^dvertise, and as^ure, this Matter, to the King of Spain, and
hi^ Ministers; (Namely, to the Count de Fuentes, Assistant to the General, of
the King of Spains Forces, in the Low Countries; as also, to capitulate, and
^ontract, with him, about the Certainty of hi^ Reward^ Andrada, (having
received those Instructions, and be^ing furnished with money, by Lopez
procurement, from Don Antonio, about whose service, his Employment, was
believed to be; Went over to Calais; Where he remained, to be near unto
England, and Flande^s; Having a Boy, that ordinarily passed to and fro, between
him and Lopez; By whom he did also, (the better to color his Employment,)
write to Lopez, Intelligence, as it was agreed he should, between him, and
Lopez; Wh^ bad him, send such N^ws, as he should take up, in the Streets. From
Calais, he writes, to Count de Fuentes, of Lopez Promise, and Demands. Upon
the Receipt of which Letters, after some Time taken, to advertise this
Proposition, into Spain; And to receive direction thereupon; The Count de
Fuentes, associated with St^^phano Ibarra, Secretary of the Council of the
Wars, in the Low Countries, calls to ^im, one, Manuel Louys Tinoco, a
Portugese, who had also followed King Antonio; and, of whose good Devotion, he
had had Experience, in that he had conveyed unto him, two several Packets,
wherewith he was trusted, by the King Antonio, for France. Of this Louys, they
first received a Corporal Oath, wi^h solemn Ceremony, taking his Hands between
their Hands, that he should keep secret, that which should be imparted to him;
And never reveal the same, though he should be apprehended, and questioned,
here. This done, they acqu^int him, with the Letters, of Andrada, with whom,
they charge him, to confer at Calais, in his way, and to pass to Lopez, into
England; Addressing, him further, to Stephano Ferrera de Gama; And signifying
unto the said Lopez, withal, (as from the King,) that he gave no great
credence to Andrada, as a person, too slight, to be us^d, in a Cause, of so
great weight: And therefore marvelled much, that he heard nothing, from
Ferrera, of this Matter; From whom, he had, in former time, been advertised, in
generality, of Lopez good affection, to do him service. This Ferrera, had been,
sometimes a Man, of great Livelihood, and wealth in Portugal, which he did
forego, in adhering to Don Antonio; And appears, to be a Man, of a Capacity,
and practice; But has, some, years since, been secretly won, to the service,
of the King of Spain; not traveling, nevertheless, too and fro, but residing,
as his Leiger, in England.

Manuel Louys, dispatched with these Instructions, and with all affectionate
commendations, from the Count to Lopez; And with Letters to Ferrera; Took his
Journey, first to Calais, where he conferred with Andrada; Of whom, receiving
more ample Information, together with a short Ticket of Credence, to Lopez,
that he was a Person, whom he might trust, without scruple, came over into
England; And, first, repaired to Ferrera, and acquainted him, with the State of
the Business, who had, before that time, given some Light, unto Lopez, that he
was not a stranger, unto the Practice, between him, and Andrada; wherewith,
(indeed,) Andrada, had (in a sort,) acquainted him. And now, upon this new
Dispatch, and Knowledge, given to Lopez, of the choice of Ferrera, to continue
that, which Andrada, had begun; He, to conform himself the better, to the
satisfaction, of the King of Spain: and his Ministers abroad, was content more
fully, to communicate, with Ferrera, with whom, from that time forward, he
meant, singly, and apertly to deal; And therefore, cunningly forbear, to speak
with Manuel Louys himself, but concluded, that Ferrera should be his only
^runk, and all his Dealings, should pass through his Hands, thinking thereby to
have gone Invisible.

Whereupon he cast with Himself, that it was not safe, to use, the Mediation,
of Manuel Louys, who had been made privy to the matter, as some base carrier,
of Letters; which Letters, also, should be written, in a Cyphar; Not of
Alphabet, but of Words; Such as might, if they were opened, import no vehement
suspicion. And therefore, Manuel Louys, was sent back, with a short Answer^ And
Lopez purveied himself, of a base Fellow, a ^ortugeze, called Gomes d' Avila,
dwelling hard by Lopez House, ^o convey his Letters. After this Messenger
provided, it was agreed, between Lopez, and Ferrera, that Letters should be
sent to the Count de Fuentes, and Secretary Iuarra, written, and signed, by
Ferrera (^or Lopez, cautelously, did forbear, to write himself,) but directed,
and (indeed,) dictated word by word, by Lopez himself. The Contents thereof
were; That Lopez was ready, to execute that Service, to the King, which before
had been treated, but required, for his Recompense, the sum of 50000. Crowns,
and assurance for the same.

These Letters were written obscurely, (as was touched,) in Terms of
Merchandise; To which Obscurity, when Ferrera excepted, Lopez answered; They
knew his meaning, by that, which ^ad passed before. Ferrera wrote also, to
Manuel Louys, but charged this Gomez, to deliver the same Letters, unto him, in
the presence of Iuarra; As also, the Letter to Iuarra, in the presence of
Manuel Louys. And these Letters, were delivered to Gomez d' Avila, to be
carried to Bruxells; And a Pasport procured, and his charges defrayed, by
Lopez. And Ferrera, the more to approve his Industry, writ Letters two several
times; The one conveyed by Emanuel Palacios,) with the privity of Lopez, to
Christofero Moro, a principal Counselor, of the King of Spain, in Spain:
Signifying, that Lopez, was won, to the King of Spain: And that, he was ready
to receive his Commandment; And received a Letter, from the same Christophero
Moro, in answer to one o^ these, which he showed unto Lopez. In the mean time,
Lopez, though a Man (in semblance,) of a heavy wit, yet, indeed, subtle of
himself, as one trained in Practice; And besides, as wily, as Fear, and
Covetousness, could make him; Thought to provide for himself, (as was partly
touched before,) as many starting Holes, and Evasions, as he could devise; If
any of these Matters, should come to Light. And first, he took his time, to
cast for^h, some general words, a far off, to her Majesty, as asking her the
Question; Whether a Deceiver might not be deceived? Whereof her Majesty, (not
imagining these words, tended to such end, as to warrant him, colourably, in
this wretched Conspiracy; But, otherwise, of her own natural Disposition, bent
to integrity, and Sincerity,) uttered Dislike, and Disallowance. Next he
thought, he had wrought a great Mystery, in demanding the precise sum of 50000.
Crowns, agreeing just, with the sum, of Assignation, or Donation, from Don
Antonio; Idly, and in that, gros^ely, imagining; That if afterward, he should
accept the same sum, he might excuse it, as made good by the King of Spain, in
regard, he desisted, to follow, and favor, Don Antonio: Whereupon, the King of
Spain, was, in honor, tied, no^ to see him a Looser. Thirdly, in his
Conferrences, with Ferrera, when he was apposed, upon the particular manner,
how he would poison her Majesty^ he purposely, named unto him, a Syrop;
Knowing, that her Majesty, never uses Syrop; And therefore, thinking, that
would prove an high point, for his Justification, if Things should come in any
Qnestion.

But, all this while, disirous after his prey, which he had in hope devoured,
He did instantly importune Ferrera, for the answering, of his last Dispatch;
Finding the Delay strange, and reiterating, the Protestations, of his
Readiness, to do the Service, if he were assured of his Money.

Now before the Return, of Gomez d' Avila, into England, this Steven Ferrera,
was discovered, to have Intelligence, with the Enemy; But so, as the
particular, of his Traffic, and Overtures, appeared not. Only it seemed,
there was great account made, of that he managed; And thereupon, he was
committed to Prison. Soon after, arrived Gomez d' Avila, and brought Let^ers,
only, from Manuel Louys, by the Name, of Franceseo de Thores; Because, (as it
seems,) the great persons, on the other side, had a contrary disposition, to
Lopez; And liked not, to write, by so base a Messenger, but continued their
Course, to trust, and employ Manuel Louys himself, who, in likelihood, was
retained, till they might receive, a full Conclusion, from Spain; Which was
not, till about two months, after. This Gomez, was apprehended, at his
Landing; And about him, were found the Letters aforesaid, written in Iargon, or
Verbal Cyphar, but yet somewhat suspicious, in these words; This Bearer will
tell you, the price, in which your Pearls are esteemed, and in what
resolution, we rest, about a little Musk, and Amber, which I am determined to
buy. Which Words, the said Manuel Louys, afterward, voluntarily confessed, to
be desciphered, in this sort; That by the Allowance of the Pearls, he meant,
that the Count de Fuentes, and the Secretary, did gladly accept, the Offer of
Lopez, to poison the Queen, signified by Ferrera's Letter; And for the
Provision, of Amber, and Musk, it was meant, that the Count, looked shortly,
for a Resolution from the King of Spain: concerning a Matter of importance;
Which was, For Burning of the Queens Ships, and another Point, tending to the
satisfaction, of their Vindicative Humor.

But while the sense, of this former Letter, rested ambiguous; And that, no
direct particular, was confessed, by Ferrera; Nor sufficient Light given, to
ground, any rigorous examination, of him; Comes over Manuel Louys, with the
Resolution from Spain: Who first understanding, of Ferrera's Restraint; and
therefore doubting, how far things were discovered, to shadow the matter, like
a cunning Companion, gave advertisement, of an Intent he had, to do service,
and hereupon obtained a Pasport. But after his coming in, he made no have, to
reveal any thing, but thought to dally, and abuse, in some other sort. And
while the Light was thus in the Clouds, there was also intercepted, a little
Ticket, which Ferrera, in Prison, had found means, to write, in care to
conceal Lopez, and to keep him out of danger, to give a Caveat of staying all
further Answers, and Advertisements, in these Causes. Whereupon, Lopez was
first called in Question.

But in Conclusion, this matter being with all Assiduity, and Policy, more and
more, pierced, and mined into; First, there was won, from Manuel Louys, his
Letters, from the Count de Fuentes, and Secretary Iuara, to Ferrera; In both
which, mention is made, of the Queens Death. In that of the Counts, under the
Term, of a Commission; And in that of the Secretaries, under the Term, of the
Great Service, whereof should arise, an universal Benefit, to the whole World.
Also the Letters of Credit, written by Gonzalo Gomez; One to Pedro de Carrera;
And the other, to Iuan Pallacio, to take up, a sum of Money, by Emanuel Louys,
by the foresaid false Name, of Fr. de Thores; Letters so large, and in a
manner, without Limitation, as any sum, by virtue thereof, might be taken up.
Which Letters, were delivered, to Louys, by the Count de Fuentes own hands,
with directions, to show them to Lopez, for his assurance. A matter, of Gods
secret working, in staying the same; For thereupon, rested only, the Execution,
of the Fact of Lopez. Upon so narrow a point, consisted the safety, of her
Majesty's Life; already, sold by Avarice, to Malice and Ambition; But
extraordinarily, preserved, by that Watchman, which never slunbreth. This same
Emanuel Louys, and Steven Ferrera also; Whereof the one, managed the Matter
abroad; And the other, resided here, to give correspondence, never meeting,
after Emanuel had returned, severally examined, without Torture, or Threatening,
did, in the end, voluntarily, and clearly, confess the Matters, above
mentioned: And in their Confessions, fully consent, and concur; Not only in
substance, but in all points, particularities, and Circumstances: Which
confessions, appear expressed, in their own Natural Language, testified, and
subscribed, with their own Hands; And in open Assembly, at the Arraignment of
Lopez, in the Guild hall, were, by them confirmed, and avouched, to Lopez his
face; And therewithal are extant, undefaced, the Original Letters, from Count
de Fuente, Secretary Iuara, and the Rest.

And Lopez himself, at his first Apprehension, and Examination, did indeed
deny; And deny, with deep, and terrible Oaths, and Execrations, the very
Conferences, and Treaties, with Ferrera, or Andrada, about the Empoysonment.
And being demanded, if they were proved against him, what he would say? He
answered; That he would yield himself guilty, of the Fact intended.
Nevertheless, being afterward confronted by Ferrera, who constantly
maintained to him, all that he said; Reducing him, to the Times, and places, of
the said Conferences, he confessed the Matter; As by his Confession, in
writing, signed with his own Hand, appears. But then he fell, to that slender
Evasion, as his last Refuge; That he meant, only, to cosen the King of Spain,
of the Money; And in that he continued, at his Arraignment; when,
notwithstanding, at the first, he did retract his own Confession; And yet,
being asked, whither he was drawn, either by Mean of Torture, or promise of
Life, to make the same Confession, he did openly testify, that no such Means,
was used toward him.

But the Falsehood of this Excuse, being an Allegation, that any Traitor may
use, and provide for himself, is convicted, by three notable Proofs. The
first, That he never opened this Matter, neither unto her Majesty, unto whom he
had ordinary Access; Nor to any Counselor of State, to have permission, to
toll on, and inveagle these Parties, with whom he did treat, if it had been
thought so convenient. Wherein, percase, he had opportunity, to have done, some
good service, for the further Discovery, of their secret Machinations, against
her Majesty's Life. The second, that he came, too late, to this shift; Having
first bewrayed, his guilty Conscience, in denying those Treaties, and
Conferences, till they were, evidently, and manifestly, proved to his Face. The
third, that in conferring, with Ferrera, about the manner, of his assurance, he
thought it better, to have the Money, in the Hands, of such Merchants, as he
should name in Antwerp; then to have brought it into England: Declaring his
purpose to be, after the Fact done, speedily to fly to Antwerp; And there, to
tarry some time, and so to convey himself, to Constantinople; where it is
affirmed, that Don Solomon, a Jew, in good credit, is Lopez his near Kinsman;
And that, he is greatly favored, by the said Don Solomon; whereby, it is
evident, that Lopez, had cast his Reckonings, upon the supposition, of the Fact
done.

Thus may appear, both, how justly, this Lopez is condemned, for the Highest
Treason; that can be imagined; And how, by Gods mavelous Goodness, her
Majesty, has been preserved. And surely, if a Man do truly consider, it is
hard to say; Whither God, has done greater things, By her Majesty, or For Her:
If you ob^erve on the one side, how God h^th ordained her Government, to break,
and cross, the unjust Ambition, of the Two Mighty Potentates, the King of
Spain; and the Bishop of Rome, never so straightly, between themselves, combined;
And, on the other side, how mightily God has protected her, both against
foreign Invasion, and Inward Troubles; And singularly, against the many secret
Conspiracies, that have been made against her Life: Thereby declaring, to the
world, that he will indeed preserve that Instrument, which he has magnified.
But the Corruptions, of these Times, are wonderful, when that Wars; which are
the highest Trialls of Right, between Princes, (that acknowledge no superior
Jurisdiction;) And ought to be prosecuted, with all Honor, shall be stained,
and infamed, with such Foul, and Inhumane Practices. Wherein, if so great a
King has been named, the Rule of the Civil Law, (which is a Rule of Common
Reason;) Must be remembered; Frustra Legis auxilium implorat, qui in Legem
Committit. He that has sought, to violate, the Majesty Royal, in the Highest
Degree, cannon claim, the pre-eminence thereof, to be exempted, from just
Imputation.

AN ADVERTISEMENT, TOUCHING THE CONTROVERSIES, OF THE CHURCH, OF ENGLAND.
IT is but Ignorance, if any Man find it strange, that the State of Religion,
(especially, in the Days of Peace,) should be exercised, and troubled, with
Controversies: For as it is, the Condition, of the Church Militant, to be ever
under Trials; So it comes to pass, that when the Fiery Trial, of
Persecution, cease, there succeeds another Trial, which, (as it were,) by
contrary Blasts of Doctrine, does sift, and winnowe, Men's Faith; And proves,
whether they Know God aright; Even as that other, of Afflictions, discovers,
whether they Love him, better, then the World. Accordingly, was it foretold, by
Christ, saying; That in the latter times, it should be said; Lo here, lo there
is Christ: Which is to be understood, not as if the very Person of Christ,
should be assumed, and counterfeitted; But this Authority, and pre-eminence,
(which is to be Truth it self,) should be challenged, and pretended. Thus have
we read, and seen, to be fulfilled, that which follows, Ecce in Deserto; Ecce
in Penetralibus: While some have sought the Truth, in the Conventicles, and
Conciliables, of Heretics, and Sectaries; others, in the Externe Face, and
Representation, of the Church; And both Sorts have been seduced. Were it then,
that the Controversies, of the Church, of England, were such, as they did
Divide, the Unity of the Spirit; And not only such, as do unswa^h her, of her
Bands, (the Bands of Peace;) yet could it be no Occasion, for any pretended
Catholic, to judge us; or for any Irreligious Person, to despise us: Or if it
be, it shall but happen to us all, as it has used to do; To them to be
Hardened, and to us to Endure, the good pleasure of God. But now, that our
Contentions, are such, as we need not, so much, that general Canon, and
Sentence, of Christ, propounded against Heretics; Erratis, nescientes
Scripturas, and potestatem Dei. You do Err, not Knowing the Scripture, and the
Power of God; As we need, the Admonition, of S. James; Let every Man be swift
to hear, slow to speak slow to wrath; And that the Wound, is no way, dangerous,
except we poison it, with our Remedies: As the Former Sort of Men, have less
Reason, to make themselves Music, in our Discord; So I have good hope, that
Nothing shall displease our Selves; which shall be sincerely, and modestly
propounded, for the appeasing of these Dissentions. For it any shall be
offended, at this voice; Vos estis fratres; ye are brethren, why strive Ye? He
shall give, a great presumption, against himself, that he is the Party, that
does his Brethren wrong.

The Controversies themselves, I will not enter into; As judging, that the
Disease, requires rather Rest, then any other Cure. Thus much we all know, and
confess, that they be not of the Highest Nature: For they are not, touching the
high Mysteries o^ Faith, such as detained the Churches, for many years, after
their first Peace: what time the Heretics moved curious Questions, and made
strange Anatomies, of the Natures, and person, of Christ: And the Catholic
Fathers, were compelled to follow them, with all Subtilty of Decisions, and
Determinations, to exclude them, from their Evasions, and to take them in their
Labyrinths: So as it is rightly said; Illis temporibus, ingeniosa Res fuit,
esse Christianum: In those days, it was an ingenious, and subtle thing, to be
a Christian. Neither are they, concerning the great parts, of the Worship of
God; Of which it is true; that, Non servatur unitas in Credendo, nisi eadem sit
in Colendo: There will be kept, no unity in Believing, except it be
entertained, in worshipping: Such as were the Controversies, of the East, and
West, Churches, touching Images: And such, as are many of those, between the
Church of Rome, and Us; As about the Adoration of the Sacrament, and the like:
But we contend, about Ceremonies, and Things Indifferent; About the Extern
Policy, and Government of the Church. In which kind, if we would but remember,
that the Ancient, and True Bounds, of Unity, are, One Faith, One Baptism; And
not, One Ceremony, One Policy; If we would observe the League, amongst
Christians, that is penned by our Savior; He that is not against us, is with
us: If we could but comprehend, that Saying; Differentiae Rituum commendant
unitatem Doctrinae; The Diversities of Ceremonies, do set forth, the unity of
Doctrine; And that, Habet Religio quae sunt AEternitatis, habet quae sunt
Temporis; Religion has parts, which belong to Eternity, and parts which
pertain to Time: And if we did but know, the virtue of silence, and slowness to
speak, commended by Saint James; Our Controversies, of themselves, would close
up, and grow together. But most especially, if we would leave, the Overweening,
and Turbulent Humors, of these times; And revive, the blessed proceeding, of
the Apostles, and Fathers, of the Primitive Church; which was, in the like, and
greater Cases, not to enter into Assertions, and Positions, but to deliver
Counsels, and Advises; we should need no other Remedy at all; Si eadem
Con^ulis, (frater,) quae affirmas, consulenti debetur Reverentia, cum non
debeatur Fides affirmanti: Brother, if that which you set down, as an
Assertion, you would deliver, by way of Advise; There were Reverence due to
your Counsel, whereas Faith is not due to your Affirmation. Saint Paul, was
content, to speak thus, Ego, non Dominus; I, and not the Lord: Et, secundum
Consilium meum; According to my Counsel: But now, Me^ do, too lightly, say;
Non ego, sed Dominus; Not I, but the Lord: yea, and bind it, with an Heavy
Denunciation of his Judgments, to terrify the simple, which have not
sufficiently understood, out of Solomon; That the Causeless Curse shall not
come.

Therefore, seeing the Accidents are they, which breed the peril, and not the
Things themselves, in their own Nature; It is meet, the Remedies, be applied
unto them, by Opening, what it is, on either part, that keeps the Wound
Green; And formalizeth, both sides, to a further Oppo^^tion; and works, an
Indisposition, in Men's minds, to be reunited; wherein no Accusation is
pretended. But I find in Reason, that Peace, is best built, upon a Repetition,
of wrongs; And in Example, that the speeches, which have been made, by the
wisest Men, De Concordia Ordinum, have not abstained, from reducing to Memory,
the Extremities, used on both parts: So as it is true, which is said; Qui pacem
tractat non is repetit Conditionibus Dissidiis, is magis Ani^mos Hominum,
dulcedine pacis fallit, quam aequitate componit.

And First of all, it is more then Time, that there were an End, and surseance,
made, of this Immodest, and Deformed, manner of Writing, lately entertained;
whereby, Matter of Religion, is handled, in the style of the Stage. Indeed,
bitter, and earnest, Writing, must not hastily, be condemned; For Men cannot
contend Coldly, and without affection, about Things, which they hold Dear, and
Precious. A Pollitick Man, may write, from his Brain, without Touch, and Sense,
of his Heart; As in a Speculation, that appertains not unto him: But, a
Feeling Christian, will express, in his words, a Character, of Zeal, or Love.
The latter of which, as I could wish rather embraced, being more proper for
these Times, yet is the Former warranted also, by great Examples.

But to leave, all Reverent, and Religious, Compassion, toward Evils, or
Indignation toward Faults; and to turn, Religion into a Comedy, or Satyr; To
search, and rip up wounds, with a Laughing Countenance; To intermix, Scripture,
and scurrility, sometime, in one Sentence; Is a thing, far from the devout
Reverence, of a Christian, and scant beseeming, the honest Regard, of a sober
Man. Non est major Confusio, quam Scrii, and Ioci. There is no greater
Confusion, then the confounding, of Jest and Earnest. The Majesty of Religion,
and the Contempt, and Deformity, of things ridiculous, are things as distant,
as things may be. Two principal Causes, have I ever known, of Atheism;
Curious Controversies, and profane Scoffing: Now, that these two, are joined
in one, no doubt, that Sect, will make no small Progression. And here, I do
much esteem, the Wisdom, and Religion, of that Bishop, which replied, to the
first Pamphlet, of this kind, who remembered, that a Fool, was to be answered,
but not, by becoming like unto him; And considered, the Matter, which he
handled, and not the Person, with whom he dealt.

Job, speaking of the Majesty, and Gravity of a Judge, in himself says; If I
did smile, they believed it not: As if h^ should have said; If I diverted, or
glanced, upon Conceit of Mirth, yet Men's Minds, were so possessed, with a
Reverence, of the Action in hand, as they could not receive it. Much more,
ought not this to be, amongst Bishops, and Divines, disputing about Holy
Things. And therefore, as much, do I mislike, the Invention of him, who, (as it
seems,) pleased himself in it, as in no mean Policy; That these Men, are to
be dealt withal at their own Weapons, and, pledg^d in their own Cup. This
seemed to him, as profound a Devise, as when the Cardinal Sansovino,
counseled Julius the second, to encounter the Council of Pisa, with the
Council of Lateran; Or as Lawful a Challenge, as Mr. Jewel made, to confute,
the pretended Catholics, by the Fathers: But those Things, will not excuse,
the Imitation, of Evil in another. It should be, contrariwise, with us, as
Caesar said; Nil malo, quam eos similes esse sui, Et me mei. But now; Dum de
bonis contendimus, de Malis consentimus: While we Differ about good things, we
Resemble in evil.

Surely, if I were asked, of these Men, who were the more to be blamed, I
should, per case, remember the Proverb; That the second Blow makes the Fray;
And the saying of an Obscure Fellow; Qui replicat, multiplicat: He that
replieth, multiplieth. But, I would determine, the Question, with this
Sentence; Alter principium Malo dedit, alter Modum abstulit: By the ones Means,
we have a Beginning, and by the other, we shall have none End.

And truly, as I do marvel, that some of those Preachers which call for
Reformation; (whom I am far from wronging; so far, as to join them, with these
Scoffers;) Do not, publish some Declaration, whereby they may satisfy the
world, that they dislike their Cause, should be thus solicited; So I hope,
assuredly, that my Lords of the Clergy, have none Intelligence, with this
interlibelling; But do altogether disallow, that their Credit should be thus
defended. For though, I observe, in one of them, many Glosses, whereby the Man,
would insinuate himself, into their Favors; yet I find it to be ordinary, that
many Pressing, and Fawning Persons do misconjecture, of the Humors, of Men in
Authority; And many times, Veneri immolant suem; they seek to gratify them,
with that, which they most dislike. For I have great Reason, to satisfy my
self, touching the Judgment of my Lords, the Bishops, in this Matter, by that
which was written by one of them, which I mentioned before, with honor.
Nevertheless I note, ^here is not an indifferent hand carried, towa^ds these
Pamphlets, a they deserve; For the one sort, flies in the Dark, and the other,
is uttered openly. Wherein, I might advise, that side, ou^ of a Wise w^iter,
who has set it down, That, punitis Ingeniis gliscit Authoritas.

And, indeed, we see, it ever falls out, that the Forbidden Writing, is
always ^hought, to be certain sparks of a Truth, that fly up in^o the faces of
those, that seek to choke it, and tread it out; Whereas, a Book Authorized is
thought to be, but Temporis Voces; The Language of the Time. But in plain
Truth, I do find, (to mine understanding,) these Pamphlets, as meet to be
suppressed, as the other. First, because, as the former sort, does deface, the
Government, of the Church, in the persons of the Bishops, and Prelates; So the
other, does lead into Contempt, the Exercises of Religion, in the Persons of
sundry Preachers: So as it disgraceth an higher matter, though in the meaner
Person.

Next, I find, certain indiscreet, and dangerous Amplifications, as if the
Civil ^overnment, it self, of this State, had near lost the Force of her
Sinews; And were ready, to enter, into some Convulsion, all things being full
of Faction, and Disorder; which is as unjustly acknowledged, as untruly
affirmed. I kow, his Meaning is, to enforce, this unreverent, and violent
Impugning, of the Government of Bishops, to be, a suspected Forerunner, of a
more general Contempt. And I grant, there is Sympathy, between the Estates;
But no such matter, in the Civil Policy, as deserves so dishonorable a
Taxation.

To conclude this Point; As it were to be wished, that these Writings, had been
abortive, and never seen the Sun; So the next is, since they be commen abroad,
that they be censured, (by all that have Understanding, and Conscience,) as the
untemperate Extravagancies, of some Light persons. Yea, further, that Men
beware, (except they mean to adventure, to deprive themselves, of all sense of
Religion, and to pave their own Hearts, and make them as the High Way,) how
they be conversant in them; And much more, how they delight in that Vein; But
rather to turn their Laughing, into Blushing; And to be ashamed, as of a short
Madness; That they have, in matters of Religion, taken their Disport, and
Solace. But this, perchance, is of these Faults, which will be soonest
acknowledged; Though I perceive, nevertheless, that there want not some, who
seek to blaunch, and excuse it.

But to descend, to a sincere View, and Consideration, of the Accidents, and
Circumstances, of these Controversies, wherein, either part, deserves Blame,
or Imputation; I find, generally, in Causes of Church Matters, that Men do
offend, in some, or all, of these five Points.

The First is, the Giving Occasion, unto the Controversies; And also, the
Inconsiderate, and Ungrounded, Taking of Occasion. The Next is, the Extending,
and Multiplying, the Controversies, to a more general Opposition, or
Contradiction, then appears, at the first propounding of them, when Men's
Judgments are least partial. The Third is, the Passionate, and Unbrotherly
Practices, and Proceedings, of both Parts, toward the Persons, each of others,
for their Discredit, and Suppression. The Fourth is, the Courses, holden, and
entertained, on either side, for the drawing of their Partisans, to a more
straight, Union within themselves; Which ever imports, a further Distraction,
of the Entire Body. The last is, the Undue, and Inconvenient, Propounding,
publishing, and Debating, of the Controversies. In which Point, the most
palpable Error, has been already spoken of; As that, which through the
strangeness, and Freshness of the Abuse, first offers it self, to the
Conceits, of all Men.
Now concerning the Occasion, of the Controversies; It cannot be denied, but
that the Imperfections, in the Conversation, and Government of those, which
have chief place in the Church, have ever been principal Causes, and Motives,
of Schisms, and Divisions. For whiles the Bishops, and Governers, of the
Church, continue full of Knowledge, and good Works; Whiles they Feed the Flock
indeed; Whiles they deal, with the Secular States, in all Liberty, and
Resolution, according to the Majesty of their Calling, and the precious care of
Souls, imposed upon them; So long, the Church is situated, as it were upon an
Hill; No Man makes question of it, or seeks to depart from it: But when
these virtues, in the Fathers, and Leaders, of the Church, have lost their
Light, And that they wax worldly, Lovers of themselves, and Pleasers of Men;
Then Men begin, to groap for the Church, as in the Dark^ They are in doubt,
whether they be the Successors of the Apostles, or of the Pharisees: yea,
howsoever they sit in Moses Chair, yet they can never speak, Tanquam
Authoritatem habentes, as having Authority, because they have lost their
Reputation, in the Consciences of Men, by declining their steps, from the way,
which they trace out to others. So as Men, had need, continually, have sounding
in their Ears, this same; Nolite Exire: Go not out: So ready are they, to
depart from the Church, upon every voice. And therefore, it is truly noted by
one, that writes as a Natural Man; That the Humility of the Friars, did, for
a great time, maintain, and bear out, the Irreligion, of Bishops, and Prelates.

For this is the Double Policy, of the spiritual Enemy; either by counterfeit
Holiness of Life, to Establish, and Authorize Errors; Or by Corruption of
Manners, to discredit, and draw in question, Truth, and Things Lawful. This
concerns, my Lords the Bishops, unto whom, I am witness to my self, that I
stand affected, as I ought: No Contradiction has supplanted, in me, the
Reverence, that I owe to their Calling: Neither has any Detraction, or
Calumny, imbased mine Opinion, of their Persons. I know some of them, whose
Names are most pierced, with these Accusations, to be Men of great virtues;
Although the Indisposition of the times, and the want of Correspondence, many
ways, is enough to frustrate, the best Endeavors, in the Edifying of the
Church. And for the rest, generally, I can condemn none. I am no Judge of them,
that belong, to so High a Master; Neither have I two Witnesses. And I know, it
is truly said, of Fame, that -- Pariter Facta, a^que Infecta Canebat.


Their Taxations, arise not, all, from one Coast; They have many, and
different, Enemies; Ready to invent Slander, more ready ^o amplify it, and
most ready to believe it. And Magnes Mendacii Credulitas; Credulity is the
Adamant of Lies. But if any be, against whom, the supreme Bishop, has not a
few Things, but many Things; If any have lost his first Love; If any be neither
Hot, nor Cold; If any have stumbled, too fondly, at the Threshold, in such
sort, that he cannot sit well, that entered ill; It is time they return, whence
they are fallen, and confirm the Things, that remain.

Great is the Weight of this Fault; Et eorum causa abhorrebant a Sacr^ficio
Domini: And For their Cause, did Men abhor, the Adoration of God. But howsoever
it be, Those, which have sought to deface them, and cast Contempt upon them,
are not to be excused.

It is the precept of Salomo^, that the Rulers be not Reproached; No, not in
our Thought. But that, we draw, our very Conceit, into a Modest Interpretation,
of their Doings. The Holy Angel, would give no Sentence of Blasphemy, against
the Common Sl^underer, but said; Increpet te Dominus: The Lord Rebuke thee. The
Apostle. Saint Paul, though against him, that did pollute Sacred Justice, with
Tyrannous Violence, he did justly denounce ^he Judgment of God, saying;
Per^utiet te Dominus: The Lord will strike thee: yet in saying, Paries
dealbate, he thought he had gone too far, and retracted it. Whereupon a Learned
Father said; Ipsum, quamvis inane nomen, and umbram Sacerdotis, expavit.

The ancient Councels, and Synodes, (as is noted by the Ecclesiastical Story,)
when they deprived any Bishop, never recorded the Offense, but buried it in
perpetual Silence: Only Cham, purchased, his Curse, by revealing his Fathers
Disgrace, And yet a much gre^ter Fault is it, to ascend, from their Person, to
their Calling, and draw that in question. Many good Fathers, spoke rigourously,
and severely, of the unworthiness of Bishops; As if, presently, it did
forfeit, and cease their Office. One says; Sacerdotes nominamur, and non
sumus: We are called Priests, but Priests we are not. Another says; Nisi bonum
Opus amplecta^is, Episcopus esse non potes: Except thou undertake the good
work, thou can not be a Bishop: Yet they meant nothing less, then to move
doubt, of their Calling, or Ordination.

The Second Occasion, of Controversies, is the Nature, and Humor, Church never
wants, a kind of Persons, which love the Salutation, of Rabbi, Master; Not in
Ceremony, or Complement, but in an Inward Authority, which they seek, over Men's
Minds, in drawing them, to depend, upon their Opinions, and to seek Knowledge,
at their Lips. These Men, are the true Successors, of Diotrephes, the Lover of
Pre-eminence; And not, Lord Bishops. Such Spirits do light upon another sort of
Natures, which do adhere to these Men; Quorum gloria in Obsequio; Stiff
Followers, and such, as zeal mervailously, for those, whom they have chosen,
for their Masters. This latter sort, for the most part, are Men, of young
years, and superficial Understanding; Car^ied away, with par^iall respects of
Persons; Or with the Enticing Appearance, of Godly Names, and Pretenses: Pauci
res ipsas sequuntur, plures nomina Rerum, plurimi nomina Magistrorum. Few
follow the things themselves, more the names of the Things, and most the Names
of their Masters.

About these general Affections, are wreathed, and interlaced, accidental,
and private Emulations, and Discontentments; All which, together, break forth
into contentions; Such as either violate Truth, Sobriety, or Peace. These
generalities apply themselves. The Universities, are the Seat, or the
Continent, of this Disease; Whence it has been, and is derived, into the Rest
of ^he Realm. There Men, will no longer be, e numero, of the Numeber. There, do
others side themselves, before they know, their Right Hand, from their Left. So
it is true, which is said; Transeunt ab Ignorantia, ad praejudicium. They skip
from Ignorance to a prejudicate Opinion; And never take, a sound Ju^gement, in
their way. But, as it is well noted; Inter Iuvenile Iudicium, and senile
praejudicium, omnis veritas corumpitur: Through want of years, when Men are not
indifferent, But partial, then their Judgment, is weak, and unripe.

And when it grows, to Strength, and Ripeness, by that time, it is
forestalled, with such a Number of prejudicate Opinions, as it is made
unprofitable: So as, between these two, all Truth is corrupted. In the mean
while, the Honorable Names, of Sincerity, Reformation, and Discipline, are put
in the fore Ward; So as, Contentions, and Evil Zeals, cannot, be touched,
except these Holy Things, be thought first to be violated. But howsoever, they
shall infer, the Solicitation, for the Peace, of the Church, to proceed, from
Carnal Sense, yet, I will conclude, ever, with the Apostle Paul; Cum sit inter
vos, Zelus, and Contentio, nonne carnales estis? While there is amongst you,
Zeal, and Contention, are ye not carnal? And howsoever, they esteem, the
Compounding of Controversies, to savor of Man's Wisdom, and Human Policy; And
think themselves led, by the Wisdom, which is from above; yet I say with Saint
James; Non est ista sapientia de sursum descendens; sed Terrena, Animalis,
Diabolica. Vbi enim Zelus, and Contentio, ^bi Inconstantia, and omne opus
pravum. Of this Inconstancy, it is said by a Learned Father; Procedere volunt,
non ad perf^ctionem, sed ad permutationem: They seek to go forward still, not
to perfection, but ^o change.

The Third Occasion of Controversies, I observe to be, an Extreme and
unlimitted, Detestation, of some former Heresy, or Co^ruption, of the Church,
already acknowledged, and convicted. This was the Cause, that produced, the
Heresy of Arrius, grounded, especially, upon De^estation of C^ntilism; least
the Christians, should seem, by the Assertion, of the equal Divinity, of our
Savior Christ, to approach, unto the Acknowledgement, of more ^ods, then One.
The Detestation, of the Heresy, of Arrius, produced that of Sabellius; who
holding ^or Ex^c^able, the Dissimilitude, which Arrius pretended in the
Trinity, fled so far from him, as he fell upon that other extremity, to deny
the Distinction of Pers^ns: And to say, they were, but only Names, of sev^rall
Offices, and Dispensations. Yea, most of the Heresies, and ^ch^smes, of the
Church, have sprung up, of this Root; While M^n, have made it, as it were,
their S^ale, by which, to measure the Bounds, of the most perfect Religion;
Taking it, by the furth^st distance, from the Error, last condemned. These be
Posthumi Haeresium Filii; Heresies, that arise, out of the Ashes, of other
Heresies, that are extinct, and amortized.

This Manner of Apprehension, does, in some degree, possess many in our Times.
They think it the true Touchstone, to try what is good and evil, by measuring,
what is more, or less, opposite, to the Institutions, of the Church, of Rome;
Be it Ceremony; Be it Policy, or Government; yea, be it other Institutions of
greater Weight; That is ever most perfect, which is removed, most deg^ees, from
that Church: And that, is ever polluted, and blemished, which participateth, in
any Appearance, with it. This is a subtle, and dangerous, Conceit, for Men to
entertain; Apt to delude themselves, more apt to delude the People, and most
apt of all, to calumniate their Adversaries. This surely, (but that a Notorious
Condemnation, of that Position, was before our Eyes,) had, long since, brought
us, to the Rebaptization of Children, baptized according to the Pretended
Catholic Religion. For I see that, which is a Matter, of much like reason;
Which is the re^ordaining of Priests, is a Matter, already, resolutely
maintained. It is very meet, that Men beware, how they be abused by this
Opinion; And that they know, that it is a Consideration, of much greater
Wisdom, and Sobriety, to be well advised; whether, in general Demolition, of
the Institutions, of the Church, of Rome, there were not, (as Men's Actions are
imperfect,) some Good purged with the Bad; Rather, then to purge the Church as
they pretend, every day anew: Which is the way, to make a wound in the Bowels,
as is already begun.

The Fourth, and Last, Occasion, of these Controversies, (a Matter, which did,
also, trouble the Church, in former times,) is the partial, Affectation, and
Imitation, of Foreign Churches. For many of our Men, (during the time of
persecution, and since,) having been Conversant, in Churches abroad; And
received, a great Impression, of the form of Government, there ordained, have
violently sought, to intrude the same, upon our Church. But I answer;
Consentiamus in eo quod convenit, non in eo quod receptum est: Let us agree in
this, that every Church do that, which is convenient, for the State, of it
self, and not in particular Customs: Although their Churches, had received,
the better Form, yet, many times, it is to be sought; Non quod Optimum, sed e
bonis quid ^roximum: Not that which is Best, but of good Things, which is the
Best, and Readiest, to be had. Our Church is not now to plant; It is settled,
and established. It may be in Civil States, a Republicke, is a better Policy,
then a Kingdom; Yet God forbid, that lawful Kingdomes^ should be tied to
innovate, and make Alterations. Qui mala introducit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat,
revelatam in verbo; Qui Nova intro^ucit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat, revelatam in
Rebus. He that brings in Evil Customs, resists the will of God, revealed
in his Word; He that brings in new Things, resists the Will of God,
revealed in the Things themselves. Consule providentiam Dei cum verbo Dei; Take
Counsel, of the Providence of God^ as well as of his Word. Neither yet do I
admit, that their Form, although it were possible, and convenient, is better
then ours, if some Abuses were taken away. The Parity, and Equality, of
Ministers, is a Thing, of wonderful great Confusion: And so is An Ordinary
Government by Synods; which does, necessarily, ensue upon the other.

It is hard, in all Causes, but especially in Religion, when Voices, shall be
Numbered, and not Weighed: Equidem, (says a Wise Father,) ut vere quod res est
scribam, prorsus decrevi fugere omnem Conventum Episcoporum; Null^us enim
Concilii bonum exitum unquam vidi; Concilia enim non minuunt Mala, sed augent
potius. To s^y the truth, I am utterly determined, never to come, to any
Council of Bishops. For I never yet saw, good end, of any Council; For
Councels aba^e not ill things, but rather increase them. which is to be
understood, not so much of General Councels, as of Synods, gathered, for the
ordinary Government of the Church. As for the Depriva^ion of Bishops, and such
like causes; This mischief has taught the use of Arch Bishops, Patriarchs, and
Primates; as the abuse of them since, has taught Men to mislike them.

But it will be said; Look to the Fruits, of the Churches abroad, and Ours. To
which I say, that I beseech the Lord, to multiply his Blessings, and Graces,
upon those Churches, an hundred fold. But yet, it is not good, that we fall, on
the numbering of them. It may be, our peace, has made us more wanton. It may be
also, (though I would be loath, to derogate, from the Honor, of those
Churches, were it not to remove Scandalls,) that their Fruits, a^e, as Torches,
in the Dark, which appear greatest, afar off. I know, they may have some strict
Orders, for the repressing of sund^y Excesses: But when I consider, of the
Censures of some persons, as well upon particular Men, as upon Churches; I
think on the saying of a Platonist, who says; Certe vitia Irascibilis partis
Animae sunt gradu praviora, quam concupiscibilis, ^ametsi occultiora: A matter,
that appeared much, by the Ancient Contentions, of Bishops. God grant, that we
may contend, with other Churches, as the Vine with the Olive, which of us shall
bear the best Fruit; And not, as the Briar with the Thistle, which of us is
most unprofitable. And thus much, touching the occasions of these Controversies.

Now, briefly, to set down, the Growth and Progr^ssion, of the Controversies:
whereby will be verified, the saying of Solomon; That the Course of Contention,
is to be stopped, at the first; Being else as the waters, which if they gain a
Breach, it will hardly ever be recovered.

It may be remembered, that on that part, which call for Reformation, was first,
propounded, some Dislike, of certain Ceremonies, supposed to be Superstitious;
some complaint of Dumb Ministers, who possess Ric^ Benefices; And some
Invectives, against the Idle, and Mon^sti^^ll, Continuance, within the
Vniversi^ies, by those, who had Livings to be resident upon, and such like
Abuses. Thence, they went on, to condemn, the Government, of Bis^ops, as an
Hierarchy, Remaining to us, of the Corruptions, of the Roman Church; And to
except, to sundry Institutions, in the Church; As not sufficiently, delivered,
from the pollutions, of former Times.

And lastly, they are advanced, to define, of an only, and perpetual Form, of
Policy, in the Church; which, without Consideration, of possibility, and
foresight of Peril, and perturbation of the Church, and State, must be
erected, and planted, by the Magistrate. Here they stay. Others, not able, to
keep footing in so steep Ground, descend further; That the same must be entered
into, and accepted of the people, at their peril, without the Attending, of
the Establishment, of Authority. And, so in the mean time, they refuse to
communicate with us, reputing us to have no Church. This has been, the
progression, of that side. I mean of the Generality. For I know, some persons,
(being of the Nature, not only to love Extremities, but also, to fall to them,
without degrees^) were at the highest strain, at the first.

The other Part, which maintains, the present Governm^nt^ of the Church, has
not kept, one Tenor, neither. First those Ceremonies, which were pretended, to
be corrupt, they maintained, to be things indifferent; and opposed, the
examples, of the good Times, of the Church, to that challenge, which was made
unto them, because they were used, in the latter supers^itious Times. Then were
they also content, mildly, to acknowledge, many Imperfections, in the Church;
As Tares, commen up, amongst the Corn; which yet, (according to the wisdom,
taught by our Savior,) were not, with strife, to be pulled up, lest it might
spoil, and supplant, the good Corn; But to grow on together till the Harvest.
After, they grew, to a more absolute Defense, and Maintenance, of all the
Orders, of the Church; And stiffely, to hold, that nothing was to be innovated;
partly because it needed not, partly because it would make a Breach, upon the
Rest. Hence, (exaspected through Contentions,) they are fallen, to a direct
Condemnation of the Contrary part, as of a Sect. Yea, and some ^ndiscreet
persons, have been bold, in open Preaching, to use disho^ourable, and
Derogatory, Speech, and censure, of the Churches abroad: And that so far, as
some of our Men, (as I have heard,) ordained in Foreign parts, have been
pronounced, to be no lawful Ministers. Thus we see, the Beginnings were
modest, but the Extremes, are violent. So as there is, almost, as great a
Distance, now, of either side, from it self, as was, at the first, of one, from
the other. And surely, though my Meaning, and Scope, be not, (as I said
before,) to enter into the Controversies themselves, yet I do admonish, the
Maintainers, of the alone Discipline, to weigh, and consider, seriously, and
attentively, how near they are unto them, with whom, I know, they will not
join. It is very hard to affirm, that the Discipline, which, they say, we want,
is one of the essential parts, of the worship of God; And not, to affirm
withal, that the People themselves, upon peril of Salvation, without staying
for the Magistrate, are to gather themselves into it. I demand, if a Civil
State, should receive the Preaching, of the Word, and Baptism; And interdict,
and exclude the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: were not Men bound, upon danger
of their souls, to draw themselves, to Congregations, wherein they might
celebrate this Mystery? And not to content themselves, with that part of Gods
worship, which the Magistrate, had authorized? This I speak, not to draw them,
into the mislike of others, but into a more deep Consideration, of themselves:
Fortasse non redeunt, quia suum progressum, non intelligunt.

Again, to my Lords, the Bishops, I say; That it is hard, for them, to a void
Blame, (in the Opinion of an indifferent person,) in standing, so precisely,
upon Altering nothing. Leges, novis Legibus, non recreatae, acescunt. Laws,
not refreshed, with new Laws; wax sour. Qui mala non permutat, in bonis non
perseve^ra^: Without change of ^ll, a Man cannot continue the Good. To take
away many Abuses, Supplanteth not good orders, but establishes them. Morosa
Moris Retentio, Res turbulenta est, aeque ac Novitas: A contentious Retaining
of Custom is a Turbulent thing, as well as Innovation. A good Husband, is ever
proining in his Vineyard, or his Field; Not unseasonably, indeed, not
unskilfully, but lightly he finds, ever somewhat to do. We have heard, of no
Offers of the Bishops, of Bills in Parliament; which, no doubt, proceeding from
them, to whom it properly belongs, would have every where received
Acceptance. Their own Constitutions, and Orders, have reformed them little. Is
nothing amiss? Can any Man defend, the use of Excommunication, as a Base
Process, to lackay up, and down, for Duties, and Fees; It being, a precursory
Judgment, of the latter day?

Is there no Mean, to train, and nurse up, Ministers? (For the yield, of the
Universities, will not serve, though they were never so well gove^ned:) To
train them, I say, not to Preach, (For that, every Man, confidently,
adventureth, to do;) But to preach soundly, and to handle the Scriptures, with
Wisdom, and Judgment? I know, Prophesying, was subject to great Abuse; And
would be more abused now, because Heat of Contentions, is increased: But I say,
the only Reason, of the Abuse, was, because, there was admitted to it, a
Popular Auditory; And it was not contained, within a private Conference, of
Ministers: Other things, might be spoken of. I pray God, to inspire the
Bishops, with a fervent Love, and Care, of the People; And that they may not,
so much, urge Things in Controversy, as Things out of Controversy; Which all
Men, confess to be Gracious, and Good. And thus much, for the Second Point.

N^w as to the Third Point, of Unbrotherly Proceeding, on either Part; It is,
directly, contrary to my Purpose, to amplify wrongs. It is enough, to note,
and number them; Which I do also, to move Compassion, and Remorse, on the
Offending Side; And not, to animate Challengers, and Complaints, on the other.
And this Point, (as Reason is,) does chiefly touch that side, which can do
most: Injuriae potentiorum sunt: Injuries, come from them, that have the upper
hand.

The Wrongs of them, which are possessed, of the Government, of the Church,
toward the other, may, hardly, be dissembled, or Excused. They have charged
them, as though, they denied Tribute to Caesar; And withdrew, from the Civil
Magistrate, the Obedience, which they have ever performed, and taught. They
have sorted, and coupled them, with the Family of Love, whose Heresies, they
have labored, to destroy, and Confute. They have been swift of Credit, to
receive Accusations against them, from those, that have quarrelled with them,
but for speaking, against Sin, and Vice. Their Accusations, and Inquisitions,
have been strict, Swearing Men to Blanks, and Generalities; Not included within
compass of Matter certain; Which the Party, which is to take the Oath, may
comprehend, to be, a Thing Captious, and Strainable. Their urging of
Subscription, to their own Articles, is but Lacessere, and irritare, Morbos
Ecclesiae; Which otherwise, would spend, and exercise, themselves. Non
concessum quaerit, sed dissidium, qui, quod factis praestatur, in verbis
e^igit. He seeks not unity, but Division, which exacteth that in words, which
Men are content to yield in Action. And it is true, there are some, which, (as
I am persuaded,) will not, easily, offend, by Inconformity, who,
notwithstanding, make some conscience, to subscribe. For they know, this Note,
of Inconstancy, and Defection, from that, which they have long held, shall
disable them, to do that good, which otherwise they might do: For such is the
weakness of Many, that their Ministry, should be thereby discredited. As for
their easy Silencing of them, in such great scarcety of Preachers, it is to
punish the People, and not them. Ought they not, (I mean the Bishop,) to keep
one Eye open, To look upon the Good, that the Men do; but to fix them both,
upon the Hurt, that they suppose comes by them? Indeed, such as are
intemperate, and Incorrigible, God forbid they should be permitted to Preach:
But shall every inconsiderate Word, sometimes, captiously watched, and for the
most part, hardly enforced, be as a Forfeiture, of their voice, and Gift, in
preaching? As for sundry particular Molestations, I take no pleasure to recite
them. If a Minister, shall be troubled, for saying in Baptism; Do you believe,
for, Do thou believe? If another, shall be called in question, for praying
for her Majesty, without the Additions, of her Style; whereas, the very form of
Prayer, in the Book of Common Prayer, has, Thy Servant Elizabeth, and no more:
If a Third, shall be accused, upon these words, uttered touching the
Controversies, Tollatur Lex, and fiat Certamen: (Whereby was meant, that the
prejudice, of the Law, removed, either Reasons should be equally compared;) Of
calling the People, to Sedition, and Mutiny; As if he had said; Away with the
Law, and try it out with Force: If these, and other like particulars, be true,
which I have, but by Rumour^ and cannot affirm; It is to be lamented, that they
should labor, amongst us, with so little comfort. I know, Restrained
Governments, are better, then Remiss; And I am, of his mind, that said; Better
is to live where nothing is lawful, then where all Things are lawful. I
dislike, that Laws should not be continued, or Disturbers be unpunished: But
Laws, are likened to the Grape, that being too much pressed, yields, an hard,
and unwholesome, Wine. Of these Things, I must say; Ira Viri non operatur
Iusticiam Dei. The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

As for the Injuries, of the other Part, they be Ictus inermes; As it were,
Headless Arrows: They be Fiery, and Eager, Invec^ives; And, (in some fond
Men,) u^civill, and unreverent, Behavior, toward their Superiors. This last
invention also, which exposes them, to Derision, and Obloquy, by Libels,
charge not (as I am persuaded,) the whole side: Neither does that other,
which is yet more odious, practiced by the worst sort of them; which is, to
call in, (as it were, to their Aides, (certain Merce^ary Bands, which impugn
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, to have the spoil, of their
Endowments, and Livings; Of those I cannot speak too hardly. It is an
Intelligence, between Incendiaries, and Robbers; The one to Fire the House, the
other to Rifle it.

The Fourth Point, wholly pertains to them, which impugn, the present
Ecclesiastical Government; who, although, they have not cut Themselves off,
from the Body, and Communion, of the Church; yet do they affect, certain
Cognizances and Differences, wherein they seek to correspond amongst
themselves, and to be separate from others. And it is truly said; Tam sunt
Mores quidam Schismatici, quam Dogmata Schismatica: There be as well
Schismatic Fashions, as Opinions. First, they have impropriated, unto
themselves, the Names of Zealous, Sincere, and Reformed; As if, all others,
were Cold, Minglers of Holy Things, and Profane, and Friends of Abuses: Yea,
be a man endued, with great Virtues, and fruitful in good works; yet if he
concur not with them, they term him, (in Derogation,) a Civil, and Moral,
Man; And compare him, to Socrates, or some Heathen Philosopher: Whereas the
Wisdom of the Scriptures, teaches us otherwise: Namely, to judge, and
denominate Men Religious, according to their Works, of the Second Table:
Because they of the First, are often Counterfeit, and practiced in Hypocrisy.
So Saint John says; That a Man, does vainly boast, of Loving God, whom he
never saw, if he love not his Brother, whom he has seen. And Saint James
says; This is true Religion, to visit the Fatherless, and the Widow. So as
that, which is, with them, but Philosophical, and Moral, is, in the Apostles
Phrase, True Religion, and Christianity. As in Affection, they challenge, the
said Virtues of Zeal, and the rest; So in Knowledge, they attribute unto
themselves, Light, and Perfection. They say, the Church of England, in King
Edwards time, and in the Beginning of her Majesty's Reign, was but in the
Cradle; And the Bishops, in those times, did somewhat, for Daybreak; But that,
Ma^urity^ and Fullness, of Light, proceeded from themselves. So Sabinius,
Bishop of Heraclea, a Macedoniam Heretic, said; That the Fathers, in the
Council of Nice were but Infants, and Ignorant Men: That the Church, was not
so perfect in their Decrees, as to refuse, that Further Ripeness, of Knowledge,
which Time had revealed. And as they censure, virtuous Names, by the Names, of
Civil, and Moral; So do they censure Men, truly, and godly wise, (who see
into the vanity of their Affections,) by the name of Politics: saying, that
their Wisdom, is but Carnal, and sav^uring of Man's Brain. So likewise, if a
Preacher, preach with Care, and Meditation; (I speak not, of the vain,
Scholasticall, Manner of Preaching; But soundly indeed, ordering the Matter, he
handles, dis^inctly, for Memory; Deducting, and drawing it down, for
Direction; and authorizing it, with strong proofs, and warrants;) They censure
it, as a Form of Speaking, not becoming, the Simplicity of the Gospel; And
refer it, to the Reprehension, of Saint Paul, speaking, of the Enticing Speech,
of Man's Wisdom.

Now, for their own Manner of Preaching, what is it? Surely, they exhort well,
and work Compunction of Mind; And bring Men well to the Question; Viri,
Fratres, quid ^aciemus? But that is not enough; Except they resolve the
Question. They handle, Matters of Controversy, weakly, and obiter, and as
before a People, that will accept of any Thing. In Doctrine of Manners, there
is little, but Generality, and Repetition. The word, (the Bread of Life,) they
toss up and down, they break it not: They draw not, their Directions down, ad
Casus Conscientiae: That a Man may be warranted, in his perpetual Actions,
whether they be Lawful, or not. Neither, indeed, are many of them, able, to do
it; What through want, of Grounded knowledge; What through want, of Study, and
Time. It is a Compendious, and easy Thing, to call for the Observation of the
Sabbath Day; or to speak against unlawful Gain: But what Actions, and works,
may be done upon the Sabbath, and what not; And what Courses, of Gain, are
Lawful, and in what Cases? To set this down, and to clear the whole Matter,
with good Distinctions, and Decisions, is a Matter of great Knowledge, and
Labor; And asks much Meditation, and Conversing, in the Scriptures, and
other Helps, which God has provided, and p^eserve^, for Instruction.

Again, they carry not, an equal Hand, in Teaching the People, their lawful
Liberty, as well, as their Restraints, and Prohibitions: But they think, a Man,
cannot go too far, in that, that has a show of a Commandment.

They forget, that there are Sins, on the Right Hand, as well as o^ the Left;
And that, the word is double edged, and cutteth on both Sides; As well the
Profane Trangressions; as the superstitious Observances. Who doubts, but
that, it is as unlawful, to shut, where God has opened, as to open, where God
has shut: To bind, where God has loosed, as to loose, where God has bound.
Amongst Men, it is, commonly, as ill taken, to turn back Fav^^^s, as to disobey
Commandments. In this Kind of Zeal, (for Example,) they have pronounced,
generally, and without difference, all Untruths, unlawful; Notwithstanding,
that the Midwives, are directly reported, to have been blessed, for their
Excuse: And Rahab, is said, by Faith, to have concealed the Spies: And Salomons
selected Judgment, proceeded upon a Simulation: And our Savior, the more to
touch the Hearts, of the two Dis^iples, with an holy Dalliance, made, as if he
would have passed Emaus. Further, I have heard some Sermons of Mortification,
which, I think, with very good Meaning, they have preached, out of their own
Exprience, and Exercise; And Things, in private Counsels, not unmeet: But
surely, no Sound Conceits, Much like to Parsons Resolution, or not so good;
Apt, to breed in Men, rather weak Opinions, and perplexed Despaires, then
Filial, and True Repentance, which is sought.

Another Point, of great Inconvenience, and peril, is, to entitle the People,
to hear Controversies, and all Kinds of Doctrine. They say, no part, of the
Counsel, of God, is to be suppressed, nor the People defrauded. So as the
Difference, which the Apostle makes, between Milk, and Strong Meat, is
confounded: And his Precept, that the weak, be not admitted, unto Questions,
and Controversies, takes no place.

But most of all is to be suspected, as a Seed of further Inconveni^nce, their
Manner, of Handling the Scriptures. For whilst, they seek express, Scripture,
for every Thing; And that they have, in a manner, deprived themselves, and the
Church, of a special Help, and Support, by Embasing, the Authority, of the
Fathers; They resort to Naked Examples, Conceited Inferences, and Forced
Allusions; such, as do mine, into all Certainty, of Religion.

Another Extremity, is the Excessive Magnifying of that, which though it be a
principal, and most holy Institution; yet has it Limits, as all things else
have. We see, wheresoever, in a manner, they find in the Scriptures; The Word,
spoken of, they expound it of Preaching. They have made it, in a manner, of the
Essence, of the Sacrament, of the Lords Supper, to have a Sermon precedent.
They have, in a sort, annihilated the use of Liturgies, and Forms of Divine
Service; Although, the House of God be denominated, of the Principal, Domus
Orationis; A House of Prayer, and not a House of Preaching. As for the Life, of
the good Monks, and Hermits, in the Primitive Church, I know, they will
condemn a Man, as half a Papist, if he should maintain them, as other then
Profane, because they heard no Sermons. In the mean time, what Preaching is,
and who may be said to Preach, they move no Question. But, (as far, as I see,)
every man, that presumes to speak in Chair, is accounted a Preacher. But I am
assured, that not a few, that call hotly, for a Preaching Ministry, deserve to
be the First themselves, that should be expelled. All which Errors, and
Misproceedings, they do fortify, and entrench, by an addicted Respect, to
their own Opinions; And an Imp^^ience, to hear Contradiction, or Argument; yea,
I know some of them, that that would think it, a Tempting of God, to hear, or
read, what may be said against them: As if there could be, A, Quod bonum est,
tenete; without an Omnia probate, going before.

This may suffice, to offer unto themselves, a Thought, and Consideration,
whether, In these things, they do well, or no? And to correct, and assuage, the
Partiality, of their Followers. For as for any Man, that shall, hereby, enter
into a Contempt of their Ministry; it is but his own Hardness of Heart. I know,
the work of Exhortation, does chiefly rest, upon these Men, and they have Zeal,
and Hate, of Sin. But again, let them take Heed, that it be not true, which one
of their Adversaries said; That they have but two small wants; Knowledge, and
Love. And so I conclude this Point.

The last Point, touching the due Publishing, and Debating, of these
Controversies, needs no long Speech. This strange Abuse, of Antiques, and
Pasquils, has been touched before. So likewise, I repeat that, which I said;
That a Character of Love, is more proper for Debates, of this Nature, then that
of Zeal: As for all direct, or indirect, Glaunces, or Levels, at Men's Persons,
they were ever, in these Causes, disallowed.

Lastly, whatsoever be pretended, the People is no meet Arbitrator; but rather
the quiet, modest, and private Assemblies, and Conferences, of the Learned. Qui
apud Incapacem loquitur, non disceptat, sed calumniatur. The Press, and
Pulpit, would be freed, and discharged, of these Contentions: Neither
Promotion, on the one Side; nor Glory, and Heat, on the other Side, ought to
continue those Challenges, and Cartells, at the Cross, and other Places. But
rather, all Preachers, especially such as be of good temper, and have Wisdom
with Conscience, ought to inculcate, and beat upon a Peace, Silence, and
Surseance. Neither let them fear Solons Law, which compelled, in Factions,
every particular Person, to range himself, on the one side; Nor yet, the fond
Calumny of Neutrality. But let them know, that is true, which is said by a wise
Man; That Neuters, in Contentions, are either better, or worse, then either
Side.

These things have I, in all sincerity, and simplicity, set down, touching the
Controversies, which now trouble, the Church of England. And that, without all
Art, and Insinuation. And therefore, not like to be grateful, to either Part.
Notwithstanding, I trust, what has been said, shall find a Correspondence, in
their minds, which are not embarked in Partiality; And which love the Whole,
better then a Part. Wherefore, I am not, out of hope that it may do good; At
the least, I shall not repent my self, of the Meditation.

FINIS.
IN HAPPY MEMORY, OF ELIZABETH, QUEEN of ENGLAND. OR, A COLLECTION, OF THE
FELICITIES, OF Queen Elizabeth.
Written by his Lordship in Latin; AND Englished by the Publisher.
QVeen Elizabeth, both in her Natural Endowments, and her Fortune, was
Admirable amongst Women, and Memorable amongst Princes. But this is no Subject,
for the Pen of a mere Scholar, or any such Cloistred Writer. For these Men,
are eager in their Expressions, but shallow in their Judgments; And perform
the Scholars part well, but transmit Things but unfaithfully to Posterity.
Certainly, it is a Scienc^, belonging to Statesmen, and to such as sit at the
Helmes of great Kingdoms; and have been acquainted with the weight, and
Secrets, of Civil Business; to handle this matter dexterously. Rare, in all
Ages, ha^h been the Reign of a Woman: More rare, the Felicity of a Woman, in
her Reign: But most rare, a Permanency, and Lasting, joined with that Felici^y.
As for this Lady, she reigned Four and Forty years, complete, and yet she did
not survive her Felicity. Of this Felicity, I am purposed to say somewhat; yet
without any Excursion into Praises. For Praises are the Tribute of Men, but
Felicity the Gift of God.

First, I reckon it as a part of her Felicity, that she was advanced to the
Regal Throne, from a Private Fortune. For this is ingenerate, in the Nature,
and Opinions, of Men, to ascribe that, to the greatest Fel^city, which is not
counted upon, and comes unlooked for But this is not that I intend. It is
this. Princes, that are trained up, in their Fath^rs Courts, and to an
immediate, and Apparent, Hope of Succession, do get this, by the Tenderness,
and remisseness, of their Education, that they become (commonly) less capable,
and less Tempera^e, in their Affections. And therefore, you shall find those,
to have been the ablest, and most acc^m^lished Kings, that were Tutoured, by
both Fortunes. Such was with us, King Henry the Seventh; An^ with the French,
Lewis the Twel^^h: Both which, in recent Memory, and, almost, about the same
time, obtained their Crowns, not only, from a Private, but also from an
Adverse, and Afflicted, Fortune; And did both excel, in their several ways;
The former in Prudence; And the other in Justice. Much like was the Condition
of this Princess, whose Blos^omes, and Hopes, were unequally aspected by
Fortune; That afterward, when she came to the Crown, Fortune might prove,
toward her, always Mild, and Constant. For Qu^en Elizabeth, soon after she
was born, was entitled to the Succession, in the Crown; upon the next turn
disinherited again; Then laid aside, and slighted: During the Reign, of her
Brother, her Estate, was most Prosperous, and Flourishing; During the Reign, of
her Sister, very Tempestuous, and full of Hazard. Neither yet, did she pass,
immediately, from the Prison, to the Crown; (which sudden Change, might have
been enough, to make her cast off all Moderation;) But first she regained her
Liberty; Then there budded forth some probable Hopes of Succession; And lastly,
in a great Still, and Happiness, she was advanced to the Imperial Crown,
without either Noise, or Competitour. All which I allege, that it may appear,
that the Divine Providence, intending to produce, a most exquisite Princess,
was pleased, to prepare, and mould Her, by these Degrees, of Discipli^e.
Neither ought the Misfortune of her Mother, justly to stain, the pure Stream of
her Blood; especially, seeing it is very evident, that King Henry the eighth
did first burn, with new Loves, before he was enflamed, with Indignation,
against Queen Anne: Neither is it unknown, to the Ages, since, that he was a
King, naturally prone, to Loves, and Jealousies; And not containing himself, in
those cases, from the effusion of Blood. Besides, the very person, for whom she
was suspected, shows, the Accusation, to be less probable, and built upon
weak, and frivolous, Suppositions: Which was, both secretly whispered, in many
Men's ears, at that Time; And which, Queen Anne her self, testi^ied, by her
undaunted courage, and that memorable Speech of hers, at the Time of her Death.
For having gotten, (as she supposed,) a faithful and friendly, Messenger, in
the very Hour before her Death, she delivered him these words, to relate unto
the King; That she had ever found the King, very constant and firm, to his
purpose of Advancing her; For first, from the estate of a Gentlewoman, only,
and no way pretending to Noble Titles, He raised Her, to the Honor of a
Marchioness; Next, he vouchsafed to make her his Consort, both of his Kingdom,
and Bed; And now, that there remained no higher earthly Honor, he meant to
crown her Innocence, with the Glory of Martyrdom. But though, the messenger
durst not relate these words to the King, who was already enflamed with new
Loves; yet certain Tradition, the Conserver of Truth, has conveyed them to
Posterity.

Another principal thing, which I cast into Queen Elizabeth's Felicity, was the
Time, and Period of her Reign; Not only for that it was Long, but also,
because it fell, into that season, of her Life, which was most Active, and
Fittest, for the swaying of a Scepter. For she was fully Five and Twenty years
old, (at which age, the Civil Law freeth from a Cura^our,) when she came to
the Crown; And reigned to the Seventieth year of her Life. So that she never
suffered, either the Detriments, of Pupillage, and Check of an Over-awing
Power; Or the Inconveniences of an Impot^nt, and unwieldy, Old Age. And
Old Age, is not, without a competent portion of miseries, even to private men;
But to Kings, besides the Common Burden of years, it brings, for the most
part, a Declining, in the Estates, they govern, and a Conclusion of their
Lives, without Honor. For there has scarce been known a King, that has
lived, to an Extreme, and Impotent Old Age, but he has suffered some
Detriment, in his Territories, and gone less in his Reputation. Of which
Thing, there is a most eminent Example, in Philip the Second, King of Spain, a
most puissant Prince, and an Excellent Governer; Who, in the last years of his
Life, and Impotent Old Age, was sensible of this, whereof we speak; And
therefore, with great circumspection, submitted Himself, to Natures Law;
Voluntarily surrendered the Territories he had gotten in France; Established a
Firm Peace in that Kingdom; Attempted the like in other Places; That so, He
might transmit his Kingdoms, Peaceable, and Entire, to his next Heir.
Contrary-wise, Queen Elizabe^hs Fortune, was so constant, and deeply rooted,
that no Disaster in any of her Dominions, accompanied, her ind^ed declining,
but still able, years: Nay further, for an undeniable Token of her Felicity,
she died not, before the Rebellion in Ireland, was ^ortunately decided, and
quashed, by a Battle there; Least otherwise, it might have defalked, from the
Total Sum, of her Glory. Now the Condition also, of the People, over whom
she reigned, I take to be a Matter, worthy our Observation. For i^ her Lot had
fallen, amongst the desolate ^^lmyrens, or in Asia, a soft, and effeminate Race
of Men, a Woman-Prince, might have been sufficient, for a Womanish People; But
for the English, a Nation, stout, and warlike, to be ruled by the Check of a
Woman, and to yield so humble Obedience to her, is a Thing deserving the
highest Admiration.

Neither was this Disposition of her People, (Hung^y of War, and unwillingly
bowing to Peace,) any Impediment to her, but that she enjoyed, and maintained,
Peace, all her Days. And this Desire, in her, of Peace, together with her
fortunate accomplishment thereof, I reckon to be one, of her chiefest Praises.
For this was Happy for her Times, Comely for her Sex, and Comfortable to her
Conscience. Indeed, about the Tenth year of her Reign, there was an Offer of a
Commotion, in the Northern Parts; But it was soon laid asleep, and
extinguished: But all her Reign beside, was free from the least Breath, or Air,
of Civil Broils. Now I judge the Peace, maintained by her, to be the more
eminent, for two causes; Which indeed make nothing for the Merit of that Peace,
but much for the Honor. The one, that it was set off, and made more
co^spicuous, by the Broyls, and Dissensions, of Neighboring Nations; As it
were, by so many Lights, and Torches: The other, that amidst the Benefits of
Peace, she lost not the Honor of Arms: Insomuch, that the Reputation, of the
English Arms, was not only preserved, but also advanced by her, upon many
glorious Occasions. For the Succors, sent into the Netherlands, France, and
Scotland; The Expeditions by Sea into both the Indies, whereof some circled the
whole Globe of the Earth; The Fleets sent into Portugal and to annoy the
Coasts of Spain; And lastly, the often Suppressions, and Overthrows, of the
Rebels in Ireland; did both show the warlike Prowess of our Nation, to be no
whit diminished; And did much increase the Renown of the Queen.

There was another Thing, that did greatly advance her Glory: That both by her
timely Succors, her N^ighbour Kings were settled in their Right^ull Thrones;
and the Suppliant People, (who by the ill Advisednesse of their Kings, were
abandoned, and given over, to the Cruel^y, of their Ministers; And to the Fury,
of the Multitude; and to all manner, of Butchery, and Desolation; were relieved
by Her; By reason whereof, they subsist unto this Day. Neither was She a
Princess, less Benign, and Fortunate in the Influence of her Counsels, then
of her Succors; As being One, that had, oftentimes, interceded to the King of
Spain, to mitigate his wrath, against his Subjects, in the Netherlands, and to
reduce them to his Obedience, upon some tolerable Conditions; And further, as
being one, that did perpetually, and upon all occasions, represent to the
French Kings, the Observation of their own Edicts, so often declaring, and
promising, peace to their Subjects. I cannot deny, but that these good
Counsels of hers, wanted the Effect: In the former, I verily believe, for the
Unive^sall good of Europe; Least happily, the Ambition of Spain, being unloosed
from his Fetters, should have poured it self, (as things then stood,) upon the
other Kingdoms, and States of Christendom: And for the latter, the Blood of so
many Innocents, with their Wives, and Children; Slain, within their own
Harbors, and Nests, by the Scumme of the People, (who like so many Mastifes,
were let loose, and heartened, and even set upon them, by the State;) would not
suffer it; which did continually cry unto God for Vengeance, that so
Blood-sucking a Kingdom, might have her fill thereof, in the intestine,
Slaughters, and Consumption, of a Civil War. Howsoever she persisted, to
perform the part of a wise, and loving, Confederate.

There is another Cause also, for which we may justly admire, this Peace, so
constantly pursued, and maintained, by the Queen. And that is, that it did not
proceed, from any Bent, or Inclination, of those Times; But from the Prudency,
of her Government, and discreet Carriage of Things. For whereas, she her self,
was not without manifest Danger, from an ill affected Party at home, for the
Cause of Religion; And that the Strength and Forces of this Kingdom, were in
the Place of a Bulwark, to all Europe, against the then dreadful, and
overflowing, Ambition, and Power, of the King of Spain; She might have
apprehended just Cause of a War: But, as she was still ready, with her
Council, so she was not, behind hand, with her Forces. And this we are taught
by an Event, the most Memorable, of any in our time, if we look upon the
Felicity thereof. For when as the Spanish Navy, (set forth with such wonderful
Preparations, in all kinds; the Terror, and Amazement of all Europe; Carried
on with almost Assurance of victory;) came braving upon our Seas; It took not
so much, as one poor Cock-boat of ours, nor fired any one Village, nor landed
one Man upon English Ground; But was utterly defeated, and after a shameful
Flight, and many shipwracks, quite dispersed; So as the Peace, of this
Kingdom, was never more Firm, and Solid. Neither was her Felicity less, in
Escaping Treacherous Attempts at home, then in subduing, and Defeating, foreign
Invasions. For not a few Treasons, plotted against her Life, were, most
fortunately, discovered, and disappointed. And this was no cause, to make her
lead, a more fearful, or diffident, life, then before. No new Increase of her
Guard; No Immuring her self within her own Walls, or Forbearing to be seen
abroad; But as one assured, and confident; And that was more mindful of her
Escape from Danger, then of the Danger it self, she was constant, to her former
Customs, and Fashions.

Furthermore, it is worth our labor, to consider the Nature of the Times, in
which she Reigned. For there are some Times, so Barbarous, and Ignorant, that
it is no greater matter, to govern People, then to govern a Flock of Sheep. But
this Queen, fell upon Times, of singular Learning, and Sufficiency; In which,
it was not possible, to be eminent, without admirable Endowments of wit, and a
Rare Temper of Virtue. Again, the Reigns of Women, are, For the most part,
obscured by their Husbands: Upon whom, all their Praises, and worthy Acts, do
re^lect: As for those, that continue unmarried, it is they that impropriate,
the whole glory, and meri^, to themselves. And this was the peculiar Glory of
this Princess; That she had no Props, or Supports, of her Government, but
those, that were, of her own making. She had no Brother, the Son of her Mother;
No Uncle; None other of the Royal Blood and Lineage, that might be Partner in
her Cares, and an Vpholder of the Regal Dignity. And as for those, whom she
raised to Honor, she carried such a discreet Hand over them, and so
enterchanged her Favour^, as they all strived in Emulation, and Desire, to
please her best, and she her self remained, in all Things, an Absolute
Princess. Childlesse she was, and left no Issue behind Her; which was the Case
of many, of the most fortunate Princes; Alexander the ^reat, Julius Caesar,
Trajan, and others. And this is a Case, that has been often controverted, and
argued, on both ^ides; Whilst some hold, the want of Children, to be a
Diminution, of our Happiness; As if it should be an Estate, more then Human,
to be happy, both in our own Persons, and in our Descendants: But others, do
account, the want of Children, as an Addition to ^arthly Happiness; In as
much, as that Happiness, may be said, to be complete, over which Fort^ne has
no Power, when we are gone: Which, if we leave Children, cannot be.

She had also many Outward Gifts of Nature. A tall Sta^ure; A comely and strait
Making; An extraordinary Majesty of Aspect, ^oyned with a Sweetness; A most
Happy, and Constant, Healthfulnesse of Body. Unto which I may add, that in the
full Possession, both of her Limms, and Spirits, until her last Sickness;
(Having received no Blow from Fortune^ Nor Decay from Old Age;) she obtained
that, which Augustus Caesar, so importunately prayed for; An easy and
undistempered passage, out of this World. Which also is reported of Antoninus
Pius, that Excellent Emperor; Whose Death, had the Resemblance, of some soft,
and pleasing Slumber. So in Queen Elizabeth's Disease, there was no ghastly, or
fearful Accident; No Idleness of Brain; Nothing unaccustomed to Man in
general: She was not transported, either with desire of Life, or Tediousness
of Sickness, or extremity of Pain; She had no grievous, or uncomely,
Symptoms; But all things were of that kind, as did rather show, the Frailty of
Nature, then a Deordination, or Reproach of it. For some few Days, before her
Death, being much pined, with the extreme Drought, of her Body, and those
Cares, that accompany a Crown; And not wonted, to refresh her Self with Wine,
or any Liberal Die^; she was struck with a Torpour, and Frigidity in her
Nerves; Notwithstanding, which is rare in such Diseases, she retained both her
Speech, and Memory, and Motion though but flow and weak, even to the end. And
in this Case, she continued, but a few days; So as it cannot be called, the
Last Act of her Life, but the First step to her Death. For as it is, a
Miserable Condition, to see the Facultie^, of our Body, buried before us; And
to survive long after them; So it is a Fair, and Natural, Conclusion of our
Life, when the Senses, are, by little and little, laid asleep, that the
Dissolution of the whole, should immediately follow.

I will add one Thing more, to make up, the full Measure, of her Felicity:
which is, that she was not only most Happy, in her own Person, but in the
Abilities, and virtues of her Servants, and Ministers For she was served by
such Persons, as, I suppose, this Island never brought forth the like, before
her Times. Now when God bears a love to Kings, no doubt, he raises up, the
Spirits, of Wise Servants, as a concurrent Blessing.

There are two fair Issues, of her Happiness, born to her, since her Death; I
conceive, not less Glorious, and Eminent, then those she enjoyed a live. The
one of her Successor; The other of her Memory. For she has gotten such a
Successor, who although for his Masculine Virtues, and Blessing of Posterity,
and Addition of Territories, he may be said, to exceed her Greatness, and
somewhat to obscure it; Notwithstanding, he is most zealous, of her Name, and
Glory; And does even give, a Perpetuity to her Acts; Considering both in the
Choice of the Persons, and in the Orders, and Institutions of the Kingdom, he
has departed so little from her. So as, a Son could hardly succeed a Father,
with less Noise, or Innovation. As for her Memory, it has gotten such Life,
in the Mouths, and Hearts, of Men, as that, Envy being put out by her Death,
and her Fame lighted, I cannot say, whether the Felicity of her Life, or the
Felicity of her Memory, be the greater. For if (perhaps) there fly abroad, any
factious Fames, of Her, raised either by Discontented Persons, or such, as are
averse in Religion; (which notwithstanding dare now scarce show their Faces,
and are every where cried down;) The same, are neither true, neither can they
be long lived. And for this cause especially, have I made this Collection,
(such as it is,) touching her Felicity, and the Marks of Gods Favor toward
Her; That no malicious Person, should dare to interpose a Curse, where God has
given a Blessing. Now if any Man, shall allege that against me, which was once
said to Caesar; We see what we may admire, but we would fain see what we can
commend; Certainly, for my part, I hold true Admiration, to be the highest
Degree of Commendation. And besides, such Felicities as we have recounted,
could not befall any Princess, but such an one, as was extraordinarily
supported, and cherished by Gods Favor; And had much in her own Person, and
Rare Virtues, to create, and work out, unto her self, such a Fortune.
Notwithstanding, I have thought good, to insert something now, concerning her
Moral Part; Yet only in those things, which have ministered occasion, to some
Mallicious Tongues, to traduce her.

This Queen, as touching her Religion, was Pious; Moderate; Constant, and an
Enemy to Novelty. First for her Piety; Though the same were most conspicuous,
in her Acts, and the Form of her Government; yet it was Pourtrayed also, in the
common Course of her Life, and her daily Comportment. Seldom would she be
absent, from Hearing Divine Service, and other Duties of Religion, either in
her Chapel, or in her Privy Closet. In the reading of the Scriptures, and the
writings of the Fathers, especially of Saint Augustine, she was very Frequent:
She composed certain Prayers, her self, upon emergent occasions. Whenever she
named God, though it were in common discourse, she would, for the most part,
add, The Title of Maker; saying; God my Maker: And compose, both her Eyes, and
Countenance, to a Submisnesse, and Reverence. This I have often (my self)
observed, being in her presence. Now whereas some have divulged her
unmindfulnesse of Mortality, in that she would never endure any Mention, either
of her Age, or Death, it is most false: For she would often, and that, many
years, before her Death, with a great deal of Meekness, profess, that she
found her self grown, an old Woman; And she would, sometimes, open her self,
what she liked best, for an Inscription upon her Tomb; Saying; That she loved
no pompous, or vainglorious, Titles, but would only have, a Line, or two, for
her Memory; wherein, her Name; and her Virginity; and the years of her Reign;
and her Establishing of Religion; and her Maintaining of Peace; should be, in
the fewest words, comprehended. It is true, that whilst she was in her
vigorous years, and able to bear Children, if at any time she were moved, to
declare her Successor, she would make Answer; That she would never endure, to
see her winding sheet, before her Eyes. And yet notwithstanding, some few
years, before her death, one day, when she was in a deep Meditation, and, (as
it may be ghessed,) in that of her Mortality, One, that might be bold, said
unto her; Madam, there are diverse Offices, and great places in the state, which
you keep too long void;. She arose up, in some displeasure, and said; I am
sure, my Office will not be long void.

As for her Moderateness in Religion, I shall seem to be at a stand, in regard
of the Severe Laws, made against her Subjects, of the Romish Religion.
Notwithstanding, that which I shall say, is no more, then what I know for
certain, and diligently observed. Most certain it is, that it was the Firm
Resolution, of this Princess, not to offer any violence to Consciences: But
then, on the other Side, not to suffer the State of her Kingdom, to be ruined,
under pretense of Conscience, and Religion. Out of this Fountain, she
concluded; First, That to allow Freedom, and Toleration, of two Religions, by
public Authority, in a Nation Fierce, and Warlike; And that would easily fall,
from Dissension of Minds, to Siding and Blows, would bring inevitable Ruin to
this Kingdom. Again, in the Newness of her Reign, when there was a general
distrust, she singled out some of the Bishops, of the most Turbulent, and
Factious, Spirits, and commi^ted them to free Custody; And this not without the
warrant of Former Laws; As for the Rest, either of the Clergy, or Laity, she
did not ransack their Consciences, by any Sev^re Inqu^sition, but rather
secured them, by a gracious Connivency. And this was the State of Things, at
the first. Neither did she depart, from this Clemency, when the Excommunication
of Pius Quin^us, came Thund^ing against her; which might both justly have
provoked her, and have ministered occasion, to new Courses; But howsoever, she
followed her Royal Nature still. For, as a wise Lady, and of a high Courage,
she was not a whit terrified, at the Roaring of a Bull; Being well assured, of
her Peoples Love, and Fidelity, toward her; As also of the Disability, of the
Popish Faction, within the Kingdom, to do her Hurt, if no Foreign Enemy
joined with them. But then, about the three and twentieth year of her Reign,
there followed a Mighty Change. And this Distinction of the Times, is not any
Device of mine, but it is expressed in the public Acts of that Time, and, as
it were, cut in Brass. For before that year, was there never any Capital or
severe Punishment, inflicted upon any of her Subjects, as they had Relation to
the Romish Religion, by the Laws formerly made. But just then, began that
proud, and vast Intention of Spain, to conquer this Kingdom, by little and
little, to show it Self. Of this, the principal Part was, to stir up, by all
means, a Party within the Kingdom, of such, as were ill affected to the State,
and desirous of Innovation, that might adhere to the Forrainer, at his Landing.
For this, they had no other Hopes, then the Difference in Religion. Wherefore,
they set it down, to pursue this Course, with all their power. And the
Seminaries, at that time, budding, Priests were sent into England, to plant,
and disperse, a Love, to the Romish Religion; To teach, and inculcate, the
power, of the Popes Excommunication, in freeing Subjects from their Allegiance;
And to awaken, and prepare, the minds of Men, to an Expectation, of a Change.
About the same time, Ireland also was attempted by an Invasion; And the Queens
Name, and Government, traduced, by sundry, and scandalous Libells: To be short,
there was an unusual Swelling in the State, the Forerunner of greater
Troubles. Yet I will not affirm, that every Priest, which was sent over, was
made of the Counsel, or Privy to the Enterprise; But that, some of them,
became the wicked Instruments only, of other Men's Malice. Notwithstanding,
this is true, and witnessed, by the Con^^ssions of many, that almost all the
Priests, which were sent into this Kingdom, from that aforenamed year, unto
the Thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; (At what time, that Design of the
Pope, and Spain, was put into execution, by those memorable Preparations, of
the Navy, and Landforces,) Had in their Instructions, besides other Parts of
their Function, to distill, and insinuate, i^to the People, these Particulars;
It was impossible^ Things should continue, at this stay; They should see, ere
long, a great change, in this State; That the Pope, and Catholic Princes, were
careful for the English, if they would, not be wanting to themselves. Again,
sundry of ^he Priests, did manifestly interpose themselves, into those
Consultations, and Plots, which tended, to the undermining, and Ruining, of
this Kingdom: And, (which especially moved her,) Letters were intercepted, out
of diverse parts, that discovered, the true Face of the Plot; In which was
written, that they doubted not, to go beyond, the vigilance, of the Queen, and
State, in the Matter of Catholics: For the Queen would only have an eye,
least there should arise, any Fit Head, in the Person of some Lord, or other
Eminent Gentleman of quality, under whom the Catholics might unite: But they
had thought upon another course; As namely, by private Men, and those but of
mean Rank, that should not confer, nor scarce know, of each others employment,
to prepare, and mature, the Business, by the Secrecy of Confession. And these
were their Engines then, which, (as has appeared since, in a case not much
unlike,) are usual, and familiar, to that Ord^r of Men. In this great Deluge
of Danger, there was a Necessity imposed, upon Queen Elizabeth, to restrain, by
some sharper Bands of Laws, that part of her Subjects, which were alienated
from her, and had drunk, too deep a Draught, of this Poison, ever to recover;
And further, which by their retired Living, and Exemption from public Offices,
were grown very Rich: And moreover, the Mischief daily growing, when as the
Cause thereof, was ascribed, to none other, then the Seminary Priests; Who had
been nourished, in Foreign Parts, and received Exhibition, from the Bounty, and
Alms, of Foreign Princes, professed Enemies to this State; And who had
conversed in such places, where the Name of Queen Elizabeth, was never heard,
but as of an Heretic, and Excommunicate, and Accursed Person; And who, though
themselves, (sometimes,) had no hand in Treason, yet they were known, to be the
intimate Friends, of them that had; And lastly, who by their Arts, and Poisons,
had infected, and soured, the Mass, and Lump, of the Catholics, which,
before, was more Sweet, and Harmless, with a new kind of Leven, and desperate
Maliciousness; There could no other Remedy be devised, but by forbidding such
Persons, to enter into this Kingdom, upon pain of their Lives: Which, at last,
in the 27th. year of her Reign, was done accordingly. Nay, and when the event
it self, had confirmed this to be true; (I mean, immediately after that the
dreadful Tempest, arose from Spain, threatening no less then utter
desolation;) yet did it nothing mollify, or turn, the edge, of these Men's,
Malice, and Fury; but rather whetted it; As if they had cast off, all Natural
Affection^ to their Country. As for the Times succeding, (I mean after the
Thirtieth year of her Reign,) though indeed our Fear of Spain, which had been
the Spur to this Rigor, had fairly breathed out, or was well abated; yet
considering the Memory of Times past, had made so deep Impression, in Men's
Hearts, and Cogitations; And that it would have seemed, either Inconstancy, to
repeal those former Laws, or Sloth, to neglect them; The very Constitution of
Things, did suggest to the Queen, that it was not safe, to reduce them unto
that State, wherein they had continued, until the three and twentieth year of
her Reign. Hereunto may be added, the Industry of some Persons, in improving
the Revenues of the Exchequer; And the Zeal of some other Ministers of Justice,
which did never think their Country safe, unless the Laws were rigorously
executed; All which, did importune, and press, the Execution, of the Laws.
Notwithstanding the Queen, for a manifest Token, of her Royal Nature, did so
dull, the edge of the Laws, that but a very few Priests, in respect of their
Number, did suffer death. Now all this, which I have said, is not by way of
Defense: For the Matter needs it not: For neither, could this Kingdom, have
been safe without it; Neither were the Proceedings, any way, comparable, or of
kinn, to those bloody, and unchristianly Massacres, in the Catholic Countries;
Which proceeded, merely, from Rancour, and Pride, and not from any necessity
of State. Howsoever, I hope, I have made my first Assertion good; That she was
Moderate in the Point of Religion; And that the Change, which happened, was not
in her Nature, but upon the Necessity of the Times.

Now for the Constancy, of Queen Elizabeth, in Religion, and the observance
thereof, I know no better Argument then this; That although she found the
Romish Religion, confirmed, in her Sisters days, by Act of Parliament; And
established, by all strong, and potent, Means, that could be devised; And to
have taken, deep Root, in this Kingdom; And that all those, which had any
Authority, or bare Office in the State, had subscribed to it; yet for that she
saw, it was not agreeable, to the Word of God, nor to the Primitive Purity, nor
to her own Conscience, she did, with a great deal of Courage, and with the
assistance, of a very few Persons, quite expel, and abolish it. Neither, did
she this, by precipitate, and Heady Courses, but Timing it wisely, and soberly.
And this may well be conjectured, as from the Thing it self, so also by an
Answer of hers, which she made upon occasion. For within a very few days, of
her Coming, to the Crown, when many Prisoners, were released, out of Prison;
(as the Custom is at the Inauguration of a Prince;) There came to her, one
day, as she was going to Chapel, a certain Courtier, that had the Liberty of
a Buffone; And either, out of his own Motion, or by the Instigation, of a wiser
Man, presen^ed her with a Petition; And before a great number of Courtiers,
said to her, with a loud voice; That there were yet four or five Prisoners,
unjustly detained in Prison; He came, to be a Suter, to have them set at
Liberty: Those were, the four Evangelists, and the Apostle Saint Paul; who had
been long shut up, in an unknown tongue, as it were in Prison, so as they could
not converse, with the common People. The Queen answered very gravely; That it
was best first, to enquire of them, whether they would be set at liberty, or
no? Thus she silenced, an unseasonable Motion, with a doubtful Answer; As
reserving the Matter wholly, in her own Power. Neither did she bring in this
Alteration, timorously, or by pieces, but in a grave, and mature, Manner, after
a Conference betwixt both Sides, and the Calling, and Conclusion of a
Parliament. And thus, within the Compass of one year, she did so establish,
and settle, all Matters, belonging to the Church, as she departed not, one
Hairs Breadth, from them, to the end of her Life. Nay, and her usual Custom
was, in the beginning of every Parliament, to forewarn the Houses, not to
question, or innovate, any thing, already established, in the Discipline, or
Rites of the Church. And thus much of her Religion.

Now if there be any Severer Nature, that shall tax her, for that she suffered
her self, and was very willing, to be courted, wooed, and to have Sonnets made
in her Commendation; And that she continued this, longer, then was decent for
her years; Notwithstanding, if you will take this Matter at the best, it is not
without singular Admiration; Being much like unto that, which we find in
Fabulous Narrations, of a certain Queen, in the Fortunate Islands, and of her
Court, and Fashions, where Fair purpose, and Love-making was allowed, but
Lascivi^usnesse banished: But if you will take it at the worst, even, so it
amounts, to a more high Admiration; Considering that these Courtships, did
not much eclipse her Fame, and not at all her Majesty; Neither, did they make
her, less Apt for Government, or check, with the affairs, and businesses, of
the Public. For such passages as these, do often entertain the time, even with
the greatest Princes. But to make an end of this Discourse. Certainly, this
Princess was Good, and Moral: And such, she would be acknowledged: She
Detested Vice; And desired, to purchase Fame, only by honorable Courses: And
indeed, whilst I mention her Moral Parts, there comes a certain pas^age into
my mind, which I will insert. Once, giving order, to write to her Ambassador,
about certain Instructions, to be delivered, apart, to the Queen Mother, of the
House of Valois; And that her Secretary, had inserted a certain Clause, that
the Ambassador should say, as it were, to endear her, to the Queen Mother;
That they two, were the only pair, of Female Princes, from whom, for
experience, and Arts of Government, there was no less expected, then from the
greatest Kings: She utterly disliked the Comparison, and commanded it to be put
out, saying; That she practiced, other principles, and Arts of ^overnment, then
the Queen Mother did. Besides, she was not a little pleased, if any one should
fortune to tell her, that suppose, she had lived in a private Fortune, yet she
could not have escaped, without some Note of Excellency, and Singularity, in
her Sex. So little did she desire, to borrow, or be beholding to her Fortune,
for her Praise. But if I should wade further, into this Queens Praises,
Moral, or Politic, either, I must slide into certain Common places, and Heads
of Virtue, which were not worthy of so great a Princess; Or if I should
desire, to give her Virtues, the true Grace, and Luster, I must fall into a
History of her Life; Which requires, both better Leisure, and a better Pen,
then mine is. Thus much in brief, according to my ability: But to say the
Truth; The only Commender, of this Ladies virtues, is Time; Which, for as many
Ages, as it has runn, has not yet showed us, one of the Female Sex, equal to
Her, in the Administration of a Kingdom.

SEVERAL DISCOURSES Written, in the Days OF KING JAMES, Whereof, some of
them, PRESENTED TO His Majesty.

BEING, A brief Discourse, of the Union, of England and Scotland. Articles, and
Considerations, touching the Union, aforesaid. A Beginning of the History of
Great Britain. A Letter, and Discourse, to Sir Henry Savill, touching Helps,
for the Intellectual Powers. Certain Considerations, touching the better
Pacification, and Edification, of the Church of England. Certain
Considerations, touching the Plantation, in Ireland. Advice to the King,
touching Suttons Estate. A Proposition, to the King, touching the Compiling and
Amendment, of the Laws, of England. A Fragment, of an Essay, of Fame.

By the Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban.

LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks-head, near the Mitre Tavern, 1657.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE, Of the Happy UNION, OF THE KINGDOMS, OF ENGLAND, and
SCOTLAND; Dedicated, in Private, TO HIS MAJESTY.
I Do not find it strange, (excellent King,) that when Heraclitus, (he that was
surnamed^ the Obscure,) had set forth a certain Book, (which is not now
extant,) many Men took it, for a Discourse of Nature; And many others took it,
for a Treatise of Policy. For there is a great Affinity, and Consent, between
the Rules of Nature, and the true Rules of Policy: The one being nothing else,
but an Order, in the Government, of the World; And the other, an Order, in the
Government, of an Estate. And therefore the Education, and Erudition, of the
Kings of Persia, was in a Science, which was termed, by a Name then, of great
Reverence; but now degenerate, and taken in the ill part. For the Persian
Magic, which was the secret Literature of their ^ings, was an Application, of
the Contemplations, and Observat^ons of Nature, unto a sense Politic; Taking
the Fundamental Laws of Nature, and the Branches, and Passages of them, as an
Origi^all, or first Model, whence to take, and describe, a Copy, and
Imitation, for Government.

After this manner, the foresaid Instructours, set before their Kings, the
Examples of the Celestial Bodies; The Sun, the Moon, and the rest; which have
great Glory, and veneration, but no Rest^ or Intermission: Being in a
perpetual Office of Motion, for the Cherishing, (in turn, and in Course^) of
Inferior Bodies: Expressing, l^kewise, the true manner, of the Motions, of
Government; which, though they ought to be, Swift, and Rapide, in respect of
Dispatch, and Occasions; yet are they to be, Constant, and Regular, without
Wave^ing, or Confusion,

So did they r^pres^nt unto them, how the Heavens, do not en^ich themselves, by
the Earth, and the Seas; Nor keep no dead Stock, nor untouched Treasures, of
that they draw to them from below; But whatsoever Moisture, they do levy, and
take, from both ^lements, in Vapors, they do spend, and turn back again, in
Showers; Only holding, and storing them up, for a time, to the End, to is^ue,
and distribute them, in Season.

But, chiefly, they did express, and expound unto them, that Fundamental Law
of Nature; whereby all things do subsist, and are preserved: which is, that
every Thing in Nature; although it has his private, and pa^ticular, Affection,
and Appetite; And does follow, and pursue the same, in small Moments; And when
it is free, and delivered, from more general, and common, Respects; yet,
nevertheless, when there is Question, or Case, for Sustaining of the more
General, they fo^sake their own Particularities, and attend, and conspire, to
uphold the public.

So we see, the Iron, in small Quantity, will ascend, and approach, to the
Lodestone, upon a particular Sympathy: But if it be, any Quantity of moment,
it leaves his Appetite, of Amity to the Loadstone, and like a good Patriott,
falls to the Earth; which is the Place, and Region, of Massy Bodies.

So again the Wa^er, and other like Bodies, do fall, toward the Center of the
Earth; which is, (as was said,) their Region, or Country: And yet we see,
nothing more usual, in all Water Works, and Engines, then that the Water,
(rather then to suffer any Distraction, or Disunion, in Nature) will ascend,
Forsaking the Love, to his own Region, or Country, and applying it self, to
the Body, next adjoining.

But it were, too long a Digression, to proceed, to more Examples, of this
Kind. Your Majesty, your self, did fall, upon a Passage, of this Nature, in
your gracious speech of Thanks unto your Counsel; when acknowledging,
Princely, their Vigilancies, and well Deservings, it pleased you to note, that
it was a success, and Event, above the Course of Nature, to have so great
Change, with so great a Quiet. Forasmuch, as sudden Mutations, as well in
State, as in Nature, are rarely, without violence, and perturbation. So as
still I conclude, there is, (as was said,) a Congruity, between the Principles
of Nature, and Policy. And lest that Instance, may seem to oppone, to this
Asse^tion, I may, even in that particular, with your Majesty's favor, of^er
unto you, a Type, or Pattern in Nature, much resembling, this Event, in your
State; Namely Earthquakes, which many of them, bring ever, much Terror, and
wonder, but no Actual Hurt; The Earth trembling for a Moment, and suddenly
stablishing, in perfect Quiet, as it was before.

This Knowledge then, of making, the Government of the World, a Mirror, for
the Government of a State, being a Wisdom almost lost, (Whereof the Reason, I
take to be, because of the Difficulty, for one Man, to embrace both
Philosophies;) I have thought good, to make some proof, (as far as my
weakness, and the Straights, of Time, will suffer,) to, revive, in the
Handling, of one particular, wherewith now I most humbly present your Majesty:
For surely, as has been said, it is a Form of Discourse, anciently used
toward Kings; And to what King, should it be more proper, then to a King that
is stvdious, to conjoyn contemplative Virtue, and Active Virtue together?

Your Majesty, is the first King, that had the Honor, to be Lapis Angularis,
to unite, these two Mighty, and warlike, Nations, of England, and Scotland,
under one Sovereignty, and Monarchy. It does not appear, by the Records, and
Memories, of any true History; Or scarcely by the Fiction, and Pleasure, of any
Fabulous Narration, or Tradition; That ever, of any Antiquity, this Island, of
Great Britain, was united, under one King, before this day. And yet there be
no Mountains, nor Races, of Hills; There be no Seas, or great Rivers; There is
no Diversity, of Tongue, or Language, that has invited, or provoked, this
ancient separation, or Divorce. The Lot of Spain was, to have the several
Kingdoms, of that Continent, ( Portugal only except,) to be united, in an
Age, not long past; And now, in our Age, that of Portugal also, which was the
last that held out, to be incorporate, with the rest. The Lot of France, has
been, much about the same time, likewise, to have reannexed, unto that Crown,
the several Dutchies, and Portions, which were in former times, dismembered.
The Lot of this Island, is the last, reserved for your Majesty's happy times,
by the special Providence, and Favor, of God; who has brought your Majesty,
to this happy Conjunction, with great Consent of Hearts, and in the strength of
your years, and in the Maturity of your Experience. It rests, but that, (as I
promised,) I set before your Majesty's Princely Consideration, the Grounds of
Nature, touching the Union, and Commixture, of Bodies; And the Correspondence,
which they have, with the Grounds of Policy, in the Conjunction, of States, and
Kingdoms^

First, therefore, that Position; Vis unita fortior; Being one of the common
Notions of the Mind, needs not much, to be ^nduced, or illustrate.

We see the Sun, when he enters, and while he continues, under the sign of
Leo, causes more vehement Heats, then when he is in Cancer; what time, his
Beams, are, nevertheless, more perpendicular. The Reason whereof, in great
part, has been truly ascribed, to the Conjunction, and Cor-Radi-ation, in that
place of Heaven, of the Sun, with the four Stars, of the first Magnitude;
Syrius, Canicula, Cor Leonis, and Cauda Leonis.

So the Moon, likewise, by ancient Tradition, while she is in the same Sign, of
Leo, is, said, to be at the Heart; which is not, for any Affinity, which that
place of Heaven, can have, with that part, of Man's Body; But only, because the
Moon is then, by reason of the Conjunction, and Nearness, with the Stars
aforenamed, in greatest strength of Influence; And so, works upon that part,
in Inferior Bodies, which is most Vital, and ^rincipall.

So we see, Waters, and Liquours, in small Quantity, do, easily, putrify, and
corrupt; but in large Quantity, subsist long, by reason, of the Strength, they
receive, by Union.

So in Earthquakes, the more general, do little hurt, by reason, of the united
weight, which they offer to subvert; but narrow, and particular, Earthquakes,
have, many times, overturned, whole Towns, and Cities.

So then, this Point, touching the Force of Union, is evident. And therefore,
it is more fit, to speak, of the Manner of Union: wherein, again, it will not
be pertinent, to handle one Kind of Union, which is Union by Victory, when one
Body, does, merely, subdue another, and converteth the same, into his own
Nature; Extinguishing, and Expulsing, what part soever of it, it cannot
overcome. As when the Fire, converteth the Wood, into Fire, purging away the
Smoke, and the Ashes, as unapt Matter to inflame: Or when the Body, of a Living
Creature, does convert, and assimilate, Food, and Nourishment, purging, and
expelling, whatsoever it cannot convert. For these Representations, do answer,
in matter of Policy, to Union of Countries, by Conquest; where the Conquering
State, does extinguish, extirpate, and expulse, any part of the State
Conquered, which it finds so contrary, as it cannot alter, and convert it.
And therefore, leaving violent Unions, we will consider, only, of Natural
Unions.

The Difference is excellent, which the best Observers, in Nature, do take,
between Compositio, and Mistio; Putting together, and Mingling: The one, being
but a Conjunction, of Bodies, in place, the other, in Quali^y, and Consent: The
one, the Mother of Sedition, and Alteration, The other, of Peace, and
Continuance: The one, rather a Confusion, then an Union, the other, properly,
an Union. Therefore, we see, those Bodies, which they call Imperfecte mista,
last not, but are speedily dissolved. For take, for Example, Snow or Froath,
which are Compositions, of Air, and Water; And in them, you may behold, how
easily they sever, and dissolve, the Water, closing together, and excluding the
Air.

So those three Bodies, which the Alchymists do so much celebrate, as the three
Principles of Things; That is to say; Earth, Water, and Oil; (which it pleases
them to term, Salt, Mercury, and Sulphur;) we see, if they be united, only, by
Composition, or putting together, how weakly, and rudely, they do incorporate:
For Water, and Earth, makes, but an unperfect slime: And if they be forced
together, by Agitation, yet upon a little settling, the Earth resideth in the
Bottom. So Water, and Oil, though by Agitation, it be brought into an
Ointment, yet after a little settling, the Oil will float on the Top: So as such
Imperfect Mistures, continue no longer, then they are forced; And still, in the
end, the worthiest gets above.

But otherwise it is, of perfect Mistures. For we see, these three Bodies, of
Earth, Water, and Oil, when they are joined, in a Vegetable, or Mineral, they
are so united, as without great subtilty of Art, and Force of Extraction, they
cannot be separated, and reduced, into the same simple Bodies, again. So as the
Difference, between Compositio, and Mistio, clearly set down, is this: That
Compositio, is the Joining, or putting together, of Bodies, without a new Form;
And Mistio, is the Joining, or putting together, of Bodies, under a new Form.
For the new Form, is Commune Vinculum: And without that the old Forms, will be
at Strife, and Discord.

Now to reflect, this Light of Nature, upon Matter, of Estate: There has been,
put in practice, in Government, these two several kinds, of Policy in
Vniting^ and Conjoyning, of States, and Kingdoms: The one to retain the ancient
Form, still severed, and only conjoined in Sovereignty: The other, to super
induce a new Form, agreeable, and convenient, to the entire Estate. The former
of these, has been more usual, and is more Easy; but the latter is more
Happy. For if a Man, do attentively revolve, Histories of all Nations, and
judge truly thereupon, he will make this Conclusion: That there was never any
States, that were good Commixtures, but the Romans. Which, because it was the
best State of the World, and is the best Example of this Point, we will chiefly
insist thereupon.

In the Antiquities of Rome, Virgill brings in Jupiter, by way of Oracle, or
Prediction, speaking of the Mixture, of the Trojans, and the Italians.

Sermonem Ausonii Patrium, moresque tenebant,
Vtque est Nomen crit; Commixti Corpore tantum,
Subsident Teuc^i, Morem, Ritusque Sacrorum,
Adjiciam; faciamque omnes uno ore Latinos.
Hinc Genus Ausonio mistum, quod sanguine surget,
Supra Homines, supra ire Deos, pietate videbis.
Wherein, Jupiter, makes a kind of Partition, or Distribution; That, Italy
should give the Language, and the Laws; Troy should give a Mixture, of Men,
and some Religious Rites; And both People, should meet in one Name, of Latins.

Soon after the Foundation, of the City of Rome, the People of the Romans, and
the Sabines, mingled upon equal Terms. Wherein, the Interchange, went so even,
that, (as Livy notes,) the one Nation gave the Name, to the Place, the other
to the People. For Rome continued the Name, but the people were called
Quirites; which was the Sabine word, derived of Cures, the Country of ^atius.

But that, which is chiefly to be noted, in the whole Continuance, of the
Roman Government; they were so liberal, of their Naturalizations, as, in
effect, they made perpetual Mixtures. For the manner was, to grant the same,
not only to particular persons, but to Families, and Lineages; And not only
so, but to whole Cities, and Countries. So as, in the end, it came to that,
that Rome was Communis Patria, as some of the Civilians call it.

So we read of Saint Paul, after he had been beaten with Rods, and thereupon
charged the Officer, with the violation, of the Privilege, of a Citizen, of
Rome; The Captain said to him; Art thou then a Roman? That Privilege has
cost me dear. To whom Saint Paul replied; But I was so born, And yet, in
another place, Saint Paul, professes himself, that he was a Jew, by Tribe: So
as it is manifest, that some of his Ancestors, were naturalized; and so it was
conveyed to him, and their other Descendants.

So we read, that it was one, of the first Despites, that was done, to Julius
Caesar; That whereas he had obtained Naturalization, for a City in Gaul, one
of the City was beaten with Rods, of the Consul Marcellus.

So we read, in Tacitus, that in the Emperor Claudius time, the Nation of
Gaul, (that part which is called Comata, the wilder part,) were Suitours, to
be made capable, of the honor, of being Senators, and Officers, of Rome. His
words are these: Cum de supplendo Senatu a^itaretur, primoresque Galliae, quae
Comata appellatur, foedera and Civitatem Romanam pridem assecuti, Ius
adipiscendorum in urbe Honorum, expeterent; multus, ca super re, variusque
Rumor, and studiis diversis, apud Principem, certabatur. And in the end, after
long debate, it was ruled, they should be admitted.

So likewise, the Authority of Nicholas Matchiavell, seems not to be
contemned; who, enquiring the Causes, of the Growth, of the Roman Empire, does
give Judgment; There was not one greater then this; That the State, did so
easily compound, and incorporate with strangers.

It is true, that most Estates, and Kingdoms, have taken the other Course. Of
which this effect has followed; That the Addition, of further Empire, and
Territory, has been, rather, matter of Burden, then matter of Strength, unto
them: yea and further, it has kept alive, the Seeds, and Roots, of Revolts,
and Rebellions, for many Ages: As we may see, in a fresh, and notable Example,
of the Kingdom, of Aragon: Which, though it were united, to Castile, by
Marriage, and not by Conquest; And so descended in Hereditary Union, by the
space of more then an 100. years; yet because it was continued, in a divided
Government, and not well Incorporated, and Cemented, with the other Crowns;
Entered into a Rebellion, upon point of their Fueros, or Liberties, now of very
late years.

Now to speak briefly, of the several parts, of that form, whereby States, and
Kingdoms, are perfectly united; They are, (besides the Sovereignty it self,)
four in Number: Union in Name; Union in Language; Union in Laws; Union in
Employments.

For Name, though it seem, but a superficial, and Outward Matter, yet it
carries much Impression, and Enchantment: The General, and common Name, of
Grecia made the Greeks, always apt to unite, (though otherwise full of
Divisions, amongst themselves,) against other Nations, whom they called
Barbarous. The Helvetian Name, is no small Band, to knit together, their
Leagues, and Confederacies, the faster. The common Name of Spain; (no doubt,)
has been, a special means, of the better union, and Conglutination, of the
several Kingdoms, of Castile, Aragon, Granada, Navarre, Valentia, Catalonia,
and the rest; Comprehending also now lately Portugal.

For Language, it is not needful to insist upon it; because both your Majesty's
Kingdoms, are of one Language, though of several Dialects; And the
Difference, is so small, between them, as promises, rather an enriching, of
one Language, then a continuance of two.

For Laws, which are the Principal Sinnewes of Government, they be of three
Natures; Iura, which I will term Freedoms, or Abilities; Leges; and Mores.

For Abilities, and Freedoms, they were amongst the Romans, of four Kinds, or
rather Degrees. Ius Connubii; Ius Civitatis; Ius Suffragii; and Ius Petitionis,
or Honorum. Ius Connubii, is a thing in these times, out of Use: For Marriage
is open, between all Diversities, of Nations. Ius Civitatis, answers to that,
we call Denization, or Naturalization. Ius Suffragii, answers to the Voice in
Parliament. Ius Petitionis, answers to place in Counsel, or Office. And the
Romans, did, many times, sever these Freedoms, granting Ius Connubii, sine
Civitate; And Civitatem, sine suffragio; And suffragium, si^e Iure Petitionis,
which was, commonly, with them, the last.

For those, we called Leges, it is a Matter of Curiosity, and Inconveniency, to
^eek, either to extirpate all particular Customs; Or to draw all Subjects, to
one Place, or resort, of Judicature, and Session. It suffices, there be an
Uniformity, in the Principal, and Fundamental Laws, both Ecclesiastical,
and Civil: For in this Point, the Rule holds, which was pronounced by an
Ancient Father, touching the Diversity, of Rites, in the Church: For finding
the Vesture, of the Queen, in the Psalm, (which did prefigure the Church,) was
of diverse Colors; And finding again, that Christ's Coat, was without a seam, he
concludes well; In vest varietas sit, Scissura non sit.

For Manners, a Consent in them, is to be sought industriously, but not to be
enforced: For Nothing amongst People, breeds so much pe^^inacy, in holding
their Customs, as sudden, and violent, of^er to remove them.

And as for Employments, it is no more, but in indifferent Hand, and Execution
of that Verse; Tr^s, Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.


There remains, only, to remember, out of the Grounds of Nature, the two
Conditions, of Perf^ct mixture; Whereof the former is Time. For the Natural
Philosophers say well; that Compositio is Opus Hominis; and Mistio Opus
Naturae. For it is the Duty of Man, to make a fit Application, of Bodies
together: But the perfect Fermentation, and Incorporation, of them, must be
left to Time, and Nature; And Unnatural Hasting thereof, does disturb the
work, and not dispatch it.

So we see, after the Graft, is put into the Stock, and bound, it must be left
to Time, and Nature, to make that Continuum, which, at the first, was but
Contiguum. And it is not any continual pressing, or Thrusting together, that
will prevent Natures season, but rather hinder it. And so in Liquours, those
Commixtures, which are, at the first, troubled, grow after, clear, and settled,
by the benefit, of Rest, and Time.

The Second Condition is; That the greater draw the less. So we see, when two
Lights do meet, the greater, does darken, and, dim the less. And when a
smaller River, runs into a greater, it loses both his Name, and Stream.
And hereof, to conclude, we see an excellent Example, in the Kingdoms, of
Judah, and Israel. The Kingdom of Judah, contained Two Tribes; The Kingdom, of
Israel, contained Ten: King David, reigned, over Judah, for certain years; And
after the Death of Isbosheth, the Son of Saul, obtained, likewise, the Kingdom
of Israel This Union continued in him, and likewise in his Son Solomon, by the
space of 70. years, at least, between them both: But yet, because the Seat, of
the Kingdom, was kept still in Judah, and so the less sought to draw ^he
greater; upon the first occasion offered, the Kingdoms brake again, and so
continued ever after.

Thus having, in all Humbleness, made Oblation, to your Majesty, of these
simple Fruits, of my Devotion, and Studies; I do wish, and do wish it, not in
the Nature, of an Impossibility, (to my Apprehen^ion;) That this happy Union,
of your Majesty's two Kingdoms of England, and Scotland, may be in as good an
Hour, and under the like Divine Providence, as that was, between the Romans,
and the Sabines.

CERTAIN ARTICLES, OR, CONSIDERATIONS, TOUCHING THE UNION, OF THE KINGDOMS, OF
ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND; Collected, and dispersed, for His MAJESTY'S better
Service.
YOUR Majesty, being, (I do not doubt,) directed, and conducted, by a better
Oracle, then that, which was given for Light, to AEneas, in his Peregrination;
( Antiquam exquirite Matrem;) has a Royal, and, indeed, an Heroical, Desire,
to reduce these two Kingdoms, of England, and Scotland, into the Unity, of
their Ancient Mother Kingdom of Britain. Wherein, as I would gladly applaud
unto your Majesty, or sing aloud that Hymn, or Antheme; Sic itur ad Astra; So,
in a more soft, and submisse, voice, I must, necessarily, remember, unto your
Majesty, that Warning, or Caveat; Ardua, quae Pulchra; It is an Action, that
requires, yea^ and needs much, not only of your Majesty's Wisdom, but of
^our Felicity. In this Argument, I presumed, at your Majesty's first Entrance,
to write a few Lines, indeed Scholastically, and Speculatively, and not
Actively, or Politickly, as I held it fit for me, at that time; when neither
your Majesty, was, in that your desire, declared; Nor my self, in that Service,
used, or trusted. But now that both your Majesty, has opened your desire, and
purpose, with much Admiration, even of those, who give it not, so full an
Approbation; And that my self, was, by the Commons, graced, with the first
Vote, of all the Commons, Selected, ^or that Cause; Not in any Estima^ion of my
Ability, (For therein so wise an As^embly could not be so much deceived,) but
in an acknowledgement, of my Extreme Labors, and Integrity, in that Business;
I thought my self, every ways bound; Both in Duty to your Majesty; And in
^rust, to that House of Parliament; And in Consent to the Matter it self; And
in Conformity, to mine own Travailes, and Beginnings; Not to neglect, any
pains, that may tend, to the furtherance, of so excellent a work: Wherein I
will endeavor, that that which I shall set down, be Nihil minus quam verba:
For Length, and Ornament, of Speech, are to be used, for persuasion of
Multitudes, and not for Information of Kings: especially, such a King, as is
the only instance, that ever I knew, to make a Man of Plato's Opinion, That all
Knowledge is but Remembrance; And that the Mind of Man, knows all Things, and
demands only, to have her own No^ions, excited, and awaked. Which your
Majesty's rare, and indeed singular, Gift, and faculty, of swift Apprehension,
and infinite Expansion, or Multiplication, of another Man's Knowledge, by your
own, as I have often observed, so I did extremely admire in Goodwins Cause,
Being a matter full of Sec^ets, and Mysteries, of our Laws, merely new unto
you, and quite out of the Path of your Education, Reading, and Conference:
Wherein, nevertheles^e, upon a Spark of Light given, your Majesty took in so
Dexterously, and Profoundly, as if you had been indeed Anima Legis; Not only in
Execution, but in understanding: The Remembrance whereof, as it will never be
out of my mind, so it will always be a warning to me, to seek rather to excite
your Judgem^nt briefly, then to enform it tediously; And if in a Matter, of
that Nature, how much more in this, wherein your Princely Cogitations have
wrought themselves, and been conversant; And wherein, the principal Light,
p^oceeded from your self.

And, therefore, my Purpose is, only to break, this Matter, of the Union, into
certain short Articles, and Questions; And to make, a certain kind, of Anatomy,
or Analysis, of the Parts, and Members thereof; Not that I am of Opinion, that
all the Questions, which I now shall Open, were fit to be, in the Consultation,
of the Commissioners, propounded. For I hold nothing, so great an Enemy, to
good Resolution, as the Making, of too many Questions; Specially in Assemblies,
which consist of many. For Princes, for Avoiding of Distraction, must take many
Things by way of Admittance; And if Questions, must be made of them, rather to
suffer them, to arise from others, then to grace them, and autho^ize them, as
propounded from themselves. But unto your Majesty's private Consideration, to
whom it may better sort with me, rather to speak as a Remembrancer, then as a
Counceller; I have thought good, to lay before you, all the Branches,
Lineaments, and Degrees, of this Union; that upon the Vi^w, and Consideration,
of them, and their Circumstances, your Majesty may the more clearly discern,
and more readily call to mind, which of them is to be embraced, and which to be
rejected; And of these, which are to be accepted, which of them is presently to
be proceeded in, and which to be put over to further time; And again, which of
them, shall require Authority of Parliament, and which are fitter, to be
effected, by your Majesty's Royal Power, and Prerogative, or by other
Policies, or Means; And lastly, which of them, is liker to Pass, with
Difficulty, and Contradiction, and which, with more Facility, and Smoothness.

First therefore, to begin with that Question, that I suppose will be out of
question.

Statutes concerning Scotland, and the Scottish Nation.
Whether it be not meet, that the Statutes, which were made touching Scotland,
or the Scottish Nation, while the Kingdoms stood severed, be repealed?

It is true, there is a Diversity in these; For some of these Laws, consider
Scotland as an Enemy Country; Other Laws consider it, as a Foreign Country
only: As for Example, the Law of Rich. 2. Anno 7o, which Prohibiteth, all
Armor, or Victual, to be carried to Scotland; And the Law of 7o of K. H. the
7. that Enacteth, all the Scottish Men, to depart the Realm, within a time
prefixed; Both these Laws, and some others, resepct Scotland, as a country of
hostility: But the of Law of 22 of Ed. 4, that endueth Barwick, with ^he
Liberty, of a Staple, where all Scottish Merchandises, should resort, that
should be uttred for England: And likewise all English Merchandises, that
should be uttered for Scotland; This Law beholds Scotland, only, as a
Foreign Nation; And not so much neither; For there have been erected, Staples,
in Towns of ^ngland, for some Commodities, with an Exclusion, and Restriction,
of other Parts, of England.

But this is a Matter of the least Difficulty; your M^sty, shall have a
Calender made, of the Laws, and a Brief of the Effect; And so you may judge of
them: Laws, Customs, Commissions, Offi^ers^ of the Borders, or Marches.
And the like, or Reciproque, is to be done by Scotland, for such Laws, as
they have concerning England, and the English Nation.

The Second Question is, what Laws, Customs, Commissions, Officers,
Garrisons, and the like, are to be put down, discontinued, or taken away, upon
the Borders of both Realms.

This Point, because I am not acquainted, with the Orders of the Marches, I can
say the less.

Herein falls that Question, whether that the Tennants, who hold their
Tennant Rights, in a greater Freedom, and Exemption, in Consideration of their
Service, upon the Borders; And that the Countries themselves, which are, in the
same respect, discharged, of Subsidies, and Taxes; should not now be brought,
to be, in one degree, with other Tennants, and Countries; Nam cessante caussa
tollitur Effectus; Wherein, in my Opinion, some time would be given; Quia adhuc
eorum Messis in Herba est: But some present Ordinance, would be made, to take
effect, at a future time; considering, it is one of the greatest Points, and
Marks, of the Division, of the Kingdoms. And because Reason does dictate, that
where the Principal Solution of Continuity was, the^e the Healing, and
Consolidating Plaster, should be chiefly applied; There would be some further
Device, for the utter, and perpetual, Confounding, of those Imaginary Bounds,
(as your Majesty terms them;) And therefore, it would be considered, whether
it were not convenient, to Plant, and Erect, at Carleil, or Barwick, some
Counsel, or Court of Justice, the Jurisdiction whereof, might extend, part
into England, and part into Scotland; With a Commission, not to proceed
precisely, or merely, according to the Laws, and Customs, either of England,
or Scotland; But mixtly, according to Instructions, by your Majesty, to be set
down, after the Imitation, and Precedent, of the Counsel, of the Marches, here
in England, Erected, upon the Union, of Wales.

The third Question is that, Further Union besides the Removing of Inconvenient
and dissenting Laws and Usages.
which many will make a great Question of, though, perhaps, your Majesty, will
make no Question of it; And that is, Whether your Majesty, should not make, a
stop, or stand here, and not to proceed, to any ^urther Union; Contenting your
Self, with the two former Articles, or Points.

For it will be said, That we are now well, (thanks be to God;) And your
Majesty, and the State, of neither Kingdom, is to be repented of; And that it
is true, which Hippocrates says; That, Sana Corpora difficile medicationes
serunt: It is better, to make Alterations^ in sick Bodies, then in sound. The
Consideration of which Point, will rest upon these two Branches: What
Inconveniences will ensue, with time, if the Realms stand, as they are,
divided, which are yet not found, nor sprung up. For it may be, the sweetness,
of your Majesty's first Entrance, and the great Benefit, that both Nations have
felt thereby, has covered many Inconveniences; Which, nevertheless, be your
Majesty's Government, never so gracious, and Pollitick, Continuance of Time,
and the Accidents of Time, may breed, and discover, if the Kingdoms stand
divided.

The Second Branch is; Allow no manifest, or important, Peril, or
Inconvenience, should ensue, of the Continuing o^ the Kingdoms Divided; yet,
on the other Side, whether that, upon the further Uniting of them, there be not
like to follow, that Addition, and Increase, of Wealth, and Reputation, as is
worthy your Majesty's Virtues, and Fortune, to be the Author, and Founder of,
for the Advancement, and Exaltation, of Your Majesty's Royal Posterity, in
time to come.

Points wherein the Nations stand already united.
But admitting, that your Majesty should proceed, to this more perfect, and
entire, Union; Wherein your Majesty may say, Majus Opus moveo; To enter, into
the Parts, and Degrees thereof, I think fit, first, to set down, as in a brief
Table, in wh^t Points, the Nations, stand now, at this present time, already
united; And in what Points, yet still severed, and divided; that your Majesty
may the better see, what is done, and what is to be done; And how that which is
to be done, is to be inferred, upon that which is done.

The Points, wherein the Nations, stand already united, are;
In Sovereignty. In the Relative thereof, which is Subjection. In Religion. In
Continent. In Language.
And now, lastly, by the Peace, by your Majesty concluded, with Spain In
Leagues, and Confederacies; For now, both Nations, have the same Friends, and
the same Enemies.

Yet notwithstanding, there is none of the six Points, wherein the Union, is
perfect, and Consummate; But every of them, has some scruple, or rather Grain
of separation, enwrapped, and included in them.

Sovereignty; Line Royal.
For the Sovereignty, the Union is absolute in your Majesty, and your
Generation; But if it should so be, (which God, of his infinite Mercy, defend,)
that your Issue should fail, then the Descent, of both Realms, does resort to
the several Lines, of the Several Bloods Royal.

Su^jection Obedience.
For Subjection, I take the Law of England, to be clear, (what the Law of
Scotland, is I know not;) That all Scottishmen, from the very Instant of your
Majesty's Reign begun, are become Denizons; And the Post-Nati, are naturalized
Subjects, of England, for the time forwards: For, by our Laws, none can be an
Alien, Alien Naturalization
but he that is, of another Allegiance, then our Sovereign Lord the Kings; For
there be but two Sorts of Aliens, whereof we find mention in our Law; An Alien
Ami, and an Alien En^my: Whereof the former, is a Subject, of a State, in Amity
with the King, And the latter, a Subject, of a State, in Hostility: But whether
he be one, or other, it is an Essential Difference, unto the Definition of an
Alien, if he be not of the Kings Allegiance; As we see it evidently, in the
precedent of Ireland; who since they were Subjects, to the Crown, of England,
have ever been Inheritable, and capable, as Natural Subjects; And yet, not by
any Statute, or Act of Parliament, but merely by the Common Law, and the Reason
thereof. So as, there is no doubt, that every Subject of Scotland was^ and is,
in like Plight, and Degree, since your Majesty's Coming in, as if your
Majesty, had granted, particularly, your Letters of Denization, or
Naturalization, To every of them; And the Post-Nati, wholly Natural. But then,
on the other Side, for the time Back-wards, and ^or those that were Ante-Nati,
the Blood is not, by Law, naturalized; So as they cannot take it, by Descent^
from their Ancestors, without Act of Parliament. And therefore, in this Point,
there is a Defect, in the Vn^on, of Subjection.

For Matter of Religion, the Union is perfect, Religion, Church Government.
in points of Doctrine; but in Matter of Discipline, and Government, it is
imperfect.

For the Continent; Continent Borders.
It is true, there are no Natural Boundaries of Mountains, or Seas, or
Navigable Rivers; But yet the^e are Badges, and Memorialls, of Borders; Of
which Point, I have spoken before.

For the Language; Language, Di^lect.
It is true, the Nations are unius Labii, and and have not the first Curse of
Disunion, which was Confusion of Tongues, whereby one understood not another.
But yet the Dialect is differing, and it remains, a kind of Mark, of
Distinction. But for that, Tempori permittendum, it is to be left to Time: For
considering, that both Languages, do concur, in the principal Office, and
Duty, of a Language, which is to make a Man's self understood; For the rest, it
is rather to be accounted, (as was said) a Diversity of Dialect, then of
Language: and as I said in my first Writing, it is like to bring forth, the
enriching of one Language, by compounding, and taking in the proper, and
significant Words, of either Tongue, rather then a Coutinuance, of two
Languages.

For Leagues, and Confederacies; Leagues, Confederacies, Treaties.
It is true, that neither Nation, is now in Hostility, with any State,
wherewith the other Nation, is in Amity: but yet so, as the Leagues, and
Treaties, have been concluded, with either Nation, respectively, and not with
both, jointly; which may contain, some Diversity of Articles, of strai^ness of
Amity, with one, more then with the other.

But many of these Matters, may, perhaps, be of that kind, as may fall within
that Rule; In vest varietas sit, scissura non sit.

Now to descend to the particular Points, wherein the Realms, stand, severed,
and divided, over and besides, the former six Points of separation, which I
have noted, and placed, as defects, or Abatements, of the six Points of the
Union; And therefore, shall not need to be repeated. The Points, I say yet
remaining, I will divide, into External, External points of the Separation
and Union.
and into Internal.

The External Points, therefore, of the Separation, are four.

1. The several Crowns; I mean the Ceremonial, and Material, Crowns. 2. The
second is, the several Names, Styles, or Appellations. 3. The third is, the
several Prints, of the Seals. 4. The fourth is, the several Stamps, or Marks
of the Coins, or Moneys.
It is true, that the External, are, in some respect, and parts, much mingled,
and interlaced, with Considerations Internal; And that they may be as
effectual, to the rue Union, which must be the work of Time, as the In^ernall;
Because, they are Operative, upon the Conceits, and Opinions, of the People:
The Vnit^g, of whose Hearts, and Affect^ons, is the Life, and true End of this
Work.

The Ceremonial or Mate^iall Crowns.
For the Ceremonial Crowns, the Question will be, whether there shall be
framed, one, new, Imperial Crown, of Britain, to be used for the times to come?

Also, admitting that to be thought Convenient, whether in the Frame thereof,
there shall not be some Reference, to the Crowns, of Ireland, and France.

Also, whether your Majesty, should repeat, or iterate, your own Coronation,
and your Queens; or only ordain, that such new Crown, shall be used, by your
Posterity, hereafter.

The Difficulties will be, in the Conceit, of some Inequali^y, whereby the
Realm of Scotland, may be thought, to be made an Accession, unto the Realm of
England. But that rests in some Circumstances: for the Compounding, of the
two Crowns, is equal; The Calling of the new Crown, the Crown of Britain is
equal. Only the Place of Coronation, if it shall be at Westminster, which is
the Ancient, August, and Sacred place, for the Kings of England, may seem to
make an Inequality: And again, if the Crown of Scotland, be discontinued, then
that Ceremony, which, I hear, is used in the Parliament, of Scotland; in the
absence of the Kings, to have the Crowns carried in solemnity, must likewise
cease.

The Styles and Names.
For the Name, the main Question is, whether the Contracted Name, of Britain,
shall be, by your Majesty, used, or the Divided Names of England, and Scotland.

Admitting there shall be an Alteration, then the Case will require, these
Inferior Questions.

First, whether the Name of Britain, shall, not only, be used, in your
Majesty's Style, where the entire Style is recited; And in all other Forms, the
Divided Names to remain, both of the Realms, and of the People; Or otherwise,
that the very Divided Name^, of Realms, and People, shall, likewise, be changed,
or turned into special or subdivided Names, of the General Name; That is to
say, for Example; whether your Majesty, in your Style, shall denominate your
self, King of Britain, France, and Ireland; etc. And yet, neverth^lesse, in
any Commission, Writ, or otherwise, where your Majesty mentions, England, or
Scotland, you shall retain the ancient Names, as Secundum Con^uetudinem Regni
nostri Angliae; or whether, those Divided Names, shall be, for ever, lost, and
taken away, and turned, into the subdivisions, of South-Britain, and
North-Britain; and the People to be South-Brittains, and North-Brittains; And
so, in the Example aforesaid, the Tenor of the like clause, to run, Secundum
Consuetudinem Britanniae Australis.

Also, if the former of these, shall be thought convenient, whether it were not
better, for your Majesty, to ^ake, that Alteration of Style, upon you, by
Proclamation, as Edward the third did, the Style of France, then to have it
enacted by Parliament.

Also in the Alteration, of the Style, whether it were not better, to transpose
the Kingdom, of Ireland, and put it, immediately, after Britain, and so place
the Islands together; And the Kingdom of France, being upon the Continent,
last: In regard, that these Islands, of the Western Ocean, seem, by Nature, and
Providence, an entire Empire in themselves; And also, that there was never King
of England, so entirely possessed of Ireland, as your Majesty is: So as your
Style to run, King of Britain, Ireland, and the Islands Adjacent, and of
France, etc.

The Difficulties in this, have been, already, thoroughly beaten over, but they
gather but to two Heads.

The one, Point of Honor, and Love, to the former Names.

The other, Doubt, lest the Alteration, of the Name, may induce, and involve,
an Alteration of the Laws, and Policies, of the Kingdom; Both which, if your
Majesty shall assume, the Style, by Proclamation, and not by Parliament, are in
themselves satisfied: For then, the usual Names, must needs remain, in Writs,
and Records; The Forms whereof, cannot be altered, but by Act of Parliament;
And so the point of Honor satisfied. And again, your Proclamation alters no
Law; And so, the Scruple, of a tacit, or employed, Alteration of Laws,
likewise satisfied. But then, it may be considered, whether it were not a Form,
of the greatest Honor, if the Parliament, though they did not enact it, yet
should become Suitors, and Petitioners to your Majesty, to assume it.

For the Seals; The Seals.
That there should be but one Great Seal of Britain, and one Chanceller; And
that their should only be a Seal in Scotland; for Processes, and ordinary
Justice; And that all Patents, of Graunts, of Lands, or otherwise, as well in
Scotland, as in England, should pass under the Great Seal here, kept about
your Person; It is an Alteration internal, whereof ^ do not now speak.

But the Question, in this Place, is; whether the Great Seals, of England, and
Scotland, should not be changed, into one, and the same Form, of Image, and
Superscription, of Britain; which, Nevertheless, is requisite, should be, with
some one plain, or manifest, Alteration, lest there be a Buz, and suspect, that
Grants of Things in England, may be passed, by the Seal of Scotland; Or e
converso.

Also, whether this Alteration, of Form, may not be done, without Act of
Parliament, as the Great Seals, have used, to be heretofore changed, as to
their Impressions.

The Standards, and Stamps, Moneys.
For the Moneys, as to the Real, and Internal Consideration thereof, the
Question will be, whether your Majesty, should not continue two Mints; which,
the Distance of Territory considered,) I suppose, will be of Necessity.

Secondly, how the Standards, (if it be not already done, as I hear some doubt
made of it, in popular Rumor,) may be reduced, into an Exact proportion, for
the time to come; And likewise, the Compu^ation, Tale, or Valuation, to be made
exact, for the Moneys, already beaten.

That done, the last Question is, (which is only proper to this place,)
whether the Stamp, or the Image, and Superscription, of Britain, for the time
forwards, should not be made, the self same, in both places, without any
Difference at all. A Matter also, which may be done, as our Law is, by your
Majesty's Prerogative, without Act of Parliament.

These Points, are Points, of Demonstration, Ad faciendum populum; But so much
the more, they go, to the Root, of your Majesty's Intention; which is to
imprint, and inculcate, into the Hearts, and Heads, of the People; that they
are one People, and one Nation.

In this kind, also, I have heard it, pass abroad in Speech, of the Erection,
of some new Order, of Knighthood, with a Reference to the Union, and an Oath
appropriate thereunto; which is a Point, likewise, deserves a Consideration.
So much for the External Points.

Internal Points of Union.
The Internal Points, of Separation, are as follows.

1. Several Parliaments. 2. Several Councels of Estate. 3. Several Officers
of the Crown. 4. Several Nobilities. 5. Several Laws, 6. Several Courts of
Justice, Trialls, and Processes. 7. Several Receipts, and Finances. 8.
Several Admiralties, and Merchandizings: 9. Several Freedoms, and Liberties.
10. Several Taxes, and Imposts.
As touching the Several States Ecclesiastical; and the several Mints, and
Standards; and the several Articles, and Treaties, of Intercourse, with
Foreign Nations, I touched them before.

In these Points, of the straight, and more inward, Union, there will
interveyn, one principal Diffi^ulty, and Impediment, growing from that Root,
which Aristotle, in his Politics, makes, to be the Root, of all Division, and
Dissension, in Common Wealths; And that is Equality, and Inequality. For the
Realm of Scotland, is now, an Ancient, and Noble, Realm, substantive of it
self. But when this Island, shall be made Britain, then Scotland, is no more to
be considered, as Scotland, but as a part of Britain; No more then England, is
to be considered, as England, but as a part, likewi^e, of Britain: And
consequently, neither of these, are to be considered, as Things entire of
themselves, but in the Proportion that they bear to the Whole. And therefore,
let us imagine, ( Nam id Mente Possumus, quod actu non Possumus,) that Britain,
had never been divided, but had ever been one Kingdom; Then that part, of
Soil, or Territory, which is comprehended under the Name of Scotland; is, in
quantity, (as I have heard it esteemed, how truly I know not;) Not past, a
third part of ^ritain; And that part of Soil, or Territory, which is
comprehended, under the Name of England, is two parts of Britain; Leaving to
speak, of any Difference, of Wealth, or Population, and speaking only of
Quantity. So then, if, for Example, Scotland, should bring to Parliament, as
much Nobility, as England, then, a Third part, should countervail two parts;
Nam si Inaequalibus aequalia addas, omnia erunt ^naequalia. And this, I protest
before God, and your Majesty, I do speak, not as a Man born in England, but as
a Man born in Britain. And therefore, to descend, to the particulars.

For the Parliaments, Parliament.
the Consideration of that Point, will fall into four Questions.

1. The first, what proportion shall be kept, between the Votes of England, and
the Votes of Scotland. 2. The Second, touching the Manner of Proposition, or
possessing, of the Parliament, of Causes there to be handled; Which in England,
is used to be done, immedia^ly, by any Member, of the Parliament, or by the
Prolocutor; And in Scotland, is used to be done, immediately, by the Lords, of
the Articles; Whereof, the one Form, seems to have, more Liberty, and the
other, more Gr^vity, and Maturity: And therefore, the Question will be, whether
of these, shall yield to other; Or whether there should not be, a Mixture of
both, by some Commissions, precedent, to every Parliament, in the Nature, of
Lords, of the Articles; And yet not Excluding, the Liberty, of propounding, in
full Parliament, afterward. 3. The Third, touching the Orders of Parliament,
how they may be compounded, and the best, of either, taken. 4. The Fourth, how
those, which by Inheritance, or otherwise, have Offices of Honor, and
Ceremony, in both the Parliaments, as the Lord Steward, with us, etc. may be
satisfied, and Duplicity accommodated.
For the Counsels of Estate, Cousell^ o^ Estate.
while the Kingdoms stand divided, it should seem necessary, to continue
several Counsels; But, if your Maj^sty^ should proceed to a strict Union,
then, howsoever your Majesty, may establish, some Provincial Counsels, in
Scotland, as there is here, of York, and in the Marches of Wales; Yet the
Question will be, whether it will not be, more convenient, for your Majesty, to
have but one Trivy Council, about your Person; Whereof, the Principal
officers, of the Crown, of Scotland, to be, for Dignity sake, howsoever, their
Abiding, and Remaining, may be, as your Majesty, shall employ their Service.
But this Point, belongs, merely, and wholly, to your Majesty's Royal Will,
and Pleasure.

For the Officers, of the Crown, Off^cers of the Crown
the Consideration thereof, will fall into these Questions.

First, in regard, of the Latitude, of your Kingdom, and the Distance of Place,
whether it will not be Matter of necessity, to continue the several Officers,
because of the Impossibility, for the service, to be performed, by one. The
Second, admitting, the Duplicity, of Officers, should be continued, yet,
whether there should not be a Difference, that one should be the Principal
Officer, and the other, to be, but Special, and Subalterne: As for example,
one to be Chancellor of Britain, and the other, to be Chancellor, with some
special Addition; As here of the Duchy, etc. The Third, if no such specialty,
or Inferiority, be thought fit, then whether both Officers, should not have the
Ti^le, and the Name, of the whole Island, and Precincts: As the Lord Chanceller
of England, to be, Lord Chanceller of Britain; And the Lord Ch^nceller of
Scotland, to be, Lord Chanceller of Britain; But with several proviso's, that
they shall not, intromit themselves, but within their several precincts.
For the Nobilities, Nobilities.
the Consideration thereof, will fall into these Questions.

The First, of their Votes, in Parliament, (which was touched before,) what
proportion they shall bear, to the Nobility of England: Wherein, if the
Proportion, which shall be thought ^it, be not full, yet your Majesty may, out
of your Prerogative, supply it: For although, you cannot make fewer, of
Scotland, yet you may make more of England. The Second is, touching the Place,
and Precedence; wherein, to marshall them, according to the Precedence of
England, in your Majesty's Style; And according, to the Nobility, of Ireland;
That is, all English Earls first, and then Scottish, will be thought unequal,
for Scotland. To marshall them, according to Antiquity, will be thought
unequal for England. Because I hear, their Nobility, is, generally, more
ancient: And therefore, the Question will be, whether the indifferentest way,
were not, to take them enterchangeably; As for Example; First, the Ancient Earl
of England; And then, the Ancient Earl of Scotland; And so, Alternis Vicibus.
For the Laws, to make an entire, and perfect, Union, Law^^.
it is a Matter of great Difficulty, and Length; Both in the Collecting of
them, and in the Passing of them. For first, as to the Collecting of them,
there must be made, By the Lawyers, of either Nation, a Digest, under Titles,
of their several Laws, and Customes^ As Well Common Laws, as Sta^utes; That
they may be Collated, and Compared; And that, the Diversities, may appear, and
be discerned of. And for the Passing of them, we see, by expe^rience, that
Patrius Mos, is dear to all men; And that Men are bred, and nourished up, in
the Love of it; And therefore, how harsh, Changes, and Innovations, are. And we
see, likewise, what Disputation, and Argument, the Alteration, of some one Law,
does cause, and bring forth; How much more, the Alteration, of the whole Corpse,
of the Law? Therefore, the first Question will be, whether it be not good, to
proceed by parts, and to take that, that is most necessary, and leave the rest,
to Time? The Parts therefore, or Subject, of Laws are, for this purpose,
fitliest distributed, according to that ordinary Division, of Criminal, and
Civil; And those of Criminal Causes, into Capital, and Penal.

The Second Question, therefore, is; Allowing the General Union of Laws, to
be too great a Work, to embrace, whether it were not convenient, that Cases
Capital, were the same, in both Nations? I say, the Cases; I do not speak, of
the Proceedings, or Trials; That is to say; whether the same Offenses, were not
fit, to be made Treason, or Felony, in both places?

The Third Question is, whether Cases Penal, though not Capital, yet if they
concern the Public State, or otherwise, the Discipline of Manners, were not
fit, likewise, to be brought, into one Degree? As the Case, of Misprision of
Treason; The Case of Praemunire; The Case of Fugitives; The Case of Incest; The
Case of Simony; and the rest.

But the Question, that is more urgent, then any of these, is; Whether these
Cases, at the least, be they of an higher, or inferior, degr^e; Wherein the
Fact committed, or Act done in Scotland, may prejudice, the State, and
Subjects, of England, or e converso; Are not, to be reduced, into one
Uniformity, of Law, and Punishment? As for Example; A perjury, committed, in a
Court of Justice, in Scotland, cannot be prejudicial, in England; Because
Depositions, taken in Scotland, cannot be produced, and used, here in England.
But a Forgery, of a Deed, in Scotland, I mean, with a false Date of England,
may be used, and given in Evidence, in England. So likewise, the Depopulating,
of a Town in Scotland, does not, directly, prejudice, the State of England: But
if an English Merchant, shall carry Silver, and Gold, into Scotland, (as he
may,) and thence transport it, into foreign parts, this prejudiceth the State
of England: And may be, an Evasion, to all the Laws, of England, ordained in
that Case: And therefore, had need to be bridled, with as severe a Law, in
Scotland, as it is here in England.

Of this kind, there are many Laws.

The Law, of the 50, of Rich. the 2. of going over without license, if there be
not the like Law in Scotland, will be frustrated, and evaded: For any Subject
of England, may go first into Scotland, and thence into foreign parts.

So the Laws, prohibiting Transportation of sundry Commodities, as Gold, and
Silver, Ordnance, Artillery, Corn, etc. if there be not, a Correspondence of
Laws, in Scotland, will, in like manner, be deluded, and frustrate: For any
English Merchant, or Subject, may carry such Commodities, first into Scotland,
as well, as he may carry them, from Port, to Port, in England. And out of
Scotland, into Foreign Parts, without any Peril of Law.

So Libells, may be devised, and written, in Scotland, and published, and
scattered in England.

Treasons, may be plotted in Scotland, and executed^ in England.

And so, in many other Cases, if there be not, the like Severity, of Law, in
Scotland, to restrain Offenses, that there is in England; (whereof, we are here
ignorant, whether there be, or no,) It will be, a Gap, or Stop, even for
English Subjects, to escape, and avoid, the Laws, of England.

But for Treasons, the best is, that by the Statute, of 26. K. Hen. the 8'h.
Cap. 13. any Treason, committed in Scotland, may be proceeded with, in England,
as well, as Treasons committed, in France, Rome, or elsewhere.

For Courts of Justice, Trialls, Processes, and other Administration of Laws,
Courts of Justice, and Administration of Laws.
to make any Alteration, in either Nation, it will be a Thing, so new, and
unwonted, to either People; That it may be doubted, it will make, the
Administration of Justice; (Which, of all other Things, ought to be known, and
certain, as a beaten way;) To become intricate, and uncertain: And besides, I
do not see, that the Severalty, of Administration of Justice, though it be by
Court Sovereign, of last Resort; (I mean, without Appeal, or Error;) Is any
Impediment at all, to the Union of a Kingdom: As we see by Experience, in the
several Courts of Parliament, in the Kingdom of France: And I have been,
always, of Opinion, that the Subjects of England, do, already, fetch Justice,
somewhat far off, more then in any Nation, that I know, the largeness of the
Kingdom Considered, though it be helped, in some part, by the Circuits, of the
Judges; And the two Councels, at York, and in the Marches of Wales, established.

But it may be a good Question, whether, as Commune Vinculum, of the Justice,
of both Nations, your Majesty, should not erect, some Court about your person,
in the Nature, of the Grand Council, of France; To which Court, you might, by
way of Evocation, draw Causes, from the ordinary Judges, of both Nations; For
so does the French King, from all the Courts, of Parliament, in France; Many of
which, are more remote, from Paris, then any part of Scotland, is from London.

For Receipts, and Finances, Receipts, Finances, and Patrimonies of the Crown.
I see no Question will arise; In regard it will be Matter of Necessity, to
establish in Scotland, a Receipt of Treasure, for Payments, and Erogations, to
be made, in those parts: And for the Treasure of Spare, in either Receipts, the
Custodies thereof, may well be several; considering, by your Majesty's,
Commandment, they may be, at all times, removed, or disposed, according to
your Majesty's Occasions.

For the Patrimonies, of both Crowns, I see, no Question will arise; Except
your Majesty would be pleased, to make one compounded Annexation, for an
Inseparable Patrimony, to the Crown, out of the Lands, of both Nations; And so,
the like, for the Principality of Britain, and for other Appennages, of the
rest of your Children; Erecting, likewise, such Dutchies, and Honors,
compounded, of the Possessions, of both Nations, as shall be thought fit.

For Admiralty, or Navy, I see, no great question, will arise: Admiralty, Navy,
and Merchandising.
For I see no Inconvenience, for your Majesty, to continue Shipping, in
Scotland. And for the Jurisdictions, of the Admiralties, and the Profits, and
Casualties, of them, they will be respective, unto the Coasts, over against
which, the Seas lie, and are situated; As it is here, with the Admiralties, of
England.

And for Merchandising, it may be a Question, whether that the Companies, of
the Merchant Adventurers, of the Turkey Merchants, and the Muscovy Merchants,
(if they shall be continued,) should not be compounded, of Merchants, of both
Nations, English, and Scottish. For to leave Trade free, in the one Nation, and
to have it restrained, in the other, may, percase, breed some Inconvenience.

For Freedoms, and Liberties, Freedoms and Liberties.
the Charters of both Nations, may be reviewed: And of such Liberties, as are
agreeable, and convenient, for the Subjects, and People, of both Nations, one
Great Charter, may be made, and confirmed, to the Subjects, of Britain; And
those Liberties, which are peculiar, or proper, to either Nation, to stand in
State, as they do.

(...)
But for Imposts, and Customs, it will be a great Question, how to accommodate
them, and reconcile them: For, if they be much easier in Scotland, then they be
here in England, (which is a Thing, I know not,) then this Inconvenience will
follow; That the Merchants of England, may unlade, in the Ports of Scotland;
And this Kingdom, to be served, from thence, and your Majesty's Customs
abated.

And for the Question, whether the Scottish Merchants, should pay Strangers
Custom, in England, that rests, upon the Point, of Naturalization, which I
touched before.

Thus have I made your Majesty, a brief, and naked, Memorial, of the Articles,
and Points, of this great Cause; which may serve, only, to excite, and stir
up, your Majesty's Royal Judgment, and the Judgment of Wiser Men, whom you
will be pleased to call to it: Wherein, I will not presume, to persuade, or
dissuade any thing; Nor to interpose mine own Opinion; But do expect light,
from your Majesty's Royal Directions; Unto the which, I shall ever submit my
Judgment, and apply my Travailes: And I most humbly pray your Majesty, in this
which is done, to pardon my Errors, and to cover them, with my good Intention,
and Meaning, and Desire I have, to do your Majesty Service; And to acqui^e the
Trust, that was reposed in me; And chiefly, in your Majesty's benign, and
gracious Acceptance.

FINIS.
THE BEGINNING OF THE HISTORY, OF GREAT BRITAIN.
BY the Decease, of Elizabeth, Queen of England, the Issues, of King Henry the
8th, failed; Being spent, in one Generation, and three Successions. For that
King, though he were one, of the goodliest Persons, of his time, yet he left,
only by his Six Wives, three Children; who Reigning successively, and Dying
Childelesse, made place, to the Line, of Margaret, his eldest, Sister, Married,
to James the 4th, King of Scotland. There succeeded therefore, to the Kingdom
of England, James the 6th, then King of Scotland, descended of the same
Margaret, both by Father, and Mother: So that, by a rare Event, in the
Pedegrees of Kings, it seemed, as if the Divine Providence, to extinguish, and
take away, all Note of a Stranger, had doubled^ upon his Person, within the
Circle of one Age, the Royal Blood of England, by both Parents. This
suc^ession, drew toward it, the Eyes of all Men; Being one, of the most
memorable Accidents, that had happened, a long time, in the Christian World. For
the Kingdom, of France, having been reunited, in the Age before, in all the
Provinces thereof, formerly dismembered: And the Kingdom, of Spain, being, of
more fresh memory, united, and made entire, by the Annexing of Portugal, in
the Person, of Philip the second; There remained, but this Third, and last
Union, for the counterpoizing, of the Power, of these three great Monarchies;
And the disposing, of the Affairs, of Europe, thereby, to a more assured, and
universal, Peace, and Concord. And this Event, did hold Men's Observations, and
Discourses, the more; Because, the Island, of Great Britain, divided from the
Rest of the World, was never before united, in it self, under one King;
Notwithstanding the People be of one Language, and not separate, by Mountains,
or great Waters: And, notwithstanding also, that the uniting of them, had been,
in former times, industriously attempted, both by War, and Treaty. Therefore,
it seemed, a manifest work of Providence, and Case of Reservation, for these
times; Insomuch, as the vulgar conceived, that now there was an End given, and
a Consummation, to superstitious Prophecies; (The Belief of Fools, but the
Talk, sometimes, of Wise Men;) And to an ancient tacit Expectation, which had
by Tradition, been infused, and inveterated, into Men's Minds. But, as the best
Divinations, and Predictions, are the Politic, and probable, Foresight, and
Conjectures, of wise Men; So, in this Matter, the Providence, of King Hen. the
7th, was in all Men's Mouths; Who, being one, of the Deepest, and most prudent
Princes, of the World, upon the Deliberation, concerning the Marriage, of his
Eldest Daughter, into Scotland, had, by some Speech, uttered by him, showed
himself sensible, and almost Prescient, of this Event.

Neither did there want, a Concurrence, of diverse Rare, external
Circumstances, (besides the Virtues, and Conditions, of the Person,) which gave
great Reputation, to this Succession. A^ King, in the strength of his years,
supported with great Alliances abroad, established with Royal Issue at home,
at Peace with all the World, practiced, in the Regiment, of such a Kingdom, as
might rather enable a King, by variety of Accidents, then corrupt him, with
Affluence, or vain glory; And One, that besides his universal Capacity, and
Judgment, was notably exercised, and practiced, in Matters of Religion, and
the Church; Which, in these times, by the confused use, of both Swords, are
become so intermixed, with Considerations of Estate, as most of the Counsels,
of Sovereign Princes, or Republiques, depend upon them: But nothing, did more
fill, Foreign Nations, with Admiration, and Expectation, of his Succession,
then the wonderful, and (by them,) unexpected, Consent, of all Estates, and
Subjects, of England, for the receiving of the King, without the least scruple,
Pause, or Question. For it had been generally dispersed, by the Fugitives,
beyond the Seas, (who partly, to apply themselves, to the Ambition, of
Forreiners; And partly, to give Estimation, and value, to their own
Employments; used to represent, the state of England, in a false light;) That
after Queen Elizabeth's Decease, there must follow, in England, nothing but
Confusions, Interreg^s, and perturbations of Estate; likely, for to exceed, the
Ancient Calamities, of the Civil Wars, between the Houses, of Lancaster, and
York: By how much more, the Dissentions, were like to be more Mortal, and
Bloody, when Foreign Competition, should be added, to Domestical; And
Divisions for Religion, to Matter of ^itle, to the Crown. And in special,
Parsons the Jesuit, under a disguised Name, had, not long before, published,
an express Treatise; Wherein, whether his Malice, made him believe his own
Fancies; Or whether, he thought it the fittest way, to move Sedition; Like
evil Spirits, which seem, to foretell, the Tempest, they mean to move; He
labored to display, and give color, to all the vain Pretenses, and Dreams, of
Succession, which he could imagine; And thereby, had possessed Many abroad,
that knew not the Affairs here, with those his Vanities. Neither wanted there,
here, within this Realm, diverse Persons, both Wise, and well affected, who,
though they doubted not, of the undoubted Right; yet, setting before
themselves, the waves of peoples Hearts; (Guided, no less, by sudden, and
temporary, Winds, then by the natural Course, and Motion, of the Waters;)
Were, not without fear, what might be the Event? For Queen Elizabeth, being a
Prince, of extreme Caution; and yet One, that loved Admiration, above Safety;
And knowing, The Declaration of a Successor, might, in point of Safety, be
disputable; But in point of Admiration, and Respect, assuredly to her
Disadvantage; Had, from the beginning, set it down, for a Maxim, of Estate, to
impose a Silence, touching Succession. Neither was it only Reserved, as a
Secret of Estate, but Restrained, by severe Laws; That no Man, should presume,
to give Opinion, or maintain Argument, touching the same; So, though the
Evidence of Right, drew all the Subjects of the Land, to think one Thing; yet
the Fear of Danger of Law, made no Man privy, to others Thought. And therefore,
it rejoiced all Men, to see so fair a Morning of a Kingdom, and to be
thoroughly secured, of former Apprehensions; As a Man, that awaketh, out of a
Fearful Dream. But so it was, that not only the Consent, but the Applause,
and Joy, was infinite, and not to be expressed, thronghout the Realm of
England, upon this Succession: Whereof, the Consent, (no doubt,) may be truly
ascribed, to the Clearness of the Right; But the general Joy, Alacrity, and
Gratulation, were the Effects, of differing Causes. For Queen Elizabeth,
although she had the use, of many, both Virtues, and Demonstrations, that
might draw, and knit unto her, the Hearts of her People; Yet nevertheless,
carrying a Hand, Restrained in Gift, and strained, in Points of Prerogative,
could not answer the Votes, either of Servants, or Subjects, to a full
Contentment; especially in her latter Days, when the Continuance of her Reign,
(which extended to Five and Forty years,) might discover, in People, their
Natural Desire, and Inclination, toward Change; So that a new Court, and a
new Reign, were not, to many, unwelcome. Many were glad, and especially, those
of Settled ^state, and Fortunes, that the Fears, and Incertainties were
Over-blown, and that the Dye was cast: Others that had made their way, with the
King, or offered their Service, in the Time of the former Queen, thought now
the Time was come, for which they had prepared: And generally, all such, as had
any dependence, upon the late Earl of Essex; (Who had mingled, the Secrecy^ of
his own Ends, with the Popular pretense, of advancing the Kings Title;) Made
account, their Cause was amended. Again, such as ^ought misdoubt, they had
given the King, any occasion of Distaste, did continue, by their Forwardness,
and Confidence, to show, it was but their Fastness, to the Former Government;
And that, those Affections, ended with the Time. The Papists, nourished their
hopes, by collating, the Case, of the Papists in England, and under Queen
Elizabeth, and the Case, of the Papists, in Scotland, under the King:
Interpreting, that the Condition, of them, in Scotland, was the less Grievous;
And divining, of the Kings Government here accordingly: Besides, the Comfor^,
they ministered themselves, from the Memory, of the Queen his Mo^her. The
Ministers, and those which stood, for the Presbytery, thought their Cause, had
more Sympathy, with the Discipline of Scotland, then the Hierarchy of England;
And so, took themselves, to be, a Degree nearer their Desires. Thus had every
Condition of Persons, some Contemplation of Benefit, which they promised
themselves; Overreaching, perhaps, according to the Nature of Hope; But yet,
not without, some probable Ground, of Conjecture. At which time also, there
came sorth, in Print, the Kings Book, entitled (...): Containing, Matter of
Instruction, to the Prince, his Son, touching the Of^ice of a King; Which
Book, falling into every Man's Hand, filled the whole Realm, as with a good
Perfume, or Incense, before the Kings coming in: For being excellently
written, and having nothing of Affectation, it did not only satisfy better,
then particular Reports, touching the Kings Disposition; But far exceeded, any
formal, or curious, Edict, or Declaration, which could have been devised, of
that Nature, wherewith Princes, in the beginning of their Reigns, do use, to
grace themselves, or at least, express themselves gracious, in the Eyes of
their People. And this was, for the general, the State, and Constitution, of
Men's Minds, upon this Change: The Actions themselves, passed in this Manner,
etc.

The Rest is wanting.
A LETTER, AND DISCOURSE, TO Sir HENRY SAVILL, TOUCHING HELPS, FOR THE
INTELLECTVAL POWERS.
SIR,
COming back from your Invitation at Eton, where I had refreshed my Self, with
Company, which I loved; I fell, into a Consideration, of that Part, of Policy,
whereof Philosophy speaks too much^ and Laws too little; And that is, of
Education of Youth. Whereupon, fixing my mind^ a while, I found strait ways,
and noted, even in the Discourses of Philosophers, which are so large in this
Argument, a strange Silence, concerning one principal Part, of that Subject:
For as touching, the Framing, and Seasoning, of Youth, to Moral Virtue; (As
Tolerance of Labors, Continency from Pleasures, Obedience, Honor, and the
like; They handle it; But touching the Improvement, and Helping, of the
Intellectual Powers; As of Conceit, M^mory, and Judgment, they say nothing.
Whether it were, that they thought it, to be a Matter, wherein Nature only
prevailed; Or that they intended it, as referred, to the several, and Proper,
Arts, which teach, the use, of Reason, and Speech. But ^or ^he former of these
two Reasons, howsoeve^, it pleases them, to distinguish, of Habits, and
Powers; The Experience is manifest enough, that the Motions, and Faculties, of
the Wit, and Memory, may be, not only governed, and guided, but also
confi^med, and ^nlarged, b^ Custom, and Exercise, duly applied: As if a Man
exercise shooti^g, he shall not only shoot nearer the Mark, but also draw a
stronger Bow. And as for the Latter, of Comprehending, these precepts, within
the Arts, of Logic, and Rhetoric; If it be rightly considered, their Office
is distinct, altogether, from this Point: For it is no part, of the Doctrine,
of the Use, or Handling, of an Instrument, to te^ch, how to Whet, or grind,
the Instrument, to give it a sharp edge; Or how to quench it, or otherwise,
whereby to give it a stronger Temper. Wherefore, finding this part of
Knowledge, not broken, I have, but tanquam aliud agens, entered into it, and
salute you with it; Dedicating it, after the ancient manner, first as to a dear
Friend; And then as to an Apt Person; For as much, as you have, both place, to
practice it, and Judgment, and Leisure, to look deeper into it, then I have
done. Herein you must call to mind, (...). Though the Argument, be not of great
Height, and Dignity, nevertheless, it is of great, and universal use: And
yet, I do not see, why, to consider it rightly; That should not be a Learning
of Height, which teaches to raise, the Highest, and Worthiest, Part of the
Mind. But howsoever that be, if the World take any Light, and Use^ by this
Writing, I will, the Gratulation be, to the good Friendship, and Acquaintance,
between us two. And so I commend you, to Gods Divine Protection.

A DISCOURSE, touching HELPS, for the INTELLECTUAL POWERS.
I did ever hold it, for an Insolent, and unlucky, Saying; Faber quisque
Fortunae suae; except it be uttered, only, as an Hortative, or Spur, to
correct Sloth. For otherwise, if it be believed, as it sounds; And that a
Man, enters into an high Imagination, that he can compass, and fathom, all
Accidents; And ascribes, all Successes, to his Drifts, and Reaches; And the
contrary, to his Errors, and Sleepings: It is commonly seen, that the Evening
Fortune, of that Man, is not so prosperous, as of him, that without slackning,
of his Industry, attributes much to Felicity, and Providence above him. But if
the Sentence were turned to this; Faber quisque Ingenii sui, it were somewhat
more True, and much more Profitable: Because it would teach Men, to bend
themselves, to Reform, those Imperfections, in themselves, which now they seek
but to Cover: And to attain, those Virtues, and Good Parts, which now they
seek, but to have, only, in show, and Demonstration. Yet notwithstanding,
every Man attempteth to be, of the first Trade, of Capenters; And Few bind
themselves to the Second: whereas, nevertheless, the Rising in Fortune,
seldom, amendeth the Mind; But, on the other side, the Removing of the Stonds,
and Impediments, of the Mind, does often clear, the passage, and Current, to a
Man's Fortune. But certain it is, whether it be believed, or no, that, as the
most excellent of Mettalls, Gold, is, of all other, the most Pliant, and most
Enduring to be wrought; So, of all Living, and Breathing Substances, the
Perfectest, (Man,) is the most susceptible of Help, Improvement, Impression,
and Alteration; And not only in his Body, but in his Mind, and Spirit; And
there again, not only, in his App^tite, and Affection, but in his Powers of
Wit, and Reason.

For as to the Body of Man, we find many, and strange, Experiences, how Nature
is overwrought by Custom, even in Actions, that seem of most difficulty, and
least possible. As first in Voluntary Motion; Which though it be termed
Voluntary, yet the highest Degrees of it, are not Voluntary; For it is, in my
Power, and Will, to Run; But to Run faster, then according to my Lightness, or
Disposition of Body, is not in my Power, nor Will. We see the Industry, and
Practice, of Tumblers, and Funambulo's, what Effects, of great Wonder, it
brings, the Body of Man, unto. So for suffering of Pain, and Dolor, which is
thought so contrary to the Nature of Man, there is much Example of Penances, in
stric^ Orders, of superstition, what they do endure; Such as may well verify,
the Report, of the Spartan Boys, which were wont, to be scourged, upon the
Altar so bitterly, as sometimes they dyed of it; And yet were never heard to
complain. And to pass to those Faculties, which are reckoned more Involuntary;
As Long Fasting, and Abstinenee; and the contrary Extreme, ( Voracity;) The
Leaving, and Forbearing, the Use, of Drink, for altogether; The Enduring
vehement Cold, and the like; There have not wanted, neither do want, diverse
Examples, of strange Victories, over the Body, in every of these. Nay in
Respiration, the proof has been of some, who by continual use of Diving, and
Working, under the Water, have brought themselves, to be able, to hold their
Breath, an incredible time; And others, that have been able, without
Suffocation, to endure, the Stifling Breath, of an Oven, or Furnace, so heated;
As though, it did not scal^, nor burn; Yet it was, many Degrees, too ho^, for
any Man, not made to it, to Breath, or take in. And some Impostours, and
Counterfeits, likewise, have been able, to wreat^, and cast their Bodies, into
strange Forms, and Motions: Yea, and others, to bring themselves, into
^rances, and Astonishments. All which Examples, do demonstrate, how variously,
and how to High, Points, and Degrees, the Body of Man, may be, (as it were,)
molded, and wrought. And if any Mad conceive, than it is some secret propriety
of Nature, that has been in those Persons, which have attained to those
Points; And that it is not open, ^or every Man, to do the like, though he had
been put to it; For which Cause, such Things, come but very rarely to pass; It
is true, no doubt, but some Persons, are apter then others; But so, as the more
aptness, causes Perfection, but the less Aptnes^e, does not disable: So
that, for Example, the more apt Child, that is taken, to be made a Funambulo,
will prove more excellent in his Feats; But the less apt will be Gregarius
Funambulo also. And there is small Question, but that these Abilities, would
have been more common; And others, of like sort, not attempted, would,
likewise, have been brought, upon the Stage, but for two Reasons: The one,
because of Men's Diffidence, in prejudging them, as Impossibilities; For it
holds, in those things, which the Poet says; Possunt, quia posse videntur:
For no Man shall Know, how much may be done, except he Believe, much may be
done. The other Reason is, because they be, but Practices, base, and
inglorious, and of no great use; And therefore sequestered from Reward of Value;
And on the other side, painful; So as the Recompense ballanceth not with the
Travail, and Suffering. And as to the Will of Man, it is that, which is most
Maniable, and Obedient; As that, which admits most Medicines, to cure, and
alter it. The most Sovereign, of all, is Religion; which is able to change, and
transform it, in the deepest, and most inward inclinations, and Motions: And
next to that is Opinion, and Apprehension; Whether it be infused by Tradition,
and Institution; or wrought in, by Disputation, and Persuasion: And the Third
is Example, which transformeth the Will of Man, into the Similitude of that,
which is most obversant, and familiar toward it. And the Fourth is, when one
Affection, is healed, and corrected, by another: As when Cowardice, is remedied
by Shame, and Dishonor; Or Sluggishnesse, and Backwardness, by indignation,
and Emulation; And so of the like. And lastly, when all these Means, or any of
them, have new framed, or formed, Humane Will; Then does Custom, and Habit,
Corroborate, and confirm, all the rest. Therefore, it is no marvel, though
this Fa^ulty, of the Mind, (of Will, and Election;) which inclines Affection,
and Appetite, being but the Inceptions, and Rudiments, of Will; May be so well
governed, and managed; Because, it admits access, to so diverse Remedies, to
be applied to it, and to work upon it. The Effects whereof are so many, and so
known, as require no Enumeration; But, generally, they do issue, as Medicines
do, into two Kinds, of Cures; whereof the one, is a Just, or True, Cure; And
the other, is called Palliation. For, either the Labor, and Intention is, to
reform the Affections, really, and truly; Restraining them, if they be too
violent; And raising them, if they be too Soft, and Weak; Or else, it is to
cover them; Or, if occasion be, to pretend them, and represent them. Of the
former Sort whereof, the Examples, are plentiful, in the Schools, of
Philosophers, and in all other Institutions, of Moral Virtue; And of the other
sort, the Examples, are, more plentiful, in the Courts of Princes, and in all
Politic Traffic: Where it is ordinary to find, not only profound
Dissimulations, and Suffocating the Affections, that no Note, or Mark, appear
of them, outwardly; But also, lively Simulations, and Affec^ations, carrying
the Tokens of Passions, which are not; As Risus Iussus, and Lachrymae Coactae,
and the like.

Of Helps, of the Intellectual Powers.
THe Intellectual Powers, have fewer means, to work upon them, then the Will,
or Body of Man; But the one, that prevails, that is Exercise, works more
forcibly in them, then in the Rest.

The Ancient Habit, These that follow, are but indisgested Notes.
of the Philosophers; Si quis quaerat, in utramque partem, de omni Scibili.

The Exercise, of Scholars, making Verses extempore; Stans pede in uno.

The Exercise, of Lawyers, in Memory Narrative^

The Exercise, of Sophists, and Io. ad Oppositum, with manifest effect.

Artificial Memory greatly helped by Exercise.

The Exercise, of ^uffons, to draw all things, to Conceits Ridiculous.

The Means that help the Understanding, and Faculties thereof, are.

(Not Example, as in the Will, by Conversation; And here, the Conceit of
Imitation, already disgested; with the Confutation, Obiter, si videbitur, of
Tullies Opinion, advising a Man, to take some one to Imitate. Similitude of
Faces analyzed.)

Arts, Logic, Rhetoric: The Ancients, Aristotle, Plato, Thaetetus Gorgias,
Litigiosus, vel Sophista, Protagoras, Aristotle, Schola sua. Topics, Elenchs,
Rhetoricks, Organon, Cicero, Hermogenes. The Neotericks, Ramus, Agricola. Nil
sacri Lullius. his Typocosmia, studying Coopers Dictionary; Mattheus
Collection, of proper words for Metaphors; Agrippa, de vanitat. etc.

Que. if not here, of Imitation.

Collections preparative. Aristotle's Similtude of a Shoomakers Shop, full of
Shoes, of all Sorts: Demosthenes Exordi^ Concionum. Tulli^s precept, of Theses
of all sorts, preparative.

The Relying upon Exercise, with the Difference, of Using, and tempering, the
Instrument; And the Similitude, ^f prescribing, against the Laws, of Nature
and of Estate.

5. Points.
Exercises, are to be framed, to the Life: That is to say, to work Ability, in
that kind, whereof a Man, in the Course of Action, shall have most Use.

indirect, and Oblique Exercises, which do, per parts, and per consequentiam,
enable these Faculties; which perhaps, direct Exercise, at first, would but
distort. And these, have chiefly place, where the Faculty is weak, not per se,
but per Accidens. As if Want of Memory, grow through Lightness of Wit; and
want of stayed Attention; Then the Mathematiques, or the Law, helps: Because,
they are Things, wherein if the Mind once roam, it cannot recover.

Advantages of Exercise; As to dance with heavy Shoes; To march with heavy
Armor, and Carriage; And the contrary Advantage, (in Natures, very dull, and
unapt,) of working Alacrity, by framing an Exercise, with some Delight, or
Affection; -- Veluti pueris dant Crustula blandi
Doctores, Elementa velint ut discere prima.


Cautions of Exercise; As to beware, lest by evil doing, (as all Beginners do
weakly,) a Man grow not, and be inveterate, in an ill Habit; And so take, not
the Advantage of Custom in perfection, but in confirming ill. Slubbering on
the Lute.

Marshalling, and Sequel of Sciences, and practices: Logic, and Rhetorick^
should be used, to be read, after Poesy, History, and Philosophy. First,
Exercise, to do things well, and clean; after, promptly, and readily.

The Exercises, in the Universities, and Schools, are of Memory, and
Invention; Either to speak by Heart, that which is set down verbatim; Or to
speak Extempore. Whereas, there is little use, in Action, of either of both:
But most things, which we utter, are neither verbally premeditate, nor merely
Extemporall. Therefore Exercise, would be framed to take a little Breathing,
and to consider of Heads; And then to fit, and form, the Speech, Ex tempore.
This would be done, in two manners; Both with writing, and Tables; And without.
For, in most Actions, it is permitted, and passable, to use the Note;
Whereunto, if a Man be not accustomed, it will put him out.

There is no use, of a Narrative Memory, in Academiis, viz, with Circumstances
of Times, Persons, and Places, and with Names; And it is one Art, to discourse,
and another to Relate, and Describe: And herein Use, and Action, is most
conversant.

Also, to Sum up, and Contract, is a Thing, in Action, of very general Use.

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the Better, PACIFICATION, AND EDIFICATION, OF
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND Dedicated, to His most Excellent MAJESTY.
THE Unity of your Church, (excellent Sovereign,) is a Thing, no less
precious, then the Union of your Kingdoms; Being both Works, wherein your
Happiness, may contend, with your Worthiness: Having therefore presumed, not
without your Majesty's gracious Acceptance, to say somewhat of the one; I am,
the more encouraged, not to be silent, in the other: The rather, because it is
an Argument, that I have traveled in heretofore: But Solomon, commends a
Word spoken in Season, And as our Savior; (speaking of the Discerning of
Seasons,) says; When you see a Cloud, rising in the West, you say, it will be
a shower: So your Majesty's Rising, to this Monarchy, in the West Parts, of the
World, does promise, a sweet, and fruitful, Shower, of many Blessings, upon
this Church, and Commonwealth; A Shower, of that Influence, as the very first
Deaws, and Drops thereof, have, already, laid the Storms, and Winds,
throughout Christendom; Reducing, the very Face, of Europe, to a more
peaceable, and Amiable, Countenance. But to the Purpose.

It is very true, that these Ecclesiastical Mat^ers, are Things, not properly
appertaining, to my Profession; which, I was not, so inconsiderate, but to
object to my Self: But finding, that it is, many times, seen, that a Man, that
stands off, and somewhat removed, from a Plot of Ground, does better survey
it, and discover it, then those which are upon it; I thought it not impossible,
but that I, as a Looker on, might cast mine Eyes, upon some Things, which the
Actours themselves, (especially, some being interessed, some led and addicted,
some declared and engaged,) did not, or would not see. And that, knowing in my
Conscience, (wheretoo God bears witness,) that the Things which I shall
speak, spring out of no Vein of Popularity, Ostentation, Desire of Novelty,
Partiality to either Side, Disposition to intermeddle, or any the like Leven; I
may conceive hope, that what I want, in depth of Judgment, may be
countervailed, in Simplicity, and Sincerity, of Affection. But of all Things,
this did most animate me; That I found, in these Opinions, of mine, (which I
have long held, and embraced, as may appear by that, which I have, many years
since, written of them, according to the proportion, nevertheless, of my
weakness,) a Consent, and Confo^mity, with that, which your Majesty has
published, of your own, most Christian, most Wise, and Moderate Sense, in these
Causes: wherein you have well expressed, to the World, that there is in^used,
in your Sacred Breast, from God, that High principle, and Position of
Government; That you ever hold the Whole, more dear, then any Part.

For who sees not, that Many are affected, and give Opinion, in these Matters,
as if they had not, so much a desire, to purge the Evil, from the Good, as to
countenance, and protect, the Evil, by the Good? Others speak, as if their
Scope, were only, to set forth, what is Good, and not to seek, what is
Possible; which is to Wis^, and not to Propound. Others proceed, as if they had
rather, a Mind of Removing, then of Reforming: But howsoever, either Side, as
Men, (though excellent Men) shall run into Extremities; yet your Majesty, as a
most Wise, Equal, and Christian Moderator, is disposed, to find out, the
Golden Mediocrity, in the Establishment, of that which is Sound; And, in the
Reparation, of that, which is Corrupt, and decayed. To your Princely Judgment,
then, I do, in all Humbleness, submit, whatsoever I shall propound; offering
the same, but as a Mite^ into the Treasury, of your Wisdom: For, as the
Astronomers, do well observe; That when three, of the Superior Lights, do meet
in Conjunction, it brings forth, some admirable Effects: So, there being
joined, in your Majesty, the Light of Nature, the Light of Learning, and above
all, the Light of Gods Holy Spirit; It cannot be, but your Government, must be
as a Happy Constellation, over the states of your Kingdoms. Neither is there
wanting, to your Majesty, that Fourth Light; which though it be, but a borrowed
L^ght, yet is, of singular E^ficacy, and Moment, added to the rest; which is,
the Light, of a most wise, and well compounded, Council; To whose Honorable,
and Grave, Wisdoms, I do likewse submit, whatsoever I shall speak: Hoping,
that I shall not need, to make Protestation, of my Mind, and Opinion; That
until your Majesty, does otherwise determine, and order, all Actual, and Full
Obedience, is to be given, to Ecclesiastical Iurisdicton, as it now stands;
And when your Majesty, has determined, and ordered, that every good subject
ought to rest satisfied, and apply his Obedience, to your Majesty's Laws,
Ordinances, and Royal Commandments: Nor, of the Dislike, I have, of all
Immodest Bitterness, peremptory presumption, Popular handling; And other
Courses, tending rather to Rumor, and Impression, in the vulgar Sort, then to
likelihood of Effect, joined with Observation of Duty.

But before, I enter, into the Points controverted, I think good to remove, (if
it may be,) two Opinions, which do directly confront, and oppone, to
Reformation: The one, bringing it to a Nullity; And the other, to an
Impossibility. The First is; That it is against good Policy, to innovate any
thing, in Church Matters; The other; That all Reformation, must be, after one
Platform.

For the First of these, it is excellently said, by the Prophet; State super
vias antiquas, and videte, quaenam sit via recta, and vera, and ambulate in ea.
So as, he does not say; State super vias antiquas, and ambulate in eis: For it
true, that with all Wise, and Moderate, Persons, Custom, and Usage, obtains
that Reverence, as it is sufficient Matter, to move them, to make a stand, and
to discover, and take a View; But it is no warrant, to guide, and conduct them:
A just Ground, I say, it is, of Deliberation, but not of Direction. But, on the
other side, who knows not, that Time, is truly compared, to a Stream, that
carries down, fresh, and pure Waters, into that salt Sea of Corruption, which
invironeth all Human Actions? And therefore, if Man shall not, by his Industry,
Virtue, and Policy, as it were, with the Oar, row against the Stream, and
inclination of Time; All Institutions, and Ordinances, be they never so pure,
will corrupt, and degenerate. But not, to handle this matter, Commonplace
like, I would only ask, why the Civil State, should be purged, and restored,
by Good, and Wholesome, Laws, made every Third, or Fourth, year, in Parliament
assembled; Devising Remedies, as fast as Time, breeds Mischief; And
contrariwise, the Ecclesiastical State, should still continue, upon the Dreggs
of Time, and receive, no Alteration now, for this Five and Forty years, and
more? If any Man, shall object, that if the like Intermission, had been used,
in Civil Causes also, the Error had not been great; Surely the Wisdom of the
Kingdom, has been otherwise, in Experience, for Three Hundred years space, at
the least. But, if it be said to me, that there is a Difference, between Civil
Causes, and Ecclesiastical, they may as well tell me, that Churches, and
Chapels, need no Reparations, though Castles, and Houses, do; Whereas
commonly, to speak truth, Dilapidations, of the Inward, and Spiritual,
Edifications, of the Church, of God, are, in all times, as great, as the
Outward, and Material. Sure I am, that the very word, and Style, of
Reformation, used by our Savior; Ab initio non fuit sic; was applied, to
Church Matters; And those, of the highest Nature, concerning the Law Moral.

Nevertheless, He were both unthankful, and unwise, that would deny, but that
the Church, of England, during the time of Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory,
did flourish. If I should compare it, with Foreign Churches, I would ^ather,
the Comparison should be, in the Virtues, then, as some make it, in the
Defects; Rather, I say, as between the Vine, and the Olive, which should be
most fruitful, And not, as between the Briar, and the Thistle, which should be
most unprofitable. For that Reverence, should be used, to the Church, which the
good Sons of Noah, used, to their Fathers Nakedness; That is, as it were, to go
backwards, and to help, the Defects thereof, and yet to dissemble them. And it
is to be acknowledged, that scarcely any Church, since the Primitive Church,
yielded, in like Number of Years, and Latitude of Country, a greater Number, of
Excellent Preachers, Famous Writers, and Grave Governers: But for the
Discipline, and Orders, of the Church, as many, and the chiefest, of them, are
Holy, and Good; So yet, i^ Saint John, were to indite an Epistle, to the Church
of England, as he did, to them of Asia, it would, sure, have the Clause; Habeo
adversus te pauca. And no more, for this Point; Saving that, as an Appendix
thereunto, it is not amiss, to touch that Objection, which is made to the
Time, and not to the Matter; Pretending, that if Reformation, were necessary,
yet it were not now seasonable, at your Majesty's First Entrance: Yet
Hippocrates says; Si quid moves, a principio move: And the wisdom, of all
Examples, do show, that the wisest Princes, as they have ever been, the most
sparing, in Removing, or Alteration, of Servants, and Officers, upon their
Coming in; So, for Removing of Abuses, and Enormities; And for Reforming of
Laws, and the Policy of their States, they have, chiefly, sought to ennoble,
and commend, their Beginnings therewith; Knowing, that the first Impression,
with People, continues long; And when Men's Minds, are most in Expectation, and
Suspense, then, are they best wrought, and managed: And therefore it seems
to me, that as the Spring of Nature, (I mean, the Spring of the year,) is the
best Time, for purging, and Medicining, the Natural Body; So the Spring of
Kingdoms, is the most proper Season, for the purging, and Rectifying, of
Politic Bodies.

There remains yet, an Objection, rather of Suspicion, then of Reason; And
yet such, as I think, makes a great Impression, in the minds, of very wise,
and well affected, Persons; which is; That if way be given, to Mutation, though
it be in taking away Abuses, yet it may so acquaint Men, with sweetness of
change, as it will undermine, the Stability, even of that, which is sound, and
good. This, surely, had been a good, and true, allegation, in the Ancient
Contentions, and Divisions, between the People, and the Senate, of Rome: where
things were carried, at the Appetites of Multitudes; which can never keep,
within the Compass, of any Moderation: But the^e Things, being with us, to
have an orderly passage, under a King, who has a Royal power, and approved
Judgment; And knows, as well the Measure of Things, as the Nature of them;
It is, surely, a needless, Fear. For they need not doubt, but your Majesty,
with the advice of your Council, will discern, what Things are intermingled,
like the Tares, amongst the wheat; which have their Roots, so enwrapped, and
entangled, as the one, cannot be pulled up, without endangering the other; And
what, are mingled, but as the Chafe, and the Corn, which need but a Fan, to
sift, and sever them. So much therefore, for the first Point, of no
Reformation, to be admitted, at all.

For the Second Point, that there should, be but one form, o^ Discipline, in
all Churches; And that, imposed, by necessity, of a Commandment, and
prescript, out of the word of God; It is a Matter, Volumes have been compiled
of, and therefore cannot receive a brief Redargution. I, for my part, do
confess, that in Revolving the Scriptures, I could never find, any such Thing;
But that God, had left, the like Liberty, to the Church Government, as he had
done to the Civil Government; To be varied, according to Time, and Place, and
Accidents; which, nevertheless, his high, and Divine, Providence, does order,
and dispose. For all Civil Governments, are restrained, from God, unto the
general Grounds, of Justice, and Manners; But the Policies, and Forms, of them,
are left Free; So that Monarchies, and Kingdoms; Senates, and Seignories,
Popular States, and Communalties; are lawful; And where they are planted,
ought to be maintained inviolate.

So likewise, in Church Matters, the Substance of Doctrine, is Immutable; And
so are, the general Rules, of Government; But for Rites, and Ceremonies; And
for the particular Hierarchies, Policies, and Disciplines, of Churches, they be
left at large. And therefore, it is good, we return, unto the ancient Bounds of
Unity, in the Church of God; which was, One Faith, One Baptism; And not, one
Hierarchy, one Discipline: And that we observe the League of Christians, as it
is penned by our Savior, which is, in substance of Doctrine, this; He that is
not with us, is against us: But in Things indifferent, and but of circumstance,
this; He that is not against us, is with us. In these things, so as the
general Rules be observed; That Christ's Flock be fed; That there be, a
Succession, in Bishops, and Ministers, which are the Prophets of the new
Testament; That ^here be a due, and reverent, use, of the power, of the Keys;
That those that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel; That all things tend to
edification; That all things be done, in order, and with decency; And the like;
The rest, is left, to the Holy wi^dome, and Spiritual Discretion, of the
Master Builders, and in^eriour Builders, in Christ's Church; As it is
excellently alluded, by that Father, that noted; That Christ's Garment, was
without Seam, and yet, the Churches G^rment, was of diverse Colors; And
thereupon, sets down for a Rule; In vest varietas sit, scissura non fit.

In which Variety, nevertheless, it is a safe, and wise, Course, to follow
good Examples, and Presidents; But then, by the Rule of Imitation, and Example,
to consider, not only, which are Best, but which are the Likeliest; as namely,
the Government, of the Church, in the purest Times, of the first Good
Emperors, that embraced the Faith. For the Times of Persecution, before
Temporal Princes, received our Faith; As they were, excellent Times, for
Doctrine, and Manners; so they be unproper, and unlike Examples, of outward
Government, and Policy. And so much, for this Point: Now to the particular
Points, of Controversies, or rather of Reformation.

Circumstances, in the Government, of Bishops.
FIrst therefore for the Government of Bishops, I for my part, not prejudging,
the Presidents of other Reformed Churches, do hold it warranted, by the Word of
God, and by the Practice, of the Ancient Church, in the better Times; And much
more convenient, for Kingdoms, then Parity of Ministers, and Government by
Synods. But then further, it is to be considered, that the Church, is not now
to plant, or Build; But only, to be proi^ed, from Corruption; And to be
repaired, and restored, in some decays.

For it is worth the Noting, that the Scripture says; Translato Sacerdotio,
necesse est, ut and Legis fiat Translatio. It is not possible, in respect of
the great, and near Sympathy, between the State Civil, and the State
Ecclesiastical, to make so main an alteration, in the Church, but it would
have a perilous operation, upon the Kingdoms: And therefore, it is fit, that
Controversy, be in Peace, and Silence.

But there be two Circumstances, in the Administration, of Bishops, Wherein, I
confess, I could never be satisfied; The one, the sole Exercise, of their
Authority; The other, the Deputation, of their Authority.

For the First, the Bishop gives Orders alone; Excommunicateth alone; Judges
alone. This seems, to be a Thing, almost, without Example, in good
Government; and therefore, not unlikely, to have crept in, in the degenerate,
and corrupt, Times. We see, the greatest Kings, and Monarchs, have their
Counsels: There is no Temporal Court, in England, of the Higher sort, where
the Authority, does rest in one person: The Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the
Exchequer, are Benches, of a certain Number, of Judges. The Chancellor of
England, has an Assistance, of twelve Masters, of the Chancery. The Master of
the Wards, has a Council, of the Court: So has, the Chancellor of the
Duchy. In the Exchecquer Chamber, the Lord Treasurer, is joined, with the
Chancellor, and the Barons. The Masters of the Requests, are ever, more then
One. The Justices of Assise, are two. The Lord Presidents, in the North, and in
Wales, have Counsels of diverse; The Star Chamber, is an Assembly, of the Kings
Privy Coun^ell, aspersed, with the Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal: So as in
Courts, the principal Person, has ever, either Colleagues, or Assessours.

The like, is to be found, in other, well governed, Commonwealths, abroad,
where the Jurisdiction is yet more dispersed; As in the Court of Parliament of
France; And in other places. No man will deny, but the Acts, that pass the
Bishops Jurisdiction, are of as great Importance, as those, that pass, the
Civil Courts; For Men's Souls, are more precious, then their Bodies, or Goods;
And so are their Good Names. Bishops have their Infirmities, and have no
Exception, from that general Malediction, which is pronounced against all Men
Living; Vae Soli, nam si ceciderit; etc. Nay, we see; that the first Warrant,
in Spiritual Causes, is directed to a Number; Dic Ecclesiae; which is not so,
in Temporal Matters: And we see, that in general Causes, of Church
Government, there are, as well Assemblies, of all the Clergy, in Counsels, as
of all the States in Parliament: Whence should this sole exercise, of
Jurisdiction come? Surely, I do suppose, and I think, upon good Ground; That Ab
Initio non fuit ita: And that the Deans, and Chapters, were Counsels, about
the Sees, and Chairs, of Bishops, at the first; And were, unto them a
Presbytery, or Consistory; And intermedled, not only, in the Disposing, of
their Revenues, and Endowments; but much more, in Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.
But, it is probable, that the Deans, and Chapters, stuck close to the Bishops,
in Matters of Profit, and the World, and would not loose their Hold; But, in
Matters of Jurisdiction, (which they accounted but Trouble, and Attendance,)
they suffered the Bishops to encroach, and usurp; And so the one continues,
and the other is lost. And we see, that the Bishop of Rome, ( Fas enim and ab
Host doceri; And, no question, in that Church, the first Institu^ions, were
excellent,) performs, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as in Consistory.

And whereof consists t^is Consis^ory, but of the Parish Priests, of Rome,
which term themselves Cardinals, a Cardinibus Mundi; Because, the Bishop,
pretends to be universal, over the whole World. And hereof again, we see
many shadows, yet remaining: As that the Dean, and Chapter, pro forma,
chooses the Bishop, which is the Highest Point, of Jurisdiction. And that, the
Bishop, when he gives Orders, if there be any Ministers, casually present,
calls them, to join with him, in Imposition of Hands, and some other
Particulars. And therefore it seems to me, a Thing Reasonable, and Religious,
and according to the first Institution, that Bishops, in the greatest Causes,
and those which require a Spiritual Discerning; Namely in Ordaining,
Suspending, or Depriving Ministers; In Excommunication, (being restored, to the
true, an proper Use; As shall be afterward touched;) In sentencing, the
Validity, of Marriages, and Legitimations, In Judging Causes Criminous, as
Symony, Incest, Blasphemy, and the like; Should not proceed sole, and
unassisted. Which Point, (as I understand it,) is a Reformation, that may be
planted, sine Strepi^u, without any Perturbation, at all: And is a Matter,
which will give strength to the Bishops; Countenance to the inferior Degrees of
Pelates, or Ministers; And the better Issue, or proceeding, to those Causes,
tha^ shall p^s^e.

And, as I wish, this strength, given to the Bishops, by Council, so it is not
unworthy, your Majesty's Consideration, whether you s^all not think fit, to
give strength, to the general Council, of your Clergy, (the Convocation
House;) which was then restrained, when the State of the Clergy, was thought, a
Suspected Part, to the Kingdom, in Regard, of their late Homage, to the Bishop
of Rome; Which State, now, will give place to none, in their Loyalty, and
Devotion, to your Majesty.

For the Second Point; which is, the Deputation of their Authority; I see, no
perfect, and sure Ground, for that neither; Being somewhat different, from the
Examples, and Rules, of Government. The Bishop, exercises his Jurisdiction, by
his Chanceller, and Commissary, Official, etc. We see, in all Laws, in the
world, Offices o^ Confidence, and skill, cannot be put over, nor exercised by
Deputy^ Except it be, especially, contained, in the Original Grant; And in
that case, it is dutiful. And for Experience, there was never, any Chanceller
of England, made a Deputy. There was never any Judge, in any Court, made a
Deputy. The Bishop, is a Judge, and of a high Nature; whence comes it, that
he should depute^ Considering, that all Trust, and Confidence, (as was said,)
is personal, and Inherent; And cannot, nor ought not, be transposed? Surely,
in this again; Ab Initio non fuit sic; But it is probable, that Bishops, when
they gave themselves, too much, to the Glory of the World, and became Grandees
in Kingdoms, and great Councellers to Princes, then did they deleague, their
proper Jurisdictions, as Things, of too inferior a Nature, for their
Greatness; And then, after the Similitude, and Imitation, of Kings, and Counts
Palatine, they would have their Chancellers, and Judges.

But that Example, of Kings, and Potentates, gives no good Defense. For the
Reasons, why Kings, administer, by their Judges, although themselves are
Supreme Judges, are two. The one, because the Offices of Kings are, for the
most part, of Inheritance; And it is a Rule, in all Laws, that Offices of
Inheritance, are rather Matters, that Ground in Interest, then in Confidence;
For as much, as they may fall upon Women, upon Infants, upon Lunaticks, and
Idiots, persons incapable, to Execute Judicature, in Person; And therefore,
such Offices, by all Laws, might, ever, be exercised, and administered, by
Delegation. The Second Reason is, because of the Amplitude of their
Jurisdictions; Which is a great, as either their Birthright, from their
Ancestors, or their Sword-right from God, makes it. And therefore, if Moses,
that was Governer, over no great People, and those collected together, in a
Camp; And not scattred, in Provinces, and Cities; Himself of an extraordinary
Spirit; Was, nevertheless, not able, to suffice, and hold out, in person, to
judge the People; But did, by the advice of Iethro, approved from God,
substitute Elders, and Judges, how much more, other Kings, and Princess?

There is a Third Reason, likewise, though not much to the present purpose; And
that is; That Kings, either in respect of the Commonwealth, or of the
Greatness of their own Patrimonies, are, usually, Parties in Suites; And then,
their Judges, stand indifferent, between Them, and the Subject. But in the Case
of Bishops, none of these Reasons hold. For first, their Office is Elective,
and for Life, and not Patrimoniall, or Hereditary: An Office, merely of
Confidence, Science, and Qualification: And for the Second Reason, it is true,
that their Jurisdiction, is Ample, and Spacious; And that their Time, is to be
divided, between the Labors; As well, in the Word, and Doctrine, as in
Government, and Jurisdiction. But yet, I do not see, (supposing, the Bishops
Courts, to be used, incorruptly, and without any indirect course held, to
multiply Causes for gain of Fees;) But that the Bishop, might very well, for
Causes of Moment, supply, his Judicial Function, in his own Person. For we
see, before our Eyes, that one Chanceller of England dispatcheth, the Suites in
Equity, of the whole Kingdom; which is not so much, by reason, of the
Excellency, of that Rare Honorable Person, which now holds the place; But it
was ever so, though, more, or less, burdenous, to the Suitor, as the
Chanceller, was more, or less, able, to give dispatch. And if Hold be taken,
of that which was said before, that the Bishops Labor in the Word, must take
up, a principal Part of his Time; so, I may say again, that Matters of State,
have, ever, taken up, most of the Chancellers Time; Having been, for the most
part, Persons, upon whom the Kings, of this Realm, have most relied, for
Matters of Council. And therefore, there is no Doubt, but the Bishop, whose
Circuit is less ample, and the Causes, in Nature, not so multiplying; with the
Help, of References, and Certificates, to, and from, fit Persons, for the
better Ripening of Causes, in their mean proceedings; And such ordinary Helps,
incident to Jurisdiction; May, very well, suffice his Office. But yet, there is
another Help; For the Causes, that come before him, are these: Tithes;
Legacies; Administrations, and other Testamentary Causes; Causes Matrimonial;
Accusations against Ministers, tending to their Suspension, Deprivation, or
Degrading; Simony; Incontinency; Heresy; Blasphemy; Breach of the Sabbath; And
other, like Causes, of Scandal. The first two of these, in mine Opinion,
differ from the Rest; That is, Tithes, and Testaments; For those, be Matters of
profit, and, in their nature, Temporal; Though, by a Favor, and Connivence,
of the Temporal Jurisdiction, they have been allowed, and permitted, to the
Courts Ecclesiastical: The one, to the end, the Clergy, might sue for that,
that was their Sustentation, before their own Judges; And the other, in a kind
of Piety, and Religion, which was thought incident, to the performance, of Dead
Men's Wills. And surely, for these two, the Bishop, in mine opinion, may, with
less danger, discharge himself, upon his Ordinary Judges. And I think,
likewise, it will fall out, that those Suites, are in the greatest number. But
for the rest, which require a Spiritual Science, and Discretion, in respect of
their Nature^ or of the Scandal, it were reason, in mine Opinion, there were
no Audience given, but by the Bishop Himself; He being also assisted, as was
touched before: But it were necessary also, he were attended, by his
Chanceller, or some others, his Officers, being learned, in the Civil Laws;
for his better Instruction, in Points, of Formality, or the Courses, of the
Court: which if it were done, then were there less use, of the Officials
Court; Whereof, there is now, so much Complaint. And Causes, of the Nature
aforesaid, being only drawn, to the Audience, of the Bishop, it would
repress, frivoulous, and Prowling Suites; And give, a Grave, and Incorrupt,
Proceeding, to such Causes, as shall be fit, for the Court.

There is a Third Point also, not of Jurisdiction, but of Form of Proceeding,
which may deserve Reformation. The rather, because it is contrary, to the
Laws, and Customs, of this Land, and State; which, though they do not rule
those Proceedings, yet may they be advised with, for better Directions; And
that is, the Oath ex Officio; Whereby Men, are enforced, to accuse themselves;
And that, that is more, are sworn unto Blancks, and not unto Accusations, and
Charges declared. By the Law of England, no man is bound, to accuse himself. In
the Highest Cases, of Treason, Torture is used, for Discovery, and not for
Evidence. In Capital Matters, no Delinquents, Answer, upon Oath, is required;
No, not permitted. In Criminal Matters, not Capital, handled in the
Star Chamber; And in Causes of Conscience, handled in the Chancery, for the
most part, grounded, upon Trust, and Secrecy, the Oath of the Party, is
required. But how? Where there is an Accusation, and an Accuser, which we call,
Bills of Complaint; (From which the Complainant cannot vary; And, out of the
Compass, of the which, the Defendant may not be examined,) Exhibited unto the
Court, and, by Process, notified, unto the Defendant. But to examine a Man,
upon Oath, out of the Insinuation of Fame; Or out, of Accusations, secret, and
undecl^red; Though it have, some Countenance, from the Civil Law; yet it is,
so opposite, Ex Diametro, to the Sense, and Course, of the Common Law, as it
may well receive, some Limitation.

Concerning the Liturgy, the Ceremonies, and Subscription.
FOr the Liturgy, great Respect, and Heed, would be taken, least, by inveighing
against the Dumb Ministry, due Reverence, be not withdrawn, from the Liturgy.
For though the Gift of Preaching, be far above that of Reading; Yet, the Action
of the Liturgy, is as High, and Holy, as that of the Sermon. It is said; Domus
mea Domus Orationis Vocabitur: The House of Prayer, Not the House of Preaching:
And whereas the Apostle says; How shall Men call upon him, on whom they have
not believed? And how shall they believe, unless they hear? And how shall they
hear, without a Preacher? It appears, that as Preaching is the more
Original, so Prayer is the more Final: As the Difference is, between the
Seed, and the Fruit; For the Keeping of Gods Law, is the Fruit, of the
Teaching, of the Law; And Prayer, or Invocation, or Divine Service, or Liturgy;
(For these, be but Varieties, of Terms;) Is the Immediate Hallowing, of the
Name of God; And the principal work, of the first Table; And, of the great
Commandment, of the Love, of God. It is true, that the Preaching, of the Holy
Word, of God, is the Sowing of the Seed; It is the Lifting up, of the Brazen
Serpent; The Ministry of Faith; And the Ordinary Means, of Salvation; But yet,
it is good, to take Example, how that the best Actions, of the Worship of God,
may be extolled, excessively, and superstitiously. As the Extolling, of the
Sacrament, bred the Superstition of the Mass; The Extolling of the Liturgy,
and Prayers, bred the Superstition, of the Monastical Orders, and Oraisons;
And so, no doubt, Preaching likewise, may be magnified, and extolled,
superstitiously; As if, all the whole Body, of Gods Worship, should be turned
into an Ear. So as none, (as I suppose,) of sound Judgment, will derogate from
the Liturgy, if the Form thereof, be, in all parts, agreeable, to the Word of
God; The Example of the Primitive Church; And that holy Decency, which Saint
Paul commends. And therefore, first, that there be a Set form of Prayer; And
that, it be not lef^, either to an Extemporall Form, or to an Arbitrary Form.
Secondly, that it consist, as well of Lauds, Hymns, and Thanksgivings, as of
Petitions, Prayers, and Supplications. Thirdly, that the Form thereof be
quickened, with some shortness, and Diversities, of Prayers, and Hymns, and
with some Interchanges, of the Voice of the People, as well as of the Minister.
Fourthly, that it adimit some Distinctions, of Times, and Commemorations, of
Gods principal Benefits, as well General, as particular. Fifthly, that
Prayers, likewise, be appropri^ted, to several Necessities, and Occasions, of
the Church. Sixthly, that there be a Form, l^kewise, of Words, and Liturgy, in
the Administration of the Sacraments, and in the Denouncing of the Censures, of
the Church, and other Holy Actions, and Solemnities: These things, I think,
will not be much controverted.

But for the Particular Exceptions, to the Liturgy, in form, as it now
stands; I think, diverse, of them, allowing they were Just, yet seem they not
to be Weighty; Otherwise, then that nothing ought to be accounted Light, in
Matters of Religion, and Piety; As the Heathen himself could say; Etiam vultu
sepe laedi^ur Pietas. That the word, ( Priest,) should not be continued,
especially with Offense, the word, ( Minister,) being already made familiar.
This may be said, that it is a good Rule in Translation, never to confound that
in one word, in the Translation, which is precisely distinguished, in two words
in the Original; for doubt of Equivocation, and Traducing. And therefore,
seeing the word (...), and (...), be always disti^guished, in the Original;
And the one used for a Sacri^icer, the orher for a Minister; The word, Priest,
being made common to both, (whatsoever the Derivation be,) yet, in use, it
confounds the Minister, with the Sacrificer. And for an Example, of this
kind; I did ever allow, the Discretion, and Tenderness, of the Rhemish
Translation, in this Point; That finding, in the Original, th word (...), and
never (...), do ever translate Charity, and never Love; Because of of the
Indifferency, and Equivocation, of the word, with Impure Love.

Touching the Absolution, it is not unworthy Consideration, whether it may not
be thought, unproper, and unnecessary? For there are, but two sorts, of
Absolution; Both supposing, an Obligation, precedent: The one, upon an
Excommunication, which is Religious, and Primitive; The other, upon Confession,
and Penance, which is Superstitious, or, at least, Positive; And both
Particula^, neither General. Therefore, since the one is taken away, and the
other has his proper case, what does a general Absolution, wherein, there is
neither Penance, nor Excommunication, precedent? For the Church, never loses,
but where the Church has bound. And surely, I may think, This, at the first,
was allowed, in a kind, of spiritual Discretion; Because the Church thought,
the people, could not be suddenly weaned, from their Conceit of Assoyling; To
which they had been, so long accustomed.

For Confirmation, to my understanding, the State of the Question is, whether
it be not, a matter mistaken, and altered by Time; And whether, that be not now
made, a Subsequent to Baptism, which was, indeed, an Inducement, to the
Communion. For whereas in the Primitive Church, Children were examined of their
Faith before they were admitted to the Communion, Time may seem to have turned
it, to refer, as if it had been, to receive, a Confirmation of their Baptism.

For Private Baptism, by Women, or Lay-Persons, the best Divines, do utterly
condemn it; and I hear it not generally defended; And I have often marvailed,
that where the Book, in the Preface, to Public Baptism, does acknowledge,
that Baptism, in the Practice, of the Primitive Church, was Anniversary, and
but at certain Times; which shows, that the Primitive Church, did not
attribute, so much, to the Ceremony, as they would break an outward, and
general, Order for it; The Book, should afterward, allow of Private
Baptism; As if the Ceremony, were of that Necessity, as the very Institutiou,
which committed Baptism only to the Ministers, should be broken, in regard,
of the supposed Necessity. And therefore this Point, of all others, I think,
was, b^t a Concessum proper Duritiam Cordis.

For the Form, of Celebrating Matrimony, the Ring seems to many, even of
vulgar Sense, and Understanding, a Ceremony not Grave; Especially, to be made,
(as the words make it,) the essentia^l Part, of the Action? Besides, some other
of the words, are noted, in Speech, to be, not so Decent, and Fit.

For Music in Churches; That there should be Singing of Psalms, and
Spiritual Songs, is not denied: So the Question is, de Modo; Wherein, if a
Man, will look attentively, into the Order, and Observation, of it, it is easy
to disce^n, between the Wisdom, of the Institution, and the Exercise of the
late Times. For first, there are no Songs, or Verses, sung, by the Quire, which
are not supposed, by continual use, to be so familiar with the People, as they
have them without Book; Whereby, the Sound, hurts not the Understonding; And
those, which cannot read, upon the Book, are yet Pertakers of the Sense, and
may follow it with their mind. So again, after the Reading of the Word, it was
thought fit, there should be, some pause, for Holy Meditation, before they
proceeded, to the Rest, of the Service: Which Pause, was thought fit, to be
filled, rather with some grave sound, then with a still silence; Which was the
Reason, of the Playing upon the Organs, after the Scriptures read. All which
was Decent, and tending to Edisicatirn. But then, the Curiosity of Devision,
and Reports, and other Figures of Music, have no Affinity, with the Reasonable
Service of God, but were added, in the more pompous Times.

For the Capp, and Surplisse, since they be Things, in their Nature,
indifferent; And yet, by some, held superstitious; And that the Question is,
between Science, and Conscience; It seems to fall, within the Compass, of the
Apostles Rule; Which is, That the stronger, do descend, and yield, to the
Weaker. Only, the D^fference is, that it will be materially said, that the Rule
holds, between Private Man, and Private Man, But not between the Conscience, if
a Private Man, and the Order, of a Church. But yet since the Question, at this
time, is of a Tolleration; Not by Connivence, which may encourage Disobedience;
But by Law, which may give ^ Liberty; It is good, again, to be advised, whether
it fall not, within the Equity, of the Former Rule: The rather, because the
Silencing of Ministers, by this Occasion, is, in this scarcity of good
preacher^, a punishment, that lights upon the People, as well as upon the
Party. And for the Subscription, it seems to me, in the Nature of a
Confession; And therefore, more proper^ to bind, in the Unity of Faith; And to
be urged, rather, for Articles of Doctrine, then for Rites, and Ceremonies, and
Points of ou^ward Government. For howsoever, Politic Considerations, and
Reasons of State, may require Uniformity, yet Christian, and Divine Grounds,
look, chiefly, upon Unity.

Touching a Preaching Ministry.
TO speak of a Learned Ministry; It is true, that the Worthiness, of the
Pastors, and Ministers, is, of all other points of Religion, the most Summary;
I do not say, the Greatest, but the most Effectual, toward the rest: But
herein to my Understanding, while Men, go on, in Zeal, to hasten this work,
they are not aware, of as great, or greater Inconvenience, then that, which
they seek to remove. For while, they in veigh, against a Dumb Ministry, they
make, too easy, and too promiscous, an Allowance of such, as they account
Preachers; Having not Respect enough, to their Learnings, in other Arts, which
are Handmaides, to Divinity; Not Respect enough, to Years, except it be, in
Case, of Extraordinary Gift; Not Respect enough, to the Gift it self, which,
many Times, is none at all. For God forbid, that every Man, that can take unto
himself Boldness, to speak an Hour together, in a Church upon a Text, should
be admitted for a Preacher, though he mean never so well. I know, there is a
great Latitude, in Gifts; And a great Variety in Auditories, and Congregations;
But yet so, as there is, Aliquid Infimum, below which, you ought not to
descend. For you must, rather, leave the Arc, to shake, as it shall please
God, then put, unworthy Hands, to hold it up: And when we are, in Gods Temple,
we are warned, rather, to put our Hands, upon our Mouth, then to offer, the
Sacrifice, of Fools. And surely, it may be justly thought, that amongst many
Causes of Atheism; which are miserably met in our Age; As Schisms, and
Controversies; Profane Scoffings, in Holy Matters; and others; It is not the
least, that diverse do adventure, to handle the Word of God, which are unfit,
and unworthy. And herein, I would have, no man, mistake me, as if I did extol,
curious, and affected, Preaching; which is, as much, on the other side, to be
disliked; And breeds Atheism, and Scandal, as well as the other; (For who,
would not be offended, at one, that comes into the Pulpit, as if he came upon
the Stage, to play Parts, or Prizes?) Neither, on the other side, as if I would
discourage any, who has any tolerable Gift.

But upon this Point, I ground three Considerations: First, whether it were not
requisite, to renew, that good Exercise, which was practiced, in this Church,
some years; And afterward, put down, by order, indeed, from the Church; In
regard, of some Abuse thereof; Inconvenient, for those Times; And yet, against
the Advice, and Opinion, of one, of the Greatest, and Gravest, Prelates, of
this Land; And was commonly called Prophesying. Which was this; That the
Ministers, within a Precinct, did meet, upon a week day, in some principal
Town; where there was, some ancient, Grand Minister, that was President; And an
Auditory, admitted, of Gentlemen, or other Persons of Leisure. Then every
Minister, successively, beginning with the youngest, did handle one, and the
same part, of Scripture, spend^ng, severally, some Quarter of an Hour, or
better, And, in the whole, some two Hours: And so, the Exercise, being begun,
and concluded, with Prayer; And the President, giving a Text, for the next
meeting, the Assembly was dissolved. And this was, as I take it, a Forthnights
Exercise: which in my Opinion, was the best way, to frame, and train, up
Preachers, to handle the Word of God, as it ought to be handled, that has been
practiced. For we see, Orators, have their Declamations; Lawyers, have their
Moots; Logicians their Sophems; And every practice of Science, has an Exercise
of Erudition, and initiation, before Men come to the Life; Only Preaching,
which is the worthiest; And wherein it is most danger to be amiss; Wants an
Introduction, and is ventred, and rushed upon, at the first: But unto this
Exercise of the Prophecy, I would wish, these two Additions; The one, that
after this Exercise, which is, in some sort, Public, there were, immediately,
a Private Meeting, of the same Ministers; Where they might, brotherly admonish,
the one, the other; And specially the elder sort, the younger, of any Thing,
that had passed, in the Exercise, in Matter, or Manner, unsound, and uncomely;
And, in a word, might, mutually, use such Advise, Instruction, Comfort, or
Encouragement, as Occasion might minister; For public Reprehension, were to be
debarred. The other Addition, that I mean, is, That the same Exercise, were
used in the Universities, for young Divines, before they presumed to Preach, as
well, as in the Country, for Ministers. For they have, in some Colleges, an
Exercise, called a Common Place; Which can, in no Degree, be so profitable,
being but the Speech, of one Man, at one time. And if it be feared, that it may
be Occasion, to whet Men's Speeches, for Controversies, it is easily remedied,
by some strict Prohibition, that Matters of Controversy, tending, any way, to
the violating, or Disquieting, the Peace of the Church, be not handled or
entered into; Which Prohibition, in regard, there is ever to be, a Grave person,
President, or Moderatour, cannot be frustrate. The second Consideration is,
whether it were not convenient, there should be a more exact Probation, and
Examination, of Ministers; Namely, that the Bishops, do not ordain alone, but
by Advise; And then, that Ancient, Holy Orders of the Church might be revived:
By the which, the Bishop did ordain Ministers, but at four set times, of the
year; which were called, Quatuor Tempora; which, are, now, called Ember-weeks;
It being thought fit, to accompany, so High an Action, with general Fasting,
and Prayer, and Sermons, and all Holy Exercises; And the Names, likewise, of
those, that were to be Ordained, were published, some days, before their
Ordination; To the end, Exceptions might be taken, if just Cause were. The
Third Consideration, is, that if the Case of the Church of England be, that
where a Computation is taken, of all the Parochian Churches, (allowing the
Union of such, as were too small, and adjacent;) And again, a Computation, to
be taken, of the persons, who are worthy to be Pastors; And, upon the said
Account, if it fall out, that there are many more Churches, then Pastors; Then
of Necessity, Recourse must be had, to one of these Remedies; Either, that
Pluralities, must be allowed; (specially, if you can by permutation, make the
Benefices more compatible:) Or that there be Allowed Preachers, to have a more
general Charge, to supply, and serve, by turn, Parishes unfurnished: For that
some Churches, should be provided, of Pastors, able to teach; and others wholly
Destitute, seems, to me, to be against the Communion of Saints, and
Christians; And against the Practice, of the Primitive Church.

Touching the Abuse, of Excommunication.
EXcommunication, is the greatest Judgment, upon Earth; Being that, which is
ratified in Heaven; And being, a Precursory, or Prelusory Judgment, of the
great Judgment, of Christ, in the End of the World. And therefore, for this,
to be used unreverently, and to be made, an Ordinary Process, to lackey up and
down, for Fees, how can it be, without Derogation, to Gods Honor, and making,
the power of the Keys, contemptible? I know, very well, the Defense thereof,
which has no great Force; That it issues forth, not for the Thing it self,
but for the Contumacy. I do not deny, but this Judgment is, (as I said
before,) of the Nature, of Gods Judgments, of the which, it is a Model. For,
as the Judgment of God, takes hold, upon the least sin, of the Impenitent;
And takes no hold, of the greatest Sin of the Convert, or Penitent: So
Excommunication, may, in case, issue, upon the smallest Offense; And, in Case,
not issue, upon the greatest: But is this Contumacy, such a Contumacy, as
Excommunication is now used for? For the Contumacy, must be such, as the Party,
(as far, as the Eye, and Wisdom, of the Church, can discern,) stands in
State, of Reprobation, and Damnation: As one, that for that time, seems given
over, to Final Impenitency. Upon this Observation, I ground two
Considerations: The one, that this Censure, be restored, to the true Dignity,
and Use, thereof; which is, that it proceed not, but in Causes, of great
weight; And that it be decreed, not by any Deputy, or Substitute, of the
Bishop, but by the Bishop, in Person; And not by him alone, but by the Bishop
Assisted.

The other Consideration, is, That in liew, thereof, there be given, to the
Ecclesiastical Court, some ordinary Process, with such Force, and Coercion,
as appertains; That so the Dignity, of so high a Sentence, being, retained,
and the Necessity, of Mean Process supplied, the Church, may be, indeed,
restored, to the Ancient Vigor, and Splendor. To this purpose, joined with
some other Holy, and Good, purposes, was there a Bill, drawn in Parliament, in
the Three and Twentieth Year, of the Reign, of the Queen deceased; (which was
the Gravest Parliament, that I have known; And the Bill, recommended, by the
gravest, Counselor of Estate, in Parliament; Though afterward, it was stayed,
by the Queens, special Commandment, the Nature of those Things considered.

Touching, NON-RESIDENTS, And PLURALITIES.
FOR Non-R^sidence, except it be, in Case of necessary Absence, it seems, an
Abuse, drawn out of Covetousness, and Sloth: For that Men, should Live of the
^lock, that they do not Feed; Or of the Altar, at which they do not Serve; Is a
Thing, that can hardly receive, just Defense. And to Exerc^se, the Office, of a
Pastor, in Matter of the Word, and Doctrine, by Deputies; Is a Thing not
warranted, as has been touched before. The Questions upon this Point, do
arise, upon the Cases of Exception, and Excusation; Which shall be thought
Reasonable, and Sufficient; And which not. For the Case of Chaplains, let me
speak that with your Majesty's pardon, and with Reverence, toward the other
Pe^res, and Grave Persons, whose Chaplains, by Statutes, are privileged: I
should think, that the Attendance^ which Chaplains give, to your Majesty's
Court, and in the H^^ses, and Families, of their Lords, were a juster Reason,
why they should have no Benefice, then why, they should be quallified, to have
Two: For, as it stands, with Christian Policy, that such Attendance, be, in
no wise, neglected; Because that good, which ensues thereof, to the Church of
God, may exceed, or countervaile, that, which may follow of their Labors, in
any, though never so large, a Congregation; So it were reasonable, that their
Maintenance should Honorably, and Liberally, proceed thence, whence their
Labors be employed. Neither, are there wanting, in the Church, Dignities, and
P^eserments, not joined, with any exact Cure of Souls; By which, and by the
Hope of which, such Attendants in Ordinary, (who ought to be, as for the most
part they are, of the best Gifts, and Sort,) may be, further, encouraged, and
rewa^ded. And as for Extraordinary Attendants, they may, very well, retain the
Grace, and Countenance, of their places, and Duties, at times incident
thereunto, without Discontinuance, or Non-Residence, in their Pastoral
Charges. Next, for the Ca^e, of intending, Studies in the Universities, it
will, more easily, receive an Answer; For Studies, do but serve, and tend, to
the Practice, of those Studies; And therefore, for that, which is most
Principal, and Final, to be left undone, for the Attending, of that, which is
Subservient, and Subminist^ant, seems to be, against proportion, of Reason.
Neither do I see, but that, they proceed right well, in all Knowledge, which do
couple Study, with their Practice; And do not first Study altogether, and then
Practice altogether; And therefore, they may, very well, Study, at their
Benefices. Thirdly, for the Case, of Extraordinary Service of the Church; As if
some Pastor, be sent, to a General Council; Or here, to a Convocation; And
likewise, for the Case of Necessity, as in the particular, of Infirmity of
Body, and the like; No man will contradict, but there may be, some
Substitution, for such a Time. But the General Case, of Necessity, is the Case
of Pluralities; the Want of Pastors, and Insufficiency, of Livings,
considered, Posito, that a Man, does, faithfully, and incessantly, divide, his
Labors, between two Cures; Which kind of Necessity, I come now, to speak of,
in the Handling, of Pluralities.

For Pluralities, in Case, the Number, of Able Ministers, were sufficient, and
the Value of Benefices were sufficient, then Pluralities, were, in no sort,
tolerable. But we must take heed, we desire not Contraries. For to desire,
that every Parish, should be furnished, with a sufficient Preacher; And to
desire, that Pluralities, be, forthwith, taken away, is to desire Things
contrary; Considering, De Facto, there are not, Sufficient Preachers, for every
Parish: Whereto add likewise, that there is not, Sufficient Living, and
Maintenance, in many Parishes, to maintain a Preacher; And it makes, the
Impossibility, yet much the greater. The Remedies, in Rerum Natura, are but
Three; Union, Permutation, and Supply. Union, of such Benefices, as have the
Living, too small, and the Parish not too great, and are Adjacent. Permutation,
to make Benefices more compatible, though men be over ruled, to some loss, in
changing a Better, for a Nearer. Supply, by Stipendary Preachers, to be
rewarded, with some Liberal Stipends, to supply, as they may, such places,
which are unfurnished, of sufficient Pastors. As Queen Elizabeth, amongst
other, her Gracious Acts, did erect, certain of them, in Lancashire; Toward
which Pensions, I see no reason, but Reading Ministers, if they have rich
Benefices, should be charged.

Touching the Provision, for sufficient Maintenance, in the Church.
TOuching Church Maintenance, it is well to be weighed, what is, Iure Divino,
and what, Iure Positivo. It is a Constitution, of the Divine Law, from which
humane Laws, cannot derogate; That those, which feed the flock, should live of
the Flock; That those, that serve, at the Altar, should live of the Altar; That
those, which dispense spiritual things, should Reap Temporal Things; Of
which, it is also an Appendix, that the Proportion, of this Maintenance, be not
small, or necessitous, but Plentiful, and Liberal. So then, that all the
Places, and Offices, of the Church, be provided, of such a Dotation, that they
may be maintained, according to their several Degrees, is a Constitution,
permanent, and perpetual: But for particularity, of the Endowment, whether it
should consist of ^ithes, or Lands, or Pensions, or Mixed, might make a
Question, of Convenience, but no Question, of precise Necessity. Again, that
the Case, of the Church, de facto, is such, that there is want, in the Church,
of Patrimony, is confessed. For the Principal Places, namely, the Bishops
Livings, are, in some particulars, not sufficient; And therefore, enforced, to
be supplied, by Tolleration of Commendams, Things, of themselves, unfit, and
ever held of no good Report. And as for the Benefices, and Pastors Places, it
is manifest, that very many of them, are very weak, and penurious. On the other
side, that there was a Time, when the Church, was rather burdened, with
Superfluity, then with Lack, that is likewise apparent; But it is long since;
So as the Fault, was in others, the Want redoundeth unto us. Again, that it
were to be wished, that Impropriations, were returned to the Church, as the
most Proper, and Natural, Endowments thereof, is a Thing likewise, wherein Men's
Judgments, will not much vary. Nevertheless, that it is an Impossibility, to
proceed now, either to their Resumption, or Redemption, is as plain on the
other side. For Men are stated in them, by the Highest Assurance, of the
Kingdom, which is, Act of Parliament; And the value of them, amounts, much
above ten Subsidies: And the Restitution must, of Necessity, pass their Hands,
in whose Hands they now are, in possession, or Interest.

But of these things, which are manifestly true, to infer, and ground, some
Conclu^ions. First, in mine own Opinion, and Sense, I must confess, (let me
speak it with Reverence,) that all the Parliaments, since 27o. and 31o. of H.
8. (who gave away Impropriations, from the Church,) seem to me, to stand, in a
sort, obnoxious, and obliged, to God, in Conscience, to do somewhat for the
Church; To reduce the Patrimony thereof, to a Competency. For since, they have
debarred, Christ's Wife, of a great part, of her Dowry, it were Reason, they
made her, a competent Ioynture. Next to say, that Impropriations, should be
only charged; That carries, neither Possibility, nor Reason. Not Possibility,
for the Reasons touched before: Not Reason, because, if it be conceived, that
if any other Person be charged, it should be a Re-charge, or Double-charge, in
as much, as he pays Tithes, already, that is a Thing mistaken. For it must be
remembered, that as the Realm, gave Tithes, to the Church; So the Realm, since
again, has given Tithes, away from the Church, unto the King: As they may give
their 8th Sheaf, or Ninth Sheaf. And therefore, the first Gift, being
evacuated, it cannot go, in defeazance, or discharge, of that perpetual Bond,
wherewith Men are bound, to maintain Gods Ministers. And so, we see, in
Example, that diverse Godly, and well Disposed, People, not Impropriatours, are
content, to increase, their Preachers Livings; which, though in Law, it be but
a Benevolence, yet, before God, it is a Conscience. Further, that
Impropriations, should not be, somewhat, more deeply, charged, then other
Revenues, of like value, me thinks, cannot well be denied; Both, in regard, of
the Ancient claim of the Church; And the Intention, of the first Giver; And
again, because they have passed, in valuation, between Man and Man, somewhat,
at the less rate, in regard, of the said pretense, or Claim, of the Church, in
Conscience, before God. But of this Point, touching Church-Maintenance, I do
not think fit, to enter into further Particularity, but reserve the same, to a
fitter Time.

Thus have I, in all Humbleness, and Sincerity of Heart, to the best of my
understanding, given your Majesty, Tribute, of my Cares, and Cogitations, in
this Holy Business; So highly tending to Gods Glory, your Majesty's Honor,
and the Peace, and Welfare, of your States. Insomuch, as I am persuaded, that
the Papists themselves, should not need, so much, the Severity of Penal Laws,
if the Sword of the Spirit, were better edged, by strengthening the Authority,
and suppressing the Abuses, in the Church.

To conclude, renewing my most Humble Submission, of all that I have said, to
your Majesty's, most High Wisdom; And again, most humbly, craving pardon, for
any Errors, committed in this Writing; which, the same weakness, of Judgment,
that suffered me to commit them, would not suffer me to discover them; I end,
with my Devout, and Fervent, Prayer to God; That, as he has, made your
Majesty, the Cornerstone, in joining, your two King^domes; So you may be also,
as a Cornerstone, to unite, and knit together, these Differences, in the
Church, of God; To whose Heavenly Grace, and never erring, Direction, I commend
your Majesty's Sacred Person, and all your Doings.

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS, TOUCHING THE PLANTATION IN IRELAND PRESENTED TO His
Majesty, 1606,
IT seems God, has reserved, to your Majesty's Times, two Works; which
amongst the Works of Kings, have the supreme Pre-eminence; The Union, and
Plantation, of Kingdoms. For although it be a great Fortune, for a King, to
deliver, or recover, his Kingdom, from long continued Calamities; yet, in the
Judgment of those, that have distinguished, of the Degrees, of Sovereign
Honor; To be a Founder, of Estates, or Kingdoms, excels all the rest? For,
as in Arts, and Sciences, to be the first Inventer, is more, then to
Illustrate, or Amplify: And as, in the Works of God, the Creation, is greater,
then the Preservation; And as, in the Works of Nature, the Birth, and Nativity,
is more then the Continuance: So in Kingdoms, the first Foundation, or
Plantation, is of more Noble Dignity, and Merit, then all that follows. Of
which Foundations, there being but two Kinds; The first that makes One of
More; And the Second, that makes, One of None; The Latter, resembling, the
Creation of the World, which was, De Nihilo ad Quid; And the Former, the
Edification of the Church, which was de Multiplici ad Simplex, vel ad unum: It
has pleased the Divine Providence, in singular Favor to your Majesty, to put,
both these Kinds of Foundations, or Regenerations, into your Hand; The one, in
the Union, of the Island, of Britain; The other, in the Plantation of Great and
Noble Parts, of the Island, of Ireland: Which Enterprises, being once happily
accomplished; Then that, which was uttered, by One of the Best Orators, in one
of the Worst verses; O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam: May be, far more
truly, and properly, applied to your Majesty's Act: Natam te Rege Britanniam;
Natam Hiberniam. For He spoke, unproperly, of Deliverance, and Preservation;
But, in these Acts of yours, it may be verified, more naturally. For indeed,
Unions, and Plantations, are the very Nativities, or Birth-Dayes of Kingdoms.
Wherein, likewise, your Majesty has yet a Fortune extraordinary, and
Differing, from former Examples, in the same Kind. For most Part of Unions, and
Plantations, of Kingdoms, have been founded, in the ^ffusion of Blood; But your
Majesty shall build, in Solo puro, and in Area pura, that shall need no
Sacrifices Expiatory, ^or Blood; And therefore, (no doubt,) under a Higher, and
more Assured, Blessing. Wherefore, as I adventured, when I was less known, and
less particularly bound, to your Majesty, then since, by your undeserved
Favor, I have been, to write somewhat touching the Union; which your Majesty
was pleased to accept; And which since, I have, to my power, seconded by my
Travels; Not only, in Discourse, but in Action: So I am, thereby, encouraged,
to do the like, touching this Matter of Plantation; Hoping, that your Majesty,
will, through the weakness of my Ability, ^iscern the strength of my Affection;
And the Honest, and fervent, Desire I have, to see your Majesty's Person, Name,
and Times, Blessed, and Exalted, above those, of your Royal Progenitors. And
I was, the rather, invited this to do, by the Remembrance, that when the Lord
chief Justice, deceased, Popham, served in the place, wherein I now serve; And
afterward, in the Atturney^^ Place, he labored greatly, in the last Project,
touching the Plantation of Munster. Which nevertheless, as it seems, has
given more light, by the Errors thereof, what to Avoid; Then, by the Direction
of the same, what to Follow.

First therefore, I will speak somewhat, of the Excellency of the Work; And
then, of the Means to compass, and effect it. For the Excellency of the Work, I
will divide it, into four Noble, and Worthy, Consequences, that will follow
thereupon. The First of the four, is Honor; whereof I have spoken enough
already, were it not, that the Harp of Ireland, puts me in mind, of that
Glorious Emblem, or Allegory, wherein the wisdom of Antiquity, did figure,
and shadow out, works of this Nature. For the Poets feigned, that Orpheus by
the virtue, and sweetness, of his Harp, did call, and assemble, the Beasts,
and Birds, of their Nature, wild, and savage, to stand about him, as in a
Theater; Forgetting their Affections, of Fierceceness, of Lust, and of Prey;
and listening to the Tunes, and Harmonies, of the Harp: and soon after, called
likewise the Stones, and the Woods, to remove, and stand in order about him:
which Fable, was anciently interpreted, of the Reducing, and Plantation, of
Kingdoms; when People of Barbarous Manners, are brought, to give over, and
discontinue, their Customs, of Revenge, and Blood, and of dissolute Life, and
of Theft, and of Rapine; And to give Ear, to the wisdom of Laws, and
Governments, whereupon, immediately follows, the Calling of Stones, for
Building, and Habitation; and of Trees, for the seats of Houses, Orchards, and
Enclosures, and the like.

This Work, therefore, of all other, most Memorable, and Honorable, your
Majesty has now in Hand; specially, if your Majesty join, the Harp of David,
in casting out, the Evil Spirit, of Superstition; with the Harp of Orpheus, in
casting out Desolation, and Barbarism.

The second Consequence, of this Enterprise, is the Avoiding, of an
Inconvenience, which commonly attends upon Happy Times, and is an evil
effect, of a good Cause. The Revolution of this present Age, seems to incline
to Peace, almost generally in these Parts; And your Majesty's, most Christian,
and virtuous, affections, do promise the same, more specially, to these your
Kingdoms. An effect, of Peace, in Fruitful Kingdoms, (where the stock of
People, receiving no Consumption, nor Diminution, by war, does continually
multiply, and increase;) must, in the end, be a Surcharge, or Overflow of
People, more then the Territories can well maintain; Which, many times,
insinuating a general Necessity, and want of Means, into all estates; Does
turn, External Peace, into Internal Troubles, and Seditions. Now what an
excellent Diversion, of this Inconvenience, is ministered, by Gods Providence,
to your Majesty, in this Plantation of Ireland? wherein, so many Families, may
receive, Sustentations, and Fortunes; And the Discharge of them, also, out of
England, and Scotland, may prevent many Seeds of Future perturbations? So that
it is, as if a Man were troubled, for the Avoidance of water, from the place,
where he has built his House; And afterward, should advise with himself, to
cast those waters, and to turn them, into Fair Pools, or Streams, for pleasure,
provision, or use. So shall your Majesty, in this Work, have a double
Commodity; In the Avoidance of People here, and in Making use of them there.

The third Consequence, is the great Safety, that is like to grow, to your
Majesty's Estate, in general, by this Act; In discomfiting all Hostile
Attempts of Forreiners; which the Weakness of that Kingdom, has heretofore
invited: Wherein, I shall not need, to fetch Reasons, afar off, either for the
general, or particular. For the general, because nothing is more evident,
then that, which one of the Romans, said of Peloponnesus; Testudo intra tegumen
tuta est. The Tortoise is safe within her shell: But, if she put forth, any
part of her Body, then it endangereth, not only the part that is so put forth,
but all the Rest. And so, we see in Armor, if any part be left naked, it puts
in hazard the whole Person. And, in the Natural Body of Man, if there be any
weak, or Affected, part, it is enough, to draw Rheums, or Malign Humors unto
it, to the Interruption, of the Health, of the whole Body.

And for the Particular, the Example is too Fresh, that the indisposition of
that Kingdom, has been a conti^^al Attractive, of Troubles, and Infestations,
upon this Estate; and though your Majesty's Greatness, does, in some sort,
discharge this Fear, yet with your increase of Power, it cannot be, but Envy is
likewise increased.

The fourth, and last Consequence, is the great Profit, and Strength, which is
like to redound, to your Crown, by the working, upon this unpolished Part
thereof: Whereof, your Majesty, (being in the strength of your years,) are
like, by the good pleasure of Almighty God, to receive, more then the First
Fruits; And your Posterity, a growing, and Springing Vein of Riches, and
Power. For this Island, being another Britain; As Britain was said, to be
another World; Is endowed, with so many Dowries of Nature, (considering the
Fruitfullnesse of the Soil, the Ports, the Rivers, the Fishings, the Quarries,
the Woods, and other Materials; And specially, the Race, and Generation of
Men, valiant, hard, and active^) As it is not easy, no not upon the Continent,
to find, such Confluence of Commodities, if the Hand of Man, did join with the
Hand of Nature. So then for the Excel^lency, of the work, in point of Honor,
Policy, Safety, and Vtility, here I cease. For the Means, to effect this Work;
I know your Majesty shall not want, the Information of Persons expert, and
industrious, which have served you there, and know the Region: Nor the Advice,
of a Grave, and Prudent Counsel, here; which know the Pulses, of the Hearts,
of People, and the ways, and Passages, of conducting great Actions: Besides
that, which is ab^ve all; which is, that Fountain, of Wisdom, and
Universality, which is in your self: yet notwithstanding, in a thing, of so
public a Nature, it is not amiss, for your Majesty, to hear variety of
Opinion. For as Demosthenes says well; The good Fortune, of a Prince, or
State, does, sometimes, put a good Motion, into a Fools Mouth. I do think
therefore, the Means, of accomplishing this Work consists of two principal
Parts. The first, the Invitation, and Encouragement, of Undertakers: The
second, the Order, and Policy of the Project, it self. For as in all Engines of
the Hand, there is somewhat, that gives the Motion and Force, and the rest,
serves to guide, and govern, the same: So it is in these Enterprises, or
Engines, of Estate. As for the former of these, there is no doubt, but next
unto the Providence, and ^inger of God, which writes these Virtuous, and
Excellent, Desires, in the Tables, of your Majesty's Heart, your Authority, and
Affection, is Primus Motor, in this Cause: And therefore, the more strongly,
and fully, your Majesty shall decla^e your self in it, the more shall you
quicken, and animate, the whole proceeding. For this is is an Action, which as
the worthiness of it, does bear it, so the Nature of it requires it, to be
carried in some Height of Reputation; And fit, in mine Opinion, for Pulpits,
and Parliaments, and all places, to ring, and resound of it. For that, which
may seem Vanity, in some Things; (I mean, Matter of Fame;) is of great
efficacy, in this Case.

But now, let me descend, to the inferior Spears, and speak, what
Cooperation, in the Subjects, or undertakers, may be rai^sed, and kindled, and
by what Means. Therefore, to take plain Grounds, which are the surest; All Men
are drawn into Actions, by three Things, Pleasure, Honor, and Profit. But
before I pursue the three Motives, it is fit, in this place, to enterlace, a
word, or two, of the Quality, of the Undertakers; wherein my Opinion simply is,
that if your Majesty, shall make these Portions of Land, which are to be
Planted, as Rewards, or as Suits, or as Fortunes^ for those, that are in want;
And are likest to seek after them; That they will not be able, to go through,
with the Charge, of good substantial Plantations; But will Desicere, in Opere
medio; And then, this Work will succeed, as Tacitus says; Acribus i^i^i^s,
Fine incurioso. So that, this must rather be an Adventure, f^r such as are
full; Then a setting up, of those, that are low of Means; For those Men, are
fit, indeed, to perform these Undertakings; Which were fit, to purchase dry
Reversions, after Lives, or years; Or such, as were fit, to put out Money, upon
long Returns.

I do not say, but that I think, the Undertakers themselves, will be glad to
have some Captains, or Men of Service, intermixed among them, for their safety;
But I speak, of the Generality of Undertakers; which, I wish, were Men of
Estate, and Plenty.

Now therefore, it follows well to speak, of the aforesaid three Motives: For
it will appear the more, how necessary it is, to allure, by all means,
Undertakers; Since those Men, will be least ^it, which are like to be, most in
Appetite, of themselves; And those most fit, which are like, least to desire it.

First therefore, for Pleasure, in this Region or Tract of Soil, there is no
Warm Winters, nor Orange Trees, nor strange Beasts, or Birds, or other Points
of Curiosity, or Pleasure, as there are in the Indies, and the like; So as,
there can be found, no Foundation, made upon Mat^er of Pleasure, otherwise,
then that the very Desire of Novel^y, and Experiment, in some stirring Natures,
may work somewhat; And therefore, it is the other two Points, of Honor, and
Pr^fit, whereupon we are wholly to r^st.

For Honor, or Coun^enance, if I shall mention to your Majesty, whether, in
wisdom, you shall think convenient, the better to express your Affection to
the Enterprise, and for a Pledge there of, to add ^he Earldome of Vlster, to
the Princes Titles; I shall, but learn it, out of the practice, of King Edward
the First; Who first used the like course, as a mean, the better to restrain,
the ^^untrey of Wales: And, I take it, the Prince of Spain, has the Addition,
of a Province, in the Kingdom of Naples; And other Pr^si^ents, I think, there
are, and it is like, to put more life, and Enc^uragement, into the Undertakers.

Also, considering the large Territories, which are to be Planted, it is not
unlike, your Majes^y will think, of raising some Nobili^y there; which, if it
be done merely, upon new Titles, of Dignity, havi^g no manner of Reference to
the Old; And if it be done also, without putting, to many Portions, into one
Hand; And lastly, if it be done, without any great Franchises, or Commands; I
do not see, any Peril, can ensue thereof: As, on the other side, it may draw
some Persons, of great Estate, and Means, into the Ac^ion, ^o the great
Furtherance, and Supply, of the charges ^hereof.

And lastly, for Knighthood, to such Persons, as have not attained it; Or
otherwise, Knighthood, with some new Difference, and Precedence; It may, no
doubt, work with Many. And if any Man think, that these Things, which I
propound, are Aliquid nimis, for the ^roportion, of this Action; I confess,
plainly, that if your Majesty, will have it, really, and effectually,
performed; My Opinion is, you cannot bestow too much Sunshine upon it. For
Lunae Radiis non maturescit Botrus. Thus much for Honor.

For Pr^^it, it will consist in Three parts: First, the ^asie Rates, that your
Majesty, shall be pleased, to give, the Undertakers of the Land, they shall
receive. Secondly, the Liberties, which you may be pleased, to con^er upon
them. When I speak of Liberties, I mean not, Libert^es of ^urisdiction; As
Counties palatine, or the like; (which it seems, has been the Error, of the
ancient Donations, and Pla^tations, in that Coun^ry;) But I mean, only
Liberties, tending to Commodity: As Liber^y, to transport, any of the
Commodities, growing upon the Coun^ry, new Planted; Liberty to Import, from
hence, all Things, appertaining to their necessary use, Custom free; Liberty,
to take Timber, or other Materials, in your Majesty's Woods, there, and the
like. The Third is, Ease of Charge; That the whole Mass, of Charge, does not
rest, upon the Private Purse, of the Undertakers.


For the Two Former of these, I will pass them over; because, in the Project,
which with good diligence, and providence, has been presented to your Majesty^
by your Ministers of that Kingdom, they are, in my Opinion, well handled.

For the Third, I will never despair, but that the Parliament, of England, if
it may perceive, that this Action, is not a Flash, but a Solid, and Settled
pursuit, will give aid, to a Work, so Religious, so Politic, and so
Profitable. And the Distribution of Charge, (if it be o^served,) falls,
naturally, into Three Kinds of Charge; And every, of those Charge^,
respectively, ought to have, his proper Fountain, and Issue. For as, there
proceeds, from your Majesty's Royal Boun^y, and Munificence, the Gift of the
Land, And the other Materials; Together with the Endowment of Liberties; And
as the Charge, which is Private; As Building of Houses, St^cking of Grounds,
Victual, and the like, is to rest upon the Particular Undertakers; So
whatsoever is Public; As Building of Churches, Walling of Towns,
Town-Houses, Bridges, Cawsies, or Highways, and the like; Ought not, so
properly, to lie upon particular Persons, but to come, from the Public
Estate, of this, Kingdom; To which, this Work, is like to return, so great an
Addition, of Glory, Strength, and Commodity.

For the Project it self, I shall need to speak the less, in regard, it is so
considerately digested already, for the County of Tyrone; And Therefore, my
Labor shall be, but in those Things, wherein, I shall either Add to, or
Dissent from, that which is set down; Which will include, Five Points, or
Articles. First, ^hey mention a Commission, for this Plantation; Which, of all
Things, is most necessary, both to Direct, and Appease, Controversie^, and the
like.

To this I add Two Propositions. The one, that which, perhaps, is meant,
though not expressed; That the Commissioners, should, for certain times,
reside, and abide, in some Habitable Town, of Ireland, near in Distance, to the
Country, where the Plantation shall be; To the end; Both that they may be more
at Hand, for the Execution of the Parts, of their Commission; And withal, it
is like, by drawing of Concourse of People, and Trades Men, to such Towns, it
will be some Help, and Commodity, to the Undertakers, for Things, they shall
stand in need of. And likewise, it will be a more safe place of Receipt, and
Store, wherein to Unlade, and Deposite, such Provisions, as are after to be
employed.

The Second is, that your Majesty, would make a Correspondency, between the
Commission there, and a Council of Plantation, here. Wherein I warrant, my
self, by the President, of the like Council, of Plantation, for Virginia; An
enterprise, in my Opinion, differing as much from this, as Amadis de Gaul,
differs from Caesar's Commentaries. But when I speak of a Council of
Plantation^ I mean, some Persons, chosen, by way of Reference; Upon whom the
Labor, may rest; To prepare, and report, Things, to the Council of Estate,
here, that concern that Business. For although, your Majesty, have a grave,
and sufficient, Council in I^eland: From whom, and upon whom, the
Commissioners, are to have Assistance, and Dependence; yet that supplies not
the Purpose, whereof I speak. For considering, that upon the Advertisements, as
well of the Commissioners, as of the Council of Ireland, it self; There will
be many Occasions, to crave Directions, from your Majesty, and your Privy
Council here, which are busi^d with a world of Affairs; It cannot but give
greater Expedition, and some better Perfection, unto some Directions, and
Resolutious; If the Matters, may be considered of before hand, by such, as may
have a continual Care, of the Cause. And it will be, likewise, a Comfort, and
Satisfaction, to some Principal Undertakers, if they may be admitted of that
Council.

Secondly, there is a Clause, wherein the Undertakers, are restrained, that
they shall execute the Plantation, in Person; from which I must dissent, if I
will consent, with the Grounds, I have already taken. For it is not probable,
that Men, of great Means, and Plentiful Estates, will endure the Travail,
Diseasements, and Adventures, of going thither in Person; But rather, I
suppose, Many will undertake Portions, as an Advancement, for their Younger
Children, or Kins^olks; Or for the Sweetness, of the Expectation, of a great
Bargain, in the end, when it is overcome. And therefore, it is like, they will
employ Sons, Kinsfolks, Servants, or Tenants; And yet be glad, to have the
Estate, in themselves. And, it may be, some again, will join their Purses,
together; And make, as it were, a Partner-ship, or Ioynt-Adventure; And yet man
forth, some one Person, by consent, for the Executing of the Plantation.

Thirdly, there is a Main Point, wherein, I fear, the Project, made, has two
much of the Line, and Compass; And will not be, so natural, and easy, to
Execute; Nor yet, so Politic, and Convenient: And that is, that the Buildings,
should be, Sparsim, upon every Portion; And the Castle, or Principal House,
should draw the Tenements, and Farms about it, as it were into Villages,
Hamlets, or ^ndships; And that there should be, only, Four Corporate Towns,
for the Artificers, and Tradesmen.

My Opinion is, that the Building, be altogether in Towns, to be compounded,
as well of Husbandries, as of Arts. My Reasons are.

First, when Men come into a Country, Vast, and Void of all Things necessary,
for the use of Man's Life; If they set up together, in a Place, one of them,
will the better supply, the wants of another Work Folks of all sorts, will be
the more continually on work, without Loss of Time; When, if Work fail in one
Place, they may have it fast by; The Wages will be ma^e, more passible, for
Carriages, to those Seats, or Towns, then they can be, to a Number of
dispersed, Solitary, Places; And infinite other, helps, and Easements, scarcely
to be comprehended, in Cogitation, will ensue, in Vicinity, and Society of
People; Whereas, if they build scattered, (as is projected,) Every Man, must
have a Cornu-Copia, in himself, for all Things he must use; Which cannot but
breed, much Difficulty, and no less Wast. Secondly, it will draw out, of the
Inhabited Country, of Ireland, Provisions, and Victuals, and many necessaries,
because they shall be sure of Utterance; Whereas, in the Dispersed Habitations,
every Man must reckon, only, upon that, that he brings with him; As they do,
in Provisions, of Ships. Thirdly, the Charge of Bawnes, as they call them, to
be made, about every Castle, or House, may be spared, when the Habitations,
shall be congregated, only into Towns.

And lastly, it will be a Means, to secure the Country, against future Perils,
in case, of any Revolt, and Defection. For, by a slight Fortification, of no
great Charge, the danger of any Attempts, of Kierns, and Swordmen, may be
prevented: The Omission of which Point, in the last Plantation, of Mun^ter,
made the Work of years, to be but the Spoil of Days. And if any Man think, it
will Draw People, too far off; from the Grounds, they are to labor; It is to
be understood, that the Number, of the Towns, be increased accordingly; And
likewise, the Situation of them, be, as in the Center, in respect of the
Portions assigned to them. For in the Champian Countries of England, where the
Habitation, uses to be in Towns, and not dispersed, it is no new Thing, to go
two Miles off, to Plow, part of their Grounds: And two Miles Compass, will
take up a good Deal of Country.

The fourth Point, is a Point, wherein, I shall differ, from the Project,
rather in Quantity, and Proportion, then in Matter. There is allowed to the
undertaker, within the five years of Restraint, to alien a third part, in Fee
Farm; And to Demise, another for forty years; which, I fear, will mangle the
Portions; And, will be, but a shift, to make money, of two parts: Whereas, I am
of Opinion, the more, the first undertaker, is forced to keep, in his own
Hands, the more the Work is like to prosper. For First, the Person, liable, to
the State here, to perform the Plantation, is the Immediate Undertaker.
Secondly, the more, his Profit depends, upon the Annual, and Springing,
Commodity; The more Sweetness, he will find, in putting forward, Manurance,
and Husbanding of the Grounds; And therefore is like to take more care of it.
Thirdly, since the Natives, are excluded, I do not see, that any persons, are
like to be drawn over, of that Condition, as are like to give Fines, and
undertake the Charge of Building: For I am persuaded, that the People
transported, will consist of Gentlemen, and their Servants; And of Laborers,
and Hindes; And not of Yeomen, of any wealth; And therefore, the Charge of
Building, as well of the Tenements, and Farms, as of the Capital Houses,
themselves, is like to rest, upon the Principal Undertakers, which will be
recompensed, in the end, to the full, and with much advantage, if they make no
long Estates, or Leases.

And therefore this Article, to receive some Qualification.

Fifthly, I should think it requisite, that Men of Experience, in that
Kingdom, should enter, into some particular Consideration, of the Charges, and
Provisions, of all kinds, that will be incident to the Plantation; To the end,
that thereupon, some Advise, may be taken, for the Furnishing, and
Accommodating them, most conveniently; Aiding private Industry, with public
Care, and Order.
Thus I have expressed to your Majesty, those simple, and weak^ Cogitations,
which I have had in my Self, touching this Cause; Wherein, I most humbly desire
your pardon, and gracious acceptance, of my good Affection, and Intention. For
I hold it for a Rule, that there belongs to great Monarchs, from Faith^ull
Servants, not only the Tribute of Duty, but the Oblations of cheerfulness of
Heart. And so I pray the Almighty, to bless this great Action, with your
Majesty's Care; And your Care; with Happy Success.

ADVICE TO THE KING, TOUCHING Mr. SUTTONS ESTATE.
May it please Your MAJESTY;
I Find it, a Positive Precept, of the Old Law; That there should be n^
Sacrifice without Salt. The Moral whereof, (besides the Ceremony,) may be;
That God is not pleased, with the Body of a good Intention; Except it be
seasoned, with that Spiritual Wisdom, and Judgment, as it be not easily
Subject, to be corrupted, and perverted. For Salt, in the Scripture, is a
Figure, both of Wisdom, and Lasting. This comes into my Mind, upon this Act
of Mr. Sutton; Which seems to me, as a Sacrifice without Salt; Having the
Materials, of a Good Intention, but not powdered, with any such Ordinances, and
Institutions, as may preserve the same from turning Corrupt; Or, at least, from
becoming Unsavory, and of little Use. For though, the Choice of the Feoffees,
be of the best; yet neither can they always live; And the very Nature, of the
Work it self, in the vast, and unf^^, Proportions thereof, being apt to provoke
a Mis-imployment; It is no Diligence of theirs, (except there be a Digression
from that Model,) that can excuse it, from running the same way, that Gifts of
like Condition, have heretofore done. For to desig^ the Charter House, a
Building fit for a Princes Habita^ion, for an Hospital; Is all one, as if one
should give in Alms, a Rich Embroyde^ed ^loak, to a Beggar. And certainly, a
Man may see, Tanquam quae Ocul^s Cernuntur, that if such an Edifice, with Six
Thousand pounds Revenue, be erected into one Hospital; It will, in small time,
degenerate, to be made a preferment, of some great Person, to be Master, and he
to take all the sweet, and the Poor, to be stinted, and take but the Crumbs: As
it comes to pass, in diverse Hospitals, of this Realm; Which have but the Names
of Hospitalls, and are but wealthy Benefice^, in respect of the Mastership; But
the Poor, which is the Propter quid, little relieved. And the like, has been
the Fortune, of much of the Alms, of the Roman Religion, in the Great
Foundations; which being begun in Vainglory, and Ostentation^ have had their
Judgment, upon them, to end in Corruption, and Abuse. This Meditation, has
made me presume, to write these few Lines to your Majesty; Being no better ^hen
good Wishes, which your Majesty's great Wisdom, may make some thing, or
Nothing, of.

Wherein, I desire, to be thus understood; That if this Foundation, (such as it
is,) be perfect, and Good in Law; Then I am too well acquainted, with your
Majesty's Disposition, to advise, any Course, of power, or Profit, that is not
grounded upon a Right: Nay further, if the Defects be such, as a Court of
Equi^y may Remedy, and Cure; Then I wish, that as Saint Peter^ shadow, did cure
Diseases; So the very shadow, of a Good Intention, may cure Defects of that
Nature. But if there be a Right, and Birthright, planted in the Heir; And not
Remediable by Courts of ^quity; And that Right, be submitted to your Majesty;
Whereby it is both, in your power, and Grace, what to do; Then I do wish, that
this rude Mass, and Chaos^ of a Good Deed, were directed, rather to a Solid
Merit, and Durable Charity, then to a Blaze of Glory, that will but crackle, a
little, in Talk, and quickly extinguish.

And this may be done, observing the Species, of Mr. Suttons Intent, though
varying in Individuo. For it appears, that he had, in Notion, a Triple Good;
An Hospital; And a School; And Maintaining of a Preacher; Which Individualls,
refer to these Three General Heads. Relief of Poor; Advancement of Learning;
And Propagation of Religion. Now then, if I shall set before your Majesty, in
every of these Three Kinds, what it is, that is most wanting in your Kingdom;
And what is like, to be the most Fruitful, and Effectual use, of such a
Beneficence, and least like to be perverted: That I think, shall be no ill
Scope of my Labor, how meanly soever performed; For out of Variety,
represented, Election may be best grounded.

Concerning the Relief of the Poor; I hold some Number, of Hospitalls, with
Competent Endowments, will do far more good, then one Hospital, of an
Exorbitant Greatness. For though the one Course, will be the more Seen, yet
the other will be the more Felt. For if your Majesty erect many, besides the
observing the Ordinary Maxim; Bonum, quo communius, eo melius, choice may be
made, of those Towns, and Places, where there is most Need; And so the Remedy,
may be Distributed, as the Disease, is Dispersed. Again, Greatness of Relief,
accumulate in one place, does rather invite a Swarm, and Surcharge, of Poor,
then relieve those, that are, naturally, bred in that place: Like to ill
tempred Medicines, that draw more Humor to the Part, then they Evacuate from
it. But chiefly, I rely, upon the Reason, that I touched in the Beginning; That
in these Great Hospitalls, the Revenues, will draw the Use, and not the Use,
the Revenues; And so, through the Mass of the Wealth, they will swiftly tumble
down, to a Misemployment. And if any Man say, that in the Two Hospitalls in
London, there is a President of Greatness, concurring with Good Employment;
Let him consider, that those Hospitalls, have Annual Governers; That they are
under the Superior Care, and Policy, of such a state, as the City of London;
And chiefly, that their Revenues, consist not upon Certainties, but upon
Casualties, and Free Gifts; Which Gifts would be withheld, if they appeared
once to be perverted: So as, it keeps them, in a continual Good Behavior,
and Awe, to employ them aright: None of which Points, do match, with the
present Case.

The next Consideration may be, whether this intended Hospital, as it has a
more ample Endowment, then other Hospitals have, should not likewise work, upon
a better Subject, then other Poor: As that it should be converted, to the
Relief of Maimed Soldiers, Decayed Merchants, Householders Aged, and Destitute
Churchmen, and the like; Whose Condition, being of a better sor^, then loose
People, and Beg^gars, deserves, both a more Liberal Stipend, and Allowance,
and some proper place of Relief, not intermingled, or coupled, with the Basest
Sort of Poor: Which Project, though Specious, yet, in my Judgment, will not
answer the Designment, in the Event, in these our Times. For certainly, few Men
in any Vocation, which have been some Body, and bear a Mind, somewhat
according to the Conscience, and Remembrance, of that they have been, will ever
descend, to that Condition, as to profess, to live upon Alms, and to become,
a Corporation, of Declared Beggars; But rather will choose, to live Obscurely,
and as it were, to hide themselves, with some private Friends: So that the End,
of such an Institution, will be, that it will make the Place, a Receptacle of
the Worst, Idlest, and most dissolute Persons, of every Profession; And to
become a Cell of Loyterers, and Cast Serving Men, and Drunkards, with Scandal
rather then Fruit, to the Common Wealth. And of this kind, I can find but one
Example with us; Which is, the Alms Knights of Windsor; Which particular,
would give a Man, small encouragement, to follow that President.

Therefore, the best Effect of Hospitals, is, to make the Kingdom, if it were
possible, capable of that Law; That there be no Beggar in Israel. For it is
that kind of People, that is a burden, an Eye sore, a scandal, and a Seed, of
Peril, and Tumult, in the State. But chiefly, it were to be wished, that such
a Beneficence, toward the Relief of the poor, were so bestowed; As not only,
the Mere, and Naked, Poor, should be sustained; But also, that the Honest
Person, which has hard means to live, upon whom the Poor are now charged,
should be in some sort eased. For that were a Work, generally acceptable, to
the Kingdom, if the Public Hand, of Alms, might spare, the Private Hand, of
^ax. And therefore, of all other Employments, of that kind, I commend most,
Houses of Relief, and Correction; which are Mixed Hospitalls, where the Impotent
Person, is relieved, and the Sturdy Beggar, buckled to work; And the unable
Person also, not maintained to be Idle, (which is ever joined with
Drunkenness, and Impurity,) But is sorted, with such work, as he can manage,
and perform; And where the uses, are not distinguished, as in other Hospitals;
Whereof some, are for Aged, and Impotent; and some for Childr^n; And some, for
Correction of Vagabonds; But are general, and promiscuous. So that, they may
take, off Poor, of every sort, from the Country, as the Country breeds them.
And thus, the Poor themselves, shall find the Provision, and other People the
sweetness, of the Abatement, of the Tax. Now if it be objected, that Houses of
Correction, in all places, have not done the good expected; (as it cannot be
denied, but in most places, they have done much Good;) It must be remembered,
that there is a great Difference, between that, which is done, by the
Distracted Government, of Justices of Peace; And that, which may be done by a
settled Ordinance, subject to a Regular Visitation, as this may be; And besides,
the Want has been, commonly, in Houses of Correction, of a competent, and
Certain, Stock, for the Materials of the Labor, which, in this case, may be
likewise supplied.

Concerning the Advancement of Learning, I do subscribe, to the Opinion, of
one, of the Wisest, and Greatest, Men, of your Kingdom. That for Grammar
Schools, there are already too many; and therefore, no Providence, to add,
where there is Excess. For the great Number of Schools, which are in your
Highness Realm, does cause a Want, and does cause likewise an Overflow; Both
of them, Inconvenient, and one of them Dangerous. For by Means thereof, they
find Want in the Country, and Towns, both of Servants for Husbandry, and
Apprentices for Trade; And, on the other side, there being more Scholars bred,
then the State, can prefer, and Employ; And the Active part, of that life, not
bearing a proportion, to the Preparative; It must needs fall out, that many
Persons, will be bred, unfit, for other Vocations, And unprofitable for that,
in which they are brought up; Which fills the Realm, full of Indigent, Idle,
and Wanton People, which are but Materia Rerum novarum.

Therefore, in this Point, I wish, Mr. Suttons Intention, were exalted a
Degree; That that, which he meant, for Teachers of Children, your Majesty
should make for Teachers of Men; wherein, it has been, my ancient Opinion, and
Observation; That in the Universities of this Realm, (which I take to be, of
the best endowed Universities of Europe,) there is Nothing more wanting,
toward the flourishing State of Learning, then the Honorable, and plentiful,
Salaries, of Readers, in Arts, and Professions. In which Point, as your
Majesty's Bounty, already, has made a Beginning; So this Occasion, is offered
of God, to make a Proceeding. Surely, Readers in the Chair, are, as the Parents
in Sciences, and deserve, to enjoy a Condition, not inferior to their
Children, that embrace the Practical Part. Else, no Man, will sit longer, in
the Chair, then till he can walk, to a better preferment: And it will come to
pass, as Virgil says, Et Patrum invalidi referent Iejunia Nati.


For, if the Principal Readers, through the Meannesse, of their Entertainment,
be but Men, of superficial Learning; And that, they shall take their place,
but in passage; It will make the Mass of Sciences, want the chief, and solid
Dimension, which is Depth; and to become, but Pretty, and, compendious, Habits
of pra^ctice. Therefore, I could wish, that in both the Universities, the
Lectures, as well of the three Professions, Divinity, Law, and Phy^sick; As of
the three Heads of Science, Philosophy, Arts of Speech, and the Mathematics,
were raised in their Pensions, unto a 100 l. per Annum, a piece; Which though
it be not near so great, as they are in some other Places, where the Greatness
of the Reward, does whistle for the Ablest Men, out of all Foreign part, to
supply the Chair; yet it may be a Portion, to content a Worthy, and Able, Man;
If he be, likewise, Contemplative in Nature; As those spirits are, that are
Fittest for Lectures. Thus may Learning, in your Kingdom, be advanced, to a
further Height; Learning, (I say,) which, under your Majesty, the most Learned
of Kings, may claim some Degree, of Elevation,

Concerning Propagation of Religion, I shall in few words, set before your
Majesty, three Propositions; None of them, Devises, of mine own, otherwise,
then that I ever approved them: Two of which, have been in Agitation, of
Speech, and The third acted.

The first is, a College for Controversies; Whereby, we shall not still
proceed Single, but shall, as it were, double our Files; Which, certainly, will
be found, in the Encounter.

The second is, a Receipt, (I like not the word Seminary, in respect, of the
Vain Vows, and implicit Obedience, and other Things, tending to the
perturbation of States, involved in that Term;) for Converts to the Reformed
Religion, either of Youth, or otherwise; For, I doubt not, but there are in
Spain, Italy, and other Countries, of the Papists, many, whose Hearts are
touched, with a sense of those Corruptions, and an acknowledgment of a better
Way; which Grace, is, many times, smothered, and choked, through a worldly
Consideration of Necessity, and want; Men not knowing, where to have Succor,
and Refuge. This, likewise, I hold a Work of great Piety, and a Work, of great
Consequence; That we, also, may be Wise, in our Generation; And that, the
Watchful, and Silent Night, may be used, as well for sowing of good Seed, as
of Tares.

The third is, the Imitation of a Memorable, and Religious Act, of Queen
Elizabeth; Who finding, a part of Lancashire, to be extremely Backward, in
Religion; And the Benefices, swallowed up, in Impropriations, did, by Decree,
in the Duchy, erect four stipends, of 100 l. per Annum, a piece, for
Preachers, well chosen, to help the Harvest; which have done, a great deal of
Good, in the Parts, where they have labored. Neither do there want, other
Corners, in the Realm, that would require, for a time, the like Extraordinary
Help.

Thus have I, briefly, delivered, unto your Majesty, mine Opinion, touching the
Employment, of this Charity: whereby, that Mass of wealth, which was in the
Owner, little better, then a Stack, or Heap, of Muck, may be spread, over your
Kingdom, to many fruitful purposes; your Majesty planting, and watering, and
God giving the Increase.

A PROPOSITION, TO His Majesty, BY Sir FRANCIS BACON, Knight, HIS MAJESTY'S
ATTVRNEY GENERAL; AND One of His PRIVY COUNSEL; Touching the Compiling, And
Amendment, Of the LAWS, of ENGLAND.
YOUR MAJESTY,
OF Your Favor, Having Made me Privy Councellor: And Continuing me, in the
Place, of your Attorney General, (which is more then was these hundred years
before,) I do not understand it to be, that by putting off, the dealing, in
Causes, between party and party, I should keep Holy Day the more: But that, I
should dedicate my time, to your Service, with less distraction. Wherefore, in
this plentiful Accession of Time, which I have now gained, I take it, to be my
duty; Not only to speed your Commandments, and the Business, of my place;
But to meditate, and to excogitate, of my self, wherein I May best, by my
Travels, derive your Virtues, to the Good of your People; And return, their
Thanks, and Increase of Love, to you again. And after I had thought, of many
things, I could ^ind, in my Judgment, none more proper, for your Majesty, as a
Master; Nor for me, as a Workman, then the Reducing, and Recompiling, of the
Laws of England.

Your Majesty is a King, blessed with Posterity; And these Kings, sort best,
with Acts of Perpetuity; When they do not leave them, instead of Children; but
transmit, both Line, and Merit, to Future Generations. You are a great Master,
in Justice, and Judicature: And it were pity, that the fruit of that Virtue,
should dye with you. Your Majesty, also Reigns, in Learned Times; The more,
in regard, Of your own perfections, and patronage of Learning; And it has been
the mishap, of Works, of this Nature, that the less Learned Time, has wrought
upon the more Learned; Which now will not be so. As for my self, the Law is my
profession, to which I am a debtor. Some little helps I May have, of other
Learning, which may give Form to matter; And your Majesty has set me, in an
Eminent place, whereby, in a Work, which must be the Work of many, I may the
better have Coadjutors. Therefore, not to hold your Majesty, with any long
preface, in that, which I conceive to be, nothing less then Words; I will
proceed to the Matter: Which matter, it self, nevertheless, requires,
somewhat briefly to be said, both of the Dignity, and likewise of the Safety,
and Convenience, of this Work; And then to go to the main; That is to say, to
show, how the work is to be done: Which incidently, also, will best
Demonstrate, that it is no vast, nor speculative, Thing; But a Real, and
feizable. Callisthenes, that followed Alexanders Court, and was grown, in some
displeasure, with him; Because he could not well brook the Persian Adoration;
At a Supper, (which, with the Graecians, was, ever, a great part, Talk,) was
desired, because he was an Eloquent Man, to speak of some Theme; which he did;
And chose, for his Theme, The praise, of the Macedonian Nation; which, though
it were, but a ^illing Thing, to praise men, to their Faces; yet he did it,
with such Advantage of Truth; and avoydance of Flattery, and with such life; As
the Hearers were so ravished with it, that they plucked the Roses off from
their Garlands, and threw them upon him: As the Manner of Applauses, then, was:
Alexander was not pleased with it, and, by way of Discountenance, said, It was
easy, to be a good Orator, in a pleasing Theme. But, (says he to
Callisthenes,) turn your style, and tell us now of our Faults, that we may,
have the profit, and not you only the praise. Which he presently did, with
such a force, and so piquantly, that Alexander said; The Goodness of his Theme
had made him Eloquent before: But now it was the Malice of his heart, that had
inspired him: 1. Sir, I shall no fall, into either of those two Extremes,
Concerning the Laws of England: They commend themselves, best to them, that
understand them: And your Majesty's, Chief Justice of your Bench, has, in his
Writings, magnified them, not with out Cause: Certainly, they are Wise, they
are Just, and Moderate, Laws; They give to God; They give to Caesar; They give
to the Subjects; that which appertains. It is true, They are as mixed, as our
Language, compounded of Brit^ish, R^man, Saxon, Danish, Norman, Customs. And
as our Language, is so much the Richer, so the Laws, are the more complete;
Neither does this attribute less to them, then those, that would have them, to
have stood out the same, in all Mutations; For no ^ree, is so good, first set,
as by Transplanting. 2. As for the Second Extreme; I have nothing to do with
it, by way, of Taxing the Laws. I speak, only, by way of Perfitting them:
Which is easiest in the b^st things; For that, which is far amiss, hardly
receives Amendment; But that, which has already; To that, more may be Given.
^esides, what I shall propound, is not, to the Matter of the Laws, but to the
Manner, of their Registry, Expression, and Tradition: So that, it gives them
rather Light, then any new Nature. This being so, for the Dignity, of the
Work, I know, scarcely, where to find the like; For, surely, that Scale, and
those Degrees, of Sovereign Honor, are true, and rightly marshalled. First,
the Founders of Estates; Then the Law givers; Then the Deliverers, and
Saviors, after long Calamities; Then the Fa^hers of their Countries; Which are
Just, and Prudent, Prince^; And Lastly, Conquerors, which Honor, is not to be
received, amongst the rest; Except it be, where there is an addition of more
Country, and Territory, to a better Government, then that was of the Conquered.
Of these in my Judgment, your Majesty, may, with more truth, then flattery, be
entitled, to the first; because of your Uniting of Britain, and Planting
Ireland; Both which savou^ of the Founder. That, which I now propound to you, may
adopt you, also, into the Second: Lawgivers, have Been called, Principes
Perpe^ui; Because, as Bishop Gardner said, in a bad Sense, that he would be
Bishop, an hundred years, after his death, in respect of the Long Leases he
made: So Lawgivers, are still Kings, and Rulers, after their Decease, in their
Laws. But this Work, shining so in it self, needs no Taper. For the safety,
and convenience, thereof; It is good to consider, and to answer those
Objectious, or Scruples, which may arise, or be made, against this Work.


Obj. 1. That it is a Thing needless; And that the Law, as it now is, is in
good Estate; Comparable to any Foreign Law; And that, it is not possible, for
the Wit of Man, in respect of the Frailty thereof, to provide, against the
Incertainties, and Evasions, or Omissions, of Law.

Resp. For the Comparison, with Foreign Laws, it is in vain, to speak of it;
For men will never agree about it. Our Lawyers, will maintain, for our
Municipall Laws; Civilians, Scholars, Travaillers, will be of the other
Opinion.

But Certain it is, that our Laws, as they now stand, are subject to great
Incertainties, and variety of Opinion, Delays, and Evasions; Whereof ensues.

1. That the Multiplicity, and length of Suites, is great. 2. That the
Contentious Person, is armed, and the Honest Subject, Wearied, and Oppressed.
3. That the Judge, is more Absolute; Who, in doubtful Cases, has a greater
stroke, and Liberty. 4. That the Chancery Courts, are more filled, the Remedy
of Law, being often obscure, and d^^^^f^ll. 5. That the ignorant Lawy^r,
shrowdeth his Ignorance of Law, in that, doubts are so frequent, and many. 6.
That Men's Assurances, of their Lands, and ^sta^e^, by Patents, Deeds, Wills,
are often subject to question, and hollow; And many the like Inconveni^nc^es.
It is a good Rule, and Direction, (For that all Laws, Secundum Magis and
Minus, do participate of Incertainties,) That fol^oweth: Mark, whether the
Doubts, that arise, are, only, in Cases of Ordinary Experience, Or, which
ha^pen not every day? ^f in the first, Only, impute it to frailty, of Man^
^oresight, that cannot reach, by Law, to all Cases: But if in the L^tt^r; be
assured, there is a fault in the Law. Of this, I say no more, but, that, (To
give every Man his Due,) Had it not been, for S^. Edward Cooks Reports,
(which, though they may have Errors, and some peremptory, and Extrajudiciall
Resolutions, more then are warranted: Yet they contain, infinite good
Decisions, and Rulings over, of Cases.)

The Law, by this Time, had been, almost, like a Ship, without ballast; For
that the Cases, of Modern Experience, are fled from those, that are adjudged,
and ruled, in Former time. But the Necessity, of this Work, is yet greater, in
the Statute Law. For First, there are a number, of Ensnaring, Penal Laws,
which lay upon the Subject; And if, in bad times, they should be awaked, and
put in Execution, would grind them to powder.

There is a learned Civilian, that expounds, the Curse of the Prophet: Pluet
super eos Laqueos, of Multitude, of Penal Laws: Which are worse, then showers
of Hayle, or Tempest, upon Cattle; for they fall upon Men.

There are some Penal Laws, fit to be retained, but t^^ir ^enalty too great,
And it is ever a Rule, that any ov^^ great Penalty, (besides the Acerbity of
it,) deads the Execution of the Law.

There is a further Inconvenience, of Penal Laws, Obsolete, and out of Use;
For that it brings a Gangrene, Neglect, and Habit Disobedience, upon other
wholesome Laws, that are fit to be continued, in Practice, and Execution: So
that our Laws, endure the Torment of Mezentius.

The living die in the Arms of the dead.
Lastly, there is, such an Accumulation, of Statutes, concerning one matter;
And they so cross, and intricate, as the Certainty of Law, is lost in the
Heap; As your Majesty, had Experience, last day, upon the Point: Whether the
Incend^ary of New Market, should have the benefit, of his Clergy.

Obj. 1. That it is a great Innovation; And Innovations, are dangerous, beyond
foresight.

Resp. All Purgings, and Medecines, either in the Civil, or Natural, Body,
are Innovations. So as that Argument, is a Common place, against all Noble
Reformations. But the tr^th is, that this work, ought not to be termed, or
held, for any Innovation, in the suspected sense. For those are the
Innovations, which are quarrelled, and spoken against, that concern the
Consciences, Estates, and Fortunes, of particular persons: But this of General
Ordinance, pricketh not particulars, but passes Sine Strepi^u. Besides, it is
on the favorable part: For it eases, it presses not: And lastly, it is,
rather, matter, of Order, and explanation, then of Alteration. Neither is this,
without President, in former Governments.

The Romans, by their Decemvirs, did make their Twelve Tables; But that was,
indeed, a new Enacting, or Constituting, of Laws, Not a Registring, or
Recompiling: And they were made, out of the Laws, of the Graecians, not out of
their own Customs.

In Athens, they had Sexvir, which were standing Commissioners, to watch, and
to discern, what Laws, waxed unproper, for the Time; And what new Law, did, in
any branch, cross, a former Law, and so, Ex Officio, propounded their Repeales.

King Lewis, the 11th. of France, had it in his intention, to have made, one
perfect, and uniform, Law, out of the Civil Law Roman, and the Povinciall
Customs, of France.

Justinian, the Emperor, by Commissions, directed, to diverse persons, Learned
in the Laws, reduced the Roman Laws, from Vastness of Volume, and a Labyrinth
of incertainties, Unto that course, of the Civil Law, which is now in use. I
find, here at home, of late years, That King Henry the 8th. in the Twenty
seventh of his Reign, was authorized, by Parliament, to nominate Thirty two
Commissioners, part Ecclesiastical, part Temporal, to purge the Canon Law,
and to make it agreeable, to the Law of God, and the Law, of the Realm; And the
same was revived, in the Fourth year, of Edward the 6th. though neither took
effect.

For the Laws of Lycurgus, Solon, Ninos, and others, of ancient time, they are
not the worse, because Grammar Scholars, speak of them. But things too
ancient, wax Children, with us again.

Edgar, the Saxon King, collected, the Laws of this Kingdom, and gave them
the Strength, of a Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed.

The Statutes, of King Edward, the First, were fundamental; But I doubt I err,
in producing so many Examples; For, as Cicero says to Caesar, so may I say, to
your Majesty: Nil Vulgar te Dignum Videri possit.


Obj. 3. In this purging, of the course, of the Common Laws, and Statutes,
much good may be taken away.

Resp. In all Purging, some good Humors, may pass away; But that, is largely
recompensed, by Lightning, the Body, of much bad.

Obj. 4. Labor were better bestowed, in bringing the Common Laws, of England,
to a Text Law, as the Statutes are; And setting, both of them down, in Method,
and by Titles.

Resp. It is too long a Business, to debate, whether Lex Scripta, aut non
Scripta, A Text Law, or Customs well registered, with received, and approved
Grounds, and Maxims, and Acts, and Resolutions Judicial, from Time to Time,
duly entered, and reported; Be the better Form, of Declaring, and Authorizing,
Laws: It was the principal Reason, or Oracle, of Lycurgus; That none, of his
Laws, should be written. Customs, are Laws written, in Living Tables: And
some Traditions, the Church does not disauthorize. In all Sciences, they are
the soundest, that keep close to Particulars; And sure I am, there are more
Doubts, that rise upon our Statutes, which are a Text Law, then upon the Common
Law, which is no Text Law. But, howsoever that Question be determined, I dare
not advise to cast the Law, into a new Mould. The work, which I propound^
tends to proyning, and Grafting, the Law; And not, to Plow up and Planting it
again: for such a Remove, I should hold, indeed, for a perilous Innovation.

Obj. 5. It will turn the Judges, Counselors of Law, and Students of Law, to
school again; And make them, to seek, what they shall hold, and advise for
Law; And, it will impose, a new charge, upon all Lawyers, to furnish
themselves, with new Books of Law.

Resp. For the Former of those, ^ouching the new Labor; It is true, it would
follow, if the Law, were new molded, into a Text Law; For then, Men must be
new to begin: And that, is one of the Reasons, for which, I disallow that
Course.

But in the way, that I shall now propound, the entire Body, and Substance of
Law, shall remain; Only discharged, of Idle, and Unprofitable, or Hurtful,
Matter: and Illustrated, by Order, and other Helps, toward the better
Understanding of it, and Judgment thereupon.

For the Latter, touching the new charge, it is not worth the speaking of, in a
matter, of so high importance; It might have been used, of the New
Translation, of the Bible, and such like Works. Books must follow Sciences,
and not Sciences, Books.

The Work it Self; And the Way to Reduce, And Recompile, the Laws of England.
THIS Work, is to be done, (to use some few words, which is the Language of
Action, and Effect,) in this manner.

It consists of two parts: The Digest, or Recompiling, of the Common Laws:
And that of the Statutes.

In the first of these, Three Things are to be done.

1. The Compiling of a Book, De Antiquitatibus Iuris. 2. The Reducing, or
Perfecting, of the Course, or Corpse, of the Common Laws. 3. The Composing, of
certain Introductive, and Auxiliary Books, touching the Study, of the Laws.
For the first of these. All Ancient Records, in your Tower, or else where,
Containing Acts of Parliament, Lords Patents, Commissions, and Judgments, and
the like, are to be Searched, Perused, and Weighed. And out of these, are to be
selected, those that are of most Worth, and Weight; And in order of Time, not
of Titles, (for the more Conformity, with the Yeare-Bookes;) to be set Down,
and Registered; Rarely, in haec Verba; But summed with Judgment, not omitting
any material part: These are to be used, for Reverend Presidents, but not for
Binding Authorities.

For the Second, which is the Maine; There is to be made, a perfect Course, of
the Law, in Serie Temporis, or Yeare-Bookes, (As we call them,) from Edward the
First, to this Day; In the Compiling, of this Course, of Law, or Yeare-Bookes,
The points following, are to be observed.

First, all Cases, which are, at this Day, clearly, no Law; but constantly
ruled, to the contrary, are to be left out: They do but fill the Volumes, and
season the Wits of Students, in a contrary sense of Law. And so likewise, all
Cases, wherein that is solemnly, and long debated, whereof there is now no
Question at all, are to be entered, as Judgments only, and Resolutions; But
without the Arguments, which are now become but frivolous: Yet for the
Observation, of the deeper sort of Lawyers, that they may see, how the Law has
altered, out of which they may pick sometimes good use; I do advise; That upon
the first in time, of those Obsolete Cases, there were a Memorandum set; That,
at that time, the Law, was thus taken, until such a time. etc. Secondly,
^omonymiae, (as Justinian calls them;) That is Cases merely, of Iteration,
and Repetition, are to be purged away; And the Cases, of Identity, which are
best Reported, and Argued, to be retained, instead of the Rest; The Judgments,
nevertheless, to be set down, every one, in time, as they are; But with a
Quotation, or Reference, to the Case, where the Point, is argued at large; but
if the Case, consist, part of Repetition, part of new Matter, The Repetition,
is, only, to be omitted. Thirdly, as to the Antinomiae, Cases Judged to the
Contrary; It were too great a trust, to refer, to the Judgment, of the
Composers, of this work; to decide the Law either way; except there be, a
current stream, of Judgments, of later times: and then, I reckon the Contrary
Cases, amongst Cases Obsolete; of which I have spoken before: Nevertheless,
this diligence would be used, that such Cases of Contradiction, be specially
noted, and coll^cted; to the end, those Doubts, that have been so long
Militant, May either, by assembling, All the Judges, in the Exchequer Chamber,
or by Parliament, be put into certainty. For to do it, by bringing them in
question, under fained parties, is to be disliked. Nil habeat Forum ex scena.
Fourthly, All Idle Quaeries, which are but Seminaries, of Doubts, and
Incertainties, are to be left out, and omitted, and no Quaeries set down, but
of great Doubts, well debated, and left undecided, for difficulty; But no
doubting, or upstarting, Quaeries: Which, though they be touched in Argument,
for Explanation; yet were better to die, then to be put into the Books.
Lastly, Cases Reported, with too great prolixity, would be drawn, into a more
Compendious Report; Not in the Nature of an Abridgement, This Constitution, of
Reporters, I obtained of the King, after I was Chancellor, and there are two,
appointed, with a 100. l. a year, a piece, s^ipend.
but Tautoligies, and Impertinences, to be cut off: As for Misprinting, and
Insensible Reporting, which, many times, confound the Students, that will be,
Obiter, amended; But more principally, if there be any thing in the Report,
which is is not well warranted, by the Record, that is also to be rectified;
The Course being thus Compiled, Then it rests, but for your Majesty^ to
appoint some grave, and sound, Lawyers, with some honorable stipend, to be
Reporters, for the Time to come; And then, this is settled, for all times.
FOR the Auxiliary Books, that Conduce, to the Study, and Science, of the Law,
they are three: Institutions; A Treatise, de Regulis Iuris; And a better Book,
De verborum significationibus, or Terms of the Law. For the Institutions, I
know well there be Books of Introductions, (wherewith Students begin) of good
worth; Specially Littleton, and Fitzherbert; Natura Brevium, But ^hey a^e, no
ways, of the Nature, of an Institutions; The Office whereof, is, to be a Key,
and general preparation, to the Reading, of the Course. And principally, it
ought to have, ^wo Properties; The one, a perspicuous, and clear, Order, o^
Method; And, the other, an Universal Latitude, or Comprehension; That the
Students, may have a little Prae-Notion, of every Thing, Like a Model, toward
a great Building. For the Treatise, de Regulis Iuris, I hold it, of all other
Things, the most important, to the Health, (as I may term it,) and good
Institutions, of any Laws. It is, indeed, like the ballast of a Ship, to keep,
all upright, and stable: But I have seen little, in this kind, either in our
Law, or other Laws, that satisfies me. The naked Rule, or Maxim, does not
the Effect. It must be made useful, by good Differences, Ampliations, and
Limitations, warranted by good Authorities; And this, not by Raising up, of
Quotations, and References, but by Discourse, and Deducement, in a Just
Tractate. In this, I have traveled my ^elf, at the first, more cursorily;
since, with more Diligence; And will go on with it, if God, and your Majesty,
will give me leave. And I do assure your Majesty, I am in good hope, that when,
Sir Edward Cooks Reports, and my Rules, and Decisions, shall come to
Posterity, there will be, (whatsoever is now thought,) Question, who was the
greater Lawyer? For the Books, of the Terms, of the Law, There is a poor
one^ But I wish, a Diligent one, wherein, should be comprised, not only, the
Exposition, of the Terms, of Law; but of the Words, of all ancient Records,
and Presidents.

For the Abridgements, I could wish, if it were possible, that none might use
them, but such, as had read the Course; First, that they might serve, for
Repertories, to Learned Lawyers, and not, to make a Lawyer, in have; But since,
that cannot be, I wish there were a good Abridgement, composed, of the Two that
are exstant, and in better order. So much for the Common Law.

Statute Law.
FOR the Reforming, and Recompiling, of the Statute Law, It consists of Four
parts.

1. The First, to discharge, the Books, of those Statutes, where as, the Case,
by Alteration of time, is vanished; As Lombard^ Jews, Gauls half Pence; etc.
Those may, nevertheless, remain, in the Libraries, for Antiquities, but no
Reprinting of them. The like, of Statutes, long since expired, and clearly
repealed; For if the Repeal be doubtful, it must be so propounded to the
Parliament. 2. The next is, to repeal all Statutes, which are Sleeping, and
not of use, but yet snaring, and in Force; In some of those, it will, perhaps,
be requisite, to substitute, some more Reasonable Law, instead of them,
agreeable to the time; In others, a simple Repeal may suffice. 3. The Third,
that the Grievousnesse, of the Penalty, in many Statutes, be mitigated, though
the Ordinance stand. 4. The last is, the Reducing, of Concurrent Statutes,
heaped one upon another, to one clear, and uniform, Law. Toward thi^, there
has been, already, upon my motion, and your Majesty's Direction, a great deal,
of good pains taken: My Lord Ho^ert, My Self, Sergant Finch, Mr. Hennage
Finch, Mr. Noye, Mr. Hackwell, and others: Whose Labors, being of a great
bulk, it is not fit, now, to trouble your Majesty, with any further
particularity, therein: Only, by this, you may perceive, the Work is already
advanced: But because, this part of the Work, which concerns the Statute
Laws, must of necessity, come to Parliament; And the Houses, will best like
that, which themselves guide; And the Persons, that themselves employ; The way
were, to Imitate, the president, of the Commissioners, for the Canon Laws, in
27. Hen. 8. and 4. Edw. 6. And the Commissioners, for the Union, of the two
Realms. Primo, of your Majesty; And so, to have the Commissioners, named, by
both Houses; but not, with a precedent power, to Conclude; But only, to
prepare, and propound to Pa^liament: This is the best way, I conceive, to
accomplish, this Excellent Work, of Honor, to your Majesty's Times, and of
Good to all Times: Which I submit, to your Majesty's better Judgment.
A FRAGMENT, OF AN ESSAY, OF FAME.
THe Poets make Fame a Monster. They describe her, in Part, finely, and
elegantly; and, in part, gravely, and sententiously. They say, look how many
Feathers she has, so many Eyes she has underneath: So many Tongues; So many
Voices; She pricks up so many Ears.

This is a flourish: There follow excellent Parables; As that, she gathers
strength in going; That she goes upon the ground, and yet hides her head in
the Clouds. That, in the day time, she sits in a Watch Tower, and flies,
most, by night: That she mingleth Things done, with things not done: And that
she is a Terror to great Cities: But that, which passes all the rest, is:
They do recount, that the Earth, Mother of the Giants, that made War against
Jupiter, and were by him destroyed, thereupon, in an anger, brought forth Fame:
For certain it is, That Rebels, figured by the Giants, and Seditious Fames, and
Libels, are but Brothers, and Sisters; Masculine, and Feminine. But now, if a
Man can tame this Monster, and bring her to feed at the hand, and govern her,
and with her fly other ravening Foul, and kill them it is somewhat worth. But
we are infected, with the style of the Poets. To speak now, in a sad, and
serious manner: There is not, in all the Politiques, a Place, less handled,
and more worthy to be handled, then this of Fame. We will, therefore, speak of
these points. What are false Fames; And what are true Fames; And how they may
be best discerned; How Fames, may be sown, and raised; How they may be spread,
and multiplied; And how they may be checked, and laid dead. And other Things,
conc^rning the Nature of ^ame. Fame, is of that force, as there is, scarcely,
any great Action wherein, it has not, a great part; Especi^lly, in the War.
Mucianus undid Vitellius by a Fame, that he scattered; That Vitellius had in
purpose, to remove the Legions of Syria, into Germany; And the Legions of
Germany, into Syria: whereupon the Legions of Syria were infinitely inflamed.
Julius C^sar, took ^ompey unprovided, and laid asleep his industry, and
preparations, by a Fame that he cunningly gave out; How Caesar's own Soldiers
loved him not; And being wearied with the Wa^s, and Laden with the spoils of
Gaul, would forsake him, as soon as he came into Italy. Livia, settled all
things^ for the Succession, of her Son Tiberius, by continual giving out, that
her husband Augustus, was upon Recovery, and amendme^t. And it is an usual
thing, with the Basshawes, to conceal the Death of the great Turk from the
Iannizaries, and men of War, to save the Sacking of Constantinople, and other
Towns, as their Manner i^. Themistocles, made Zerxes, King of Persia poasr a
pace out of ^r^cia, by giving out, that the Graecians, had a purpose, to break
his Bridge, of Ships, which he had made athwart Hellespont. There be a thousand
such like Examples; And the more they are, the less they need to be repeated;
Because a Man, meets with them, every where: Therefore, let all Wise
Governers, have as great a watch, and care, over Fames, as they have, of the
Actions, and Designs themselves.

The rest was not Finished.
Faults Escaped in the Printing.
Page 16. linea. 4. ^or Gulcis, lege, Dulcis: Page 3^. lin. 34. m^st, lege,
most: p. 37. l. 30^ fit, l. fiat: p, 54. l. 18. vel. l. Duel. p. 55. l. ult.
Thnnaus. l. Thuanus: p. 118. l. 10. deen. l. been: Eadem. l. 23. Ordinary. l.
more then Ordinary. p. 132. l 34. peasure. l. pleasure. p. 137. l. 38.
ferraine, l. foreign, Ead. l. 4^. Mean. l. Mean: p. 138. l. 46. there. l.
their: p. 144. l. ult. be. l. he: Ead. lin. linht, l. light: p. 147. l. 37.
Lord: l. Lordship. p. 164. l. 32. Non is repetit Conditionibus Dissidiis l. Non
repetitis Conditionibus Dissidii: p. 208. l. 43. Mesty. l. Majesty: p, 212. l.
14. rue. l. true: p: 218. l. 9. Mad. l. Man: Ead. l. 14. how to l. to how: p.
241. l. 16. a. l. as: p. 246. l, 10. if l. of: page 266. l. 5, Desig. l^ge
Design: 275. l. 28, Sexvir. l. Sexviri. Ead. l. 45: Ninos. l. Minos.

SEVERAL LETTERS, WRITTEN BY THIS Honorable Author, TO QUEEN ELIZABETH, KING
JAMES, DIVERSE LORDS, AND OTHERS.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head, in
Fleetstreet, 1657.

A LETTER To the LORD TREASURER, BVRGHLEY, In Excuse of his SPEECH, in
PARLIAMENT, Against the TRIPLE SVBSIDIE.
It may please your Lordship,
I Was sorry, to find, by your Lordships Speech, yesterday, that my last
Speech, in Parliament, delivered, in discharge of my Conscience, and Duty to
God, her Majesty, and my Country, was offensive. If it were misreported, I
would be glad, to attend your Lordship^ to disavow any thing, I said not; If it
were misconstrued, I would be glad, to expound my self, to exclude any sense, I
meant not. If my Heart be misjudged, by Imputation of Popularity, or
Opposition, by any envious, or officious Informer, I have great wrong; And the
greater, because the Manner of my Speech, did most evidently show, that I spoke
simply; And only, to satisfy my Conscience, and not with any Advantage, or
Policy, to sway the Cause: And my Terms, carried all signification, of Duty,
and Zeal, toward her Majesty, and her Service. It is true, that from the
Beginning, whatsoever was above a Double Subsidy, I did wish, might, (for
president sake) appear to be extraordinary; And, (for Discontents sake,) might
not have been levied, upon the Poorer sort: Though otherwise, I wished it as
Rising, as I think this will prove, and more. This was my mind, I confess it.
And therefore, I most humbly pray, your good Lordship; First, to continue me in
your own good Opinion; And then, to perform the part, of an Honorable Friend,
toward your poor Servant, and Alliance; In drawing her Majesty, to accept, of
the Sincerity, and Simplicity, of my Heart; And to bear with the rest, and
restore me, to her Majesty's Favor.

A Letter to the Lord Treasurer Burghley, recommending his first Suit, touching
the Sollicitors place.
After the remembrance of my most humble Duty,
THough I know, by late Experience, how mindful your Lordship vouchsafes to
be of me, and my poor Fortunes; since it pleased your Lordship, during your
Indisposition, when her Majesty came, to visit your Lordship, to make mention
of me, for my Employment, and preferment; yet being now in the Country, I do
presume, that your Lordship, who of your Self, had so Honorable care of the
matter, will not think it a Trouble, to be solicited therein. My hope is, that
whereas your Lordship told me, her Majesty was somewhat gravelled, upon the
Offense, she took, at my Speech in Parliament, your Lordships favorable, and
good word, (who has assured me, that for your own part, you construed, that I
spoke, to the best,) will be as a good Tide, to remove her from that Shelf. And
it is not unknown to your Lordship, that I was the first, of the Ordinary Sort,
of the Lower House, of Parliament, that spoke for the Subsidy; And that, which
I after spoke in difference, was but in Circumstances of Time, and Manner,
which methinks should be no great Matter, since there is Variety allowed in
Counsel, as a Discord in Music, to make it more perfect. But I may justly
doubt, not so much her Majesty's Impression, upon this particular, as her
Conceit, otherwise, of my Insufficiency; which though I acknowledge to be
great, yet it will be the less, because I purpose, not to divide my self,
between her Majesty, and the Causes of other Men, (as others have done,) but to
attend her Business only; Hoping, that a whole Man, meanly able, may do as
well as Half a Man, better able. And if her Majesty think, that she shall make
an Adventure, in using one, that is rather a Man of Study, than of Practice,
and Experience; Surely, I may remember, to have heard, that my Father, (an
Example, I confess, rather Ready, than Like; was made Solicitor, of the
Augmentation, (a Court of much Business,) when he had never practiced, and was
but 27 years old: And Mr. Brograve, was now, in my time, called to be Attorney
of the Duchy, when he had practiced, little, or nothing: And yet discharged
his place, with great Sufficiency. But these Things, and the like, are, as her
Majesty shall be made capable of them: wherein, knowing what Au^hority, your
Lordships Commendation, has with her Majesty^ I conclude with my Self, that
the Substance of Strength, which I may receive, will be from your Lordship. It
is true, my Life has been so private, as I have had no means, to do your
Lordship service; but yet, as your Lordship knows, I have made offer, of
such, as I could yield: For as God, has given me a mind, to love the Public;
so incidently, I have ever had your Lordship, in singular Admiration; whose
happy Ability, her Majesty has so long used, to her great Honor, and yours.
Besides, that Amendment, of State, or Countenance, which I have received, has
been from your Lordship. And therefore, if your Lordship shall stand, a good
Friend, to your poo^ Allie, you shall but Tueri Opus proprium, which you have
begun. And your Lordship, shall bestow your benefit upon one, that has more
sense of Obligation, than of Self-love. Thus humbly desiring pardon, of so long
a Letter, I wish your Lordship all Happiness. This 7th of June, 1595.

A Letter to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of a New Years Gift.
It may please your Majesty,
ACcording to the Ceremony, of the Time, I would not forget, in all
humbleness, to present your Majesty, with a small New Years Gift: Nothing to
my Mind. And therefore to supply it, I can but pray to God, to give your
Majesty, his New Years Gift; that is, a New year, that shall be, as no year, to
your Body; And as a year, with 2. Harvests to your Coffers; And every other
way, prosperous, and gladsom. And so I remain.

A Letter to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of a New Years Gift.
Most excellent Sovereign Mistress,
THe only New Years Gift, which I can give your Majesty, is that, which God
has given to me: which is, a Mind, in all Humbleness, to wait upon your
Commandments, and Business: Wherein I would to God, that I were hooded, that
I saw less; Or, that I could perform more: For now I am like a Hawk, that
bates, when I see occasion of service, but cannot fly, because I am tied to
another Fist. But mean while, I continue my presumption, of making to your
Majesty, my poor Oblation, of a Garment, as unworthy the Wearing, as his
service that sends it: But the Approach, to your Excellent Person, may give
Worth to both: which is all the Happiness I aspire unto.

A Letter, of Advice, to the Earl of Essex, to take upon him, the Care, of
Irish Causes, when Mr. Secretary Cecill was in France.
My singular good Lord,
I Do write, because I had no time, fully to express my Conceit, to your
Lordship, touching Irish Affairs; considering them, as they may concern, your
Lordship; Knowing, that you will consider them, as they may concern the State.
That it is one of the aptest particulars, that has come, or can come upon the
Stage, for your Lordship, to purchase Honor upon, I am moved to think, for 3.
Reasons. Because, it is ingenerate, in your House, in respect of my Lord, your
Fathers, Noble Attempts: Because, of all the Actions, of State, on foot, at
this time, the Labor rests most, in that particular; And because, the World,
^ill make a kind of Comparison, between those, that set it out of Frame, and
those that bring it into Frame: which kind of Honor, gives the quickest kind
of Reflection. The Transferring this Honor, upon your self, consists in 2.
points: The one, if the Principal Persons employed, come in by you, and depend
upon you: The other, if your Lordship, declare your self, and profess to
undertake, a Care of that Kingdom. For the Persons, it falls out well, that
your Lordship, has had no Interest, in the Persons of Imputation: For neith^r,
Sir William Fitz-Williams, nor Sir John Norrice, was yours. Sir William
Russell, was conceived yours, but was curbed. Sir Coniers Clifford, (as I
conceive it,) depends on you, who is said to do well. And if my Lord of
Ormond, in this Int^rim, does accommodate things well, (as it is said he does,)
I take it, h^ has, always, had good Understanding, with your Lordship: So as
all Things, hitherto, are not only whole, and entire, but of favorable Aspect,
toward your Lordship, if hereafter you choose well. Concerning the Care of
Business, the general, and popular Conceit has been, that Irish Causes have
been much neglected; w^ereby, the Reputation, of better Care, will put Life
into them. But for a Beginning, and Key, to that which shall follow; It were
good, your Lordship, would have, some large, and serious, Conference, with Sir
William Russell, Sir Richard Bingham, the Earl of Toumond, and Mr. Wilbraham;
To know their Relation of the past; Their Opinion of the present; and Their
Advise for the future.

For the Points, of Apposing them, I am too much a Stranger, to the Business,
to deduce them: But, in a general Topique, methinks, the pertinent
Interrogations, must be; Either, of the Possibility, and Means, of Accord; or
of the Nature, of the War; or of the Reformation, of Abuses; Or of the
joining, of Practice with Force, in the Disunion, of the Rebels. If your
Lordship doubt, to put your Sickle, into another Harvest; First, Time brings
it to you, in Mr. Secretaries Absence: Next, being mixed, with matter of War,
it is fittest for you: And lastly, I know, your Lordship, will carry it, with
that Modesty, and Respect, toward Aged Dignity; And that good Correspondence,
toward my dear Kinsman, and your good Friend, now abroad, as no Inconvenience,
may grow that way.

Thus have I played, the Ignorant Statesman; Which I do, to No Body, but your
Lordship; except to the Queen, sometimes, when she traine's me on. But your
Lordship will accept my Duty, and good Meaning; And secure, me, touching the
privatenesse, of that I write.

A Letter, of Advice, to the Earl of Essex, upon the first Treaty, with Tyrone,
1598, before the Earl was nominated, for the Charge of Ireland.
My very good Lord,
COncerning the Advertisements, which your Lordship imparted to me, touching
the State of Ireland, for willing Duties sake, I will set down, to your
Lordship, what Opinion, sprang in my Mind, upon that I read.

The Letter, from the Counsel, there, leaning to mistrust, and dissuade the
Treaty, I do not much rely on, for 3. Causes. First, because it is always, the
Grace, and the Safety, of such a Counsel, to err in Caution: whereunto add,
that it may be, they, or some of them, are not without Envy, toward the
Person, who is used, in treating the Accord. Next, because the Time of this
Treaty, has no show of Dissimulation; For that Tyrone, is now in no straights;
but he is more like a Gamester, that will give over, because he is a Winner,
than because, he has no more Money, in his Purse. Lastly, I do not see, but
those Articles, whereupon they ground their Suspicion, may as well proceed out
of Fear, as out of Falsehood. For the Retaining, the Dependence, of the
Vri^ghts; The protracting, the Admission, of a Sheriff; The Refusing, to give
his Son, for an Hostage; The Holding off, from present Repair, to Dublin; The
Refusing, to go presently to Accord, without including Odonnell, and other his
Associates; May very well come, of an Apprehension, in case he should receive
hard measure; And not out of Treachery. So as, if the great Person, you write
of, be faithful; And that you have not heard, some present Intelligence, of
present Succors, from Spain; (For the Expectation whereof, Tyrone would win
time;) I see no deep Cause, of Distrusting, this Course of Treaty, if the main
Conditions may be good. For her Majesty seems to me, to be a Winner thereby,
3. ways; First, her Purse shall have some Rest: Next, it will divert, the
Foreign Designs, upon the Place: Thirdly, though her Majesty, be like, for a
time, to govern but precario, in the North; And be not, (as to a true Command,)
in better state there, than before; yet, besides the two respects, of Ease of
Charge, and Advantage of Opinion, abroad, before mentioned, she shall have a
time, to use her Princely policy, in 2. points to weaken them. The one, by
Division, and Disunion, of the Heads; The other, by Recovering, and Winning the
People, from them, by Justice; which, of all other Courses, is the best.

Now for the Athenian Question; you discourse well; Quid igitur agendum est? I
will shoot my Fools Bolt, since you will have it so. The Earl of Ormond, to be
encouraged, and comforted. Above all Things, the Garrisons to be instantly
provided for. For Opportunity makes a Thief: And if he should mean never so
well now; yet such an Advantage, as the Breaking, of her Majesty's Garrisons,
might tempt a true Man.

And because, he may as well waver, upon his own Inconstancy, as upon Occasion;
(And wanton Variableness, is never restrained, but by Fear;) I hold it
necessary, he be menaced, with a strong War: Not by Words, but by Musters, and
preparations of Forces, here, in case the Accord proceed not: But none to be
sent over, lest it disturb the Treaty, and make him look to be overrun, as
soon as he has laid away Arms. And but that your Lordship, is too easy, to
pass in such Cases, from Dissimulation, to Verity; I think, if your Lordship
lent your Reputation, in this Case; That is, To pretend, that if Peace go not
on, and the Queen mean to make, not a Defensive War, as in times past, but a
full Reconquest of those parts, of the Country, you would accept the Charge; I
think, it would help, to settle Tyrone, in his seeking Accord, and win you, a
great deal of Honor, gratis.

And that, which most properly concern's, this Action, if it prove a Peace; I
think, her Majesty shall do well, to cure the Root of the Disease; And to
Profess, by a Commission, of Peaceable Men, of Respect, and Countenance, a
Reformation of Abuses, Extortions, and Injustices there; And to plant, a
stronger, and surer Government, than heretofore, for the Ease, and Protection,
of the Subject. For the Removing of the Sword, or Government in Arms, from the
Earl of Ormond; Or the sending of a Deputy, (which will eclipse it,) if Peace
follow, I think it unseasonable.

Lastly, I hold still my Opinion, (both for your better In^ormation, and the
fuller Declaration, of your Care, in Meddling, in this urgent, and meriting
Service,) That your Lordship, have a set Conference, with the persons, I named,
in my former Letter.

A Letter of Advice, to my Lord of Essex, immediately, before his going into
Ireland.
My sigular good Lo^d,
YOur late Note of my Silence, in your Occasions, has made me set down, these
few wandering Lines, as one that would say somewhat, and can say nothing,
touching your Lordships intended Charge for Ireland; Which my Endeavor, I
know, your Lordship will accept graciously; whether your Lordship take it, by
the Handle of Occasion, ministered from your Self; or of the Affection, from
which it proceeds.

Your Lordship, is designed to a Service, of great Merit, and great Peril: And
as the Greatness of the Peril must needs include, a like proportion of Merit:
So the Greatness of the Merit, may include, no small Consequence of Peril, if
it be not temperately governed. For all immoderate Success, extinguisheth
Merit, and stirs up, Distaste, and Envy; The assured Forerunners, of whole
Charges of Peril. But I am at the last point first; Some good Spirit, leading
my Penn, to presage, to your Lordship, success: Wherein, it is true, I am not
without my Oracles, and Divinations; None of them Superstitious, and yet not
all Natural. For first, looking into the Course of Gods Providence, in Things
now depending; And calling to consideration, how great things God has done, by
her Majesty, and for her: I collect, he has disposed, of this great Defection,
in Ireland, thereby, to give an urgent occasion, to the Reduction, of that
whole Kingdom; As upon the Rebellion of Desmond, there insued, the Reduction of
that whole Province.

Next, your Lordship goes against, three of the unluckiest Vices, of all
others; Disloyalty, Ingratitude, and Insolency: Which three Offenses, in all
Examples, have seldom their Doom, adjourned to the world to come.

Lastly, he that shall have had the Honor, to know your Lordship, inwardly, as
I have had, shall find Bona Exta, whereby he may better ground, a Divination of
Good, than upon the Dissection, of a Sacrifice. But that part I leave: For it
is fit ^or others, to be confident upon the cause; The Goodness, and Justice,
whereof, is such, as can hardly be matched, in any Example^ It being no
Ambitious War, against Forreiners, but a Recovery of Subjects; And that, after
Lenity of Conditions, often tried; And a Recovery of them, not only to
Obedience, but to Humanity, and Policy, from more than Indian Barbarism.

There is yet another Kind of Divination, familiar to Matters of State; Being
that, which Demosthenes, so often relied upon, in his time; when he said; That,
which for the time past, is worst of all, is, for the time to come, the best;
which is, that things go^ ill, not by Accident, but by Errors; Wherein, if
your Lordship have been, heretofore, an Awaking Censour, you must look ^or no
other now, but, Medice Cura teipsum: And though, you shall not be the Happy
Physician, that comes in the Declination of the Disease; yet you embrace that
Condition, which many Noble Spirits have accepted for Advantage; which is, that
you go, upon the greater Peril, of your Fortune; and the less, of your
Reputation; And so the Honor countervaileth the Adventure; Of which Honor,
your Lordship is in no small possession; when that her Majesty, (known to be,
one of the most judicious Princes, in discerning of Spirits, that ever
governed,) has made choice of you, (merely out of her Royal Judgment; her
Affection inclining rather to continue your Attendance;) into whose hand, and
trust, to put the Command, and Conduct, of so great Forces; The Gathering the
Fruit of so great Charge; The Execution of so many Counsels; The Redeeming, of
the Defaults, of so many former Governers; The clearing of the Glory, of her so
many happy years Reign, only, in this part, eclipsed: Nay further, how far
forth, the peril of that State, is interlaced with the peril of England; And
therefore, how great the Honor is, to keep, and defend, the Approaches, or
Ave-newes, of this Kingdom, I hear many discourse; And there is a great
Difference, whether the Tortoise, gathers her self, within her shell, hurt,
or unhurt.

And if any Man be of Opinion, that the Nature of the Enemy, does extenuate,
the Honor of the Service, being but a Rebel, and a Savage; I differ from him;
For I see, the justest Triumphs, that the Romans, in their greatness, did
obtain; And that, whereof the Emperors, in their Styles, took Addition, and
Denomination, were of such an Enemy, as this: That is, People Barbarous, and
not reduced to Civility, magnifying a kind of lawless Liberty, and prodigal of
Life, hardened in Body, fortified in Woods and Boggs, and placing both Justice
and Felicity in sharpness of their Swords: Such were the Germans, and ancient
Brittons, and diverse others. Upon which kind of People, whether the Victory
were a Conquest; or a Reconquest, upon a Rebellion, or a Revolt; It made no
difference, (that ever I could find,) in Honor. And therefore, it is not the
Enriching Predatory War, that has the pre-eminence in Honor; Else should it
be more Honor, to bring in a Carick of rich Burden, than one of the 12.
Spanish Apostles. But then, this Nature of People, does yield, a higher point
of Honor, considered in Truth, and Substance, than any war can yield, which
should be achieved, against a Civil Enemy; If the End may be; Pacique imponere
morem, to replant, and refound, the policy of that Nation; To which nothing is
wanting, but a just, and Civil, Government: which Design, as it does descend
unto you, from your Noble Father, who lost his life in that Action, (though he
paid Tribute to Nature, and not to Fortune;) So, I hope your Lordship, shall
be, as Fatal a Captain to this war, as Africanus was to the War of Carthage;
After that both his Uncle, and Father, had lost their Lives, in Spain, in the
same war. Now, although it be true, that these Things, which I write, (being
but Representations, unto your Lordship, of the Honor, and Appearance of
Success, of the Enterpris^;) Be not much, to the purpose, of any Advice; yet
it is that, which is left to me, being no Man of War, and ignorant in the
particulars of Estate. For a Man may, by the Eye, set up the White, in the
midst of the But, though he be no Archer. Therefore I will only add this
VVish, according to the English Phrase, which terms, a well-willing Advice, a
Wish: That your Lordship, in this whole Action, looking forward, would set down
this Position; That Merit is worthier than Fame; And looking back hither, would
remember this Text, That Obedience is better than Sacrifice. For Designing to
Fame, and Glory, may make your Lordship, in the Adventure of your Person, to be
valiant, as a private Soldier, rather than as a General: It may make you, in
your Commandments, rather to be Gracious, than Disciplinary: It may make you
press Action, (in respect of the great Expectation conceived,) rather hastily,
than seasonably, and safely: It may make you, seek rather, to atchieve the war,
by force, than by Intermixture of Practice: It may make you, (if God shall send
prosperous Beginnings,) rather seek the Fruition of that Honor, than the
Perfection, of the work, in hand. And for the other point, that is the
Proceeding, like a good Protestant, upon express warrant, and not upon good
Intention; your Lordship knows, in your wisdom; That as it is most fit for
you, to desire convenient Liberty of Instructions; so it is no less fit for
you, to observe the due Limits of them: Remembering, that the Exceeding of them,
may not only procure, in case of adverse Accident, a dangerous Disavow; But
also, (in case of prosperous Success;) be subject to Interpretation, as if all
were not referred, to the right End.

Thus have I presumed, to write these few Lines, to your Lordship, in Methodo
Ignorantiae; which is, when a Man speaks of a Subject, not according to the
Matter, but according to the Model, of his own Knowledge^ And most humbly
desire your Lordship, that the weakness thereof, may be supplied, in your
Lordship, by a benign Acceptance, as it is in me, by my best VVishing.

A Letter to the Earl of Essex, in offer of his Service, when he was first
enlarged, to Essex House.
My Lord;
NO Man can expound my Doings better, than your Lordship; which makes me need
to say the less: Only, I humbly pray you to believe, that I aspire to the
Conscience, and Commendation, of Bonus Civis, and Bonus Vir; And that, though I
love some Things, better, (I confess,) than I love your Lordship, yet I love
few Persons better; Both for Gratitudes sake, and for your Virtues; which
cannot hurt, but by Accident; Of which my good Affection, it may please your
Lordship, to assure your self; And of all the true Effects, and Offices, I can
yield. For as I was ever sorry, your Lordship should fly, with waxen Wings,
doubting Icarus Fortune; So for the growing, up of your own Feathers, be they
Estridges, or other kind, no man shall be more glad. And this is the
Axill-Tree, whereon I have turned, and shall turn. Which having already
signified, to you, by some near mean, having so fit a Messenger, for mine own
Letter, I thought good, also, to redouble by Writing. And so I commend you to
Gods Protection. From Graies Inn, this 9th of July, 1600.

An Answer, of my Lord of Essex, to the immediately preceding Letter, of Mr.
Bacons.
Mr. Bacon;
I Can neither Expound, nor Censure, your late Actions; Being ignorant, of all
of them, save one; And having directed my Sight inward only, to examine my
Self. You do pray me to believe, that you only aspire, to the Conscience, and
Commendation, of Bonus Civis, and Bonus Vir; And I do faithfully assure you,
that while that is your Ambition, (though your Course be Active, and Mind
Contemplative,) yet we shall both, Convenire in eodem Tertio; And, Convenire
inter Nosipsos. Your Profession of Affection, and Offer of good Offices, are
welcome to me: For answer to them, I will say but this; That you have believed,
I have been kind to you; And you may believe, that I cannot be other, either
upon Humor, or mine own Election. I am a stranger, to all Poetical Conceits,
or else I should say somewhat, of your Poetical Example. But this I must say;
That I never flew, with other Wings, than Desire to merit; And Confidence in my
Sovereigns Favor; And when one of these Wings failed me, I would light no
where, but at my Sovereigns Feet, though she suffered me, to be bruised, with
my fall. And till her Majesty, that knows, I was never Bird of Prey, finds it
to agree with her will, and her Service, that my Wings should be imped again, I
have committed my Self, to the Mue. No power, but my Gods, and my Sovereigns,
can alter this Resolution, of

Your Retired Friend, ESSEX.

Two Letters framed, the one, as from Mr. Anthony Bacon, to the Earl of Essex;
The other, as the Earls Answer thereunto, delivered to Sir Francis Bacon, with
the Advice of Mr. Anthony Bacon, his Brother, to be showed to the Queen, upon
some fit occasion; As a Mean, to work her Majesty, to receive the Earl again,
to Favor and Attendance, at Court: They were devised, whils^ my Lord remained
Prisoner, in his own House.
My singular good Lord;
THis standing at a stay, in your Lordships Fortunes, does make me, in my Love
toward your Lordship, jealous, lest you do somewhat, or omit somewhat, that
amounts to a new Error. For I suppose, of all former Matters, there is a full
Expiation: wherein, for any thing that your Lordship does, I, for my part, (who
am remote,) cannot cast, nor devise, wherein any Error should be; except in
one point, which I dare not censure, nor dissuade: which is, that (as the
Prophet says,) In this Affliction, you look up, ad Manum Percutientem, and so
make your peace with God. And yet I heard it noted, that my Lord of Leicester,
(who could never get to be taken for a Saint, nevertheless in the Queens
Disfavour,) waxed seeming Religious: which may be thought by some, and used by
others, as a Case resembling yours; If Men do not see, or will not see, the
difference between your two Dispositions. But to be plain with your Lordship,
my Fear rather is, because I hear, how some of your good, and wise, Friends,
not unpractised in the Court, and supposing themselves, not to be unseen, in
that deep, and unscrutable, Center of the Court, which is her Majesty's Mind,
do not only toll the Bell, but even ring out Peals, as if your Fortune were
dead, and buried; And as if, there were no possibility, of recovering her
Majesty's Favor; And as if, the best of your Condition, were to live, a
private, and retired Life, out of Want, out of Peril, and out of manifest
disgrace; And so in this persuasion of theirs, include a persuasion to your
Lordship, to frame, and accommodate your Actions, and Mind, to that End: I
fear, I say, that this untimely Despair, may, in time, bring forth, a just
Despair, by causing your Lordship, to slacken, and break off your wise, loyal,
and Seasonable, Endeavors, and Industries, for Reintegration to her Majesty's
favor: In Comparison whereof, all other Circumstances, are but as Atomi; or
rather, as Vacuum, without any Substance at all. Against this Opinion, it may
please your Lordship, to consider, of these Reasons, which I have collected;
And to make judgment of them; Neither out of the Melancholy, of your present
Fortune; nor out of the Infusion of that, which comes to you, by others
Relation, (which is subject to much Tincture;) But ex Rebus ipsis, Out o^ the
Nature, of the Persons, and Actions, themselves; As the trustiest, and least
deceiving Grounds, of Opinion. For though I am so unfortunate, as to be a
stranger to her Majesty's Eye, and to her Nature; yet by that which is
apparent, I do manifestly discern, that she has the Character, of the Divine
Nature, and Goodness; Quos amavit, amavit usque ad sinem; And where she has a
Creature, she does not deface, nor defeat it: Insomuch, as if I observe
rightly, in those persons, whom heretofore she has honored, with her special
Favor, she has covered, and remitted, not only Defects, and Ingratitudes, in
Affection, but Errors in State, and Service. Secondly, if I can spell, and
Scholar-like put together, the parts of her Majesty's proceeding, now toward
your Lordship; I cannot but make this Construction; That her Majesty, in her
Royal Intention, never purposed, to call your Lordships Doings, into public
Question; But only, to have used a Cloud, without a Shower, in censuring them,
by some temporary Restraint only, of Liberty, and debarring from her presence.
For first, the Handling the Cause in the Starr-Chamber, you not called, was
enforced, by the Violence, of Libelling, and Rumors; (wherein the Queen
thought to have satisfied the world, and yet spared your Lordships Appearance;)
And after, when that Means, which was intended, for the Quenching, of malicious
Brutes, turned to kindle them; (Because it was said, your Lordship, was
condemned unheard; And your Lordships Sister wrote that piquant Letter,) then
her Majesty saw plainly, that these winds of Rumors, could not be commanded
down, without a Handling of the Cause, by Making you Party, and Admitting your
Defense. And to this purpose, I do assure your Lordship, that my Brother,
Francis Bacon, who is too wise, (I think) to be abused, and too honest, to
abuse; Though he be more reserved, in all particulars, than is needful; yet, in
generality, he has ever constantly, and with asseveration, affirmed to me,
that both those Days; That of the Starr-Chamber, and that at my Lord Keepers,
were won from the Queen, merely upon necessity, and point of Honor, against
her own Inclination. Thirdly, in the last proceeding, I note 3. points; which
are directly signi^icant, That her Majesty, did expressly forbear, any point,
which was Irreparable, or might make your Lordship, in any degree, incapable,
of the return of her favor; Or might fix, any Character Indeleble, of disgrace
upon you: For she spared, the Public Place, of the Starr-Chamber: She limited
the Charge, precisely, not to touch Disloyalty; And no Record remains to
Memory, of the Charge, or Sentence. Fourthly, the very Distinction, which was
made, in the Sentence, of Sequestration, from the places of Service in State;
And leaving to your Lordship, the Place, of Master of the Horse, does, to my
understanding, indicative, point at this; That her Majesty meant, to use your
Lordships Attendance in Court, while the Exercises, of the other places, stood
suspended. Fifthly, I have heard, and your Lordship knows better, that now,
since you were in your own Custody, her Majesty, in Verbo Regio, and by his
Mouth, by whom she commits, her Royal Graunts, and Decrees, has assured
your Lordship, she will forbid, and not suffer, your Ruin. Sixthly, as I have
heard, her Majesty, to be a Prince, of that Magnanimity, that she will spare,
the Service, of the ablest Subject, or Peer, when she shall be thought, to
stand in need of it: So she is, of that Policy, as she will not loose, the
Service, of a meaner than your Lordship, where it shall depend, merely, upon
her Choice, and Will. Seventhly, I hold it for a Principle; That those
Diseases, a^e hardest to cure, whereof the Cause is obscure; And those easiest,
whereof the Cause is manifest: VVhereupon I conclude, that since it has been
your Error, in your Courses, toward her Majesty, which has prejudiced you;
That your Reforming, and Conformity, will restore you; So as you may be Faber
Fortunae propriae. Lastly, considering your Lordship, is removed, from Dealing
in Causes of State, and left only to a Place of Attendance; Methinks, the
Ambition of any Man, who can endure no Partners, in State-Matters, may be so
quenched, as they should not, laboriously, oppose themselves, to your Being in
Court: So as upon the whole Matter, I cannot find, neither in her Majesty's
Person, nor in your own Person, nor in any third Person; Neither in former
Presidents, nor in your own Case, any Cause, of dry, and peremptory, Despair.
Neither do I speak this, but that if her Majesty, out of her Resolution, would
design you, to a private Life, you should be as willing, upon her Appointment,
to go into the Wilderness, as into the Land of Promise. Only, I wish your
Lordship, will not preoccupate Despair, but put trust, next to God, in her
Majesty's Grace; and not to be wanting to your Self. I know your Lordship, may
justly interpret, that this, which I persuade, may have some reference to my
particular; because I may truly say; Te Stante, Non Virebo, (For I am withered
in my self;) but Manebo, or Tenebo; I shall, in some sort, be, or hold out. But
though your Lordships Years, and Health, may expect return of Grace, and
Fortune; yet your Eclipse for a time, is an Vltimum Vale, to my Fortune: And
were it not, that I desire, and hope, to see my Brother established, by her
Majesty's favor; (as I think him well worthy, for that he has done, and
suffered,) it were time, I did take that Course, from which I dissuade your
Lordship. But now in the mean time, I cannot choose, but perform, those honest
Duties, unto you, to whom I have been so deeply bounden.

A Letter, framed, as from the Earl, in answer, of the former Letter.
Mr. Bacon,
I Thank you, for your kind, and careful Letter. It persuades me that, which I
wish strongly, and hope for weakly; That is, Possibility of Restitution, to her
Majesty's Favor: Your Arguments, that would cherish Hope, turn to Despair. You
say the Queen, never meant, to call me to Public Censure, which shows her
Goodness: But you see I passed it, which shows others Power. I believe most
steadfastly, her Majesty never intended, to bring my Cause, to a Sentence; And I
believe as ver^ly, that since that Sentence, she meant to restore me, to attend
upon her Person. But they that could use occasions (which was not in me to
let,) and amplify Occasions, and practice Occasions, to represent to her
Majesty, a Necessity, to bring me to the one, can, and will, do the like, to
stop me from the other. You say, my Errors, were my Prejudice, and therefore I
can mend my Self: It is true; But they that know, that I can mend my Self; And
that if ever, I recover the Queen, that I will never loose her again; will
never suffer me, to obtain Interest, in her favor. And you say, the Queen
never forsook utterly, where she inwardly favored: But I know not, whether the
Hour-glasse of time, has altered her; But sure I am, The false Glass, of
others Informations, must alter her, when I want access to plead mine own
Cause. I know, I ought doubly, to be her Majesty's; Both Iure Creationis; For I
am her Creature: And Iure Redemptionis; For, I know, she has saved me, from
Overthrow. But for her first Love, and for her last Protection, and all her
great Benefits, I can but pray for her Majesty; And my Endeavors, are now, to
make, my Prayers for her Majesty, and my Self, better heard. For thanks be to
God, they that can make, her Majesty believe, I counterfeit with her, cannot
make God believe, that I counterfeit with him: And they which can let me, from
coming near unto her, cannot let me, from drawing near unto him, as I hope I
do daily. For your Brother, I hold him an honest Gentleman, and wish him all
good; Much rather, for your Sake. Your self, I know, has suffered more for me,
than any Friend I have: But I cannot but lament freely, as you see I do; And
advise you, not to do that, which I do; which is, to despair. You know
Letters, what hurt they have done me; And therefor make sure of this: And yet
I could not, (as having no other Pledge of my Love,) but communicat^ freely
with you, for the Ease of my Heart, and yours.

A Letter to Mr. Secretary Cecill, after the Defeating, of the Spanish Forces,
in Ireland; Inciting him, to em^race the Care, of Reducing that Kingdom, to
Civility; with some reasons sent, enclosed.
It may please your Honor,
AS one, that wishes you, all Increase of Honor; And as one, that cannot
leave, to love the State, (what Interest soever I have, or may come, to have in
it;) And as one, that now this dead Vacation time, has some Leisure, ad aliud
agendum; I will presume, to propound unto you, that, which though you cannot
but see, yet I know not, whether you apprehend, and esteem it, in so high a
degree; That is, for the best Action, of Importation to your self; Of sound
Honor and Merit, to her Majesty, and this Crown; without Ventosity, and
Popularity, that the Riches, of any Occasion, or the Tide, of any Opportunity,
can possibly minister, or offer. And that is, the Causes of Ireland, if they be
taken, by the right Handle. For if the Wound, be not ripped up again, and come
to a Recrudency, by new Foreign Succors, I think, that no Physician, will go
on much, with letting Blood, In Declinatione Morbi; But will intend, to Purge,
and Corroborate. To which purpose, I send you mine Opinion, without Labor of
Words, in the Enclosed; And sure I am, that if you shall enter into the matter,
according to the Vivacity, of your own Spirit, nothing can make unto you, a
more gainful return. For you shall make the Queens Felicity complete, which
now, (as it is,) is incomparable; And for your Self, you shall show your self,
as good a Patriot, as you are thought a Politic; And make the World perceive,
you have not less Generous Ends, than Dexterous Delivery, of your self,
toward your Ends; And that you have, as well true Arts, and Grounds of
Government, as the Facility, and Felicity, of Practice, and Negotiation; And
that you are as well seen, in the Periods, and Tides, of Estates, as in your
own Circle, and Way: Than the which, I suppose, nothing, can be a better
Addition, and Accumulation, of Honor, unto you. This, I hope, I may in
privatenesse, write, either as a Kinsman, that may be bold; or a Scholar, that
has Liberty of Discourse, without Committing any Absurdity. But if it seem any
Error in me, thus to intromit my self; I pray your Honor, believe, I ever
loved her Majesty, and the State, and now love your Self; And there is never
any veh^ment Love, without some Absurdity; As the Spaniard well says; Desuario
con la Calentura. So desiring your Honors pardon, I ever continue.

Considerations, touching the Queens Service, in IRELAND.
THe Reduction, of that Country, as well to Civility, and Justice, as to
Obedience, and Peace, (which things, as Affairs now stand, I hold to be
Inseparable,) consists in 4. Points.

1. The Extinguishing, of the Relics, of the War. 2. The Recovery, of the
Hearts, of the People. 3. The Removing, of the Root, and Occasions, of new
Troubles. 4. Plantations, and Buildings.
For the first: Concerning the Places, and Times, and Particularities, of
further Prosecution, in fact, I leave it, to the Opinion, of Men of War;
Only the Difficulty is, to distinguish, and discern, the Propositions, which
shall be, according to the Ends, of the State here; (That is, final, and
summary, toward the Extirpation, of the Troubles;) From those, which though
they pretend Public Ends, yet may referr, indeed, to the more Private, and
Compendious Ends, of the Council there; or the particular Governers, or
Captains. But still, (as I touched in my Letter,) I do think, much Letting
Blood, In Declinatione Morbi, is against Method of Cure; And that it will, but
enduce Necessity, and exasperate Despair; And, percase, discover the
Hollownesse of that, which is done already, which now blazeth to the best show.
For Iaglia's, and Pros^riptions, of 2. or 3. of the principal Rebels, they are,
no doubt, Iure Gentium, lawful; In Italy, usually practiced, upon the Banditi;
Best in season, where a Side goes down: And may do good, in two Kinds; The
one, if they take Effect; The other, in the Distrust, which may follow, amongst
the Rebels themselves. But of all other points, to my Understanding, the most
Effectual is, the well Expressing, or Impressing, the Design of this State,
upon that miserable, and desolate, Kingdom; Containing the same, between these
two Lists, or Boundaries: The one, that the Queen, seeks not, an Extirpation
of that People, but a Reduction; And that now, she has chastised them, by her
Royal Power, and Arms, according to the Necessity of the Occasion; Her Majesty,
takes no pleasure, in Effusion of Blood, or Displanting of Ancient
Generations. The other, that her Ma^esties Princely Care, is, principally, and
intentionally, bent, upon the Action of Ireland: And that she seeks not, so
much, the Ease of Charge, as the Royal performance, of the Office of
Protection, and Reclaim, of those her Subjects: And, in a word, that the Case
is altered so far, as may stand, with the Honor, of the Time past. And again,
I do repeat, that if her Majesty's Design be, ex Professo, to Reduce Rebels
to Obedience, it makes weakness turn Christianity; and Conditions Graces: And
so has a Finenesse, in Turning Utility, upon Point of Honor; which is
agreeable, to the Humor, of these Times. And besides, if her Majesty, shall
suddenly aba^e, the Lists of their Forces, and shall do nothing to
countervail it, in point of Reputation, of a Politic Proceeding, I doubt,
Things may, too soon fall back, into the state they were in. Next to this.
Adding Reputation to the Cause, by Imprinting an Opinion, of her M^jesties
Care, an^ Intention, upon this Action, is the Taking away, of Reputation, from
the Contrary side, by Cutting off, the Opinion, and Reputation, of Foreign
Succors; To which purpose, this Enterprise of Algiers, (if it hold according
to the Advertisement, and if it be not wrapped up, in the Period of this
Summer,) seems, to be an Opportunity, coelitus dimissa. And to the same
purpose, nothing can be more fit, than a Treaty, or a Shadow, of a Treaty, of a
Peace, with Spain; which, methinks, should be in our Power to fasten, at least
Rumore tenus, to the Deluding, of as wise People, as the Irish. Lastly, for
this point; That which the Ancients called, Potestas facta, redeundi ad
Sanitatem; And, which is but a Mockery, when the Enemy is strong, or proud, but
Effectual in his Declination; That is, A liberal Proclamation, of Grace, and
Pardon, to such as shall submit, and come in within a time prefixed; And of
some other Reward, to such, as shall bring others in; That one's Sword^ may be
sharpened by another; Is a Matter of good Experience, and now, I think, will
come in time. And percase^ though I wish the Exclusions, of such a pardon,
exceeding few, yet it will not be safe, to continue some of them, in their
Strength; But to translate them, and their Generations, into England: And give
them Recompense, and Satisfaction here, for their Possessions there; As the
King of Spain did, by diverse Families, of Portugal. To the Effecting, of all
the points, aforesaid; And likewise, those which fall, within the Divisions
following, nothing can be in priority, (either of Time, or Matter,) better,
than the sending of some Commission, of Countenance, Ad Res inspiciendas, and
componendas: For it will be a very significant Demonstration, of her Majesty's
Care, of that Kingdom; A Credence, to any, that shall come in, and submit; A
Bridle, to any, that shall have their Fortunes there, and shall apply, their
Propositions, to private Ends; And an Evidence, that her Majesty, after Arms
laid down, speedily pursues, a Politic Course, without Neglect, or
Respiration: And it has been the Wisdom of the best Examples of Government.

Toward the Recovery, of the Hearts of the People, there be but 3. things in
Natura Rerum.

1. Religion. 2. Justice, and Protection. 3. Obligation, and Reward.
For Religion, (to speak first of Piety, and then of Policy,) all Divines do
agree; That if Consciences, be to be enforced, at all, (wherein yet they
differ) two Things must precede their Inforcement: The one, Means of
Instruction; The other, Time of Operation: Neither of which they have yet had.
Besides, till they be more like Reasonable Men, than they are, their Society,
were rather Scandalous to the true Religion, than otherwise; As Pearls cast
before Swine; For till they be cleansed, from their Blood, Incontinency, and
Theft, (which are now, not the Lapses, of particular Persons, but the very
Laws of the Nation,) they are Incompatible, with Religion Reformed. For
Policy, there is no doubt, but to wrestle with them now, is directly opposite
to their Reclaiming, and cannot but continue, their Alienation of Mind, from
this Government. Besides, one of the principal Pretenses, whereby the Heads of
the Rebellion, have prevailed, both with the People, and with the Forreiner,
has been, the Defense, of the Catholic Religion: And it is that likewise,
has made the Forreiner, reciprocally, more plausible with the Rebel.
Therefore a Toleration of Religion, (for a Time, not definite,) except it be in
some Principal Towns, and Precincts; After the manner of some French Edicts,
seems to me, to be a Matter, warrantable by Religion, and in Policy, of
absolute Necessity. And the Hesitation, in this point, (I think,) has been, a
great Casting back, of the Affairs there. Neither if any English Papi^t, or
Recusant, shall for Liberty of his Conscience, transfer his Person, Family,
and Fortunes thither, do I hold it, a Matter of Danger, but expedient, to draw
on Undertaking, and to further Population. Neither if Rome, will cozen it Self,
by Conceiving, it may be some Degree, to the like Toleration, in England, do I
hold it, a matter of any Moment; But rather, a good Mean, to take off, the
Fierceness, and Eagerness, of the Humor of Rome; And to stay, further
Excommunications, or Interdictions, for Ireland. But there would go, hand in
hand, with this, some Course of Advancing Religion, indeed, where the People is
capable thereof: As the sending over, some good Preachers, especially of that
Sort, which are vehement, and zealous Perswaders, and not Scholastical; To be
resident in principal Towns; Endowing them, with some Stipends, out of her
Majesty's Revenues; As her Majesty has, most religiously, and graciously done,
in Lancashire: And the Recontinuing, and Replenishing the College, begun at
Dublin; The placing of good Men, to be Bishops there; And the Taking Care, of
the Versions, of Bibles, Catechisms, and other Books of Instruction, into the
Irish Language; And the like Religious Courses; Both for the Honor of God, and
for the Avoiding of Scandal, and Insatisfaction here, by the show of a
Toleration of Religion, in some parts there.

For Justice, the Barbarism, and Desolation of the Country, considered, it is
not possible, they should find, any Sweetness^ at all, of Justice; If it shall
be, (which has been the Error, of Times past,) Formal, and fetched far off
from the State; Because, it will require, running up and down, for Process; And
give Occasion, for Polling, and Exactions by Fees; And many other Delays, and
Charges. And therefore, there must be an Interim, in which, the Justice must be
only Summary; the rather, because it is fit, and safe, for a time, the Country
do participate of Martial Government: And therefore, I could wish, in every
principal Town, or Place, of Habitation, there were a Captain, or Governer; And
a Judge; such as Recorders, and Learned Stewards, are here in Corporations; who
may have a Prerogative Commission, to hear, and determine, Secundum sanam
Discretionem; And as near, as may be, to the Laws, and Customs of England; And
that, by Bill, or Pleint, without Original Writ; Reserving from their Sentence,
matter of Freehold, and Inheritance, to be determined, by a superior Judge,
Itinerant: And both Sentences, as well of the Bayliffwick Judge, as Itinerant,
to be reversed, (if Cause be,) before the Counsel, of the Province, to be
established there, with fit Instructions.

For Obligation, and Reward; It is true, (no doubt,) which was aunciently said;
That a State, is contained, in two Words, Praemium, and Poena. And I am
persuaded, if a Penny in the Pound, which has been spent i^ Poena, (For this
kind of War is but poena, a chastisement of Rebels, without Fruit, or
Emolument, to this State;) had been spent in praemio, that is, in Rewarding,
Things had never grown to this Extremity. But to speak forwards. The keeping of
the Principal Irish persons, in Terms of Contentment, and without Cause of
particular Complaint; And, generally, the Carrying of an even Course, between
the English, and the Irish; Whether it be in Competition; or whether it be in
Controversy; as if they were one Nation; (without that same partial Course,
which has been held, by the Governers, and Counselors, there, that some have
favored the Irish, and some contrary;) Is one of the best Medicines of State.
And as for other Points of Contentment; As the Countenancing of their Nobility,
as well in this Court, as there; The Imparting of Knighthood; The Care, of
Education, of their Children; And the like points of Comfort; They are Things,
which fall into every Man's Consideration.

For the Extirping, of the Seeds, of Troubles, I suppose, the main Roots are
but three. The first, the Ambition, and Absoluteness, of the Chief of the
Families, and Septs; The second, the licentious Idleness, of their Kernes, and
Soldiers, that lie upon the Country, by Sesses, and such like Oppressions. And
the Third, the barbarous Laws, Customs, their Brehen Laws, Habits of Apparel,
their Poets or Heralds, that enchaunt them in Savage Manners, and sundry other
such Dreggs, of Barbarism, and Rebellion; Which, by a Number, of Politic
Statutes, of Ireland, meet to be pu^ in Execution, are already forbidden; Unto
which, such Additions may be made, as the present Time requires. But the
Deducing of this Branch, requires a more particular Notice, of the State, and
Manners there, than falls within my Compass.

For Plantations, and Buildings, I do find it strange, that in the last Plot,
for the Population of Munster, there were Limitations, how much in Demesne, and
how much in Farm, and how much in Tenancy: Again, how many Buildings should be
erected; How many Irish, in Mixture, should be admitted; And other things
foreseen almost to Curiosity; But no Restraint, that they might uot build,
sparsim, at their pleasure; Nor any Condition, that they should make place^
Fortified, and Defensible: Which Omission was a strange Neglect, and
Securenesse, to my understanding. So as, for this last Point, of Plantations,
and Buildings, there be two Considerations, which I hold most material; The
one, for Quickening; And the other, for Assuring. The first is, that choice be
made, of such Persons, for the Government, of Towns, and Places; And such
Undertakers be procured, as be Men gracious, and well beloved, and are like to
be well followed. Wherein, for Munster, it may be, (because it is not Res
integra; but that the former Undertakers, stand interessed,) there will be some
Difficulty: But surely, in mine Opinion, either by Agreeing with them, or by
Overruling them, with a Parliament, in Ireland; (which in this Course, of a
Politic Proceeding, infinite Occasions, will require, speedily, to be held;)
It will be fit, to supply, fit qualified Persons, of Undertakers. The other,
that it be not left, (as heretofore,) to the Pleasure, of the Undertakers, and
Adventurers, where, and how, to build, and plant; But that they do, according
to a Prescript, or Formulary: For first, the Places, both Maritime, and Inland,
which are fittest, for Colonies, or Garrisons; As well, for doubt of the
Foreiner, as for the Keeping the Country, in Bridle, would be found, surveyed,
and resolved upon: And that the Patentees, be tied, to build, in those places
only, and to fortify, as shall be thought convenient. And lastly, it follows
of Course, in Countries, of new Populations, to invite, and provoke
Inhabitants, by ample Liberties, and Charters.

A Letter, of Recommendation, of his Service, to the Earl, of Northumberland, a
few days, before Queen Elizabeth's death.
It may please your good Lordship,
AS the Time, of Sowing a Seed, is known, but the Time of Coming up, and
Disclosing, is casual, or according to the Season; So, I am a Witness to my
Self, that there has been covered, in my mind, a long time, a Seed of
Affection, and Zeal, toward your Lordship, sown by the Estimation of your
Virtues, and your particular Honors, and Favors, to my Brother Deceased, and
my Self: Which Seed still springing, now bursteth forth, into this Profession.
And to be plain, with your Lordship, it is very true; (And no Winds, or Noyses,
of Civil Matters, can blow this, out of my Head, or Heart;) That your great
Capacity, and Love, toward Studies, and Contemplations, of an higher, and
worthier Nature, than Popular; (A Nature rare in the World, and in a person, of
your Lordships Quality, almost singular;) is to me, a great, and chief Motive,
to draw my Affection, and Admiration, toward you. And therefore, good my Lord,
if I may be, of any use, to your Lordship, by my Head, Tongue, or Penn, Means,
or Friends, I humbly pray you, to hold me your own; And herewithall, not to do
so much Disadvantage to my good Mind, nor Partly to your own VVorth, as to
conceive, that this Commendation, of my humble Service, proceeds, out of any
Streights, of my Occasions, but merely, out of an Election, and indeed, the
Fullness of my Heart: And so wishing your Lordship; all prosperity, I continue.

A Letter, of Offer, of his Service, to his Majesty, upon his first Coming in.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
IT is observed, upon a place, in the Canticles, by some; Ego sum Flos Campi,
et Lilium Convallium, that a Dispari, it is not said, Ego sum Flos Horti, et
Lilium Montium, because the Majesty of that Person, is not enclosed for a Few,
nor appropriate to the Great. And yet, notwithstanding, this Royal Virtue of
Access, which Nature, and Judgment, has planted, in your Majesty's Mind, as
the Portal of all the rest, could not, of it Self, (my Imperfections
considered,) have animated me, to have made Oblation, of my Self, immediately,
to your Majesty, had it not been joined, with an Habit, of the like Liberty,
which I enjoyed, with my late dear Sovereign Mistress; A Princess, happy in all
things else; but most happy in such a Successor. And yet further, and more
nearly, I was not a little encouraged, not only, upon a Supposal, that unto
your Majesty's Sacred Ear, (open to the Air of all Virtues,) there might come,
some small Breath, of the good Memory of my Father, so long, a Principal
Counselor, in your Kingdom; But also, by the particular Knowledge, of the
infinite Devotion, and incessant Endeavors, (beyond the strength of his Body,
and the nature of the Times;) which appeared, in my good Brother, toward your
Majesty's Service; And were, on your Majesty's part, through your singular
Benignity, by many, most gracious, and lively, Significations, and Favors,
accepted, and acknowledged, beyond the merit, of any thing, he could effect.
Which Endeavors, and Duties, for the most part, were common, to my Self, with
him, though, by design, (as between Brethren,) dissembled. And therefore, most
high, and mighty King, my most dear, and dread, Sovereign Lord; since now, the
Corner Stone, is laid, of the mightiest Monarchy, in Europe; And that God
above, who has ever a Hand, in brideling the Floods, and Motions of the Seas,
and of Peoples Hearts, has, by the miraculous, and universal consent, (the
more strange, because it proceeds, from such Diversity of Causes, in your
coming in;) Given a Sign, and Token, of great Happinnesse, in the Continuance
of your Reign; I think, there is no Subject, of your Majesty's, which loves
this Island, and is not hollow, or unworthy, whose Heart is not set on fire;
Not only, to bring you Peace-Offrings, to make you propitious; But to
sacrifice himself, a Burnt-Offring, or Holocaust, to your Majesty's Service:
Amongst which number, no Man's Fire, shall be more pure, and fervent, than mine.
But how far forth it shall blaze out, that rests, in your Majesty's
Employment. So thirsting, after the Happiness, of Kissing your Royal Hand, I
continue ever.

To Mr. Faules, in Scotland, upon the Entrance, of his Majesty's Reign.
SIR, The Occasion awaketh in me, the Remembrance, of the constant, and mutual,
good Offices, which passed, between my good Brother, and your Self: whereunto,
(as you know,) I was not, altogether, a Stranger; Though the Time, and Design,
(as between Brethren,) made me more reserved. But well do I bear in mind, the
great opinion, which my Brother, (whose Judgment I much reverence,) would
often express to me, of your Extraordinary Sufficiency, Dexterity, and Temper,
which he had found in you, in the Business, and Service, of the King, our
Sovereign Lord: This latter, bred in me, an Election, as the former gave an
Inducement, for me, to address my Self, to you; And to make this Signification,
of my Desire, toward a mutual Entertainment, of good Affection, and
Correspondence, between us; Hoping, that both some good Effect, may result of
it, toward the Kings Service; And that, for our particulars, though Occasion
give you the precedence, of furthering my being known, by good note, unto the
King; So no long time will intercede, before I, on my part, shall have some
means given, to requite your Favors, and to verify your Commendation. And so,
with my loving Commendations, good Mr. Faules, I leave you to Gods Goodness.
From Graies Inn, the 25th of March.

A Letter, commending his Love, and Occasions, to Sir Thomas Challoner, then in
Scotland, upon his Majesty's Entrance.
SIR, For our Money matters, I am assured, you received no Insatisfaction: For
you know my Mind; And you know my Means; which now, the Openness of the time,
caused, by this blessed Consent, and Peace, will increase; And so our
Agreement, according to your time, be observed. For the present, according to
the Roman Adage; (That one Cluster of Grapes, ripeneth best besides another;) I
know, you hold me not unworhty, whose mu^ual Friendship, you should cherish:
And I, for my part, conceive good hope, that you are likely to become, an
acceptable Servant, to the King, our Master: Not so much, for any way made
heretofore, (which, in my Judgement^ will make no great difference,) as for the
Stuff and Sufficiency, which, I know, to be in you; And whereof, I know, his
Majesty, may reap great Service. And therefore, my general Request is, that
according to that industrious Vivacity, which you use, toward your Friends,
you will further his Majesty's good Conceit, and Inclination, toward me; To
whom words, can not make me known; Neither mine own, nor others; but Time will,
to no Disadvantage, of any, that shall fore-runn, his Majesty's Experience, by
your Testimony, and Commendation. And though, Occasion give you the Precedence,
of Doing me this special good O^fice; yet, I hope, no long time will intercede,
before I shall have some means, to requite your Favor, and acquit your Report.
More particularly, having thought good, to make Oblation, of my most humble
Service, to his Majesty, by a few Lines, I do desire your loving care, and
help, by your Self, or such Means, as I referr to your Discretion, to deliver,
and present the same, to his Majesty's Hands. Of which Letter, I send you a
Copy, that you may know, what you carry; And may take, of Mr. Matthew, the
Letter it Self; if you be pleased, to undertake the Delivery. Lastly, I do
commend to your Self, and such your Courtesies, as Occasion may require, this
Gentleman, Mr. Matthew; eldest Son, to my Lord Bishop, of Duresm, and my very
good Friend; Assuring you, that any Curtesy, you shall use toward him, you
shall use, to a very worthy young Gentleman, and one, I know, whose
Acquaintance, you will much esteem. And so I ever continue.

A Letter, to Mr. Davis, then gone to the King, at his first Entrance.
MR. Davis, Though you went, on the sudden, yet you could not go, before you
had spoken with your Self, to the purpose, which I will now write: And
therefore, I know, it shall be altogether needless, save that I meant to show
you, that I was not asleep. Briefly, I commend my Self to your Love, and the
well using my Name; As well in repressing, and answering for me, if there be
any Biting, or Nibling at it, in that Place; As by imprinting a good Conceit,
and Opinion of me, chiefly in the King; (of whose favor, I make my Self,
comfortable Assurance;) As otherwise in that Court: And not only so, but
generally, to perform to me, all the good Offices, which the Vivacity of your
Wit, can suggest, to your mind, to be performed to one, with whose Affection,
you have so great Sympathy; And in whose Fortune, you have so great Interest.
So desiring you to be good, to concealed Poets, I continue.

A Letter, to Mr. Faules. 28 Martii, 1603.
MR. Faules, I did write unto you, yesterday, by Mr. Lake, (who was dispatched
hence, from their Lordships,) a Letter, of Revivour, of those Sparks of former
Acquaintance, between us, in my Brothers time: And now, upon the same
Confidence, finding so fit a Messenger, I would not fail to salute you; Hoping
it will fall out so happily, as that you shall be one, of the Kings Servants,
which his Majesty, will first employ, here with us: where, I hope, to have some
means, not to be barren, in Friendship, toward you. We all thirst, after the
Kings Coming, accounting all this, but as the Dawning, of the Day; before the
Rising, of the Sun, till we have his Presence. And though, now, his Majesty,
must be Ianus Bifrons, to have a Face to Scotland, as well as to England, yet,
Quod nunc instat agendum: The Expectation is here, that he will come in State,
and not in Strength. So for this time, I commend you to Gods Goodness.

A Letter, to Mr. Robert Kempe, upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth.
MR. Kempe, This Alteration is so great, as you might justly conceive, some
Coldness of my Affection toward you, if you should hear nothing from me, I
living in this Place. It is in vain to tell you, with what wonderful Still,
and Calm, this Wheel is turned round: Which, whether it be, a Remnant, of her
Felicity, that is gone, or a Fruit, of his Reputation, that is coming, I will
not determine. For I cannot, but divide my Self, between her Memory, and his
Name: Yet we account it, but a fair Morn before Sunrising, before his
Majesty's Presence; Though, for my part, I see not, whence any VVeather should
arise. The Papists are contained, with Fear enough, and Hope too much. The
French, is thought to turn his Practice, upon procuring, some Disturbance in
Scotland, where Crowns may do wonders: But this Day, is so welcome to the
Nation, and the time so short, as I do not fear the Effect. My Lord of
Southampton, expects Release, by the next Dispatch, and is already much
visited, and much well wished. There is continual poasting, by Men of good
Quality, toward the King. The rather, I think, because this Spring time, it is
but a kind of Sport. It is hoped, that as the State here, has performed the
part, of good Atturneys, to deliver the King, quiet Possession, of his
Kingdoms: So the King, will re-deliver them, quiet Possession of their Places;
Rather filling Places void, than removing Men placed. So, etc.

A Letter, to my Lord of Northumberland, mentioning a Proclamation, drawn for
the King, at his Entrance.
It may please your Lordship,
I Do hold it, a Thing formal, and necessary, for the King, to fore-runn his
Coming, (be it never so speedy,) with some Gracious Declaration, for the
Cherishing, Entertaining and preparing, of Men's Affections. For which purpose,
I have conceived a Draught, it being a thing familiar in my Mistress her times,
to have my Penn used, in Public Writings, of Satisfaction. The Use of this,
may be, in two sorts: First, properly, if your L^rdship ^hink it convenient, to
show the King any such Dr^^ght, because the Veins, and Pulses, of this St^te,
cannot bin be^ be^^ known here; which if your Lordship should do, then I would
desire you, to withdraw my Name, and only signifie^ that you ^ave some Heads
of Direction, of such a Matter, to one, o^ whose Style, and Penn, you had some
Opinion. The other, Collateral^ The^ though your Lordship, make no other use of
it, yet it is a Kin^e o^ Portraicture, of that, which I think, worthy to be
advised, by your Lordship, to the King; And, perhaps, more compendious, and
significant, than if I had set them down in Articles. I would have attended
your Lordship, but for some little Physic, I took. To morrow morning, I will
wait on you. So I ever, etc.

A Letter, to the Earl of Southampton, upon the Kings Coming in.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would have been very glad, to have presented, my humble Service, to your
Lordship, by my attendance, if I could have foreseen, that it should not have
been, unpleasing unto you. And therefore, because I would commit no Error, I
chose to write; Assuring your Lordship, how credible soever, it may seem to
you, at first, yet it is as true, as a Thing, that God knows; That this great
Change, has wrought in me, no other Change, toward your Lordship, than this;
That I may safely be now, that which I was truly before. And so craving no
other pardon, than for troubling you, with my Letter, I do not now begin to
be, but continue to be,

Your Lordships humble and much devoted.

A Letter, to the Earl of Northumberland, after he had been with the King.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Would not have lost this Journey, and yet I have not that I went for. For I
have had no private Conference, to purpo^e^ with the King. No more, has almost
any other English: For the Speech, his Majesty admits, with some Noblemen,
is rather, Matter of Grace, than Matter of Business; With the Attorney he
spoke, urged by the Treasurer of Scotland, but no more than needs must. After I
had received his Majesty's first Welcome, and was promised private Access, yet
not knowing, what matter of Service, your Lordships Letter carried, (for I saw
it not;) And well knowing, that Primeness in Advertisement, is much, I chose,
rather, to deliver it to Sir Tho. Heskins, than to cool it, in mine own Hands,
upon Expectation of Access. Your Lordship shall find a Prince, the furthest
from Vainglory, that may be; And rather, like a Prince, of the ancient Form,
than of the latter Time: His Speech is swift, and Cursory, and in the full
Dialect of his Country, And in Speech of Business short, in Speech of Discourse
large: He affects Popularity, by gracing such, as he has heard, to be
Popular, and not by any Fashions of his own. He is thought somewhat general, in
his Favors; And his Virtue of Access, is rather, because he is much abroad,
and in Press, than that he gives easy Audience. He hastneth, to a mixture, of
both Kingd^ms, and Occasions, faster perhaps, than Policy will well bear. I
told your Lordship, once before, that (methought) his Majesty rather asked
Counsel, of the time past, than of the time to come. But it is yet early, to
ground any Settled Opinion. For the particulars, I referr to conference, having
in these generals, gone further, in so tender an Argument, than I would have
done, were not the Bearer hereof so assured. So I continue, etc.

A Letter, to Mr. Pierce, Secretary, to the Deputy of IRELAND.
Mr. Pierce,
I Am glad to hear of you, as I do; And for my part, you shall find me ready,
to take any Occasion, to further your credit, and preferment: And I dare assure
you, (though I am no Undertaker,) to prepare your way with my Lord of
Salisbury, for any good Fortune, which may befall you. You teach me to complain
of Business; whereby I write the more briefly; And yet I am so unjust, as that
which I allege for mine own Excuse, I cannot admit for yours. For I must, by
Expecting, exact your Letters, with this Fruit, of your Sufficiency, as to
understand, how things pass, in that Kingdom. And therefore, having begun, I
pray you continue. This is not merely Curiosity, for I have ever, (I know not
by what Instinct,) wished well, to that impollish'd part of this Crown. And so,
with my very loving Commendations, I remain.

A Letter, to the King, upon presenting the Discourse, touching the Plantation,
of Ireland.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I Know not better how to express, my good wishes of a New Year, to your
Majesty, than by this little Book, which in all humbleness, I send you. The
Style, is a Style of Business, rather than Curious, or Elaborate. And herein, I
was encouraged, by my Experience, of your Majesty's former grace, in accepting
of the like poor Field-Fruits, touching the Union: And certainly, I reckon this
Action, as a Second Brother, to the Union. For I assure my Self, that England,
Scotland, and Ireland, well united, is such a Trifoile, as no Prince, except
your Self, (who are the worthiest) wears in his Crown, Si potentia reducatur
in Actum. I know well, that for me, to beat my Brains, about these things, they
be Majora quam pro Fortuna; But yet they be, Minora quam pro Studio, as
Voluntate. For as I do yet bear, an extreme Zeal, to the Memory, of my old
Mistress, Queen Elizabeth; To whom, I was rather bound, for her Trust, than her
Favor; So I must acknowledge my Self, more bound, to your Majesty, both for
Trust, and Favor; whereof, I will never deceive the one, as I can never
deserve the other. And so in all humbleness, kissing your Majesty's sacred
hands, I remain.

A Letter, to the Lord Chancellor, touching the History, of Britain.
It may please your good Lordship,
SOme late Act of his Majesty, referred to some former Speech, which I have
heard from your Lordship, bred in me, a great Desire; And the strength of
Desire, a Boldness, to make an humble Proposition, to your Lordship; Such, as
in me, can be no better, than a Wish: But, if your Lordship should apprehend
it, it may take, some good, and worthy, Effect. The Act, I speak of, is the
Order, given by his Majesty, for the Erection of a Tomb, or Monument, for our
late Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth; Wherein I may note much, but only this, at
this time; that as her Majesty, did always right, to his Majesty's Hopes; So
his Highness, does, in all things, Right to her Memory; A very just, and
Princely Re^tribution. But from this Occasion, by a very easy Ascent, I passed
further, being put in mind, by this Representative, of her Person, of the more
true, and more vive, Representation, which is of ^er Life, and Government: For
as Statues, and Pictures, are dumb Histories, so Histories, are speaking
Pictures: wherein, if my Affection, be not too great, or my Reading too small,
I am of this Opinion; That if Plutarch, were alive, to write Lives, by
Parallels, it would trouble him, for Virtue, and Fortune both, to find for
her, a Parallel, amongst Women. And though she was of the Passive Sex, yet her
Government, was so Active, as in my simple Opinion, it made more Impression,
upon the several States of Europe, than it received from thence. But, I
confess, unto your Lordship, I could not stay there, but went a little further,
into the Consideration of the Times, which have passed, since King Henry the
8th; wherein I find the strangest Variety, that, in so little Number, of
Successions of any Hereditary Monarchy, has ever been known: The Reign of a
Child: The offer of an Usurpation, though it were but as a Diary Ague; The
Reign, of a Lady, married, to a Foreiner; And the Reign, of a Lady, Solitary,
and Unmarried; So that, as it comes to pass, in Massive Bodies; That they
have certain Trepidations, and Waverings, before they fix, and settle; So it
seems, that by the Providence of God, this Monarchy, (before it was to settle
in his Majesty, and his Generations; In which, I hope, it is now established,
for ever;) Has had these Prelusive changes, in these Barren Princes. Neither,
could I contain my Self here; (As it is easier to multiply, than to stay a
Wish;) But calling to Remembrance, the Unworthiness, of the History of England,
in the main continuance thereof; And the Partiality, and Obliquity, of that of
Scotland, in the latest, and largest Offer, that I have seen; I conceived, it
would be Honor, for his Majesty, and a work very memorable, if this Island of
Great Britain, as it is now joined, in Monarchy, for the Ages to come; so it
were joined in History, for the Times past; And that one Just, and complete,
History, were compiled, of both Nations. And if any Man think, it may refresh
the Memory, of former Discords, he may satisfy himself with the Verse; Olim
haec meminisse juvabit. For the Case being now altered, it is Matter of
Comfort, and Gratulation, to remember former Troubles. Thus much, if it may
please your Lordship, is in the Optative Mood. It is time, that I did, Look a
little, into the Potential: wherein the Hope, which I conceived, was grounded,
upon 3. Observations. The First, the Nature of these Times, which flourish in
Learning, both of Art, and Language: which gives Hope, not only that it may
be done, but that it may be well done. Secondly, I do see that, which all the
World see's, in his Majesty, both a wonderful Judgment in Learning, and a
singular Affection toward Learning; And works, which are of the Mind, and not
of the Hand. For there cannot be, the like Honor sought, in building of
Galleries, and Planting of Elmes, along highways, and the outward Ornaments,
wherein France now is busy; (Things rather of Magnificence, than of
Magnanimity;) As there is, in the Uniting of States, Pacifying of
Controversies, Nourishing, and Augmenting, of Learning, and Arts, and the
particular Actions appertaining unto these; Of which kind, Cicero judged truly,
when he said to Caesar; Quantum Operibus tuis detrahet Vetustas, tantum addet
laudibus. And lastly, I call to mind, that your Lordship, at some times, had
been pleased, to express unto me, a great desire, that something of this Nature
should be performed; Answerable, indeed, to your other noble, and worthy,
Courses, and Actions: Joining, and adding, unto the great Services, toward his
Majesty; (which have, in small Compass of Time, been put upon your Lordship,)
other great Deservings, both of the Church, and Commonwealth, and Particulars:
So as the Opinion, of so great, and wise a Man, does seem to me, a good
Warrant, both of the Possibility, and Worth, of this Matter. But all this
while, I assure my Self, I cannot be mistaken, by your Lordship, as if I sought
an O^fice, or Employment for my Self: For no Man knows better, than your
Lordship, that if, there were in me, any Faculty thereunto, yet neither my
Course of Life, nor Profession, would permit it: But because there be so many
good Painters, both for Hand, and Colors, it needs but Encouragement, and
Instructions, to give Life unto it. So, in all Humbleness, I conclude, my
presenting unto your Lordship, of this Wish; which, if it perish, it is but a
loss of that, which is not: And so craving pardon, that I have taken so much
time, from your Lordship, I remain.

A Letter to the King, upon the sending unto him, a Beginning, of an History,
of his Majesty's Times.
It may please your Majesty,
HEaring, that you are at leisure, to peruse Stories, a desire took me, to make
an Experiment, what I could do, in your Majesty's times; which being, but a
Leaf, or two, I pray your pardon, if I send it, for your Recreation;
Considering, that Love must creep, where it cannot go. But to this, I add,
these Petitions. First, that if your Majesty do dislike any thing, you would
conceive, I can amend it, upon your least beck. Next, that if I have not
spoken, of your Majesty, Encomiastically, your Majesty, would be pleased, only
to ascribe it, to the Law, of an History; which does not clutt^r together
praises, upon the first mention of a Name, but rather disperseth, and weaveth
them, through the whole Narrative. And as for the Proper place, of
Commemoration, (which is in the Period of Life,) I pray God, I may never live,
to write it. T^irdly, that the reason, why I presumed to think of this
Oblation, was because, whatsoever my Disability be, yet I shall have that
Advantage, which, (almost) no Writer of History, has had; In that, I shall
write of Times, not only since I could Remember, but since I could observe.
And lastly, that it is only, for your Majesty's Reading.

A Letter, to the Earl of Salisbury, upon sending of him, one of his Books, of
Advancement of Learning.
IT may please your good Lordship; I present your Lordship, with a Work, of my
vacant time; which if it had been more, the Work had been better. It
appertains to your Lordship, (besides my particular respects,) in some
Propriety; In regard, you are a great Governer, in a Province of Learning. And
(that which is more) you have added to your Place, Affection toward Learning;
And to your Affection, Judgment. Of which, the last, I could be content, were,
(for the time,) less, that you might the less exquisitely Censure, that which I
offer unto you. But sure I am, the Argument is good, if it had lighted upon a
good Author. But I shall content my self, to awake better Spirits; Like a
Bellringer, which is first up, to call others to Church. So with my humble
Desire, of your Lordships good Acceptance, I remain.

A Letter, to the Lord Treasurer, Buckhurst, upon the like Argument.
MAy it please your good Lordship; I have finished a Work, touching the
Advancement, or Setting forward of Learning; which I have dedicated to his
Majesty; the most learned, of a Sovereign, or Temporal Prince, that Time, has
known. And upon reason, not unlike, I humbly present, one of the Books, to your
Lordship: Not only, as a Chanceller, of an University, but as one, that was
excellently bred, in all Learning; which I have ever noted, to shine, in all
your Speeches, and Behaviors. And therefore your Lordship, will yield a
gracious Aspect, to your first Love; And take pleasure, in the Adorning of
that, wherewith your self are so much adorned. And so humbly desiring your
favorable Acceptance thereof, with Signification of humble Duty, I remain.

A Letter, of the like Argument, to the LORD CHANCELLER.
MAy it please your good Lordship; I humbly present your Lordship, with a Work;
wherein, as you have much Commandment, over the Author: So your Lordship,
has also great Interest, in the Argument: For to speak without Flattery, few
have like use of Learning, or like Judgment in Learning, as I have observed in
your Lordship. And again, your Lordship, has been a great Planter of Learning;
Not only, in those places, in the Church, which have been in your own Gift;
But also, in your Commendatory Vote, no man has more constantly held; Detur
Digniori: And therefore, both your Lordship, is beholding to Learning, and
Learning beholding to you; Which makes me presume, with good Assurance, that
your Lordship, will accept well of these my Labors; The rather, because your
Lordship, in private Speech, has often begun to me, in expressing, your
Admiration, of his Majesty's learning, to whom I have dedicated this Work^ And
whose Virtue, and Perfection, in that kind, did chiefly move me, to a Work of
this Nature. And so, with Signification, of my most humble Duty, and Affection,
to your Lordship, I remain.

A Letter, of like Argument, to the Earl of Northampton, with request, to
Present the Book, to his Majesty.
It may please your good Lordship;
HAving finished a Work, touching the Advancement of Learning, and dedicated
the same, to his Sacred Majesty, whom I dare avouch, (if the Records of Time
err not,) to be the learnedest King, that has reigned; I was desirous, in a
kind of Congruity, to present it, by the learnedest Counselor, in this
Kingdom; To the end, that so good an Argument, lighting upon so bad an Author,
might receive some Reputation, by the Hands, into which, and by which, it
should be delivered. And therefore, I make it, my humble S^t^, to your
Lordship, to present this mean, but well meant Writing, to his Majesty, and
with it, my humble, and zealous Duty; And also, my like humble request of
Pardon, if I have too often, taken his name in Vain; Not only in the
Dedication, but in the Voucher, of the Authority, of his Speeches, and
Writings. And so I remain.

A Letter, of Request, to Dr. Playfer, to Translate the Book, of Advancement of
Learning, into Latin.
Mr. Dr. Playfer:
A Great Desire, will take a small Occasion; to hope, and put in Trial, that
which is desired. It pleased you, a good while since, to express unto me, the
good Liking, which you conceived, of my Book, of the Advancement of Learning;
and that more Significantly, (as it seemed to me,) than out of Courtesy, or
Civil Respect. My Self, as I then took Contentment, in your Approbation
thereof; So I should esteem, and acknowledge, not only my Contentment
increased, but my Labors advanced, if I might obtain your help, in that nature
which I desire. Wherein, before I set down, in plain Terms, my request unto
you, I will open my Self, what it was, which I chiefly sought, and propounded,
to my Self, in that Work; That you may perceive, that which I now desire, to be
pursuant thereupon. If I do not much err, (For any Judgment, that a Man
makes, of his own Doings, had need be spoken, with a Si nunquam fallit Imago,)
I have this Opinion, that if I had sought mine own Commendation, it had been, a
much fitter Course ^or me, to have done, as Gardeners used to do, by taking
their Seed, and Slipps, and rearing them first into Plants, and so uttering
them in Pots, when they are in Flower, and in their best State. But for as
much, as my End, was Merit, of the State of Learning, (to my Power,) and not
Glory; And because my purpose was, rather to Excite, other Men's Wits, than to
magnify mine own; I was desirous, to prevent the uncertainness, of mine own
Life, and Times, by uttering rather Seeds, than Plants: Nay, and further, (as
the Proverb is,) by sowing with the Basket, rather than with the Hand:
Wherefore, since I have only taken upon me, to ring a Bell, to call other wits
together, (which is the meanest Office,) it cannot but be consonant to my
Desire, to have that Bell heard, as far as can be. And since they are but
Sparks, which can work but upon Matter prepared, I have the more reason, to
wish, that those Sparks may fly abroad, That they may the better find, and
light, upon those Minds, and Spirits, which are apt to be kindled. And
therefore, the Privateness of the Language considered, wherein it is written,
excluding so many Readers; As on the other side, the Obscurity of the Argument,
in many parts of it, excludes many others; I must account it, a Second Birth,
of that Work, if it might be translated into Latin, without manifest loss, of
the Sense, and Matter. For this purpose, I could not represent to my Self, any
Man, into whose hands, I do more earnestly desire, that Work should fall, than
your Self: For by that, I have heard, and read, I know no Man, a greater
Master, in Commanding Words, to serve Matter. Nevertheless, I am not ignorant
of the worth of your Labors; Whether such as your Place, and Profession
imposes; Or such, as your own Virtue, may, upon your Voluntary Election, take
in hand. But I can lay before you, no other persuasions, than either the Work
it Self, may affect you with; Or the Honor, of his Majesty, to whom it is
dedicated; Or your Particular Inclination to my Self; who, as I never took so
much comfort, in any Labors of mine own, so I shall never acknowledge my Self,
more obliged, in any thing, to the Labor of another, than in that, which shall
assist it. Which your labor, if I can, by my Place, Profession, Means,
Friends, Travel, Work, Deed, requite unto you, I shall ^steem my Self, so
straightly bound thereunto, as I shall be ever most ready, both to take, and
seek, occasion of Thankfulness. So leaving it, nevertheless, Salv^ amicitia,
(as reason is,) to your own good Liking, I remain,

A Letter, to Sir Thomas Bodley, upon sending of him, his Book, of Advancement
of Learning.
I Think, no Man, may more truly say, with the Psalm, Multum Incola fuit Anima
mea, than my Self, For I do confess, since I was of any Understanding, my
Mind, has, in Effect, been absent from that I have done: And in Absence, are
many Errors, which I do willingly acknowledge; And amongst the rest, this
great one, that ledd the rest; That knowing my Self, by inward Calling, to be
fitter, to hold a Book, than to play a part, I have led my life in Civil
Causes; For which I was not very fit by Nature, and more unfit, by the
preoccupation of my Mind. Therefore calling my Self home, I have now, for a
time, enjoyed my Self; whereof, likewise, I desire, to make the World partaker.
My Labors, (if I may so term that, which was the Comfort, of my other
Labors,) I have Dedicated to the King; Desirous, if there be any Good in them,
it may be, as the Fat of a Sacrifice, incensed to his Honor; And the second
Copy, I have sent unto you; Not only, in good Affection, but in a kind of
Congruity, in regard, of your great, and rare desert, of Learning. For Bocks,
are the Shrines, where the Saint is, or is believed to be. And you, having
built an Ark, to save Learning, from Deluge, deserve Propriety, in any new
Instrument, or Engine, whereby Learning, should be improved or advanced.

A Letter, to the Bishop of Ely, upon sending his Writing, entitled, Cogitata,
and Visa.
MY very good Lord: Now your Lordship, has been so long in the Church, and the
Palace, disputing, between Kings, and Popes; Methinks, you should take
pleasure, To look into the Field, and refresh your mind, with some Matter, of
Philosophy; Though that Science, be now, through Age, waxed a Child again, and
left to Boys, and young men. And because you were wont to make me believe, you
took liking to my Writings, I send you some of this Vacations Fruits; And thus
much more, of my mind, and purpose. I hasten not to Publish; perishing I would
prevent. And I am forced, to respect, as well my Times, as the Matter. For with
me it is thus; and I think with all Men in my Case: If I bind my Self, to an
Argument, it loadeth my Mind: But if I rid my Mind, of the present Cogitation,
it is rather a Recreation. This has put me into these Miscellanies; which I
purpose to suppress, if God give me leave, to write, a just, and perfect
Volume, of Philosophy, which I go on with, though slowly. I send not your
Lordship, too much, lest it may glutt you. Now let me tell you, what my Desire
is: If your Lordship be so good now, as when you were, the good Dean of
Westminster, my request to you is; That not by Pricks, but by Notes, you would
mark unto me, whatsoever shall seem unto you, eith^r not current in the Style;
Or harsh to credit, and Opinion; Or inconvenient, for the Person, of the
Writer. For no Man, can be Judge, and Party: And when our Minds judge, by
Reflection of our Selves, they are more subject to Error. And though, for the
Matter it self, my Judgment, be, in some things, fixed, and not Accessible by
any Man's Judgment, that goes not my way; yet even in those Things, the
Admonition of a Friend, may make me, express my Self, di^versly. I would have
come to your Lordship, but that I am hastening to my House, in the Country. And
so I commend your Lordship to Gods Goodness.

A Letter, to Sir Tho: Bodley, after he had imparted to him, a VVriting,
entitled, Cogitata, and Visa:
SIR, in respect of my Going down, to my House, in the Country, I shall have
miss of my Papers; which I pray you therefore ^o return unto me. You are, I
bear you witness, Slothful, and you help me nothing: So as I am half in
conceit, that you affect not the Argument: For my Self, I know well, you love,
and affect. I can say no more to you, But, Non canimns Surdis, respondent omnia
Sylvae. If you be not of the Lodgings, chaulked up, (whereof I speak in my
Preface,) I am but to pass by your Door. But if I had you, but a Fortnight, at
Gorhambury, I would make you tell me another Tale; or else, I would add a
Cogitation, against Libraries, and be revenged on you, that way. I pray, send
me some good News, of Sir Tho: Smith; And commend me very kindly to him. So I
rest.

A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending to him, a part, of Instauratio Magna.
MR. Matthew; I plainly perceive, by your affectionate writing, touching my
Work, that one, and the same Thing, affects us both; which is, the good End,
to which it is dedicate. For as to any Ability of mine, it cannot merit, that
Degree, of Approbation. For your Caution for Church Men, and Church Matters; As
for any Impediment, it might be, to the Applause, and Celebrity, of my Work; It
moves me not; But as it may hinder the Fruit, and Good, which may come, of a
quiet, and calm, passage, to the good Port, to which it is bound, I hold it a
just respect; So as to fetch a fair Wind, I go not too far about. But the
Troth is, that I, at all, have no occasion, to meet them, in my way; Except it
be, as they will needs confederate themselves, with Aristotle, who, you know,
is intemperately magnifyed, by the Schoolmen; And is also allied, as I take
it, to the Jesuits, by Faber, who was a Companion, of Loyola, and a great
Aristotelian. I send you, at this time, the only part, which has any
Harshness; And yet, I framed to my Self, an Opinion, that whosoever allowed
well, of that Preface, which you so much commend, will not dislike, or at least
ought not to dislike, this other Speech of Preparation: For it is written, out
of the same Spirit, and out of the same Necessity: Nay, it does more fully lay
open, that the Question between me, and the Ancients, is not, of the Virtue, of
the Race, but of the Rightness, of the Way. And to speak truth, it is to the
other, but as Palma to Pagnus, part of the same Thing, more large. You ^onceive
a rig^t, that in this, and the other, you have Commission, to impart, and
communicate them, to others, According to your Discretion. Other Matters I
write not of. My self, am like the Miller of Grancester, that was wont to pray,
for Peace, amongst the Willows; For while the winds blew, the Wind-mils
wrought, and the Water-mill, was less customed. So I see, that Con^roversies of
Religion, must hinder the Advancement of Sciences. Let me conclude, with my
perpetual Wish, toward your Self; That the Approbation of your Self, by your
own discreet, and temperate, Carriage, may restore you to your Country, and your
Friends, to your Society. And so I commend you, to Gods Goodness. Graies Inn,
10 October. 1609.

A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, touching Instauratio Magna.
MR. Matthew, I heartily thank you, for your Le^ter, of the 10th of February;
And am glad, to receive, from you, Matter, both of Encouragement, and of
Advertisement, touching my Writings. For my part, I do wish, that since there
is, no Lumen-siccum, in the World; But all Madidum, and Maceratum, infused in
Affections, and Bloods or Humors, that these Things of mine, had those
Separations, that might make them more acceptable: So that they claim not, so
much Acquaintance, of the present times, as they be thereby, the less apt to
last. And to show you, that I have some Purpose, to new mould them; I send you,
a Leaf, or two, of the Preface, carrying some Figure of the whole Work.
Wherein, I purpose, to take that, which I count real, and ^ffectual, of both
Writings; And chiefly, to add a Pledge, (if not Payment,) to my Promises, I
send you also, a Memorial, of Queen Elizabe^h; To requite your Elogy, of the
late Duke of Florences, Felicity. Of this, when you were here, I showed you
some Model; At what time, (methought,) you were more willing, to hear Julius
Caesar, than Queen Elizabeth, commended. But this, which I send, is more full,
and has more of the Narrative. And further, has one part, that, I think, will
not be disagreeable, either to you, or that Place; Being the true Tract, of her
Proceedings, toward the Catholics, which are infinitely mistaken. And though
I do not imagine, they will pass allowance there, yet they will gain upon
Excuse. I find Mr. Le-Zure, to use you well, (I mean his Tongue of you,) which
shows you, either honest, or wise. But this I speak merrily. For in good faith,
I do conceive hope, that you will so govern your Self, as we may take you, as
assuredly for a good Subject, and Patriot, as you take your Self for a good
Christian^ And so we may again enjoy your Company, and you your Conscience, if
it may no other ways be. For my part, assure your Self, (as we say in the
Law,) mutatis mutandis, my love, and good wishes to you, are not diminished.
And so I remain.

A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, imprisoned for RELIGION.
MR. Matthew; Do not think me forgetful, or altered toward you. But if I
should say, I could do you any good, I should make my Power, more than it is.
I do hear that, which I am right sorry for; That you grow more Impatient, and
Busy, than at first: which makes me exceedingly fear the is^ue of that, which
seems not to stand at a stay. I my Self, am out of doubt, that you have been
miserably abused, when you were first seduced: But that, which I take in
Compassion, others may take in Severity. I pray God, that understands us all,
(better than we understand one another,) contain you, (even as I hope he will,)
at the least, within the Bounds of Loyalty to his Majesty, and Natural Piety
toward your Country. And I entreat you much, sometimes, to meditate, upon the
extreme Effects of Superstition, in this last Powder Treason; fit to be tabled,
and pictured, in the Chambers of Meditation, as another Hell, above the Ground;
And well justifying, the Censure of the Heathen; That Superstition is far
worse than Atheism: By how much it is less evil, to have no Opinion, of God at
all; than such as is impious, toward his Divine Majesty, and Goodness. Good
Mr. Matthew, receive your Self back, from these Courses, of Perdition: Willing
to have written a great deal more, I continue.

A Letter, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending his Book, De Sapientia Veterum.
MR. Matthew, I do very heartily thank you, for your Letter of the 24. of
August, from Salamanca; And, in recompense ther^of, I send you, a little Work
of mine, that has begun, to pass the World. They tell me, my Latin, is turned
into Silver, and become current: Had you been here, you should have been my
Inquisitour, before it came forth. But I think, the greatest Inquisitour in
Spain, will allow it. But one thing, you must pardon me, if I make no have to
believe, That the World should be grown to such an Ecstasy, as to reject Truth
in Philosophy, because the Author dissenteth in Religion: No more than they
do, by Aristotle, or Averroes. My great Work goes forward; And after my
manner, I alter ever, when I add. So that nothing is finished, till all be
finished. This I have written, in the midst, of a Term, and Parliament;
Thinking no time so possessed, but that I should talk of these Matters, with so
good, and dear a Friend. And so, with my wonted Wishes, I leave you to Gods
Goodness. From Graies Inn, 27th of Febr. 1610.

A Letter, of Expostulation, to the Attorney General, Sir Edward Cook.
MR. Attorney, I thought best, once for all, to let you know, in plainness,
what I find of you, and what you shall find of me: You take to your self, a
Liberty, to disgrace, and disable my Law, my Experience, my Discretion: What it
pleases you, I pray, think of me; I am one, that know's both mine own wants,
and other Men's: And it may be, perchance, that mine mend, others stand at a
stay. And surely, I may not endure, in public place, to be wronged, without
repelling the same, to my best advantage, to right my Self. You are great, and
therefore have the more Enviers; which would be glad, to have you paid, at
another cost. Since the time, I missed the Solliciters place, (the rather I
think by your means,) I cannot expect, that you, and I shall ever serve, as
Attorney, and Solliciter, together; But either, to serve with another, upon
your Remove, or to step into some other Course: So as, I am more free, than
ever I was, from any Occasion, of unworthy Conforming my Self to you; More than
general good manners, or your particular good Usage, shall provoke. And if you
had not been, short sighted, in your own Fortune, (as I think,) you might have
had more use of me. But that Tide is passed. I write not this, to show my
Friends, what a brave Letter, I have written, to Mr. Attorney: I have none of
those Humors: But that I have written, is to a good End; That is, to the more
decent Carriage, of my Masters Service; And to our particular, better
Understanding One of Another. This Letter, if it shall be answered by you, in
deed, and not in word, I suppose, it will not be worse, for us both: Else it is
but a few Lines lost; which, for a much smaller Matter, I would have
adventured. So this being to your Self, I for my part rest.

A Letter, to my Lord of Salisbury, touching the Solliciters Place.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Am not ignorant, how mean a Thing, I stand for, in desiring to come, into
the Solliciters Place: For I know well, it is not the Thing it has been; Time
having wrought Alteration, both in the Profession, and in that special Place.
Yet because, I think, it will increase my practice, and that it may satisfy my
Friends; And because I have been voiced to it, I would be glad it were done.
Wherein, I may say to your Lordship, in the Confidence, of your poor Kinsman,
and of a Man, by you advanced; Tu idem fer opem, qui Spem dedist^: For, I am
sure, it was not possible, for a Man Living, to have received, from another,
more significant, and comfortable, words of Hope; your Lordship being pleased,
to tell me, during the Course of my last Service, that you would raise me; And
that, when you had resolved, to raise a Man, you were more careful of him,
than himself; And that, what you had done for me, in my Marriage, was a benefit
to me, but of no use, to your Lordship; And therefore, I might assure my Self,
you would not leave me there; with many like Speeches, which I knew, my Duty
too well, to take any other hold of, than the Hold, of a Thankful Remembrance.
And I acknowledge, and all the World knows, that your Lordship, is no Dealer,
of Holy Water, but Noble, and Real; And, on my part, I am of a sure ground,
that I have committed nothing, that may deserve alteration. And therefore, my
Hope is, your Lordship, will finish a good Work, and consider, that Time
grows precious with me, and that I am now in Vergentibus Annis. And although
I know, that your Fortune is not to need, an Hundred such as I am, yet I shall
be ever ready, to give you my best, and First fruits; And to supply, (as much
as in me lies,) Worthiness, by Thankfulness^

A Letter, of like Argument, to the LORD CHANCELLOR.
It may please your good Lordship,
AS I conceived it to be a Resolution, both with his Majesty, and your
Lordships of his Council, that I should be placed Sollic^^^^, and the
Solliciter, to be removed, to be the Kings Sergeant: So I most thankfully
acknowledge, your Lordships furtherance, and forwardness ther^in; your
Lordship, being the Man, that first devised the Mean: Wherefore, my humble
Request, to your Lordship is, that you would set in, with some Str^ngth, to
finish this your Work: Which I assure your Lordship, I desire the rather,
because being placed, I hope, for many Favors, at last, to be able, to do you
some better Service. For as I am, your Lordship cannot use me; nor scarcely
indeed know me: Not that I vainly think, I shall be able, to do any great
Matters, but certainly, it will ^rame me to use a nearer Observance, and
Application, to such, as I honor so much, as I do your Lordsh^p; And not, (I
hope^) without some good Offices, which may, now and then, deser^e your Thanks.
And herewithall, (good my Lord,) I humbly pray your Lordship, to consider, that
Time grows precious with me, and that a Married Man, is 7. years elder, in
his thoughts, the first day. And therefore, what a discomfortable Thing it is
for me, to be unsettled still? Certainly, were it not, that I think my Self
born, to do my Sovereign Service; And therefore, in that Station, I will live
and dye; Otherwise, for mine own Private comfort, it were better for me, that
the King, did blot me out of his Book; Or that I should turn my Course, to
endeavor, to serve, in some other kind, than for me, to stand thus at a
stopp; And to have that little Reputation, which by my Industry I gather, to be
scattered, and taken away, by continual Disgraces, every new Man coming above
me. Sure I am, I shall never have fairer Promises, and Words, from all your
Lordships. For I know not what my Services are, (saving that your Lordships
told me, they were good;) And I would believe you, in a much greater Matter.
Were it nothing else, I hope the Modesty of my Suit, deserves somewhat; For I
know well, the Solliciters Place, is not as your Lordship, left it; Time
working Alteration, somewhat in the Profession, much more in that special
Place. But to conclude, as my Honorable Lady, your Wife, was some Mean, to
make me, to change the Name of Another; So if it please you, to help me, to
change mine own Name, I can be, but more and more bounden to you: And I am much
deceived, if your Lordship, find not the King, well inclined, and my Lord of
Salisbury forward, and affectionate.

A Letter, to the King, touching the Solliciters Place.
HOw honestly ready I have been (most gracious Sovereign,) to do your Majesty
humble Service, to the best of my power, and in a manner, beyond my power, (as
I now stand,) I am not so unfortunate, but your Majesty knows. For both, in
the Commission of Union, (the Labor whereof, for Men of my Profession, rested
most upon my hand;) And this last Parliament, in the Bill of the Subsidy; Both
Body and Preamble; In the Bill of Attainders, both Tresham, and the rest; In
the Matter of Purveyance; In the Ecclesiastical Petitions; In the Grievances;
And the like; as I was ever careful, (and not without good Success,) sometimes
to put forward, that which was good; sometimes to keep back, that which was not
so good; So your Majesty was pleased, kindly to accept of my Services, and to
say to me; Such Conflicts were the Wars of Peace; And such Victories the
Victories of Peace; And therefore such Servants, that obtained them, were by
Kings, that reign in Peace; no less to be esteemed, than Services of Commanders
in the Wars. In all which, nevertheless, I can challenge, to my Self, no
Su^ficiency, but that I was diligent, and reasonable happy, to execute those
Directions, which I received, either immediately from your Royal Mouth, or from
my Lord of Salisbury. At what time, it pleased your Majesty also, to promise,
and assure me, that upon the Remove of the then Attorney, I should not be
forgotten, but brought into Ordinary Place. And this was after confirmed to me,
by many of my Lords, and toward the end of the last Term, the manner also, in
particular, spoken of; That is, that Mr. Solliciter, should be made your
Majesty's Sergeant, and I Solliciter: For so it was thought best, to sort, with
both our Gifts, and Faculties, for the good of your Service: And of this
Resolution, both Court, and Country, took knowledge. Neither was this, any
Invention, on Project, of mine own; but moved from my Lords, I think, first
from my Lord Chanceller: whereupon resting, your Majesty well knows, I never
opened my Mouth, for the Greater Place; Though I am sure, I had 2.
Circumstances, that Mr. Attorney, that now is, could not allege: The one, Nine
years Service of the Crown: The other, the being Cousin Germain, to the Lord of
Salisbury, whom your Majesty esteems, and trusts so much. But for the less
Place, I conceive it was meant me. But after that, Mr. Attorney Hobert was
placed, I heard no more of my Preferment; but it seemed to me at a stopp, to my
great Disgrace, and Discouragement. For (gracious Sovereign,) if still, when
the Waters are stirred, another shall be put in before me, your Majesty had
need work a Miracle, or else, I shall be still, a ^ame Man, to do your
Service. And therefore, my most humble suit, to your Majesty, is; That this,
which seemed to me intended, may speedily be per^ormed: And, I hope, my former
Service, shall be, but as Beginnings to better, when I am better strengthened:
For sure I am, no Man's Heart is fuller, (I say not, but many may have greater
Hearts, but I say not fuller,) of Love, and Duty, to^wards your Majesty, and
your Children; As, I hope, Time will manifest, against Envy, and Detraction, if
any be. To conclude, I most humbly crave pardon for my boldness, and rest.

A Letter, to the Earl of Salisbury, of Curtesy, upon a New Years Tide.
It may please your good Lordship,
HAving no Gift, to present you with, in any degree proportionable to my mind;
I desire, nevertheless, to take the Advantage, of a Ceremony, to express my
Self, to your Lordship; it being the first time, I could make the like
Acknowledgement, when I stood, out of the person of a Suter: wherefore, I most
humbly pray your Lordship, to think of me, tha^ now it has pleased you, by
many Effectual, and great Benefits, to add the Assurance, and Comfort, of your
Love, and Favor, to that pr^cedent Disposition, which was in me, to admire,
your Virtue and Merit; I do esteem, whatsoever I have, or may have, in this
World, but as Trash, in comparison, of having the Honor, and Happiness, ^o be
a near, and well accepted, Kinsman, to so rare, and worthy, a Counselor,
Govern^^, and Patriot. For having been a studious, if not, a Curious Observer,
of Antiquittes of Virtue, as of late Pieces; I forbear to say to your Lordship,
what I find and conceive; But to any other, I would think, to make my Self,
believed. But not to be tedious, in that, which may have the show of a
Complement, I can but wish your Lordship, many happy years; Many more, than
your Father had; Even so many more, as we may need you more. So I remain.

A Letter, of Thanks, to the King, upon Mr. Atturney's Sickness.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Do understand, by some of my good Friends, to my great comfort, that your
Majesty, has in mind, your Majesty's Royal Promise, (which to me is Anchora
Spei,) touching the Atturney's place. I hope, Mr. Attorney shall do well. I
thank God, I wish no Man's Death, Nor much mine own Life, more than to do your
Majesty Service. For I account my Life the Accident, and my Duty the Substance.
But this, I will be ^old to say. If it please God^ that ever I serve your
Majesty, in the Atturney's place, I have known an Attorney Cook, and an
Attorney Hober^; Both worthy Men, and far^ above my Self; But if I should not
find, a Middle way, between their two Dispositions, and Carriages, I should not
satisfy my Self. But these things, are far, or near, as it shall please God.
Mean while, I most humbly pray your Majesty, to accept, my Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving for your Gracious Favor. God preserve your Maj^sty^ I ever remain.

A Letter, to the King, of Suit, to succeed, in the A^turney's Place.
It may please your Majesty,
YOur great, and Princely, Favors toward me, in Advancing me to Place; And
that, which is to me, of no less comfort, your Majesty's benign, and gracious
Acceptance, from time to time, of my poor Services, much above the Merit, and
Value of them; Has, almost, brought me to an Opinion, that I may sooner,
(perchance,) be wanting, to my Self, in not asking; Than find your Majesty's
Goodness wanting to me, in any my reasonable, and modest desires. And
therefore, perceiving, how at this time, Preferments of Law fly about mine
Ears; To some above me, and to some below me; I did conceive, your Majesty may
think it, rather a Kind of Dullness, or want of Faith, than Modesty, if I
should not come, with my Pitcher, to Jacobs Well, as others do. Wherein I
shall propound to your Majesty, that which tends not so much, to the Raising
of my Fortune, as to the settling of my Mind; Being sometimes assailed with
this Cogitation; That by reason of my Slowness, to see, and apprehend sudden
Occasions; Keeping on one plain Course of painful Service; I may, (in fine
Dierum,) be in danger, to be neglected, and forgotten. And if that should be,
then were it much better for me, now while I stand in your Majesty's good
Opinion, (though unworthy,) and have some little Reputation, in the World, to
give over the Course I am in, and to make proof, to do you some Honor, by my
Pen, either by writing, some faithful Narrative, of your Happy, (though not
untraduced,) Times; Or by recompiling your Laws, (which, I perceive, your
Majesty labors with; And has in your Head, as Jupiter had Pallas;) Or some
other the like work: (For without some Endeavor to do you Honor, I would not
live;) Than to spend my Wits, and Time, in this laborious place, wherein I now
serve; If it shall be deprived, of those outward Ornaments, which it was wont
to have, in respect of an Assured Succession, to some Place, of more Dignity,
and Rest: which seems now, to be an Hope, altogether Casual, if not wholly
intercepted. Wherefore, (not to hold your Majesty long,) my humble Suit, to
you, is that, than the which, I think, I cannot well go lower; which is, that
I may obtain, your Royal promise, to succeed, (if I live,) into the Atturneys
place, whenever it shall be void: It being, but the Natural, and ^mmediate
Step, and Rise, which the Place, I now hold, has ever, (in sort) made claim
to, and almost never failed of. In this Suit, I make no Friends to you^
Majesty, but rely upon no other Motive, but your Grace; Nor any other
Assurance, but your Word; whereof I had good Experience, when I came to the
Sollicite^s Place; That it was like, to the Two great Lights, which in their
Motions, are never Retro r^d^. So with my best Prayers, for your Majesty's
Happiness, I rest.

A Letter, to Sir George Carey, in France, upon sending him, his Writing, In
Felicem Memoriam Elizabethae.
My very good Lord;
BEing asked the Question, by this Bearer, an old Servant, of my Brother
Anthony Bacons, whether I would command him any thing into France; And being,
at better leisure, than I would, in regard of Sickness; I began to remember,
that neither your Business, nor mine, (though great, and continual,) can be,
upon an an exact account, any just Occasion, why so much good will, as has
passed between us, should be so much discontinued, as has been. And therefore,
because one must begin, I thought to provoke, your Remembrance of me, by a
Letter: And thinking to fit it, with somewhat, besides Salutations, it came to
my Mind, that this last Summer Vacation, by occasion of a Factious Book, that
endeavored to verefy, Misera ^emina, (The Addition of the Popes Bull,) upon
Queen Elizabeth, I did write, a few Lines, in her Memorial; which I thought,
you would be pleased to read; both for the Argument; And because, you were
wont, to bear Affection, to my Penn. Verum, ut aliud ex alio, if it came
handsomely to pass, I would be glad, the President de Thuanus.
Thou, (who has written an History, as you know, of that Fame, and Diligence,)
saw it: Chiefly, because I know not, whether it may not serve him, for some
use, in his Story: wherein, I would be glad, he did right to the Truth, and to
the Memory, of that Lady, as I perceive, by that he has already written, he is
well inclined to do. I would be glad also, it were some Occasion, (such as
Absence may permit,) of some Acquaintance, or mutual Notice^ between us. For
though he has, many ways, the precedence, (chiefly in worth,) yet this is
common to us both, that we serve our So^eraigns, in places of Law, eminent: And
not our Selves only, but our Fathers, did so before us: And lastly, that both
of us, love Learning, and Liberal Sciences, which was ever, a Bond of
Friendship, in the greatest Distance, of Places. But of this, I make no further
Request, than your Occasions, and Respects, (to me unknown,) may further, or
limit; My Principal Purpose being, to salute you, and to send you this Token.
Whereunto I will add, my very kind Commendations, to my Lady; And so commit
you both, to Gods Holy Protection.

A Letter, to my Lord Mayour, upon a Proceeding, in a Private Cause.
MY very good Lord; I did little expect, when I left your Lordship last, that
there would have been, a Proceeding against Mr. Barnard, to his Overthrow.
Wherein I must confess my Self, to be, in a sort, Accessory: Because, he
relying upon me, for Counsel, I advised that Course, which he followed. Wherein
now I begin, to question my self, whether in preserving my Respects, unto your
Lordship, and the Rest, I have not failed, in the Duty, of my Profession,
toward my Client, For certainly, if the words had been heinous, and spoken in
a malicious fashion, and in some public place, and well proved; And not a
Prattle, in a Tavern, caught hold of by one, who, (as I hear) is a detected
Sycophant ( Standish I mean;) yet I know not, what could have been done more,
than to impose upon him, a grievous Fine; And to require, the Levying of the
same; And to Take away his means of Life, by his Disfranchisement; And to
commit him, to a Defamed Prison, during Christmas; In Honor whereof, the
Prisoners, in other Courts, do, commonly, of grace, obtain some Enlargement.
This Rigor of Proceeding, (to tell your Lordship, and the rest, as my good
Friends, my Opinion, plainly,) tends not to strengthen Authority, which is
best supported, by Love, and Fear, intermixed; But rather, to make People
discontented, and Servile; especially, when such Punishment is inflicted, for
words, not by Rule of Law, but by a Jurisdiction of Discretion, which would
evermore, be moderately used. And I pray God, whereas Mr. Recorder, when I was
with you, did well, and wisely, put you in mind, of the Admonitions, you often
received from my Lords, that you should bridle unruly Tongues; That those kind
of Speeches, and Rumors, whereunto those Admonitions do referr, which are
concerning the State, and Honor thereof, do not pass too licentiously, in the
City, unpunished; while these Words, which concern your particular, are so
straightly enquired into, and punished with such Extremiy. But these Things,
your own wisdom, (first, or last,) will best represent unto you. My writing
unto you at this time, is, to the end, that howsoever I do take it somewhat
unkindly, that my Mediation prevailed no more; yet I might preserve, that
further Respect, that I am willing to use, unto such a State, in delivering my
Opinion, unto you, freely, before I would be of Counsel, or move any thing,
that should cross your Proceedings; which, notwithstanding, (in case, my
Client, can receive no Relief, at your hands,) I must, and will do.
Continuing, nevertheless, in other Things, my wonted good Affection, to your
Selves, and your Occasions.

A Letter, to my Lord Treasurer Salisbury, upon a New Years Tide.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Would Entreat, the New year, to answ^r for the Old, in my humble Thanks to
your Lordship; Both for many your Favors, and chiefly, that upon the Occasion,
of Mr. Atturneys Infirmity, I found your Lordship, even as I could wish. This
does increase a desire in me, to express my Thankful mind, to your Lordship;
Hoping, that though I find Age, and Decays, grow upon me, yet I may have a
Flash, or two, of Spirit, left to do you Service. And I do protest before
God, without Complement, or any light Vanity of Mind, that if I knew, in what
Course of Life, to do you best Service, I would take it, and make my Thoughts,
which now fly to many Pieces, to be reduced to that Center. But all this, is no
more, than I am; which is not much: But yet the Entire of him, that is, etc.

A Letter, to his Majesty, concerning Peachams Cause, January 21. 1614.
It may please your Excellent Majesty,
IT grieveth me exceedingly, that your Majesty, should be so much troubled,
with this Matter of Peacham; whose Raging Devil, seems to be turned, into a
Dumb Devil. But although, we are driven, to make our way, through Questions,
(which I wish were otherwise,) yet I hope well, the End will be good. But then,
every Man, must put too; his Helping Hand; For else, I must say to your
Majesty, in this, and the like Cases, as St. Paul said, to the Centurion, when
some of the Mariners, had an Eye, to the Cockboat; Except these stay in the
Ship, ye cannot be safe. I find, in my Lords, great, and worthy, Care, of the
Business. And for my part, I hold my Opinion, and am strengthened in it, by some
Records, that I have found. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, touching Peachams Cause. January 27. 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
THis Day, in the Afternoon, was read, your Majesty's Letters, of Direction,
touching Peacham; which because it concerns properly the Duty of my Place, I
thought it fit, for me, to give your Majesty, both a speedy, and a private,
Account thereof; That your Majesty knowing Things, clearly, how they pass, may
have the true Fruit, of your own Wisdom, and clear-Seeing Judgment, in
Governing the Business.

First, for the Regularity, which your Majesty, (as a Master in Business of
Estate,) does prudently prescribe, in Examining, and taking Examinations, I
subscribe to it; Only, I will say for my Self; that I was not, at this time,
the Principal Examiner.

For the Course, your Majesty directs, and commands, for the feeling of the
Judges, of the Kings Bench, their Several Opinions, by distributing our Selves,
and enjoining Secrecy; we did first, find an Encounter, in the Opinion, of my
Lord Cook; who seemed to affirm, that such particular, and, (as he called it,)
Auricular Taking of Opinions, was not according to the Custom of this Realm;
And seemed to divine, that his Brethren, would never do it. But when I
replied, that it was our Duty, to pursue your Majesty's Directions; And it were
not amiss, for his Lordship, to leave his Brethren, to their own Answers; It
was so concluded; and his Lordship, did desire, that I might conferr with
Himself; And Mr. Sergeant Mountague, was named, to speak with Justice Crook;
Mr. Sergeant Crew, with Justice Houghton; and Mr. Solliciter, with Justice
Dodderidge. This done, I took my Fellows aside, and advised, that they should
presently speak with the 3. Judges, before I could speak with my Lord Cook,
for doubt of Infusion; And that they should not, in any case, make any doubt to
the Judges, as if they mistrusted, they would not deliver any Opinion apart,
but speak resolutely to them, and only make their Coming to be, to know, what
time they would appoint, to be attended with the Papers. This sorted not amiss;
For Mr. Solliciter, came to me, this Evening, and related to me, that he had
found Judge Dodderidge, very ready, to give Opinion, in secret; And fell upon
the same reason, which upon your Majesty's first Letter, I had used to my Lord
Cook, at the Council Table; which was, that every Judge, was bound, expressly,
by his Oath, to give your Majesty Counsel, when he was called; And whether he
should do it, jointly, or severally, that rested, in your Majesty's good
pleasure, as you would require it. And though the Ordinary Course, was to
assemble them, yet there might intervene Cases, wherein the other Course was
more convenient. The like Answer made Justice Crook. Justice Houghton, who is a
soft Man, seemed desirous, first, to conferr; Alleging, that the other 3.
Judges, had all served the Crown, before they were Judges, but that he had not
been much acquainted, with Business, of this Nature.

We purpose therefore, ^orthwith, they shall be made acquainted with the
Papers; And if that could be done, as suddenly, as this was, I should make
small doubt of their Opinions: And howsoever, I hope, Force of Law, and
President, will bind them to the Truth: Neither am I wholly out of hope, that
my Lord Cook himself, when I have, in some dark manner, put him in doubt, that
he shall be left alone, will not continue singular.

For Owen, I know not the reason, why there should have been no Mention made
thereof, in the last Advertisement: For I must say for my Self, that I have
lost no moment of Time in it, as my Lord of Canterbury can bear me witness. For
having received, from my Lord, an Additional, of great Importance; which was,
that Owen, of his own Accord, after Examination, should compare the Case of
your Majesty, (if you were Excommunicate,) to the Case, of a Prisoner,
Condemned at the Bar; which Additional was subscribed by one Witness; but yet
I perceived it was spoken aloud, and in the Hearing of others; I presently sent
down a Copy thereof, which is now come up, attested with the Hands, of 3. more,
lest there should have been, any Scruple, of Singularis Testis; So as for this
Case, I may say, Omnia parata; And we expect, but a Direction, from your
Majesty, for the Acquainting the Judges severally; Or the 4. Judges, of the
Kings Bench, as your Majesty shall think good.

I forget not, nor forslow not, your Majesty's Commandment, touching
Recusants; Of which, when it is ripe, I will give your Majesty, a true Account,
and what is possible to be done, and where the Impediment is. Mr. Secretary,
brings Bonam Voluntatem, but he is not versed much, in these things; And
sometimes urges the Conclusion, without the premises, and by haste hinders.
It is my Lord Treasurer, and the Exchequer, must help it, if it be helped. I
have heard more ways than one^ of an ofter of 20000 l. per Annum, for farming,
the Penalties of Recusants, not including any Offense Capital, or of Praemunire;
wherein I will presume to say, that my poor Endeavors, since I was, by your
great, and sole grace, your Attorney, have been no small Spurrs, to make them
feel your Laws, and seek this Redemption; Wherein, I must also say, my Lord
Cook has done his part: And I do assure your Majesty, I know it, somewhat
inwardly, and groundedly, that by the Courses we have taken, they conform
daily, and in great Numbers; And I would to God, it were as well a Conversion,
as a Conformity; But if it should die, by Dispensation, or Dissimulation, then
I fear, that whereas your Majesty, has now, so many ill Subjects, poor, and
detected, you shall then have them, rich and dissembled. And therefore, I hold
this offer, very considerable, of so great an Increase, of Revenew; If it can
pass, the fiery Trial, of Religion, and Honor; which I wish, all Projects may
pass.

Thus, in as much, as I have made to your Majesty, somewhat a naked, and
particular account, of Business, I hope your Majesty, will use it accordingly.
God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, reporting the State, of my Lord Chancellers Health. Jan. 29. 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
BEcause I know your Majesty, would be glad, to hear, how it is, with my Lord
Chanceller; And that it pleased him, out of his ancient and great Love, to me;
which, many times, in Sickness, appears most; To admit me, to a great deal of
Speech, with him, this afternoon; which, during these three days, he has
scarcely done to any; I thought it might be pleasing to your Majesty, to
certify you, how I found him. I found him in bed, but his Spirits fresh, and
good, speaking stoutly, and without being spent, or weary; And both willing,
and Beginning of himself, to speak, but wholly of your Majesty's Business.
Wherein I cannot forget, to relate, this particular; That he wished, that his
Sentencing of I. S. at the day appointed, might be his last Work, to conclude
his Services, and express his Affection, toward your Majesty. I ^old him, I
knew your Majesty, would be very desirous, of his Presenc^, that day, So it
might be, without prejudice; But otherwise, your Majesty, esteemed a Servant,
more than a Service; specially such a Servant. Not to trouble your Majesty;
Though good Spirits, in Sickness, be uncertain Kalenders, yet I have very good
Comfort of him, and I hope by that day, etc.

A Letter, to the King, giving him an Account of Peachams Business, and some
others, Jan. 31. 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I Received, this Morning, by Mr. M^rray, a Message, from your Majesty, of some
warrant, and confidence, that I should advertise your Majesty, of your
business, wherein I had part. Wherein, I am first, humbly, to thank your
Majesty, for your good acceptance, of my Endeavors, and Service; which I am
not able to furnish, with any other Quality, save Faith, and Diligence.

For Peachams Case, I have, since my last Letter, been with my Lord Cook,
twice; Once before Mr. S^cretaries going down, to your Majesty; And once since,
which was yesterday: At the Former, of which times, I delivered him Peachams
papers; And at this Latter, the Presidents, which I had, with care, gathered,
and selected: For these Degrees, and order, the Business required.

At the former, I told him, that he knew my Errand, which stood upon two
points: The one to inform him, of the particular Case, of Peachams Treasons;
(For I never give it, other word, to him;) The other, to receive his Opinion,
to my Self, and in secret, according to my Commission, from your Majesty.

At the former time, he fell, upon the same Allegation, which he had begun, at
the Council Table; that Judges, were not to give Opinion, by Fractions, but
entirely, according to the Vote, whereupon they should settle, upon conference:
And that, this Auricular Taking of Opinions, single, and apart, was new, and
dangerous; And other words, more vehement, than I repeat.

I replied, in Civil, and plain, Terms; That I wished his Lordship, in my love
to him, to think better of it; For that this, that his Lordship was pleased, to
put into great Words, seemed to me, and my Fellows, when we spoke of it,
amongst our selves, a reasonable, and familiar Matter, For a King to consult
with his Judges, either assembled, or selected; or one, by one. And then, to
give him a little Outlet, to save his first Opinion, (wherewith he is most
commonly in love,) I added, that Judges, some times, might make a Su^e, to be
spared, for their Opinion, till they had spoken with their Brethren; But, if
the King, upon his own Princely Judgeme^t, for Reason of Estate, should think
it fit, to have it otherwise, and should so demand it, there was no declining:
Nay, that it touched, upon a Violation, of their Oath, which was, to counsel
the King, without Distinction, whether it were jointly, or severally.
Thereupon, I put him the Case, of the Privy Council; As if your Majesty, should
be pleased, to command any of them, to deliver their Opinion, a part, and in
private; whether it were a good Answer, to deny it, otherwise, than if it were
propounded, at the Table. To this he said, That the Cases were not alike,
because this concerned Life. To which I replied, That Questions of Estate,
might concern Thousands of Lives, and many Things more precious, than the
Life, of a particular; As War, and Peace, and the like.

To conclude, his Lordship, tanquam Exitum quaerens, desired me, for the time,
to leave with him, the Papers, without pressing him, to consent, to deliver a
private Opinion, till he had perused them. I said, I would; And the more
willingly, because I thought his Lordship, upon due consideration, of the
Papers, would find the Case, to be so clear a Case, of Treason, as he would
make no difficulty, to deliver his Opinion, in private; And so I was persuaded,
of the rest, of the Judges, of the Kings Bench; who likewise, (as I partly
understood,) made no Scruple, to deliver their Opinion, in private. Whereunto
he said, (which I noted well,) That his Brethren were wise Men; And that, they
might make a show, as if they would give an Opinion, as was required; But the
end would be, that it would come to this; They would say, they doubted of it,
and so pray advice, with the rest. But to this I answered, that I was sorry, to
hear him say so much, lest, if it came so to pass, some that loved him not,
might make a Construction, that that, which he had foretold, he had wrought.
Thus your Majesty see's, that as Solomon says; Gressus nolentis tanquam in
Sepi spinarum; It catches upon every Thing.

The latter Meeting, is yet, of more Importance; For then, coming armed, with
diverse presidents, I thought, to set in, with the best strength, I could, and
said; That before I descended, to the Record, I would break the Case, to him
thus. That it was true, we were to proceed, upon the ancient Statute of King
Edward the 3. because other Temporary Statutes were gone; And therefore, it
must be said in the Indictment; Imaginatus est, et Compassavit, Mortem, et
finalem Destructionem, Domini Regis: Then must the particular Treasons follow
in this manner; viz. Et quod, ad perimplendum nefandum Propositum suum,
composuit, and conscripsit, quendam detestabilem, et venenosum libellum, sive
scriptum, in quo inter alia proditoria, continetur, etc. And then the principal
passages of Treason, taken forth of the Papers, are to be entered, in haec
Verba; And with a Conclusion, in the End; Ad Intentionem, quod Ligeus Populus,
et Very Subditi, Domini Regis, cordia em suum amorem, ^ Domino Rege
retraherent, et ipsum Dominum Regem relinquerent, and Guerram, et
Insurrectionem, contra eum, levarent, et facerent, etc. I have, in this former,
followed the ancient Style, of the Indictments, for brevity sake, though when
we come to the Business it self, we shall enlarge it, according to the use of
the later times. This I represented to him, (being a thing he is well
acquainted with,) that he might perceive, the Platform of that was intended,
without any Mistaking, or Obscurity. But then I fell to the matter it self, to
lo^k him in, as much as I could, viz.

That there be 4. Means or manners, whereby the Death of the King, is
compassed, and imagined.

The first, by some particular Fact, or Plot. The second, by Disabling his
Title; As by affirming, that he is not lawful King; Or that another ought to
be King; Or that he is an Usurper; Or a Bastard; Or the like. The third, by
Subjecting his Title, to the Pope; and thereby Making him, of an Absolute King,
a Conditional King. The fourth, by Disabling his Regiment, and making him
appear, to be incapable, or indign, to reign.
These things, I relate to your Majesty, in sum, as is fit; which when, I
opened to my Lord; I did insist a little more upon, with more efficacy and
edge, and Authority of Law, and Record, than I can now express.

Then I placed Peachams Treason, within the last Division, agreeable to diverse
presidents, whereof I had the Records ready; And concluded, that your Majesty's
Safety, and Life, and Authority, was thus by Law inscansed, and quartered; And
that it was in vain, to fortify, on Three of the sides, and so leave you open
on the Fourth.

It is true, he heard me, in a grave fashion, more than accustomed, and took a
Pen, and took notes of my Divisions; And when he read the Presidents, and
Records, would say; This you mean falls within your first, or your second,
Division. In the end, I expressly demanded his Opinion, as that, whereto both
he, and I was enjoined. But he desired me, to leave the Presidents, with him,
that he might advise upon them. I told him, the rest of my Fellows, would
dispatch their part, and I should be behind with mine; which I persuaded my
Self, your Majesty would impute, rather to his Backwardness, than my
Negligence. He said, as soon as I should understand, that the rest were ready,
he would not be long after, with his Opinion.

For I. S. your Majesty knows, the day draws on; And my Lord Chancellers
Recovery, the Season, and his Age, promising, not to be too hasty. I spoke with
him, on Sunday, at what time, I found him in Bed, but his Spirits strong, and
not spent, or wearied; And spoke wholly of your Business, leading me from one
Matter, to another. And wished, and seemed to hope, that he might attend the
day, for I. S. and it were, (as he said,) to be his last work, to conclude his
Services, and express his Affection, toward your Majesty. I presumed to say to
him, that I knew your Majesty, would be exceeding desirous, of his being
present that day, so as that it might be, without prejudice, to his
continuance; But that, otherwise, your Majesty esteemed a Servant, more than a
Service; especially such a Servant. Surely, in mine Opinion, your Majesty were
better, put off the day^ than want his presence, considering the Cause of the
putting off, is so notorio^s; And then the Capital, and the Criminal, may come
together, the next Term.

I have not been unprofitable, in helping to discover, and examine, within
these few days, a late Patent, by Surreption obtained from your Majesty, of
the greatest Forest, in England, worth 30000 l. under Color, of a Defective
Title, for a matter of 400 l. The Person must be named, because the Patent,
must be questioned. It is a great Person, my Lord of Shrewsbury; Or rather, (as
I think,) a greater than he, which is my Lady of Shrewsbury. But I humbly pray
your Majesty, to know this first, from my Lord Treasurer; who, methinks,
grows even studious, in your Business. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted, Subject, and Servant.
The rather, in regard of Mr. Murray's Absence, I humbly pray your Majesty, to
have a little regard, to this Letter.



A Letter, to the King, touching my Lord Chancellers Amendment, and the putting
off, of J. S. his Cause, February 7. 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
MY Lord Chanceller, sent for me, to speak with me, this Morning, about 8. of
the clock. I perceive, he has now, that Signum Sanitatis, as to feel better
his former weakness. For it is true, I did a little mistrust, that it was but a
Boutade, of Desire, and good Spirit, when he promised himself, strength for
Friday, though I was wonn, and carried with it. But now, I find him, well
inclined, to use, (should I say) your Liberty, or rather your Interdict,
signified by Mr. Secretary, from your Majesty. His Lordship, showed me also,
your own Letter, whereof he had told me before, but had not showed it me. What
shall I say? I do much admire, your Goodness, for writing such a Letter, at
such a time.

He had sent also, to my Lord Treasurer, to desire him, to come to him about
that time. His Lordship came; And, not to trouble your Majesty, with
circumstances, both their Lordships concluded, my Self present, and concurring;
That it could be no prejudice, to your Majesty's Service, to put off the day,
for I. S. till the next Term. The rather, because there are Seven, of your
Privy Council, which are at least, Numerus, and part of the Court, which are by
Infirmity, like to be absent; That is, my Lord Chanceller, my Lord Admiral, my
Lord of Shrewsbury, my Lord of Exceter, my Lord Zouch, my Lord Stanhope, and
Mr. Chanceller of the Duchy: wherefore they agreed, to hold a Council, too
morrow, in the afternoon, for that purpose.

It is true, that I was always of Opinion, that it was no time lost; And I do
think so, the rather, because I could be content, that the Matter of Peacham,
were first settled, and put to a point. For there be, perchance, that would make
the Example upon I.S. to stand for all. For Peacham, I expect, some account,
from my Fellows, this day. If it should fall out otherwise, then, I hope, it
may not, be left so. Your Majesty, in your last Letter, very wisely, put in a
Disjunctive, that the Judges, should deliver an Opinion, privately, either to
my Lord Chanceller, or to our Selves, distributed: His Sickness, made the later
way, to be taken: But the other may be reserved, with some Accommodating, when
we see, the success of the Former.

I am appointed, this day, to attend my Lord Treasurer, for a Proposition, of
Raising Profit; and Revenew, by Infranchising Copyholders. I am right glad, to
see the Patrimonial part of your Revenew, well looked into, as well as the
Fiscal. And I hope it will so be, in other parts, as well as this. God preserve
your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, of account, of Owens Cause, etc. 11 February, 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
MY Self, with the rest, of your Counsel Learned, confered with my Lord Cook,
and the rest of the Judges, of the Kings Bench, only, being met at my Lords
Chamber, concerning the business of Owen. For although it be true, that your
Majesty, in your Letter; did mention, that the same Course, might be held, in
the Taking of Opinions, apart, in this, which was prescribed, and used, in
Peachams Cause; yet both my Lords of the Council, and we amongst our Selves,
holding it, in a Case so clear, not needful; But rathat it would import, a
diffidence in us, and deprive us, of the means, to debate it, with the Judges,
(if cause were) more strongly, (which is somewhat,) we thought best, rather to
use this Form.

The Judges desired us, to leave the Examinations, and Papers, with them, for
some little time, to consider, (which is a thing they use;) But, I conceive,
there will be, no manner of Question, made of it. My Lord Chief Justice, to
show forwardness, (as I interpret it,) showed us passages of Suarez, and
others, thereby to prove, that though your Majesty, stood not Excommunicate, by
particular Sentence, yet by the General Bulls, of Coena Domini, and others, you
were, upon the matter, Excommunicate; And therefore, that the Treason was, as
De praesenti. But I, that foresee, that if that Course should be held, when it
comes to a public day, to disseminate to the Vulgar, an Opinion, that your
Majesty's Case is all one, as if you were de Facto, particularly, and expr^s^y,
Excommunicate, it would but increase, the danger of your Person, with those,
that are Desperate Papists; And that it is needless; Commended my Lords
Diligence, but withal, put it by; And fell upon the other Course, (which is
the true way;) That is, that whosoever shall affirm, in Diem, or sub
Condition, that your Majesty, may be destroyed, is a Traitor, de praesenti;
For that, he makes you, but Tennant for Life, at the will of another. And I
put, the Duke of Buckinghams Case, who said; That if the King, caused him to be
arrested, of Treason, he would stab him; And the Case, of the Imposturess,
Elizabeth Barton, that said, That if King Henry the 8. took not his Wife again,
Katharine Dowager, he should be no longer King; And the like.

It may be, these particulars, are not worth the Relating. But because, I find
nothing in the World, so important to your Service, as to have you thoroughly
in^ormed, (the Ability of your Direction considered,) it maket^ me thus to do;
Most humbly praying your Majesty, to admonish me, if I be over-troublesom.

For Peacham, the rest of my Fellows, are ready, to make their Report, to your
Majesty, at such time, and in such manner, as your Majesty shall require it. My
Self yesterday, took my Lord Cook aside, after the rest were gone, and told
him, all the rest were ready, and I was now to require, his Lordships Opinion,
according to my Commission. He said, I should have it; And repeated that,
twice, or thrice, as thinking he had gone too far, in that kind of Negative,
(to deliver any Opi^ion apart,) before; And said, he would tell it me, within a
very short time, though he were not that instant ready. I have tossed this
Business, in omnes parts, whereof I will give your Majesty knowledge, when
time serves. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, about a Certificate, of my Lord Cook. Feb. 14. 1614.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I Send your Majesty, enclosed, my Lord Cooks Answers. I will not call them
Rescripts; Much less Oracles. They are of his own hand, and offered to me, as
they are, in writing, though I am glad of it, for mine own Discharge. I thought
it my duty, as soon as I received them, instantly, to send them to your
Majesty; And forbear, for the present, to speak further of them. I, for my
part, (though this Muscovia Weather, be a little too hard, for my
Constitution;) was ready, to have waited, upon your Majesty, this day, all
respects set aside; But my Lord Treasurer, in respect of the season, and much
other Business, was willing to save me. I will only conclude, touching these
Papers, with a Text, Divided, I can not say; Oportet isthaec fieri; But I may
say; Finis autem nondum. God preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, touching Matter, of his Revenew, and Profit. April 25.
1615.
It may please your Majesty,
I May remember, what Tacitus says, by occasion, that Tiberius, was often, and
long, absent, from Rome; In Vrbe, et parva et magna Negotia, Imperatorem simul
premunt; But says He, In recessu, dimissis rebus, minoris momenti, summae
rerum magn^rum magis agitantur. This makes me think, it shall be no
Incivility, to trouble your Majesty, with business, during your abode from
London; Knowing^, that your Majesty's Meditations, are the principal wheel, of
your Estate; And being warranted, from a former Commandment, which I received
from you.

I do now, only send your Majesty, these Papers enclosed; because I do
greatly desire, so far forth, to preserve my credit with you, as thus; That
whereas lately, (perhaps, out of too much Desire, which induces too much
belief,) I was bold to say, that I thought it as easy for your Majesty, to
come out of Want, as to go forth of your Gallery; your Majesty, would not take
me, for a Dreamer, or a Projectour; I send your Majesty therefore, some Grounds
of my Hopes. And for that Paper, which I have gathered, of Increasments
sperate, I beseech you, to give me leave, to think, that if any of the
particulars, do fail, it will be rather, for want of workmanship, in those
that shall deal in them, than want of Materials, in the Things themselves. The
other Paper, has many Discarding Cards; And I send it chiefly, that your
Majesty, may be the less surprised, by Projectors; who pretend, sometimes^
great Discoveries, and Inventions in Things, that have been propounded, and,
perhaps, after a better fashion, long since. God Almighty preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, reporting the Day of Hearing, of I. S. his Cause, in
the Star Chamber. 29 April 1615.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I. S. his Day is past, and well past. I hold it to be Ianus Bifrons; It has a
good Aspect, to that which is past; And to the Future: And does both ^atisfie,
and prepare. All did well: My Lord Chief Justice, delivered the Law, for the
Benevolence, strongly; I would he had done it timely. Mr. Chanceller of the
Exchequer spoke finely, somewhat after the manner, of my late Lord Privy Seal;
Not all out so sharply, but as elegantly. Sir Thomas Lake, (who is also new, in
that Court,) did very well, familiarly, and Counseller-like. My Lord of
Pembroke, (who is likewise a stranger there,) did extraordinarily well, and
became himself well, and had an evident Applause. I meant well also; And
because my Information, was the Ground; having spoken out of a few Heads, which
I had gathered; (For I seldom do more,) I set down, as soon, as I came home,
cursorily, a Frame of that, I had said; Though I persuade my self, I spoke it,
with more life. I have sent it to Mr. Murray, sealed; If your Majesty, have so
much idle time, to look upon it, it may give some light, of the Days work: But
I most humbly pray your Majesty, to pardon the Errors. God preserve you ever.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, and devoted Servant.

A Letter, to the King, concerning the New Company: August 12. 1615.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
Your Majesty, shall shortly receive the Bill, for the Incorporation, of the
New Company; together with a Bill, for the Privy Seal, being a Dependancy
thereof. For this Morning, I subscribed, and do^ke^^ed, them both. I think it
therefore now time, to repre^sent to your Majesty's high wisdom, that which I
conceive, and have had long in my mind, concerning your Majesty's service, and
honorable profit in this Business.

This Project, which has proceeded, from a worthy Service, of the Lord
Treasurer, I have, from the beginning, constantly affected; As may well appear,
by my sundry Labors, from time to time, in the same. For I hold it, a worthy
character, of your Majesty's Reign, and Times; Insomuch, as though your
Majesty, might have, at this time, (as is spoken,) a great Annual Benefit, for
the Quitting of it, yet I shall never be the Man, that should wish your
Majesty, to deprive your Self, of that Beatitude; Beatius est dare, quam
accipere; In this cause; But to sacrifice your profit, (though as your
Majesty's State is, it be precious to you,) to so great a Good of your Kingdom:
Although this Project, is not without a Profit, immediate, unto you, by the
increasing of Customs, upon the materials, of Dies.

But here is the Case. The New Company, by this Patent, and Privy Seal, are to
have two Things, wholly diverse, from the first Intention; Or rather, Ex
Diametro, opposite unto the same; which nevertheless, they must, of necessity
have, or else the Work is overthrown. So as I may call them Mala Necessaria,
but yet withal Temporary. For, as Men make War, to have Peace, so these
Merchants, must have license, for Whites, to the end, to banish Whites; And
they must have license, to use Teyntours, to the end to banish Teyntours.

This is therefore that I say; your Majesty, upon these two points, may justly,
and with honor, and with preservation of your first Intention, inviolate,
demand Profit, in the Interim, as long as these unnatural points continue, and
then to cease: For your Majesty, may be pleased to observe, that they are to
have all the Old Companies Profit, by the Trade of Whites; They are, again to
have, upon the proportion of Clothes, which they shall vent, died, and
dressed, the Flemmings profit, upon the Teyntour. Now then I say; As it had
been, too good Husbandry, for a King, to have taken profit of them, if the
Project could have been effected at once, (as was voiced;) So on the other
side, it might be, perchance, too little Husbandry, and Providence, to take
nothing of them, for that, which is merely lucrative to them, in the mean time.
Nay, I say further, this will greatly conduce, and be a kind of Security, to
the End desired. For I always feared, and do yet fear, that when Men, by
condition Merchants, though never so honest, have gotten into their Hands, the
Trade of Whites, and the Dispensation to Teyntour; wherein they shall reap
profit, for that, which they never sowed; But have gotten themselves
Certainties, in respect of the States hopes; They are like enough, to sleep
upon this, as upon a Pillow; And to make no haste, to go on with the rest. And
though it may be said, that that is a thing, will easily appear to the State,
yet, (no doubt,) means may be devised, and found, to draw the Business in
length. So that I conclude, that if your Majesty, take a profit of them, in the
Interim, (considering you refuse profit, from the Old Company,) it will be both
Spurr, and Bridle, to them, to make them Pace aright, to your Majesty's End.

This in all humbleness, according to my vowed Care, and Fidelity, being no
Man's Man, but your Majesty's, I present, leave, and submit, to your Majesty's
better Judgment; And I could wish, your Majesty would speak, with Sir Thomas
Lake in it; who, besides his good Habit, which he has in business, bears,
(methinks,) an indifferent Hand in this particular; And (if it please your
Majesty,) it may proceed, as from your Self, and not as a Motion, or
Observation, of mine.

Your Majesty, need not, in this, to be straightened in time; As if this must be
demanded, or treated, before you sign their Bill. For I, foreseeing this, and
foreseeing, that many things might fall out, which I could not foresee, have
handled it so, as with their good Contentment, there is a Power of Revocation,
inserted into their Patent. And so commending your Majesty, to Gods blessed,
and precious Custody; I rest,

Your Majesty's, most humble, and devoted, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching Ropers place. January 22. 1615.
SIR, Sending to the King, upon Occasion, I would not fail, to salute you, by
my Letter; which, that it may be more than two lines, I add this for News; That
as I was sitting, by my Lord Chief Justice, upon the Commission, for the
Indicting, of the Great Person; One of the Judges asked Him, whether Roper were
dead? He said, He, for his part, knew not; Another of the Judges answered; It
should concern you, my Lord, to know it. Whereupon he turned his Speech to me,
and said; No, Mr. Attorney, I will not wrestle, now in my latter times. My
Lord, (said I,) you speak like a wise Man. Well, (says he,) they have had no
luck with it, that have had it. I said again, Those days be past. Here you
have the Dialogue, to make you merry. But in sadness, I was glad to perceive he
meant not to contest. I can but honor, and love you, and rest,

Your assured Friend and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, advising, how to break off, with the New Company.
February 3. 1615.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I Spoke, yesternight, long, with my Lord Cook; And for the Rege inconsul^o, I
conceive by him, it will be, An amplius deliberandum censeo, (as I thought at
first,) so as, for the present, your Majesty, shall not need, to renew your
Commandment of Stay. I spoke with him, also, about some Propositions,
concerning your Majesty's casual Revenew; wherein, I found him, to consent with
me, fully; Assuming, nevertheless, that he had thought of them before: But it
is one Thing, to have the Vapor of a Thought; Another, to digest Business
aright. He, on his part, imparted to me, diverse Things, of great weight,
concerning the Reparat^on, of your Majesty's Means, and Finances, which I heard
gladly; Insomuch, as he perceiving the same, I think, was the readier, to open
himself to me, in one Circumstance, which he did much inculcate. I concur
fully with him, that they are to be held secret: For I never saw, but that
Business, is like a Child, which is framed invisibly in the Womb; And if it
come forth too soon, it will be abortive. I know, in most of them, the
Prosecution must rest, much, upon my Self. But I, that had the Power, to
prevail, in the Farmers Case, of the French Wines, without the help, of my Lord
Cook, shall be better able, to go through these, with his help, the ground
being no less just. And this I shall ever add of mine own, that I shall ever
respect your Majesty's Honor, no less than your Profit; And shall also take
care, according to my pensive manner, that that, which is good, for the
present, have not in it, hidden Seeds of future Inconveniences.

The Matter, of the New Company, was referred, to me by the Lords, of the Priv^
Council; wherein, after some private Speech, with Sir Lionel Cranfield, I made
that Report, which I held, most agreeable to Truth, and your Majesty's Service.
If this New Company, break, it must either, be put upon the Patent, or upon the
Order, made by themselves. For the Patent, I satisfied the Board, that there
was no Title in it, which was not, either Verbatim, in the Patent, of the Old
Company; Or by special warrant, from the Table, inserted. My Lord Cook, with
much respect to me, acknowledged, but disliked the Old Patent it self, and
disclaimed, his being at the Table, when the Additions were allowed. But, in my
Opinion, (howsoever my Lord Cook, to magnify his Science in Law, draws every
thing, (though sometimes unproperly, and unseasonably,) to that kind of
Question,) it is not convenient, to break the Business, upon those Points. For
considering, they were but Clauses, that were in the former Patents, and in
many other Patents, of Companies; And that the Additions, likewise, passed the
Allowance, of the Table, it will be, but clamoured, and, perhaps, conceived,
that to quarrel them now, is but an Occasion taken; And that the Times are
changed, rather than the Matter. But that, which preserves entire your
Majesty's Honor, and the Constancy of your Proceedings, is to put the Breach,
upon their Orders.

For this Light, I gave in my Report, which the Table readily apprehended, and
much approved; That if the Table, reject their Orders, as unlawful, and
unjust, it does free you, from their Contract: For whosoever contracteth, or
undertaketh any thing, is always understood, to perform it, by lawful means;
So as, they have plainly abused the State; if that which they have undertaken,
be either impossible, or unjust.

I am bold, to present this Consideration, to that excellent Faculty, of your
Majesty's Judgment; because, I think, it imports that future Good, which may
grow to your Majesty, in the close, of this Business; That the Falling of^, be
without all Exception. God have you in his precious Custody.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and bounden, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to the King, touching the Lord Chancellers Sickness. Feb. 9. 1615.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Am glad, to understand, by Mr. Murray, that your Majesty, accepts well, of
my poor Endeavors, in opening unto you, the passages of your Service; That
Business may come the less crude, and the more prepared, to your Royal
Judgment; the perfection whereof, as I cannot expect, they should satisfy, in
every particular, so I hope, through my Assiduity, there will result a good
Total.

My Lord Chancellers Sickness, falls out; dur^ Tempore. I have always known
him, a wise Man, and of just Elevation, for Monarchy: But your Majesty's
service must not be Mortal. And if you leese him, as your Majesty has, now of
late, purchased many Hearts, by depressing the Wicked: So God, does minister
unto you, a Counterpart, to do the like, by raising the Honest. God evermore
preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant.

A Letter, to the King, of my Lord Chancellers Amendment, and the Difference
begun, between the Chancery, and Kings Bench, Feb. 15. 1615.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I Do find, ( God be thanked,) a sensible Amendment, in my Lord Chanceller. I
was with him yesterday in private conference, about half an Hour: And this day
again, at such time, as he did seal, which he endured well, almost the space of
an Hour, though the Vapor of Wax, be offensive to him. He is free from a
Fever, Perfect in his powers, of Memory, and Speech; And not hollow, in his
Voice, nor Look; He has no panting, or laboring, Respiration; Neither are his
Coughs dry, or weak: But whosoever thinks, his Disease is but Melancholy, he
makes no true Judgment of it; For it is, plainly, a formed, and deep Cough,
with a Pectoral surcharge; So that, at times, he does almost, Animam agere. I
forbear, to advertise your Majesty, of the Care I took, to have Commissions in
readiness, because Mr. Secretary Lake, has let me understand, he signified as
much, to your Majesty: But, I hope, there shall be no use, for them, at this
time. And, as I am glad, to advertise your Majesty, of the Amendment, of your
Chancellers Person; So I am sorry, to accompany it, with an Advertisement, of
the Sickness, of your Chancery Court, though, (by the Grace of God,) that Cure
will be much easier, than the other. It is true, I did lately write to your
Majesty, that for the Matter, of the Habeas Corpora, (which was the third
Matter in Law, you had given me in charge;) I did think, the Communion in
Service, between my Lord Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Justice, in the great
Business of Examination, would so join them, as they would not square, at this
time; But pardon me, (I humbly pray your Majesty,) if I have too Reasonable
Thoughts.

And yet, that which happened, the last day, of the Term, concerning certain
Indictments, in the Nature of Praemunire, preferred into the Kings Bench, but
not sound; Is not so much, as is voiced abroad; (though I must say, it is omni
tempore Nimium, et hoc tempo^e Alienum;) And therefore, I beseech your Majesty,
not to give any Believing Ear, to Reports, but to receive the Truth, from me,
that am your Attorney General, and ought to stand indifferent, for
Jurisdictions, of all Courts; which Account, I cannot give your Majesty now,
because I was then absent^ And some are now absent, which are properly, and
authentically, to inform me, touching that which passed. Neither let this, any
ways, disjoynt, your other Business; For there is a time, for all things; And
this very Accide^t, may be turned, to Good. Not that I am of Opinion, that that
same Cunning Maxim, of Separa, and Impera, which sometimes holds in Persons,
can well take place in Jurisdictions; But because, some good Occasion, by this
Excess, may be taken, to settle that, which would have been more dangerous, if
it had gone out, by little and little. God ever preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, and most bounden Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching the Difference, between the Court
of Chancery, and the Kings Bench. Febr. 19. 1615.
SIR, I received, this Morning, from you, two Letters, by the same Bearer; The
one written before, the other, after his Majesty had received my last.

In this Difference, between the two Courts, of Chancery, and Kings Bench; (For
so I had rather take it, for this Time, than between the Persons, of my Lord
Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Justice,) I marvail not, if Rumor get way, of
true Relation. For I know Fame has swift wings; Specially that, which has
black Feathers: But within these two days, (For sooner I cannot be ready,) I
will write unto his Majesty, both the Narrative truly, and my Opinion
sincerely; Ta^ing much comfort, that I serve such a King, as has Gods
Property, in discerning truly, of Men's Hearts. I purpose, to speak, with my
Lord Chanceller, this day; And so to exhibit, that Cordial, of his Majesty's
Grace; As I hope, that other Accident, will rather rouse, and raise his Spirit,
than deject him, or incline him to Relapse. Mean while, I commend the Wit, of a
mean Man, that said this other day; Well, the next Term, you shall have an old
man, come with a Beesom of Wormwood, in his Hand, that will sweep away all
this. For it is, my Lord Chancellers Fashion, specially toward the Summer, to
carry a Posie of Wormwood. I write this Letter in Haste, to return your
Messenger with it. God keep you, and long, and happily, may you serve his
Majesty.

Sir, I thank you for your Inward Letter; I have burned it, as you commanded.
But the Fire it has kindled in me; will never be extinguished.

Your true and affectionate Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching a Motion, to swear him Counseller^
Febr. 21. 1615.
SIR, My Lord Chancellers Health, growing with the Days, and his Resignation,
being an Uncertainty, I would be glad, you went on, with my first Motion, my
swearing Privy Counselor. This I desire, not so much, to make my Self, more
sure of the other; and to put it past Competition; (For herein, I rest wholly
upon the King, and your excellent self,) But, because I find hourly, that I
need this Strength, in his Majesty's service; Both ^or my better warrant, and
satisfaction of my Conscience, that I deal not in Things, above my Vocation;
And for my better Countenance, and Prevailing, where his Majesty's service, is,
under any pretext, opposed, I would it were dispatched. I remember, a greater
Matter than this, was dispatched, by a Letter, from Royston; which was, the
Placing of the Archbishop, that now is: And I imagine, the King did it on
purpose, that the Act might appear, to be his own.

My Lord Chanceller told me, yesterday, in plain Terms, that if the King, would
ask his opinion, touching the Person, that he would commend, to succeed him,
upon Death, or Disability, he would name me, for the fittest Man. You may
advise, whether use, may not be made of this offer.

I sent, a pretty while since, a Paper, to Mr. John Murrey; which was, indeed,
a little Remembrance, of some Things past; concerning my honest, and faithful
Services to his Majesty; Not by way of Boasting, (from which I am far,) but as
Tokens, of my studying his Service; uprightly, and carefully. If you be
pleased, to call for the Paper, which is with Mr. John Murrey; And to find a
fit time, that his Majesty, may cast an eye upon it, I think it will do no
Hurt: And I have written to Mr. Murrey, to deliver the Paper, if you call for
it. God keep you in all Happiness.

Your truest Servant.

A Letter, to the King, concerning the Praemunire, in the Kings Bench, against
the Chancery. Febr. 21. 1615.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Was yesterday, in the Afternoon, with my Lord Chanceller, according to your
Commandment, which I received by the Master of the Horse; And find the Old
Man, well comforted; Both toward God, and toward the World, and that same
middle Comfort, which is Divine, and Humane, proceeding from your Majesty,
being Gods Lieutenant, on Earth, I am persuaded, has been a great Cause, that
such a Sickness, has been portable, to such an Age. I did not fail, in my
Conjecture, that this Business^ of the Chancery, has stirred him; He shows
to despise it, but he is full of it; And almost, like a young Duellist, that
finds himself behind hand.

I will now, as your Majesty requires, give you a true Relation, of that which
has passed; Neither will I decline, your Royal Commandment, for delivering my
Opinion also, though it be a tender Subject, to write on; But I, that account
my Being, but as an Accident to my service, will neglect no duty upon
Self-Safety.

First, it is necessary, I let your Majesty know, the Ground of the Difference,
between the Two Courts; that your Majesty, may the better understand the
Narrative.

There was a Statute made, 27 Edw. 3. Cap. 1. which (no doubt) in the principal
Intention thereof, was ordained, against those, that sued to Rome^ wherein
there are Words, somewhat general, against any, that questioneth, or
impeacheth, any Judgment, given in the Kings Courts, or in any other Court.
Upon these doubtful words ( other Courts,) the Controversy grows. For the
sounder Interpretation, takes them, to be meant, of those Courts, which
though, locally, they were not held at Rome, or where the Popes Chair was, but
h^re within the Realm; yet, in their Jurisdiction, had their Dependence, upon
the Court of Rome; As were the Court of the Legate here, and the Courts of the
Archbishops, and Bishops, which were then, but subordinate Judgment Seats, to
that high Tribunal of Rome. And for this Construction, the Opposition of the
Words (if they be well observed.) between the Kings Cour^s, and other Courts,
makes very much: For it imports, as if those other Courts, were not the
Kings Courts. Also, the main Scope of the Statute, fortifieth the same: And
lastly, the Practice of many Ages. The other Interpretation, (which cleaves to
the Letter,) expounds the Kings Courts, to be the Courts of Law, only, and
other Courts, to be Courts of Equity, as the Chancery, Exchequer-chamber,
Duchy, etc. Though this also flies, indeed, from the Letter, for that all
these, are the Kings Courts.

There is also another Statute, which is but a simple Prohibition, and not with
a Penalty, of a Praemunire, (as the other is;) That after Judgments given in
the Kings Courts, the parties shall be in Peace, except ^he Judgment be
undone, by Error, or Attaint, which is a Legal form, of Reversal. And of this
also, I hold, the Sounder Interpretation to be, to settle Possessions^ against
Disturbances, and not to take away Remedy, in Equity, where those Judgments,
are obtained, ex Rigore Iuris, and against good Conscience.

But upon these two Statutes, there has been, a late Conceit in some, that if
a Judgment, pass, at the Common Law, against any, that he may not, after ^ue,
for Relief in Chancery: And if he does, both He, and his Counsel, and his
Sollicitours, yea and the Judge in Equity himself, are within the Danger, of
those Statutes.

Here your Majesty, has the true state, of the Question, which I was
necessarily to open to you first, because your Majesty, calls for this
Relation; Not as News, but as Business. Now to the Historical part.

It is the Course, of the Kings Bench, that they give in Charge to a Grand
Jury, offenses of all Natures, to be presented within Middlesex, where the said
Court is; And the manner is, to enumerate them, as it were, i^ Articles. This
was done by Justice Crook, the Wednesday, before the Term ended. And that
Article, ( If any Man, after a Judgment given, had drawn the said Judgment,
to a new Examination, in any other Court) was by him, specially, given in
charge; which had not used to be given, in charge before. It is true, it was
not solemnly dwelt upon, but, as it were, thrown in amongst the rest.

The last day, of the Term; (And that which all Men condemn, the supposed last
day, of my Lord Chancellers life;) There were two Indictments preferred, of
Praemunire, for suing in Chancery, after Judgment in Common Law; The one by
Rich. Glanvile, the other by William Allen: The former against Courtney, the
party in Chancery, Gibb the Counselor, and Deurst the Clark; The latter,
against Alderman Bowls, and Humfry Smith, parties in Chancery; Sergeant More
the Counselor, Elias Wood, Solliciter in the Cause, and Sir John Tindall, Mr.
of the Chancery, and an Assessor, to my Lord Chanceller.

For the Cases themselves, it were too long, to trouble your Majesty, with
them; But this I will say; If they were set on, that preferred them, they were
the worst Marks-men, that ever were, that set them on. For there could not have
been chosen; two such Causes, to the Honor, and Advantage, of the Chancery,
for the Justness of the Decrees, and the Foulness, and Scandal, both of Fact,
and person, in those that impeach the Decrees.

The Grand Jury, consisting, (as it seems,) of very Substantial, and
Intelligent, Persons, would not find the Bills; Notwithstanding, they were
clamoured by ^he parties, and twice sent back, by the Court; And in Conclusion,
resolutely, 17 of 19, found an Ignoramus: wherein, for that time, I think,
Ignoramus, was wiser, than those that know too much.

Your Majesty will pardon me, if I be sparing, in delivering to you, some other
Circumstances, of Aggravation, and of Concurrences, of some like Matters, the
same day; as if it had been some Fatal constellation. They be not things, so
sufficiently tried, as I dare put them, into your Ear.

For my Opinion, I cannot but begin, with this Preface; That I am infinitely
sorry, that your Majesty is thus put, to salve, and ^ure, not only Accidents
of Time, but Errors of Servants: For I account this, a kind of Sickness, of
my Lord Cooks, that comes, almost, in as ill a time, as the Sickness, of my
Lord Chanceller. And as (I think,) it was one of the wisest parts, that ever he
played, when he went down, to your Majesty, to Roiston, and desired, to have my
Lord Chanceller, joined with him; So this was one of the weakest parts, that
ever he played, to make all the World perceive, that my Lord Chanceller, is
severed from him, at this time.

But for that, which may concern your Service, which is my End, (leaving other
Men to their own ways;) First, my Opinion is plainly, that my Lord Cook, at
this time, is not to be disgraced; Both because, he is so well habituate, for
that which remain^th, of these Capital Causes; And also, for that, which I
^inde, is in his Breast, touching your Finances, and Matters of Repair, of your
Estate. And, (if I might speak it,) as I think, it were good, his hopes were
at an end, in some kind, so I could wish, they were raised, in some other.

On the other side, this great, and public Affront, not only to the Reverend,
and well deserving, person, of your Chanceller; (And, at a time, when he was
thought, to lie, on Dying, which was barbarous;) But to your High Court of
Chancery, which is the Court, of your absolute power; May not, (in my Opinion,)
pass lightly, nor end, only, in some Formal Atonement; But Use is to be made
thereof, for the settling of your Authority, and strengthening of your
Praerogative, according to the true Rules of Monarchy.

Now to reconcile, and accommodate these two Advices, which seem almost
opposite. First, your Majesty, may not see it, (though I con^^ss it be
suspicious,) that my Lord Cook was, any way, a ^orehand, privy to that, which
was done; Or that he did set it, or animate it; But only took the Matter, as
it came before him; And that his Error was only, that at such a time, he did
not divert it, in some good manner.

Secondly, if it be true, (as is reported,) that any of the Puisne Judges, did
stir this Business; Or that, they did openly revile, and menace the Jury, for
doing their Conscience; (A^ they did, honestly, and truly,) I think, that
Judge, is worthy, to leese his place. And to be plain with your Majesty, I do
not think, there is any Thing, a greater Polychreston, or ad multa utile, to
your Affairs, than upon a just, and fit Occasion, to make some Example, against
the Presumption, of a Judge, in Causes, that conc^rn your Majesty: whereby the
whole Body, of those Magistrates, may be contained the better in awe; And it
may be, this will light, upon no unfit Subject, of a Person, that is Rude, and
that no Man cares for.

Thirdly, if there be, no one, so much in fault, (which I cannot yet affirm,
either way, and there must be a just Ground, God forbid el^e;) yet I should
think, that the Very Presumption, of Going so far, in so high a Cause,
deserves to have that done, which was done in this very case, upon the
Indictment of Sergeant Heal, in Queen Elizabeth's time; that the Judges, should
answer it, upon their knees, before your Majesty, or your Council, and receive
a sharp Admonition: At which time also, my Lord Wray, being then Chief Justice,
slipped the Collar, and was forborne.

Fourthly, for the persons themselves, Glanvile, and Allen, which are base
Fellows, and turbulent, I think, there will be discovered, and proved against
them, (besides the preferring of the Bil's,) such Combinations, and
Cont^mptuous Speeches, and Behaviors; As there will be good Ground, to call
them, and perhaps some of their petty Counselors, at Law, into the
Star Chamber.

In all this, which I have said, your Majesty, may be pleased to observe, that
I do not engage you much, in the main point of the Jurisdiction; For which I
have a great deal of Reason, which I now forbear. But two Things, I wish to be
done. The one, that your Majesty, take this occasion, to redouble unto all your
Judges, your ancient, and true Charge, and Rule, That you will endure, no
Innovating, the Point of Jurisdiction; But will have every Court, empaled,
within their own Presidents; And not assume to themselves, new Powers, upon
Conceits, and Inventions, of Law: The other, that in these high Causes, that
touch upon State, and Monarchy, your Majesty give them straight Charge, that
upon any Occasions intervenient hereafter, they do not make the Vulgar, party
to their Contestations, by public Handling them, before they have consulted
with your Majesty, to whom the Reiglement, of those things, only appertains.

To conclude, I am not without hope, that your Majesty, managing this Business,
according to your great Wisdom; (unto which I acknowledge my Self, not to be
worthy, to be Card-holder, or a Candle-holder;) will make profit, of this
Accident, as a Thing of Gods sending.

Lastly, I may not forget, to represent to your Majesty, that there is no
Thinking of Arraignments, until these Things, be somewhat accommodate; And
some outward, and superficial, Reconciliation, at least, made, between my Lord
Chanceller, and my Lord Chief Justice. For this Accident, is a Banquet, to all
the Delinquents Friends. But this is a Thing, that falls out, naturally, of
it Self; In respect, of the Judges Going Circuit, and my Lord Chancellers
Infirmity, with Hope of Recovery. And although this p^otraction of Time, may
breed some doubt of Mutability, yet I have lately learned, out of an excellent
Letter, of a certain King; That the Sun shows, sometimes, watery, to our Eyes,
but when the Cloud is gone, the Sun is as before. God ever preserve your
Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant.

A Letter, to the King, of Advice, upon the Breach of the New Company. Febr:
25. 1615.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
YOur Privy Council, have wisely, and truly, discerned, of the Orders, and
Demands, of the New Company, that they are unlawful, and unjust; And
themselves, have now acknowledged, the Work impossible, without them, by their
Petition in Writing, now registered, in the Council-Book: So as this Conclusion,
(of their own making,) is become peremptory, and final to themselves; And the
Impossibility confessed, the Practice, and Abuse, reserved to the Judgment,
the State shall make of it,

This Breach then, of this great Contract, is wholly on their part; which could
not have been, if your Majesty, had broken, upon the Patent: For the Patent,
was your Majesty's Act; The Orders, are their Act; And in the former Case, they
had not been liable, to further Question, now they are.

There rest two Things, to be considered: The one if they, (like Proteus, when
he is hard held,) shall yet again, vary their shape; And shall quit their
Orders, convinced of Injustice, and lay their Imposition only, upon the Trade
of Whites, whether your Majesty, shall further expect? The other, if your
Majesty dissolve them, upon this Breach, on their part, what is further to be
done, for the setting of the Trade, again, in joint, and for your own Honor,
and profit? In both which points, I will not presume to give Opinion, but
only, to break the Business, for your Majesti^s better Judgment.

For the first, I am sorry, the Occasion was given, (by my Lord Cooks Speech,
at this time, of the Commitment of some of them;) That they should seek, Omnem
movere lapidem, to help themselves. Better it had been, if (as my Lord Penton
said to me, that Morning, very judiciously, and with a great Deal of
Foresight;) That, for that time, they should have had, a Bridge, made for t^em,
to be gone. But my Lord Cook flows, according to his own Tides, and not
according to the Tides of Business. The things which my Lord Cook said, was
good, and too little, but, at this time, it was too much. But that is past.
Howsoever, if they should go back, and seek again, to entertain your Majesty,
with new Orders, or Offers, (as is said to be intended,) your Majesty has
ready; two Answers, of Repulse, if it please your Majesty to use them.

The one, that this is now the Fourth time, that they have mainly broken, with
your Majesty, and contradicted themselves. First, they undertook, to dye, and
dress, all the Cloa^hes of the Realm; Soon after, they wound themselves, into
the Trade, of Whites, and came down to the proportion contracted. Secondly,
they ought to have performed that Contract according to their Subscription, pro
rata, without any of these Orders, and Impositions. Soon after, they deserted
their Subscription, and had recourse, to these Devices, of Orders. Thirdly, if
by Order, and not by Subscription, yet their Orders, should have laid it, upon
the Whites, which is an Unlawful, and Prohibited, Trade. Nevertheless, they
would have brought in, lawful, and settled Trades, full Manufactures,
Merchandise of all Natures, Poll-Money, or Brotherhood-Money, and I cannot tell
what. And now lastly, it seems, they would go Back, to lay it, upon the
Whites: And therefore, whether you Majesty, will any more rest, and build this
great Wheel, of your Kingdom, upon these broken, and brittle, Pinns, and try
Experiments further, upon the Health, and Body, of your State, I leave to your
Princely Judgment.

The other Answer, of Repulse, is a kind of Apposing them, what they will do,
after the three years, contracted for? Which is a point, hitherto, not much
stirred, though Sir Lionell Cranfield, has ever beaten upon it, in his Speech
with me: For after the three years, they are not tied, otherwise, than as
Trade shall give Encouragement; Of which Encouragement, your Majesty, has a
bitter Taste. And if they should hold on, according to the third years
Proportion, and not rise on, by further gradation, your Majesty has not your
End. No, I fear, and have long feared, that this Feeding of the Foreiner, may
be dangerous: For as we may think, to hold up our Clothing, by Vent of Whites,
till we can dye, and dress; So they, (I mean the Dutch,) will think to hold
up, their Manufacture, of Dying, and Dressing, upon our Whites, till they can
cloth: So as your Majesty, has the greatest reason, in the World, to make the
New Company, to come in, and strengthen that part, of their Contract; And they
refusing, (as it is confidently believed they will,) to make their Default,
more visible, to all Men.

For the second main part, of your Majesty's Consultation; That is, what shall
be done, supposing an absolute Breach; I have had some Speech, with Mr.
Secretary Lake, and likewise with Sir Lionell Cranfield; And, (as I conceive,)
t^ere may be three ways, taken into consideration. The first is, that the Old
Company be restored, who, (no doubt,) are in Appetite, and (as I find by Sir
Lionell Cranfield,) not unprepared; And that the Licenses; The one, that of
30000 Clothes, which was the old License; The other, that of my Lord of
Cumberlands, which is, without stint, (my Lord of Cumberland receiving
Satisfaction;) be compounded, into one entire License, without stint; And then,
that they, amongst themselves, take order, for that profit, which has been
offered to your Majesty. This is a plain, and known way, wherein your Majesty,
is not an Actour; only it has ^his, that the Work, of Dying, and Dressing,
Clothes, which has been so much glorified, seems to be wholly relinquished,
if you leave there. The second is, that there be a free Trade, of Cloth, with
this Difference; That the Dyed, and dressed, pay no Custom, and the Whites
double Custom, it being a Merchandise prohibited, and only licentiate. This
continues in life, and ^ame, the ^ork desired, and will have a popular
Applause. But I do confess, I did ever think, that Trading, in Companies, is
most agreeable to the English Nature, which wantet^ that same general Vein, of
a Republic, which runs in the Dutch; And s^rveth to them, instead of a
Company. And therefore, I dare not advise, to adventure, this great Trade, of
the Kingdom, (which has been so long, under Government,) in a free, or loose,
Trade. The Third is, a Compounded Way of both, which is; To go on, with the
Trade, of Whites, by the Old Company restored; And that your Majesty's Profit
be raised, by Order amongst Themselves; Rather than by double Custom, wherein
you must be the Actour: And that, nevertheless, there be added a Privilege, to
the same Company, to carry out Clothes, Dyed, and Dressed, Custom-free; Which
will still continue, as a glorious Beam, of your Majesty's Royal Design. I
hope, and Wish, at least, that this, which I have written, may be of some use,
to your Majesty, to settle, by the Advice, of the Lords about you, this great
Business. At the least, it is the Effect, of my Care, and poor Ability, which,
if in me be any, it is given me, to no other end, but faithfully, to serve your
Majesty. God ever preserve you.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, and bounden Servant.

Another Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching a Motion, to swear him
Counselor. February 27. 1615.
SIR, I humbly pray you, not to think me overhasty, or much in Appetite, if I
put you in Remembrance, of my Motion, of strengthening me, with the Oath, and
Trust, of a Privy Counselor; Not for mine own strength, (For as to that, I
thank God, I am armed within,) but for the Strength, of my Service. The Times,
I submit to you, who knows them best. But sure I am, there were never Times,
which did more require, a Kings Atturne^, to be well armed, and (as I said once
to you,) to wear a Gauntlet, and not a Glove. The Arraignments, when they
proceed; The Contention, between the Chancery, and Kings Bench^ The great
Cause, of the Rege inconsulto, which is so precious, to the Kings Prerogative;
Diverse other Services, that concern the Kings Revenew, and the Repair of his
Estate. Besides, it pleases his Majesty, to accept well, of my Relations,
touching his Business; which may seem, a kind of Interloping, (as the Merchants
call it,) for one that is no Counselor. But I leave all unto you, thinking my
Self infinitely bounden unto you, for your great Favors; The Beams whereof, I
see plainly, reflect upon me, even from others: So that now, I have no greater
Ambition, than this; That, as the King, shows Himself to you, the best
Master, so I might be found, your best Servant. In which Wish, and Vow, I
shall ever rest.

Most devoted, and affectionate, to obey your Commands.

A Letter, to the King, upon some Inclination, of his Majesty, to him, for the
Chancellers Place. April 1. 1616.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
THe last day, when it pleased your Majesty, to express your Self, toward me,
far above that, I can deserve, or could expect, I was surprised, by the
Princes coming in: I most humbly pray your Majesty, to accept these few Lines,
of Acknowledgement. I never had great Thought, for my Self, further than to
maintain, those great Thoughts, which, I confess, I have, for your Service. I
know, what Honor is; And I know, what the Times are. But, I thank God, with
me, my Service is the Principal; And it is far from me, under Honorable
Pretenses, to cover base Desires; which I account then to be, when Men referr,
too much to Themselves, especially serving such a King. I am afraid of Nothing,
but that the Master of the Horse, your Excellent Servant, and I, shall fall
out, who shall hold your Stirrup best. But were you Mounted, and Seated,
without Difficulties, and Distastes, in your Business, as I desire, and hope to
see you; I should, ex animo, desire, to spend the Decline, of my years, in my
Studies. Wherein also, I should not forget, to do him Honor, who, besides his
Active, and Politic Virtues, is the best Penn of Kings; Much more, the best
Subject of a Penn. God ever preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble Subject, And more, and more, obliged Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, touching his Swearing Counselor, May 30.
1616.
SIR, The time is, as I should think, now, or never, ^or his Majesty, to finish
his good Meaning toward me; If it please him to consider, what is past, and
what is to come.

If I would tender my Profit, and oblige Men unto me, by my Place, and
Practice, I could have more profit, than I could devise; And could oblige all
the World, and offend none; which is a brave Condition, for a Man's Private. But
my Heart, is not, on these T^ings. Yet, on the other side, I would be sorry,
that worthless Persons, should make a Note, that I get Nothing, but Pains, and
Enemies; And a little Popular Reputation, which follows me, whether I will,
or no. If any thing, be to be done, for your self, I should take infinite
Contentment, that my Honor, might wait upon yours: But I would be loath, it
should wait upon any Man's else. If you would put your strength, to this
Business, it is done; And that done, many Things more, will begin. God keep you
ever; I rest,

Your true, and devoted, Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Choice, his Majesty gave him,
whether he would be sworn Counselor, or have Assurance, to succeed the
Chanceller, June 3. 1616.
SIR, The King gives me a noble choice; And you are the Man, my Heart ever
told me, you were. Ambition would draw me, to the latter part of the Choice;
But, in respect of my hearty wishes, that my Lord Chanceller, may live long;
And the small Hopes I have, that I shall live long, my Self; And above all,
because I see, his Majesty's Service, daily, and instantly, bleedeth; Toward
which, I persuade my Self, (vainly perhaps, but yet in mine own thoughts,
firmly, and constantly,) that I shall give, when I am of the Table, some
effectual Furtherance, (as a poor Thread of the Labyrinth, which has no other
Virtue, but an united Continuance, without Interruption, or Distraction;) I do
accept of the former, to be Counselor, for the present, and to give over
pleading at Bar; Let the other Matter rest upon my Proof, and his Majesty's
Pleasure, and the Accidents of Time. For to speak plainly, I would be loath,
that my Lord Chanceller, to whom I owe most, after the King, and your Self,
should be locked to his Successor, for any Advancement, or Gracing, of me. So
I ever remain.

Your true, and most devoted, and obliged, Servant.

To his very Honorable good Friend, Sir George Villiers, Master of the Horse,
to his Majesty, and of the most Noble Order of the Garter. June 12. 1616.
SIR, I send his Majesty, a Draught, of the Act of Counsel, concerning the
Judges Letter; penned, as near as I could, to his Majesty's Instructions,
received in your presence. I then told his Majesty, my Memory was not able, to
keep way with his; And therefore his Majesty will pardon me, for any Omissions,
or Errors; And be pleased; to supply, and reform the same. I am preparing,
some other Materials, for his Majesty's excellent Hand, concerning Business,
that is coming on. For since his Majesty, has renewed my Heart within me,
methinks, I should double my endeavors. God ever preserve, and prosper you; I
rest.

Your most devoted, and bounden, Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, for the Restoring of Doctor Burgis, to
preach, June 12. 1616.
SIR, I do think, you may do your self Honor, and, (that which is more,) do
a good Work, if you will assist, and perfect, a Motion begun, (and that upon a
good Ground, both of Submission, and Conformity,) for the restoring, of Doctor
Burgis, to Preach; And I wish, likewise, that if Graies Inn should think good,
(after he is free from the State,) to choose him, for their Preacher, his
Majesty should not be against it; For certainly, we should watch him well, if
he should fly forth; So as he cannot be placed, in a more safe Auditory. This
may seem a Trifle, bu^ I do assure you, I do scarce know a particular,
wherein you may open, more honest Mouths, to speak Honor of you, than this.
And I do extremely desire, there may be a full Cry, from all sorts of People,
(especially the best,) to speak, and to trumpet out, your Commendations. ^ pray
you take it to Heart, and do somewhat in it. I rest.

Your devoted and Bounden Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, of Advice, concerning Ireland; From
Gorhambury, to Windsore. July 5. 1616.
SIR, Because I am uncertain, whether his Majesty, will put to a point, some
Resolutions, touching Ireland, now at Windsore; I thought it my duty, to attend
his Majesty, by my Letter, and thereby to supply my Absence. For the Renewing,
of some former Commissions, for Ireland; And the Framing, of a new Commission,
for the Wards, and the Alienation, (which appertain properly to me, as his
Majesty's Attorney, and have been accordingly referred by the Lords;) I will
undertake, that they are prepared, with a greater care, and better
applications, to his Majesty's Service in that Kingdom, than heretofore they
have been. And therefore of that I say no more. And for the Instructions, of
the new Deputy, they have been set down, by the two Secretaries, and read to
the Board; And being things, of an ordinary nature, I do not see, but they may
pass. But there have been three Propositions, and Counsels, which have been
stirred, which seem to me, of very great Importance; wherein, I think my Self
bound, to deliver to his Majesty, my Advice, and Opinion, if they should now
come in Question.

The first is, touching the Recusant Magistrates, of the Towns, of Ireland, and
the Commonalties themselves, their Electours, what shall be done? Which
Consultation arises, from the late Advertisements, of the two Lords Justices,
upon the Instance, of the two Towns, Limrick, and Kilkenny; In which
Advertisements, they represent the Danger only, without giving any Light, for
the Remedy; Ratner warily ^or ^^^mselves, than agreeable to their Duties, and
places.

In this point, I humbly pray his Majesty, to remember, that the Refusal is
not, of the Oath of Allegiance, (which is not enacted in Ireland;) but of the
Oath of Supremacy, which cutteth deep, into Matter of Conscience. Also, that
his Majesty will, out of the dept^, of his Excellent Wisdom, and Providence,
think, and as it were, calculate with himself; Whether Time, will make more,
for the Cause of Religion, in Ireland, and be still more, and more, propitious;
Or whether Deferring Remedies, will not make the Case more difficult. For if
Time, give his Majesty Advantage, what needs precipitation, to extreme
Remedies? But if Time, will make the case more desperate, then his Majesty,
cannot begin, too soon. Now in my Opinion, Time will open, and facilitate
Things, for Reformation of Religion there; And not shut up, or lock out, the
same. For first, the Plantations going on, and being, principally, of
Protestants, cannot but mate the other party, in Time: Also, his Majesty's
Care, in placing good Bishops, and good Divines; In amplifying the College
there; And in looking, to the Education, of Wards, and such like; As they are,
the most Natural Means, so are they like, to be the most effectual, and happy,
for the Weeding out of Popery, without using the Temporal Sword; So that, I
think, I may truly conclude, that the Ripeness of Time, is not yet come.

T^erefore my Advice is, in all Humbleness, that this hazardous Course, of
Proceeding, to tender the Oath^ to the Magistrates of Towns, proceed not, but
dye by degrees: And yet, to preserve the Aut^ority, and Reputation, of the
former Council, I would have somewhat done; which is, that there be a
proceeding, to Seizu^e, of Liberties; But not, by any Act of Power, but by Quo
Warranto, or Scire facias; which is a Legal Course; An^ will be the Work of
three, or four, Terms; By which time, the Matter will somewhat cool.

But I would not, (in any case,) that the Proceedings, should be with both
Towns, which stand now in contempt, but with one of them, only: choosing that,
which shall be thought most fit. For if his Majesty, proceed with both, then
all the Towns, that are in the like case, will think it a common Cause; And
that it is, but their Case too day, and their own too morrow. But if his
Majesty proceed, but with one, the Apprehension, and Terror, will not be so
strong; For they will think, it may be their Case, to be spared, as well, as
prosecuted; And this is the best Advice, that I can give to his Majesty, in
this Straight; And of this Opinion, s^emed my Lord Chanceller, to be.

The Second Proposition is this: It may be, his Majesty will be moved, to
reduce, the Number, of his Council, of Ireland, which is now almost Fifty, to
Twenty, or the like Number; In respect, that the Greatness of the Number, does
both embase the Authority, of the Council, and divulge the Business.
Nevertheless, I hold this Proposition, to be rather specious, and solemn than
needful, at this time; For certainly, it will fill the State, full of
Coffeehouse; which, in a Growing, and unsettled Estate, ought not to be.

This I could wish, that his Majesty, would appoint a select Number, of
Counselors there, which might deal, in the Improvement, of his Revenew;
(Being a Thing not fit to pass, through too many Hands;) And the said selected
Number, should have days of Sitting, by themselves. At which, the rest of the
Council, should not be present; which being once settled, then other principal
Business of State, may be handled at those Sittings, and so the rest begin to
be disused, and yet retain their Countenance, without Murmur, or Disgrace.

The Third Proposition, as it is moved, seems to be pretty, if it can keep
promise: For it is thus. That a Means, may be found, to re-enforce his
Majesty's Army, by 500, or a 1000 Men; And that, without any Penny Increase, of
Charge. And the Means should be, that there should be a Commandment of a Local
Removing, and transferring some Companies, from one Province, to another:
whereupon it is supposed, that many, that are planted, in House, and Lands,
will rather leese their Entertainment, than remove; And thereby, new Men may
have their Pay, and yet the old, be mingled in the Country, for the Strength
ther^of.

In this Proposition, two things may be feared: The one, Discontent of those,
that shall be put off: The other, that the Companies shall be stuffed with
Novices, and Tyrones, instead of Veterani. I wish therefore, that this
Proposition, be well debated, ere it be admitted. Thus having performed that,
which Duty binds me to; I commend you, to Gods best preservation.

Your most devoted, and bounden Servant.

A Letter, from the Kings Attorney General, to the Master of the Horse, upon
the sending, of his Bill, for Viscount. August 5. 1616.
SIR, I send you the Bill, ^or his Majesti^s Signature, reformed, according to
his Majesty's Amendments, both in the two places, (which, I assure you, were
both altered, with great Judgment;) And in the Third place, which his Majesty
termed a Question only. But he is an idle Body, that thinks his Majesty, asks
an idle Question; And therefore, his Majesty's Questions, are to be answered,
by Taking away, the Cause of the Question, and not by Replying.

For the Name, his Majesty's Will, is a Law, in those things; And to speak
Truth, it is a well-sounding, and Noble Name, both here, and abroad: And being
your proper Name, I will take it, for a good Sign, that you shall give Honor,
to your Dignity, and not your Dignity to you. Therefore I have made it Viscount
Villiers: And for your Baronry, I will keep it for an Earldom: For though the
other, had been more orderly, yet that is as usual, and both alike good in Law.

For Ropers place, I would have it, by all means, dispatched. And therefore, I
marvail, it lingreth. It were no good manners, to take the Business, out of my
Lord Treasurers hands; And therefore, I purpose, to write to his Lordship, if I
hear not from him, first, by Mr. Deckom. But if I hear of any Delay, you will
give me leave, (especially since the King named me,) to deal with Sir John
Roper, my Self; For neither I, nor my Lord Treasurer, can deserve any great
thanks of you, in this Business, considering the King has spoken to Sir John
Roper, and he has promised; And besides, the thing it self, is so reasonable,
as it ought, to be as soon done, as said. I am now gotten, into the Country,
to my House, where I have some little Liberty, to think of that, I would think
of, and not of that, which other Men, Hourly break my Head withal, as it was
at London. Upon this, you may conclude, that most of my Thoughts, are of his
Majesty; And then, you cannot be far off. God ever keep you, and prosper you.
I rest always,

Your true, and most devoted, Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Sending, his Patent, of Viscount
Villiers, to be Signed. August 12. 1616.
SIR, I have sent you, now, your Patent, of Creation, of Lord Blechley, of
Blechly, and of Viscount Villiers. Blechley is your own; And I liked, the sound
of the Name, better than Whaddon: But the Name, will be hid, for you will be
called Viscount Villiers. I have put them both in a Patent, after the manner of
the Patent of Arms, where Baronries are joined. But the chief Reason was,
because I would avoid double Prefaces; which had not been fit: Nevertheless
Ceremony of Roabing, and otherwise, must be double: And now, because I am in
the Country, I will send you, some of my Country Fruits, which, with me, are
good Meditations; which, when I am in the City, are choked with Business.

After that the King, shall have watered, your new Dignities, with his Bounty,
of the Lands, which he intends you; And that, some other things, concerning
your means, which are now likewise in Intention, shall be settled upon you; I
do not see, but you may think, your private Fortunes established; And
therefore, it is now time, that you should refer your Actions, chiefly, to the
Good, of your Sovereign, and your Country. It is the life, of an Ox, or a
Beast, always to eat, and never to exercise; But Men are born, (especially
Christian Men,) not to cramm in their Fortunes, but to exercise their Virtues;
And yet, the other, have been the unworthy, and, ^ometimes, the unlucky humor,
of great Persons, in our Times; Neither will your further Fortune, be the
further off. For assure your self, that Fortune, is of a woman's Nature, that
will sooner follow you by slighting, than by too much Wooing: And in this
Dedication, of your Self to the Public, I recommend unto you, principally,
that which I think, was never done, since I was born; And which not done, has
bred, almost, a Wilderness, and Solitude, in the Kings Service: which is, that
you countenance, and encourage, and advance, able, and virtuous Men, in all
Kinds, Degrees, and Professions. For in the time of some late great
Counselors, when they bare the Sway, able Men, were by design, and of
purpose, suppressed: And though, now since, Choice goes better, both in
Church, and Commonweal^h, yet Money, and Turn-Serving, and Cunning Canvises,
and Importunity, prevail too much. And in places of Moment, rather make Able
and Honest Men, yours, than advance those, that are otherwise, because they are
yours: As for Cunning and Corrupt Men, you must, I know, sometimes use them,
but keep them at a distance; And let it appear, that you make use of them,
rather than that they lead you. Above all, depend wholly, (next to God,) upon
the King; And be ruled, (as hitherto you have been,) by his Instructions; For
that is best for your Self. For the Kings Care, and Thoughts, concerning you,
are according to the Thoughts, of a great King; whereas your Thoughts,
concerning your Self, are, and ought to be, according to the Thoughts of a
Modest Man. But let me not weary you. The Sum is, that you think Goodness,
the best part of Greatness; And that you remember, whence your Rising comes,
and make return accordingly. God ever keep you.

A Letter, to the King, touching Sir George Villiers Patent, for Baron of
Blechley, and Viscount Villiers. August 12. 1616.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Have sent, Sir George Villiers Patent, drawn again, containing also a
Baronry; The Name, Blechley, which is his own; And to my Thinking, sounds
better, than Whaddon. I have included both, in one Patent, to avoid a double
Preface, and as has been used, in the Patents, of Earls, of like nature.
Nevertheless, the Ceremony of Roabing, and otherwise, is to be double, as is
also used, in like case of Earls.

It rests, that I express unto your Majesty, my great Joy, in your Honoring,
and Advancing, this Gentleman: whom to describe, not with Colors, but with
true Lines, I may say this; Your Majesty, certainly, has found out, and
chosen, a safe Nature, a capable Man, and honest Will, Generous and Noble
Affections, and a Courage well lodged; And one that, I know, loves your
Majesty, unfeignedly; And admireth you as much, as is in a Man, to admire his
S^veraign, upon Earth. Only, your Majesty's School, (wherein, he has already
so well profited, as in this Entrance upon the Stage, being the Time of
greatest Danger, he has not committed any manifest Error;) will add
Perfection, to your Majesty's comfort, and the great Contentment, of your
People. God ever preserve, and prosper, your Majesty. I rest in all Humbleness,

Your Majesty's, most bounden, and most devoted, Subject, and Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, upon the Sending, of his Patent, for the
Creation, of Viscount, Sealed August 20. 1616.
SIR, I took much Contentment, in that, I perceive by your Letter, that you
took, in so good part, the Freedom of my Advice; And that your Self, in your
own Nature, consented therewith. Certainly, no Service is comparable, to good
Counsel; And the Reason is, because no Man, can do so much, for another, as a
Man, may do for himself: Now good Counsel, helps a Man, to help himself. But
you have so happy a Master, as supplyeth all. My Service, and good will, shall
not be wanting.

It was graciously, and kindly, done also, of his Majesty, toward me, to tell
you, that you were beholding to me. But it must be then, for Thinking of you,
as I doe^ For otherwise, for Speaking, as I think, it is but the part of an
Honest Man. I send you your Patent, whereof God give you Joy: And I send you
here, enclosed, a little Note of Remembrance, for that part of the Ceremony,
which concerns the Patent: For as for other Ceremonies, I leave to others.

My Lord Chanceller, dispatched your Patent, presently, upon the R^ceit; And
writ to me, how glad he was of it, and how well he wished you. If you writ to
him, a few words of Thanks, I think, you shall do well. God keep you, and
prosper you. I ever rest

Your true, and most devoted, Servant.

A Letter, to Sir George Villiers, acknowledging the Kings Favor in granting,
some Suit of his. August 22. 1616.
SIR, I am more, and more, bound, unto his Majesty, who, I think, knowing me,
to have other Ends, than Ambition, is contented, to make me Judge, of mine own
Desires. I am now beating my Brains, (amongst many Cares, of his Majesty's
Business,) touching the Redeeming the Time, in this Business of Cloth. The
great Question is; How to miss, or how to mate the Flemmings; How to pass by
them, or how to pass over them.

In my next Letter, I shall alter your Style; But I shall never, whilst I
breath, alter mine own Style; In being

Your true, and most devoted, Servant.

The Lord Keepers Letter, to the University, in answer, of their
Congratulation, at his first Coming to that place: To the Renowned University
of Cambridge, his Dear, and Reverend, Mother.
I Am Debtor to you of your Letters, and of the Time, likewise, that I have
taken, to answer them; But as soon as I could choose, what to think on, I
thought good, to let you know, That although, you may err much, in your
valuation of me, yet you shall not be deceived, in your Assurance: And for the
other part also, though the manner be, to mend the Picture, by the Life; yet I
would be glad, to mend the Life, by the Picture, and to become, and be, as you
express me to be. Your Gratulations, shall be no more welcome to me, than your
Business, or occasions; which I will attend; and yet not so, but that I shall
endeavor, to prevent them, by my care of your Good. And so I commend you, to
God's goodness.

Your most loving, and assured Friend, and Son, Fr. Bacon. C. S.
Gorhambury, Apr. 12. 1617.
A Letter of King James, written to his Lordship, when he was Lord Chanceller,
with his Majesty's own Hand, upon the sending to him, his Book, of Instauratio
Magna, then newly published.
MY Lord, I Have received your Letter, and your Book, than the which, you could
not have sent, a more acceptable Present unto me. How thankful I am for it,
cannot better be expressed by me, than by a firm Resolution, I have taken;
First, to read it thorough, with care, and attention; Though I should steal,
some Hours, from my Sleep; Having otherwise, as little spare time, to read it,
as you had, to write it. And the^ to use the liberty, of a true Friend, in not
sparing, to ask you the question, in any point, whereof I shall stand in doubt;
( Nam ejus est Explicare, cujus est Condere;) As, on the other part, I will
willingly give, a due commendation, to such places, as; in my opinion, shall
deserve it. In the mean time, I can, with comfort, assure you, that you could
not have made choice, of a Subject, more befitting your place^ and your
universal, and Methodick, Knowledge; And, in the general, I have already
observed, that you jump with me, in keeping the midd way, between the two
Extremes; As also in some particulars, I have found, that you agree fully, with
my opinion. And so praying God, to give your Work, as good Success, as your
Heart can wish, and your Labors deserve, I bid you heartily farewell.

James Rex.
October. 16. 1620.
OTHER LETTERS, BY THE SAME Honorable Author, Written in the Days of QVEEN
ELIZABETH.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head, in
Fleetstreet, 1657.

OTHER LETTERS, WRITTEN BY THE SAME Honorable Author.
To my Lord of Essex.
My singular good Lord,
I May perceive, by my Lord Keeper, These Letters following, I find not, in his
Lordships Register-Book, of Letters; But I am enduced, by the Style, and other
Characters, to own them, to be his.
that your Lordship, as the time served, signified unto him, an Intention, to
conferr with his Lordship, at better opportunity; Which, in regard, of your
several, and weighty occasions, I have thought good, to put your Lordship, in
remembrance of; That now, at his Coming to the Court, it may be executed;
Desiring your good Lordship, nevertheless, not to conceive, out of this my
diligence, in soliciting this matter, that I am, either much in Appetite, or
much in Hope. For as for Appetite; The Waters of Parnassus, are not like, the
Waters, of the Spaw, that give a Stomach; But rather, they quench Appetite, and
Desires. And for Hope; How can he hope much, that can allege no other Reason,
than the Reason of an Evil Debtor; who will persuade his Creditour, to lend him
new Sums, and to enter further in with him, to make him satisfy the old? And
to her Majesty, no other Reason, but the Reason of a Waterman; I am her first
Man, of those, who serve in Counsel of Law. And so, I commit your Lordship, to
Gods best preservation.

To my Lord of Essex.
My Lord,
COnceiving that your Lordship, came now up, in the person of a good Servant,
to see your Sovereign Mistress; which kind of Complements, are many times,
Instar magnorum Meritorum; And therefore, that it would be hard for me, to find
you, I have committed, to this poor Paper, the humble Salutations of him, that
is more yours, than any Man's; And more yours, than any Man. To these
Salutations, I add, a due, and joyful Gratulation, confessing that your
Lordship, in your last conference with me, before your Journey, spoke not in
vain, God making it good; That you trusted, we should say, Quis putasset?
Which, as it is found true, in a happy sense, so I wish, you do not find,
another Quis putasset, in the manner, of taking, this so great a Service. But,
I hope, it is, as he said; Nubecula est, cito transibit: And that your
Lordships Wisdom, and Obsequious Circumspection, and Patience, will turn all to
the best. So referring all, to some time, that I may attend you, I commit you
to Gods best preservation.

To my Lord of Essex.
My Lord,
I Am glad, your Lordship, has plunged, out of your own business. Wherein, I
must commend your Lordship, as Xenophon commended, the State, of his Country;
which was this; That having chosen, the worst Form of Government, of all
others, they governed the best, in that kind. Hoc, Pace, et Venia tua,
according to my Charter. Now, as your Lordship is my Witness, that I would not
trouble you, whilst your own Cause was in hand; (Though that I know, that the
further from the Term, the better the time, was to deal ^or me;) So that being
concluded, I presume, I shall be one, of your next Cares. And having
communicated with my Brother, of some course, either to persit the first, or to
make me some other way; Or rather, by seeming to make me some other way, to
perfect the first, wherewith he agreed to acquaint your Lordship; I am desirous,
for mine own better satisfaction, to speak with your Lordship, my self; Which I
had rather, were somewhere else, than at Court; And as soon, as your Lordship,
well assign me, to wait on you. And so in, etc.

To Sir Robert Cecil.
SIR,
YOur Honor knows, my Manner is, though it be not the wisest way, yet taking
it for the honestest, to do, as Alexander did, by his Physician; In drinking
the Medicine, and delivering the Advertisement, of Suspicion: So I trust on,
and yet do not smother, what I hear. I do assure you, Sir, that by a wise
Friend of mine, and not factious toward your Honor, I was told, with
asseveration, that your Honor, was bought, by Mr. Coventry, for 2000. Angels;
And that you wrought, in a contrary spirit, to my Lord your Father. And he said
further, that from your Servants, from your Lady, from some Counselors that
have observed you in my business, he knew, you wrought, under hand, against me.
The truth of which Tale, I do not believe; you know the Event will show, and
God will right. But as I reject this Report, (though the Strangeness of my
Case, might make me credulous;) so I admit a Conceit, that the last Messenger,
my Lord, and your self used, dealt ill with your Honors; And that Word, (
Speculation,) which was in the Queens mouth, rebounded from him, as a
Commendation: For I am not ignorant, of those little Arts. Therefore, I pray,
trust not him again, in my matter. This was much to write, but I think my
Fortune, will set me at liberty, who am weary of asserviling my Self, to every
Man's charity. Thus I, etc.

To Sir John Stanhope.
SIR,
YOur good promises sleep, which it may seem, now, no time to awake. But that I
do not find, that any general Calendar, of Observation of time, serves for
the Court: And besides, if that be done, which I hope, by this time, is done;
And that other matter shall be done, which we wish may be done, I hope to my
poor Matter, the one of these great Matters, may clear the way, and the other
give the occasion. And though my Lord Treasurer be absent; whose Health,
nevertheless, will enable him, to be sooner at Court, than is expected;
especially if this hard weather, (too hard to continue,) shall relent; yet we
abroad say, his Lordships spirit may be there, though his person be away. Once
I take for a good ground, that her Majesty's Business, ought to keep, neither
Vacation, nor Holyday; either in the Execution, or in the Care and preparation,
of those, whom her Majesty calls, and useth^ And therefore, I would think, no
time barred, from remembering that, with such discretion, and respect, as
appertains. The Conclusion shall be, to put you in mind, to maintain that
which you have kindly begun, according to the Reliaunce, I have, upon the
Sincerity, of your Affection, and the Soundness of your Judgment. And so I
commend you, to Gods preservation.

To my Lord of Essex.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Am very sorry, her Majesty should take my Motion to travail, in offense. But
surely, under her Majesty's Royal Correction, it is such an Offense, as it
should be, an offense to the Sun, when a Man, to avoid the scorching heat
thereof, flies into the shade. And your Lordship may ^asily think, that having
now these twenty years, (For so long it is, and more, since I went, with Sir
Am^as Paulett, into France, from her Majesty's royal Hand,) I made Her
Majesty's Service, the Scope of my life: I shall never find a greater grief
than this, Relinquere Amorem Primum. But since, principia Actionum, sunt
tantum, in nostra potestate; I hope, her Majesty, of her Clemency, yea and
Justice, will pardon me, and not force me, to pine here, with Melancholy. For
though mine Heart be good, yet mine Eyes will be sore; So as I shall have no
pleasure, to look abroad: And if I should otherwise be affected, her Majesty,
in her Wisdom, will but think me, an impudent Man, that would face out a
disgrace. Therefore, as I have ever found you, my good Lord, and true Friend,
so I pray, open the matter so, to her Majesty, as she may discern the necessity
of it, without adding hard Conceit, to her Rej^ction; Of which, I am sure, the
latter I nev^r deserved. Thus, etc.

To the Lord Treasurer.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Am to give you humble T^anks, for your favourablr opinion, which by Mr.
Secretaries report, I find, you conceive of me, for the obtaining of a good
place, which some of my honorable Friends, have wished unto me, Nec Opinanti.
I will use no reason, to persuade your Lordships Mediation, but this; That your
Lordship, and my other Friends, shall in this, beg my life, of the Queen; For I
see well, the Bar will be my Beer, as I must, and will use it, rather than my
poor Estate, or Reputation, shall decay. But I stand indiff^rent, whether God
call me, or her Majesty. Had I that in possession, which by your Lordships
only means, against the greatest opposition, her Majesty granted me, I would
never trouble her Majesty, but serve her still voluntarily, without pay.
Neither, do I, in this, more, than obey my Friends Conceits, as one that would
not be, wholly wanting to my Self. Your Lordships good opinion, does somewhat
confirm me, as that I take comfort in, above all others; Assuring your
Lordship, that I n^v^r thought so well of my Self, for any one thing, as that I
have found a fitness, to my T^inking, in my Self, to observe, and revere^ your
Virtues. For the Continuance whereof, in the prolonging, of your days, I will
still be your Beadsman; And accordingly, at this time, commend your Lordship,
to the Divine Protection.

To Foulk Grevil.
SIR,
I Understand of your pains, to have visited me; For which I thank you. My
Matter is an endless Question. I assure you, I had said; Requiesce anima mea:
But now, I am otherwise put, to my psalter; Nolite confidere. I dare go no
farther. Her Majesty, had by set speech, more than once, assured me, of her
Intention, to call me to her service; which I could not understand, but of the
place, I had been named to. And now, whether Invidus Homo hoc fecit; Or whether
my Matter, must be an Appendix to my Lo: of Essex su^e; Or whether her Majesty,
pretending to prove my Ability, means, but to take advantage, of some
Errors, which, like enough, at one time, or other, I may commit; Or what it
is; But her Majesty, is not ready, to dispatch it. And what though the Mr. of
the Rowles, and my Lo: of Essex, and your self, and others, think my case
without doubt; yet in the mean time, I have a hard condition, to stand so, that
whatsoever service, I do to her Majesty, it shall be thought to be, but
servitium viscatum, lime-twiggs, and Fetches, to place my self; And so I shall
have Envy, not Thanks. This is a Course, to quench all good spirits, and to
Corrupt every Man's Nature; which will, I fear, much hurt, her Majesty's
Service, in the end. I have been like a pi^ce of Stuff, bespoken in the shopp:
And if her Majesty, will not take me, it may be, the selling by parcels, will
be more gainful. For to be, as I told you, like a Child, following a Bird,
which when he is nearest, flies away, and lights a little before, and then
the Child after it again, and so in Infinitum, I am weary of it: As also, of
wearying my good Friends; Of whom, Nevertheless, I hope, in one course or
other, gratefully to deserve. And so, not forgetting your Business, I leave to
trouble you, with this idle Letter, being but Iusta, and Moderata Querimonia.
For indeed, I do confess, primus Amor, will not easily be cast off. And thus
again, I comm^nd me to you.

To the Lord Treasurer Burghley.
Most Honorable, and my very good Lord.
I Know, I may commit an Error, in writing this Letter, both in a time, of
great, and weighty Business; As also, when my self, am not induced thereto, by
any new particular occasion: And therefore, your Lordship may impute to me,
either Levity, or Ignorance, what appertains to good resp^cts, and
forwardness of D^aling; Especially to an Honorable Person, in whom there is
such concurrence, of Magnitudo Honoris, and Oneris; As it is hard to say,
whether is the greater. But I answer my self first, that I have ever noted it,
as a part, of your Lordships exce^^ent Wisdom, Parvis componere Magna; That
you do not exclude inferior matters, of Access, amongst the Care of great.
And for my self, I thought, it would better manifest, what I desire to
express, if I did write out of a deep, and settled consideration, of mine own
Duty, rather than upon the spur of a particular Occasion. And therefore, (my
singular good Lord) Ex abundantia cordis, I must acknowledge, how greatly, and
diversely, your Loodship has vouchsafed, to tie me unto you, by Many your
Benefits. The Reversion of the Office, which your Lordship Only procured unto
me, and carried through great, and vehement, Opposition, though it yet bear no
fruit, yet it is one of the fairest Flowers, of my poor Estate; your Lordships
constant, and serious Endeavors, to have me Solliciter: your late honorable
Wishes, for the place of the Wards: Together with your Lordships Attempt, to
give me way, by the Remove of Mr. Solliciter; They be Matters, of singular
obligation; Besides many other favors, as well by your Lordships Graunts, from
your Self, as by your Commendation to others, which I have had for my help; And
may justly persuade my Self, out of the few Denials, I have received, that
fewer might have been; if mine own Industry, and good happ, had been
answerable to your Lordships Goodness. But on the other side, I most humbly
pray your Lordships pardon, if I speak it. The time is yet to come, that your
Lordship did ever use, or command, or employ me, in my profession, in any
Services, or Occasions, of your Lordships own, or such as are near unto your
Lordship: which has made me, fear, som^times, that your Lordship does more
^onourably affect me, than thoroughly discern, of my most humble, and dutiful
Affection, to your Lordship again. Which if it were not in me, I knew not,
whether I were unnatural, unthankful, or unwise. This causes me, most humbly
to pray your Lordship; (And I know mine own case too well, to speak it as
weening, I can do your Lordship servi^e, but as willing to do it;) To believe,
that your Lordship is, upon just Title, a principal Owner, and proprietary, of
that, I cannot call Talent, but Mit^, that God has given me; which I ever do,
and shall, devote to your service. And in like humble manner, I pray your
Lordship, to pardon mine Errors, and not to impute unto me, the Errors of any
other; (which I know also, themselves, have, by this time, left, and
forethought:) But to conceive of me, to be a Man, that daily profitteth in
Duty. It is true, I do, in part, comfort my self, supposing that it is my
Weakness, and insuf^iciency, that moves your Lordship, who has so general a
command, to use others more able. But let it be as it is; For Duty only, and
Homage, I will boldly undertake, that Nature, and true Thankfulness, shall
never give place, to a politic dependence. Lastly, I most humbly desire your
Lordship, to continue unto me, the good favor, and countenance, and
Encouragement, in the Course of my poor Travails; whereof I have had, some
taste, and experience; For the which, I yield your Lordship, my very humble
good thanks. And so again, craving your Honors pardon, for so long a Letter,
carrying so empty an offer, of so unpuissant a service; But yet a true, and
unfeigned, signification, of an honest, and vowed duty; I cease, commending
your Lordship, to the preservation, of the Divine Majesty.

To my Lord of Essex.
Most Honorable, and my Singular good Lord,
I Cannot but importune your Lordship, with thanks, for your Lordships
remembering my name, to my Lord Keeper; which being done, in such an Article of
time, could not, but be exceedingly enriched, both in demonstration, and
effect: which I did well discern, by the manner of expressing thereof, by his
Lordship, again to me. This accumulating of your Lordships Favors, upon me,
hitherto, works only this effect; That it raises my mind, to aspire, to be
found worthy of them; And likewise, to merit, and serve you, for them. But
whether I shall be able to pay my vows, or no, I must leave that to God, who
has them in deposito. Whom also, I most instantly beseech, to give you fruit
of your actions, beyond that your Heart can propound. Nam Deus major est cord.
Even to the Environing of his Benedictions, I recommend your Lordship.

To Sir Thomas Lucy.
SIR, There was no News, better welcome to me, this long time, than that, of
the good Success, of my Kinsman; wherein, if he be happy, he cannot be happy
alone, it consisting of two parts. And I rend^r you, no less kind Thanks, for
your aid, and Favor, toward him, than if it had been for my Self; Assuring
you, that this Bond of Alliance, shall, on my part, tie me, to give all the
Tribute, to your good Fortune, upon all occasions, that my poor Str^ngth can
yield. I send you, so required, an Abstract, of the Lands of Inheritance; And
one Lease of great value, which my Kinsman brings; with a Note, of the
Tenures, Valews, Contents, and State, truly, and perfectly, drawn; whereby you
may perceive, the Land is good Land, and well countenanced, by scope of Acres,
^oods, and Royalties; Though the Total of the Rents, be set down, as it now
goes, without Improvement: In which resp^ct, it may somewhat differ, from your
first Note. Out of this, what he will assure in Ioincture, I leave it, to his
own kindness; For I love not to measure Affection. To conclude, I doubt not,
your Daughter, might have married, to a better Living, but never to a better
Life; Having chosen a Gentleman, bred to all Honesty, Virtue, and Worth, with
an Estate convenient. And if my Brother, or my Self, were either Thrivers, or
Fortunate, in the Queens Service, I would hope, there should be left, as great
an House, of the Cooks, in this Gentleman, as in your good Friend, Mr.
Attorney General. But sure I am, if Scriptures fail not, it will have as much
of Gods Blessing; and Sufficiency, is ever the best Feast, etc.

To Sir Robert Cecil, at his Being in France.
It may please your Honorable Lordship,
I Know you will pardon, this my Observance, in writing to you, empty of
matter, but out of the fullness of my Love. I am sorry, that as your time of
Absence, is prolonged, above that was esteemed at your Lordships setting forth;
So now, upon this last Advertisement, received from you, there grows an
Opinion, amongst better than the vulgar, that the Difficulties also of your
Ne^otiation, are increased. But because, I know the Gravity, of your Nature, to
be, not to hope lightly, it makes me to despair the less. For you are Natus ad
Ardua: And the Indisposition, of the Subject, may honor the Skill of the
Workman. Sure I am, judgment, and Diligence, shall not want in your Lordships
Self: But this was not my purpose; Being only to signify unto your Lordship,
my continual, and incessant, love toward you, thirsting after your Return, for
many respects. So I commend you ever, to the good preservation, of the Divine
Majesty. Grayes Inn.

At your Honors Commandment, ever, and particularly.

To Sir Robert Cecil.
My singul^r good Lord,
THe Argument of my Letters, to your Lordship, rather increases, than
spends; It being only the Desire, I have, to salute you: which by your
absence is more augmented, than abated. For me to write your Lordship
Occurrences, either of Scottish Braggs, or Irish Plaints, or Spanish Ruffling,
or Low Country States, were, (besides that it is alienum quiddam, from mine
own humor,) To forget, to whom I write; save that you, that know true
Advertisements, sometimes desire, and delight, to hear common Reports; As we,
that know, but common Reports, desire to hear the Truth. But to leave such, as
write to your Fortunes, I write to your self, in regard of my love to you; you
being as near to me, in Hearts Blood, as in Blood of Descent. This day, I had
the Contentment, to see your Father, upon Occasion: And methought, his
Lordships Countenance, was not decayed, nor his Cough vehement; But his Voice,
was as faint, all the while, as at first. Thus wishing your Lordship, a happy,
and speedy Return, I commend you, to the Divine Majesty.

To the Queen.
It may please your sacred Majesty,
I Would not fail, to give your Majesty, my most humble, and due Thanks, for
your Royal choice, of such Commissioners, in the great Star Chamber Cause;
Being persons, besides their Honor, of such Science, and Integrity. By whose
Report, I doubt not, but your Majesty, will find that, which you have been
heretofore enfotmed, (both by my Lord Keeper, and by some much meaner person,)
touching the Nature, of that Cause, to be true. This preparatory Hearing, does
already assail me, with new, and enlarged Offers, of Composition; which if I
had born a mind, to have hearkened unto, this matter had been quenched long
ago, without any benefit to your Majesty. But your Majesty's Benefit, is to
me, in greater regard, than mine own particular: Trusting to your Majesty's
gracious disposition, and Royal word, that your Majesty, will include me, in
any extraordinary Course, of your Sovereign pleasure, which your Majesty shall
like, to take, in this Cause. The other Man, I spoke to your Majesty of, may,
within these two Terms, be in the same streights, between your Majesty's
Justice, and Mercy, that this Man now is, if your Majesty be so pleased. So
most humbly craving pardon, for my presuming, to seek access, for these few
Lines, I recommend your Majesty, to the most precious Custody, and best
preservation, of the Divine Majesty.

Your Majesty's, most humble, and entirely obedient, Servant, and Subject.

To the Queen.
It may please your Majesty,
IT were great simplicity in me, to look for better, than that your Majesty,
Written by Mr. Bacon, for my Lord of Essex.
should cast away my Letter, as you have done Me; were it not, that it is
possible, your Majesty, will think to find somewhat in it, whereupon your
displeasure may take hold; And so Indignation, may obtain that of you, which
Favor could not. Neither might I, in reason, presume to offer, unto your
Majesty, dead lines, my self being excluded as I am; Were it not upon this
only Argument, or Subject; Namely, to clear my self, in point of Duty. Duty,
though my State, lie buried in the Sands; And my Favors, be cast upon the
Waters; And my Honors, be committed to the Wind; Yet stands surely built,
upon the Rock, and has been, and ever shall be, unforced, and unattempted. And
therefore, since the World, out of Error, and your Majesty, I fear, out of
Art, is pleased to put upon me; That I have so much, as any Election, or Will,
in this my Absence, from Attendance; I cannot but leave, this Protestation,
with your Majesty; That I am, and have been, merely a patient, and take my
self, only to obey, and execute your Majesty's will. And indeed, Madam, I had
never thought it possible, that your Majesty, could have so dis-interessed your
self of me; Nor that you had been so perfect, in the Art of forgetting; Nor
that after a Quintessence of Wormwood, your Majesty would have taken so large a
Draught of Poppy; As to have passed, so many Summers, without all Feeling of my
Sufferings. But the only Comfort I have, is this, that I know your Majesty
takes Delight, and Contentment, in executing, this Disgrace upon me. And since
your Majesty, can find no other use of me, I am glad yet, I can serve for that.
Thus making my most humble petition, to your Majesty, that in Justice,
(Howsoever you may by strangeness, untye, or by violence cut Asunder all other
Knotts,) your Majesty, would not touch me, in that which is indissoluble; That
is, point of Duty: And that your Majesty will pardon, this my un-warranted
presumption, of writing, being to such an end: I cease in all Humbleness;

Your Majesty's poor, and never so unworthy Servant,
Essex.

To my Lord of Essex.
It may please your Lordship,
THat your Lordship is, in Statu quo prius, no Man takes greater gladness,
than I do; The rather, because I assure my self, that of your Eclipses, as this
has been the longest, it shall be the least; As the Comicall Poet says; Neque
illam tu satis noveras, neque te illa, hoc ubi fit, ibi non vivitur. For if I
may be so bold, as to say what I think: I believe, neither your Lordship looked
to have found her Majesty, in all points, as you have done; Neither her
Majesty, per case, looked, to find your Lordship, as she has done. And
therefore, I hope, upon this experience, may grow more perfect Knowledge, and
upon Knowledge, more true Consent; Which I, for my part, do infinitely wish,
as accounting these Accidents to be like the Fish Remora; which, though it be
not great, yet has it a hidden propriety, to hinder the sailing of the ship.
And therefore, as bearing unto your Lordship, after her Majesty, of all public
persons, the second Duty, I could not but signify unto you, my affectionate
Gratulation. And so, I commend your good Lordship, to the best preservation, of
the Divine Majesty.

From Grayes Inn.

To my Lord Treasurer Burghley.
My Lord,
WIth as much confidence, as mine own honest, and faithful Devotion unto your
Service, and your honorable Correspondence unto me, and my poor estate, can
breed in a Man, do I commend my self unto your Lordship. I wax now somewhat
ancient; One and thirty years, is a great deal of sand, in the Houre-glasse.
My Health, I thank God, I find confirmed; And I do not sear, that Action shall
impair it; Because I account, my ordinary course of Study, and Meditation, to
be more painful, than most parts of Action are. I ever bare a mind, (in some
middle place, that I could discharge,) to serve her Majesty; Not as a Man, born
under Sol, that loves Honor; Nor under Jupiter, that loves Business; (For
the Contemplative Planet, carries me away wholly,) but as a Man, born under an
Excellent Sovereign, that deserves the Dedication, of all Men's Abilities.
Besides, I do not find, in my self, so much Self-love, but that the greater
parts, of my Thoughts are, to deserve well, (if I were able,) of my Friends, and
namely of your Lordship; who being the Atlas, of this Commonwealth, the Honor
of my House, and the second Founder of my poor Estate, I am tied, by all
duties, both of a good Patriot, and of an unworthy Kinsman, and of an Obliged
Servant, to employ whatsoever I am, to do you Service. Again, the Meanness of
my Estate, does somewhat move me: For though I cannot accuse my Self, that I am
either prodigal, or sloathfull, yet my Health is not to spend, nor my Course to
get. Lastly, I confess, that I have, as vast Contemplative Ends, as I have
moderate Civil Ends: For I have taken all Knowledge, to be my Province; And if
I could purge, it of two sort of Rovers, whereof the one, with frivolous
Disputations, Confutations, and Verbosities; The other, with blind Experiments,
and Auricular Traditions, and Impostures; has committed so many spoils; I
hope, I should bring in, Industrious Observations, grounded Conclusions, and
profitable Inventions and Discoveries, the best State of that Province. This,
whether it be Curiosity, or Vainglory, or Nature, or, (if one take it
favorably,) Philanthropia, is so fixed in my mind, as it cannot be removed.
And I do easily see, that Place of any Reasonable Countenance, does bring
commandment, of more Wits, than of a Man's own; which is the Thing I greatly
affect. And for your Lordship, perhaps you shall not find more Strength, and
less Encounter, in any other. And if your Lordship, shall find now, or at any
time, that I do seek, or affect, any place, whereunto any that is nearer unto
your Lordship, shall be concurrent, say then, that I am a most dishonest Man.
And if your Lordship, will not carry me on, I will not do as Anaxagoras did,
who reduced himself, with Contemplation, unto voluntary poverty; But this I
will do, I will sell the Inheritance, that I have, and purchase some Lease, of
quick Revenew, or some Office of Gain, that shall be executed by Deputy, and so
give over, all Care of Service, and become some sorry Bookmaker, or a true
Pioner, in that Mine of Truth, which (he said,) lay so deep. This which I have
writ unto your Lordship, is rather Thoughts, than Words, being set down without
all Art, Disguizing, or Reservation. Wherein I have done honor, both to your
Lordships Wisdom, in judging, that that will be best believed of your Lordship^
which is truest; And to your Lordships good Nature, in retaining nothing from
you. And even so, I wish your Lordship, all Happiness, and to my Self, Means
and Occasion, to be added, to my faithful desire, to do you Service. From my
Lodging at Grays Inn.

To the Lord Treasurer Burghley.
My singular good Lord,
YOur Lordships comfortable Relation, of her Majesty's gracious Opinion, and
Meaning toward me, though, at that time, your leisure gave me not leave, to
show how I was affected therewith; yet upon every Representation thereof, it
enters, and strikes, more deeply into me, as both my Nature, and Duty,
presses me, to return some Speech of Thankfulness. It must be, an exceeding
Comfort, and Encouragement to me; setting forth, and putting my Self, in way,
toward her Majesty's service, to encounter with an Example, so private, and
domestical, of her Majesty's gracious Goodness, and Benignity; Being made good,
and verified, in my Father, so far forth, as it extends, to his Posterity;
Accepting them, as commended by his service, during the Nonage, (as I may term
it,) of their own Deserts. I, for my part, am very well content, that I take
least part, either of his Abilities of Mind, or of his Wordly Advancement;
Both which he held, and received, the one of the Gift of God immediately, the
other of her Majesty's Gift: Yet, in the loyal, and earnest Affection, which he
bare to her Majesty's Service, I trust, my portion shall not be with the least,
nor in proportion with the youngest Birth. For methinks, his President, should
be a silent charge, upon his Blessing, unto us all, in our Degrees, to follow
him afar off, and to dedicate unto her Majesty's Service, both the use, and
spending, of our Lives. True it is, that I must needs acknowledge my self,
prepared, and furnished thereunto, with nothing, but with a Multitude, of
Lacks, and Imperfections; But calling to mind, how diversely, and in what
particular providence, God has declared himself, to tender the State, of her
Majesty's Affairs, I conceive, and gather hope, that those, whom he has, in a
manner, pressed, for her Majesty's Service, by working, and imprinting in them, a
single, and zealous mind, to bestow their duties therein; He will see them,
accordingly appointed, of Sufficiency convenient, for the Rank, and Standing,
where they shall be employed: So as under this her Majesty's Blessing, I trust,
to receive, a larger allowance, of Gods Graces. And as I may hope for this, so
I can assure, and promise, for my Endeavor, that it shall not be in fault: But
what Diligence, can entitle me unto, that, I doubt not, to recover. And now
seeing, it has pleased her Majesty, to take knowledge, of this my Mind, and to
vouchsafe, to appropriate me, unto her Service, preventing any desert of mine,
with her Princely liberality; First, I am humbly, to beseech your Lordship, to
present to her Majesty, my more than humble Thanks, for the same: And withal,
having regard, to mine own unworthiness, to receive such Favor; And to the
small possibility, in me, to satisfy, and answer, what her Majesty conceives;
I am moved to become, a most humble Suter to her Majesty, that this Benefit
also, may be a^fixed, unto the other: which is; That if there appear in me, no
such Towardness, of Service, as it may be her Majesty, does benignly value, and
assess me at; by reason of my sundry wants, and the disadvantage of my Nature,
being unapt to lay forth, the Simple Store, of those inferior Gifts, which God
has allotted unto me, most to view; yet that it would please her Excellent
Majesty, not to account my Thankfulness, the less, for that my Disability is
great, to show it; But to sustain me, in her Majesty's gracious opinion,
whereupon I only rest, and not upon any expectation of Desert, to proceed from
my Self, toward the Contentment thereof. But if it shall please God, to send
forth an occasion, whereby my faithful Affection, may be tried, I trust, it
shall save me labor, for ever making, more protestation of it hereafter. In
the mean time, howsoever it be not made known to her Majesty, yet God knows
it, through the daily solicitations, wherewith I address my self unto him, in
unfeigned prayer, for the Multiplying, of her Majesty's prosperities. To your
Lordship also, whose Recommendation, I know right well, has been material, to
advance, her Majesty's good opinion, of me, I can be but a bounden Servant. So
much may I safely premise, and purpose to be, seeing public, and private
Bonds, vary not, but that my Service, to her Majesty, and your Lordship, draw
in a Line. I wish therefore, to show it, with as good proof, as I can say it,
in good faith, etc.

Your Lordships, etc.

To Sir Robert Cecil.
It may please your good Honor;
I Am apt enough, to contemn Mendacia Famae; yet it is with this Distinction;
As Fame walks among Inferiors, and not as it has Entrance into some Ears. And
yet, nevertheless, in that kind also, I intend to avoid a suspicious silence,
but not to make any base Apology. It is blown about the Town, that I should
give opinion, touching my Lord of Essex Cause; First, that it was a Praemunire;
And now last, that it reached to High Treason. And this Opinion, should be
given, in opposition, to the Opinion, of the Lord Chief Justice, and of Mr.
Attorney General. Sir, I thank God, whatsoever Opinion, my Head serves me to
deliver, to her Majesty, being asked, My Heart serves me to maintain, the same
honest Duty, directing me, and assisting me. But the utter untruth of this
Report, God, and the Queen can witness; And the Improbability of it, every Man
that has Wit, more or less, can conceive. The Root of this, I discern to be^
not so much, a light, and humorous Envy, at my Accesses to her Majesty; (which
of her Majesty's grace, being begun in my first years, I would be sorry she
should estraunge in my last years; (For so I account them, reckoning by Health,
not by Age;) As a deep Malice, to your Honorable Self; upon whom, by me,
through nearness, they think, to make some Aspersion. But as I know no Remedy,
against Libels, and Lies; So I hope, it shall make, no manner of Disseverance,
of your Honorable good Conceits, and Affection toward me; which is the Thing
I confess to fear. For as for any violence, to be offered to me, wherewith my
Friends tell me, to no small terror, that I am threatened; I thank God, I have
the privy Coat, of a good Conscience; And have, a good while since, put off any
fearful care of Life, or the Accidents of Life. So desiring to be preserved,
in your goo^ Opinion, I remain.

To the Queen.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Presume, according to the Ceremony, and good manner of the Time, and my
accustomed Duty, in all Humbleness, to present your Majesty, with a simple
Gift; Almost as far from answering my Mind, as sorting with your Greatness;
And therewith wish, that we may continue to reckon on, and ever, your Majesty's
happy years of Reign: And they that reckon upon any other Hopes, I would they
might reckon short, and to their Cost. And so craving pardon, most humbly, I
commend your Majesty, to the preservation, of the Divine Goodness.

To the Queen.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
I Most humbly entreat your Majesty, not to impute my absence, to any weakness
of mind, or unworthiness. But I assure your Majesty, I do find Envy beating so
strongly upon me, standing as I do, (if this be to stand,) as it were not
Strength of Mind, but Stupidity, if I should not decline the Occasions; Except
I could do your Majesty more Service, than I can, any ways discern, that I am
able to do. My Course toward your Majesty, ( God is my witness,) has been
pure, and unleavened: And never poor Gentleman, (as I am persuaded,) had a
deeper, and truer desire, and care of your glory, your safety, your Repose of
Mind, your service: Wherein, if I have exceeded, my outward vocation, I most
humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, for my presumption. On the other side, if I
have come short, of my inward vocation, I most humbly crave Gods pardon, for
quenching the Spirit. But in this mind, I find such solitude, and want of
comfort; which I judge to be, because I take Duty too exactly, and not
according to the Dreggs, of this Age; wherein the old Antheme, might never be
more truly sung; Totus mundus in maligno positus est. My Life has been
threatened, and my Name libelled, which I count an Honor. But these are the
practices of those, whose despairs are dangerous; But yet not so dangerous as
their Hopes: Or else the Devices of some, that would put out, all your
Majesty's lights, and fall on reckoning, how many years you have reigned; which
I beseech our blessed Savior may be doubled; And that I may never live, to
see, any Eclipse of your glory, Interruption of safety, or Indisposition of
your person; which I commend to the Divine Majesty, who keep you, and fortify
you.

To my Lord Hen. Howard.
My Lord,
THere be very few besides your self, to whom I would perform this Respect. For
I contemn Mendacia Famae, as it walks among Inferiors; Though I neglect it
not, as it may have entrance, into some Ear. For your Lordships Love, rooted
upon good opinion, I esteem it highly, because I have tasted of the Fruits of
it; And we both have tasted, of the best waters, in my account, to knit minds
together. There is shaped a Tale, in Londons Forge, that beats apace at this
time; That I should deliver opinion, to the Quee^, in my Lord of Essex cause.
First, that it was praemunire; And now last, that it was High Treason; And this
opinion, to be in opposition, and Encounter, of the Lord chief Justices
Opinion, and the Attorney Generals. My Lord, (I thank God) my wit serves me
not, to deliver any Opinion, to the Qeen which my Stomach, serves me not, to
maintain: One, and the same, Conscience of Duty, guiding me, and fortifying me.
But the untruth o^ this Fable, God, and my Sovereign, can witness; And there I
leave it: Knowing no more Remedy against lies, than others do against libells.
The Root, no question of it, is; partly, some lightheaded Envy, at my Accesses
to her Majesty; Which being begun, and continued, since my childhood, as long
as her Majesty, shall think me worthy of them, I scorn those, that shall think
the contrary. And another Reason is, the Aspersion of this Tale; And the Envy
thereof, upon some great^r Man, in regard of my Nearness. And therefore, (my
Lord) I pray you, answ^r for me, to any person, that you think worthy, your own
Reply, and my defense. For my Lord of Essex, I am not servile to him, having
regard to my ^uperiours Duty. I have been much bound unto him. And on the other
side, I have spent more time, and more thoughts, about his well-doing, than I
ever did about mine own. I pray God, you his Friends, amongst you, be in the
right. Nulla Remedia, tam faciunt dolorem, quam quae sunt salutaria. For my
part, I have deserved better, than to have my Name, objected to Envy, or my
Life, to a Ruffians violence. But I have the privy Coat, of a good Conscience.
I am sure, these Courses, and Bruits, hurt my Lord more than all. So having
written to your Lordship, I desire exceedingly, to be preferred, in your good
Opinion, and Love. And so leave you, to Gods Goodness.

The Earl of Essex Letter, to the Council, at his Embarquing for Spain. June
1596.
My very good Lords;
HAving taken order, for all things, that belong to our Landforces; And
staying only, till the Ships be ready, to take in our Soldiers, I am come
aboard, as well to draw other Men, by my example, to leave the shore; As to
have time, and leisure, to ask account of my self, what other duty I have to
do, besides the Governing of those Troops; And the using of them to good
purpose. In which Meditation, as I first study, to please my most gracious
Sovereign, as well as to serve her; So my next care is, to leave your Lordships
well satisfied, of my passed Carriage, since I was nominated to this Service;
And apt, to make favorable Construction, of what I shall do hereafter.

In my past Carriage, I will neither plead Merit, nor Excuse Imperfections: For
whatsoever, I shall be able to do, I know, is less than I owe; And besides, my
Faults, my very Faith, and Zeal, (which are the best things in me,) do make me
commit Errors. But I would fain, approve the Matter it self, of undertaking
this service, to have been good, howsoever my former have been erroneous; Or at
least, my Intent, and Ends, unblameable, though my Judgment were faulty. Your
Lordships know, it has been the Wisdom of all Times, rather to attempt, and
do something, in another Country, than to attend an Enemy, and be in danger
much, in our own. And if this Rule, among the Ancients, was generally held
true, it might be better allowed of us, in particular cases, where a State,
little in Territory, not extraordinarily rich, and defended only with it self,
shall have to do, with another State, that has Many, and ample Dominions, the
Treasure of the Indies, and all the Mercenaries, of Christendom, to serve it.
For we have, as the Athenians had, with the ancient usurping Philip; Praelium
Facile, Bellum Difficile. Therefore, it is our Disadvantage, to draw the War
into Length. And if any Man, in this Kingdom, should be allowed, to persuade to
prevention, he might be one, that saw the Spaniard at home, apprehend an
Invasion, with greater Terror, than he makes it abroad: And that was a
Witness, how an Handful of Men, neither armed, victualled, nor ordered, as
they should be, landed, marched, and had done what they listed, if either the
Ships had come up, or they had had any provisions, to make a Hole in a Wall, or
to break open a Gate. But though the Counsel be good for some States, and for
ours, at some times, yet the Opportunities ought to be watched, and it must
appear, that this it is, which is now taken. The Opportunity, for such Service,
I take to be, when either the Enemy, May receive the most hurt; Or when he is
likeliest, to attempt against us, if he be not empeached. The Hurt, that our
Estate should seek, to do him, is; To intercept his Treasure, whereby we shall
cut his Sinnews, and make War upon him, with his own Money; And to beat, or at
least discontinew him, from the Sea, whereby her Majesty shall be, both secured
from his Invasions, and become Mistress of the Sea; which is the Greatness, that
the Queen of an Island, should most aspire unto. In matter of Profit, we may,
this Journey, most hurt him, and benefit our Selves; Since he has, (as is
agreed on by all Men,) more Caracks, to come home now, than ever any year
before. Besides many good Advantages, which will be offered, if we command the
Coast. And to give him a Blow, and discountenance him by Sea, now is the Time,
when he has declared his Ambition, to command the Seas; And yet, so divided
his Fleets; Some appointed to be set out, and yet scant in readiness; others
upon point of Coming home, and not fit to defend themselves, if either they be
met at Sea, or found in Harbor; And all so dispersed, in several places, as if
at any time, we might do good, that way, it is now. And whether he will make
War upon us, if we let him alone; Let his Solicitations, Offers, and Gifts to
the Rebels of Ireland; His besieging, and winning of Calais, and those parts
of France, that front upon us; And his strengthening himself by Sea, by so many
means; Let these things (I say,) tell us. So as, if we will, at any time, allow
the Counsel of prevention, to be reasonable, we must now confess it, to be
opportune. But whatsoever the Counsel were, I am not to be charged with it, For
as I was not the Contriver, nor Offerer, of the Project, so if I had refused to
join with him, that did invite me to it, I should have been thought, both
Incompatible, and Backward, in her Majesty's Service. I say not this, for that
I think the Action such, as it were Disadvantage, to be thought the Projector
of it; But I say, and say truly, that my Lord Admiral devised it, presented it
to her Majesty, and had as well the Approbation of her Majesty, and the Assent
of such of your Lordships, as were acquainted with it, as my Promise to go
with him. One thing, (I confess,) I above all Men, am to be charged withal:
That is; That when her Majesty's, the Cities of London, and the States of the
Low Countries charge was past, the Men levied, and marching, to the
Rendez-vous; I could not see, how with her Majesty's Honor, and Safety, the
Journey might be broken. Wh^rein, although I should be carried with passion,
yet I pray your Lordships consider, who, almost, that had been in my Case,
named to such an Action, voiced throughout Christendom, and engaged in it, as
much as I was worth; And being the Instrument, of drawing, more voluntary Men,
of their own charge, than ever was seen these many years: Who (I say,) would
not have been so affected? But far be it from me, in an Action, of this
importance, to weigh my Self, or my particular Fortunes. I must beseech your
Lordships, to remember, that I was, from time to time, warranted, by all your
opinions, delivered both amongst your selves, and to her Majesty: Which tieth
you all, to allow the Counsel. And that being granted, your Lordships, will
call that Zeal, which makes a Man constant, in a good Counsel, that would be
Passion, in an evil, or a doubtful. I confess, her Majesty, offered us
Recompense, for all our charges and losses. But, (my Lords,) I pray your
Lordships consider, how many Things, I should have sold, at once, for money. I
will leave mine own reputation as too small a Matter to be mentioned. But I
should have sold; The Honor of her Majesty; The safety of the State; The
Contentment of her Confederates; The Fortune and Hope, of many my poor
Contrymen; And The Possibility, of giving a Blow, to that Enemy, that ought
ever to be hateful, to all true English Hearts. I should have sold all this,
for private profit. Therefore, though I ask pardon of her Majesty, and pray
your Lordships, to mediate it for me, that I was carried by this Zeal so fast,
that I forgot those Reverend Forms, which I should have used; yet I had rather,
have my Heart, out of my Body, than this Zeal, out of my Heart. And now, as I
have laid before your Lordships, my past carriage, and entering into this
Action; So I beseech your Lordships, give me leave, to prepare you, to a
favorable Construction, of that, which I shall do hereafter. In which Suit, I
am resolved, neither to plead the Hazarding of Life, nor spending of my
Substance, in a Public Service; To the end, that I might find your Lordships,
(who are public persons,) more favorable Judges: But will confess, that I
receive, so much Favor, and Honor, by this Trust, and Employment, as when I
have done all I can, I shall still be behind hand. This Suit only I make, that
your Lordships, will neither have too great an Expectation, of our Actions, nor
too little; Lest all we do, seem either Nothing, or to be done by Chance. I
know, we must be tied, to do no more, than shall be for her Majesty's Service,
nor no less. In which strait way, though it be hard for so weak a Man as my
Self, to walk upright; yet the Example, of our raw Soldiers, may comfort, an
unsufficient General. ^or they, till they grow perfect, in all their Orders,
and Motions, are so afraid to be out, and with such a continual heedfulness,
observe, both themselves, and those that are near them, that they do keep,
almost, as good order, at the first, as ever after. I am sure, I am as
distrustful of my Self, as they. And because I have more Sense of Duty, I
shall be more Industrious. For Sea Service, the Judgment of my Honorable
Companion, shall be my Compass. And for Land, his Assent, and the Advice of
those her Majesty has named, as Counselors at War, shall be my Warranties.
It will be Honor to her Majesty, and a great Assurance to her State, if we
either bring home wealth, or give the King of Spain, a blow by Sea. But to have
made a continual Diversion, and to have left, as it were, a Thorn, sticking in
his Foot, had been a Work worthy, of such a Queen, and of such a Preparation.
For then, her Majesty, should have heard no more, of his Intentions for
Ireland, and Attempts upon the Coast of France; Or his drawing, of Ships, or
Galley's, into these Narrow Seas; But should at once, have delivered all
Christendom, from his fearful Usurpation. Wherein, as She had been great in
Fame, for such a general preservation; So she had been as great in Power, in
making, all the Enemies of Spain, in Christendom, to depend upon Her. She
should be Head of the Party; She only might be said, to make the Wars with
Spain, because she made them to purpose; And they all, but as her Assistants,
and Dependants. And lastly, as the End of the Wars is Peace; So she might have
had Peace, when she would, and with what Conditions she would, and have
included, or left out, whom she would. For she only, by this course, should
force him, to wish for Peace, and she had the means in her hands, to make the
Conditions. And as easy it had been, to have done this, as to have performed
lesser Services. The Objections against this, will be, Hazard, and Charge.
Hazard, to hold any Thing of his, that is so Mighty a King: And Charge, to send
such Supplies, from time to time, as will be needful. For Hazard, It is not
the Hazard, of the State, or the Whole, as are the Hazards, of a Defensive
War, whenever we are enforced to fight: But it is only, a Hazard of some
few, and such Commanders, as shall be set out, for such a Service. And those
also, that shall be so hazarded, shall be in less danger, than if they were
put, into any Frontire Places, of France, or of the Low Countries. For they
should not be left, in any part of the Main, or Continent of Spain, or
Portugal, where the Enemy might bring an Army, to attempt them; (T^ough I
doubt not, but after he had once tried, what it were, to besiege two or three
thousand English, in a place, well fortified, and where they had a Port open,
he would grow quickly weary, of those Attempts;) But they should be so lodged,
as the Seat, and Strength, of the place, should warrant their Safety; So that,
to pull her Majesty's Men, out of it, should be a harder Task, than to conquer
any Country, that stands on firm land, by him: And to let English quietly
possess it, should so much prejudice him, as he were not able to endure it.
And for Charge, there need not so much be expended, but that it might easily be
born. And the Place, being well chosen, and the War well conducted, in a short
time, there would not only arise enough, to pay the Charge; But great Profit
to her Majesty, and wealth to our Country, would grow, from the place, that
should be held. For in a short time, a great part, of the Golden Indian Stream,
might be turned, from Spain, to England; And her Majesty be made, to give Law,
to all the World by Sea, without her Charge. Besides, this fearful Enemy,
which is now a Terror, to all Christendom, should be so weakened, in
Strength, Reputation, and Purse, as her Majesty should, for ever after, have an
easy En^my of him. It may be your Lordships will desire to know the Place,
that should be attempted; The Means, first to take it, then to hold it; The
Commodity, or Advantage, that might grow, to this Estate by it. But that, with
your Lordships leave, shall be reserved till my Next. This is only to beseech
you, for our dear Sovereigns sake, for the Glory, and Welfare, of Her, and her
Estate, that you will think upon this general Proposition. And if your
Lordships find it reasonable, that you will move it to the Queen: By whom if I
be commanded, to set down the Hypothesis, or to descend unto particulars, I
will offer my Project, with this Condition, that if I advise any Thing, that
the Counsel of War, shall think dangerous, it may be rejected: Or if my self
be Actour in any Thing, belonging to this Project, wherein her Majesty receives
dishonor, that I may answer it, with my Life. And yet your Lordships know, I
am matched with those, in whom I have no particular Interest: But I must
attribute, their Assenting to me, to my good happ, to take the better part. In
my Lord, with whom I am joined, I find so much Honor, and Service, as I doubt
not, but our Unity in Affection, will make an Unity in Counsel, Action, and
Government. I have troubled your Lordships, with a tedious Letter, begun in a
Day of Leisure, and finished in the midst, of our troublesome Business. I pray
your Lordships, pardon the Errors in it; And keep so honorable an Opinion of
me, as I be not condemned by you, upon any Complaints, Advertisements, or
Reports, till I have given answer to them. For as the Nature of my Place, is
subject to Envy, and Detraction; So a little Body, full of sharp Humors, is
hardliest kept in Temper. And all the discontented Humors, of an Army, do make
their greatest Quarrel, to him that commands the Army; Not so much for his
Faults, as for because he bridles theirs. And so commending your good
Lordships, to Gods Divine protection, I rest;

At your Lordships commandment,
Robert Essex.

To my Lord of Essex, from Mr. Bacon^
My singular good Lord;
I Will no longer, dissever part of that, which I meant to have said, to your
Lordship, at Bar^helmes, from the Exordium, which I then made. Whereunto I will
only add this; That I humbly desire your Lordship, before you give access,
to my poor Advice, to look about, even jealously a little, if you will, and to
consider: First, whether I have not reason to think, that your Fortune
comprehends mine: Next, whether I shift my Counsel, and do not constare
^ihi; For I am persuaded, there are some, would give you the same Counsel now,
which I shall, but that they should derogate from that, which they have said
heretofore: Thirdly, whether you have taken hurt, at any time, by my careful
and Devoted Counsel: For although, I remember well, your Lordship once told
me, that you having submitted, upon my well-meant Motion, at Nonsuch, (the
place, where you renewed a Treaty, with her Majesty, of obs^quious kindness,)
she had taken advantage of it; yet I suppose, you do si^ce believe, that it did
much attemp^r a cold Malignant Humor, then growing upon her Majesty, toward
your Lordship, and has done you good in consequence. And for my being against
it, now lately, that you should not estrange your self, although I give place
to none, in true Gratulation; Yet neither do I repent me of sa^e Counsel;
Neither do I judge of the whole Play, by the First Act. But whether I counsel
you the best, or for the best, Duty binds me, to offer to you, my wishes. I
said to your Lordship, last time; Martha, Martha, attendis ad plurima, unum
sufficit. Win the Queen; If this be not the Beginning, of any other Course, I
see no end. And I will not now speak, of Favor of Affection, but of other
Correspondence, and Agreeablen^sse: which, whenever it shall be conjoined,
with the other of Affection, I durst wag^r my life, (let them make what
Prosopopaeas they will, of her Majesty's Nature;) That in you, she will come to
the Question of; Quid fiet Homini, quem Rex vult honorare? But how is it now? A
Man, of a Nature, not to be ruled; That has the Advantage, o^ my Affection,
and knows it; Of an Estate, not grounded to his Greatness; Of a popular
Reputation; Of a Military Dependence: I demand, whether there can be a more
dangerous Image, than this, represented to any Monarch living; Much more to a
Lady, and of her Majesty's Apprehension? And is it not more evident, than
Demonstration it self, that whilst this Impression continues, in her
Majesty's Breast, you can find, no other Condition, than Inventions, to keep
your Estate, bare, and low; Crossing, and Disgracing your Actions; Extenuating,
and Blasting of your Merit; Carping with Contempt, at your Nature, and
Fashions; Breeding, nourishing, and fortifying, such Instruments, as are most
Factious against you; Repulses, and Scorns, of your Friends, and Dependants,
that are true, and steadfast; winning, and inveigling away from you, such as are
Flexible, and wavering; Thrusting you into odious Employments, and Offices, to
supplant your Reputation; Abusing you, and Feeding you, with Dalliances, and
Demonstrations, to divert you, from Descending, into the serious Consideration,
of your own Case; yea, and percase Ventring you, in perilous, and desperate,
Enterprises. Herein, it may please your Lordship, to understand me; For I mean
noth^ng less, than that these Things, should be plotted, and intended, as in
her Majesty's Royal Mind toward you; I know the Excellency, of her Nature,
too well. But I say, wheresoever the formerly described Impression, is taken,
in any Kings Breast, toward a Subject, these other recited Inconveniences,
must of necessity, of politic consequence, follow; In respect, of such
Instruments, as are never failing, about Princes; which spy into their Humors,
and Conceits, and second them; And not only second them, but in seconding
increase them; Yea and, many times, without their knowledge, pursue them,
further than Themselves would. Your Lordship, will ask the Question, wherewith
the Athenians, were wont to interrupt their Orators, when they exaggerated
their dangers; Quid igitur agendum est?

I will tell your Lordship, Quae mihi nunc in mentem veniunt; Supposing,
nevertheless, that your Self, out of your own Wi^dom, upon the case, with this
Plainness, and Liberty, represented to you^ will find out, better Expedients,
and Remedies. I wish a Cure applied, to every, of the five former Impressions,
which I will take, not in order, but as I think, they are of weight.

For the removing the Impression, of your Nature, to be Opiniastre, and not
Rulable; First, and above all things, I wish, that all Matters past, which
cannot be revoked, your Lordship would turn altogether, upon Insatisfaction,
and not upon your Nature, or proper Disposition. This String you cannot, upon
every apt occasion, harp upon too much. Next, whereas I have noted you, to fly,
and avoid, (in some respect justly,) the Resemblance, or Imitation, of my Lord
of Leicester, and my Lord Chanceller Hatton; yet I am persuaded, (howsoever I
wish your Lordship, as distant, as you are, from them, in Points of Favor,
Integrity, Magnanimity, and Merit;) That it will do you much good, between the
Queen, and you, to allege them, (as often as you find occasion,) for Authors,
and Patterns. For I do not know, a readier mean, to make her Majesty think,
you are in your right way. Thirdly, when at any time, your Lordship, upon
occasion, happen in Speeches, to do her Majesty right, (for there is no such
Matter, as Flattery, amongst you all,) I fear, you handle it, Magis in speciem
adornatis verbis, quam ut sentire videaris. So that a Man, may read Formality,
in your Countenance; Whereas your Lordship should do it, familiarly, Et
oratione fida. Fourthly, your Lordship, should never be, without some
Particulars afoot, which you should seem to pursue, with Earnestness, and
Affection; And then let them fall, upon taking Knowledge, of her Majesty's
Opposition, and Dislike. Of which, the weightiest Sort may be, if your Lordship
offer to labor, in the behalf of some, that you favor, for some of the
Places, now void; Choosing such a Subject, as you think her Majesty, is like to
oppose unto: And if you will say, that this is, Conjunctum cum aliena Injuria;
I will not answer; Haec non aliter constabunt; But I say; Commendation from so
good a Mouth, does not hurt a Man, though you prevail not. A less weighty Sort
of Particulars, may be, the Pretense of some Iourneys, which, at her Majesty's
request, your Lordship might relinquish; As if you would pretend a Journey, to
see your Living, and Estate, toward Wales, or the like: For as for great
Foreign Iourneys, of Employment, and Service, it stands not with your Gravity,
to play, or Stratageme, with them. And the lightest sort of particulars, which
yet are not to be neglected, are, in your Habits, Apparel, Wearings, Gestures,
and the like.

The Impression, of greatest prejudice, next, is that, of a Militar Dependence.
Wherein, I cannot sufficiently wonder, at your Lordships course; That you say,
the Wars are your Occupation; And go on, in that course: Whereas, if I might
have advised your Lordship, you should have left that Person, at Plimmouth;
More than, when in Counsel, or in commending fit persons, for service for
Wars, it had been in season. And here, (my Lord,) I pray mistake me not. I am
not to play now, the Part of a Gownman, that would frame you best, to mine own
turn. I know what I owe you. I am infinitely glad of this last Journey, now it
is past: The rather, because you may make, so Honorable a full Point, for a
time. You have Property good enough, in that Greatness. There is none can, of
many years, ascend, near you, in competition. Besides, the Disposing of the
Places, and Affairs, both, concerning the Wars, (you increasing in other
Greatness,) will, of themselves, flow to you; which will preserve that
Dependence, in full measure. It is a Thing, that of all Things, I would have
you retain, the Times considered: And the Necessity of the Service, for other
reason, I know none. But I say; Keep it in Substance, but abolish it in shows,
to the Queen. For her Majesty loves Peace. Next she loves not Charge.
Thirdly, that kind of Dependence, makes a Suspected Greatness. Therefore,
Quod instat agamus. Let that be a sleeping Honor a while; And cure the Queens
mind in that point. Therefore again, whereas I heard your Lordships designing
to your self, the Earl Marshals place, or the place of Master of the Ordnance,
I did not, in my mind, so well like of either; Because of their Affinity, with
a Martial Greatness. But of the Places, now void, in my Judgment, and
discretion, I would name you, to the place, of Lord Privy Seal. For first, it
is the Third Person, of the great Officers, of the Crown. Next, it has a kind,
of Super-Intendence, over the Secretary. It has also an Affinity, with the
Court of Wards, in regard of the Fees, from the Liveries. And it is a fine
Honor, quiet place, and worth a Thousand pounds by year. And my Lord Admiralls
Father, had it, who was a Martial Man. And it fits a Favorite, to carry her
Majesty's Image in Seal, who bears it best expressed in Heart. But my chief
Reason is, that which I first alleged, to divert her Majesty, from this
Impression, of a Martial Greatness. In concurrence whereof, If your Lordship,
shall remit any thing of your former diligence, at the Starr-chamber; If you
shall continue, such Intelligences, as are worth the cherishing; If you shall
pretend, to be as Bookish, and Contemplative, as ever you were; All these
Courses, have both their Advantages, and uses in themselves otherwise, and
serve exceeding aptly to this purpose. Whereunto, I add one Expedient more,
stronger than all the rest; And for mine own confident Opinion, void of any
prejudice, or danger of Diminution, of your Greatness; And that is, the
Bringing in, of some Martial Man, to be of the Council; Dealing directly with
her Majesty in it, as for her Service, and your better assistance; Choosing
nevertheless some Person, that may be known, not to come in against you, by
any former Division. I judge the fittest, to be, my Lord Mount-joy, or my Lord
Willoughby. And if your Lordship, see deeplier into it, than I do, that you
would not have it done, in effect; Yet in my Opinion, you may serve your turn,
by the pretense of it, and stay it nevertheless.

The Third Impression is, of a Popular Reputation; which, because it is a
Thing, good in it self, being obtained as your Lordship obtains it, that is,
Bonis artibus; And besides, Well governed, is one of the best Flowers, of your
Greatness, both present, and to come; It would be handled tenderly. The only
way is, to quench it Verbis, and not Rebus. And therefore to take all
Occasions, to the Queen, to speak against Popularity, and Popular Courses,
vehemently; And to tax it in all others: But, nevertheless, to go on, in your
Honorable Commonwealth Courses, as you do. And therefore, I will not advise
you, to cure this, by dealing in Monopolies, or any Oppressions. Only, if in
Parliament, your Lordship be forward for Treasure, in respect of the Wars, it
becomes your Person well. And if her Majesty object Popularity to you at any
time, I would say to her; A Parliament will show that; And so feed her with
Expectation.

The Fourth Impression, of the Inequality, between your Estate of Means, and
your Greatness of Respects, is not to be neglected. For believe it, (my Lord,)
that till her Majesty find you, careful of your Estate, she will not only
think you, more like to continue, chargeable to her, but also have a Conceit,
that you have higher Imaginations. The Remedies are; First, to profess it, in
all speeches to her. Next, in such Suits, wherein both Honor, Gift, and
Profit, may be taken, to communicate freely with her Majesty, by way of
enducing her, to grant, that it will be this Benefit to you. Lastly, to be
plain with your Lordship; (For the Gentlemen are such, as I am beholding to;)
Nothing can make the Queen, or the World, think so much, that you are come, to
a provident Care, of your Estate, as the Altering of some of your Officers:
Who, though they be as true to you, as One Hand to the Other; Yet Opinio
Veritate major. But if, in respect of the Bonds, they may be entered into, for
your Lordship, you cannot so well dismiss your self of them, this cannot be
done, but with Time.

For the Fifth, and Last, which is, of the Advantage of a Favorite: As severed
from the rest, it cannot hurt; So joined with them, it makes her Majesty, more
fearful, and shadowy, as not knowing her own strength. The only Remedy to
this, is; To give way, to some other Favorite, as in particular you shall
find, her Majesty inclined; So as the Subject has no ill, nor dangerous
Aspect, toward your self. For otherwise, whosoever shall tell me, that you may
not have singular use, of a Favorite, at your Devotion; I will say, he
understands not the Queens Affection, nor your Lordships Condition. And so I
rest.

October 4. 1596.
To Sir Robert Cecil.
Sir,
I Forbear not to put in Paper, as much as I thought, to have spoken to your
Honor, too day, if I could have stayed; Knowing, that if your Honor, should
make other use of it, than is due to good meaning; And then I am persuaded you
will; Yet to persons of Judgment, and that know me otherwise, it will rather
appear, (as it is,) a precise Honesty, and this same, Suum cuique tribuere,
than any Hollownesse to any. It is my luck still, to be a kinn to such Things,
as I neither like in nature; nor would willingly meet with, im my Course; But
yet cannot avoid, without show of base Timorousness, or else of unkind, or
suspicious strangeness.

Some Hiatus in the Copy.

And I am of one Spirit still. I ever liked the Galenists, that deal with good
Compositions; And not the Paracelsians, that deal with these fine Separations:
And in Music, I ever loved easy Ayers, that go full, all the parts together;
And not these strange points, of Accord, and Diseord. This I write not, I
assure your Honor, officiously; Except it be, according to Tullies Offices;
that is, Honestly, and Morally. For though, I thank God, I account upon the
proceeding, in the Queens Service, or not proceeding, both ways; And therefore,
neither mean to fawn, not retire; yet I naturally desire good opinion, with any
Person, which for Fortune, or Spirit, is to be regarded; Much more with a
Secretary of the Queens, and a Cousin Germain; And one, with whom, I have ever
thought my Self, to have some sympathy, of Nature, though Accidents have not
suffered it to appear. Thus not doubting of your Honorable Interpretation, and
usage, of that I have written, I commend you, to the Divine preservation.

From Grayes Inn.
To my Lord of Essex.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Pray God, her Majesty's weighing, be not like the weight, of a Balance;
Gravia deorsum, Levia sursum. But I am as far, from being altered, in Devotion
toward Her, as I am from Distrust, that she will be altered, in opinion
toward me, when she knows me better. For my Self, I have lost some Opinion,
some Time, and some Means; This is my Account: But then, for Opinion, it is a
Blast, that goes, and comes; For Time, it is true, it goes, and comes
not; But yet I have learned, that it may be redeemed.

For Means, I value that most; And the rather, because I am purposed, not to
follow, the Practice of the Law: (If her Majesty command me, in any
particular, I shall be ready, to do her, willing Service;) And my Reason is
only, because it drinks too much Time, which I have dedicated to better
purposes. But even, for that point of Estate, and Means, I partly lean, to
Thales Opinion; That a Philosopher may be rich, if he will. Thus your Lordship
sees, how I comfort my Self: To the Increase whereof, I would fain please my
Self, to believe that to be true, which my Lord Treasurer writes; Which is,
that it is more, than a Philosopher, morally can digest. But without any such
high Conceit, I esteem it, like the pulling out, of an Aching Tooth, which I
remember, when I was a Child, and had little Philosophy, I was glad of, when it
was done. For your Lordship, I do think my Self, more beholding to you, than
to any Man. And I say, I reckon my Self, as a Common; (Not Popular, but
Common;) And as much, as is lawful, to be enclosed of a Common; So much your
Lordship shall be sure to have.

Your Lordships, to obey your Honorable Commands, more settled, than ever.

To my Lord of Essex.
My singular good Lord,
YOur Lordships, so Honorable minding my poor Fortune, the last year, in the
very Entrance, into that great Action, (which is a time of less leisure;) And
in so liberal an Allowance, of your Care, as to write three Letters, to stir
me up Friends, in your absence; Does, after a sor^, warrant me, not to object
to my Self, your present Quantity of affairs, whereby to silence my Self, from
Petition of the like Favor. I brake, with your Lordship, my self, at the
Tower; And I take it, my Brother, has since renewed, the same Motion; Touching
a Fortune, I was in thought to attempt, in Genere Oeconomico. In Genere
Politico, certain Cross Winds, have blown contrary. My Suit to your Lordship
is, for your several Letters, to be left with me, dormant, to the Gentlewoman,
and either of her Parents. Wherein, I do not doubt, but as the Beams of your
Favor, have often dissolved, the Coldness of my Fortune; So in this Argument,
your Lordship will do the like, with your Penn. My Desire is also, that your
Lordship would vouchsafe unto me, as out of your care, a general Letter, to my
Lord Keeper, for his Lordships holding me, from you, recommended; Both, in the
Course, of my Practice, and in the Course, of my Employment, in her Majesty's
Service. Wherein, if your Lordship shall, in any Antithesis, or Relation,
affirm, that his Lordship shall have no less Fruit of me, than of any other,
whom he may cherish, I hope, your Lordship shall engage your Self, for no
Impossibility. Lastly, and chiefly, I know not, whether I shall attain, to see
your Lordship, before your Noble Journey: For Ceremonies, are Things,
infinitely, inferior to my Love, and to my Zeal. This let me, with your
allowance, say unto you, by Penn. It is true, that in my well-meaning Advices,
out of my love to your Lordship, and, perhaps, out of the State, of mine own
mind, I have sometimes persuaded, a Course differing: Ac tibi pro tutis
insignia Facta placebunt: Be it so: yet remember, that the Signing of your
Name, is nothing, unless it be, to some good Patent, or Charter, whereby your
Country may be endowed, with Good, and Benefit. Which I speak, both to move
you, to preserve your Person, for further Merit, and Service of her Majesty,
and your Country; And likewise, to referr this Action, to the same end. And so,
in most true, and fervent, prayers, I commend your Lordship, and your Work in
^and, to the Preservation, and Conduct, of the Divine Majesty; So much the more
watchful, as these Actions, do, more manifestly, in show, though alike in
Truth, depend upon his Divine Providence.

To my Lord of Canterbury.
It may please your Grace;
I Have considered the Objections, perused the Statutes, and framed the
Alterations; Which I send; Still keeping my self, within the Brevity of a
Letter, and Form of a Narration; Not entering, into a Form of Argument, or
Dispu^ation: For, in my poor Conceit, it is, somewhat, against the Majesty, of
Princes Actions, to make too curious, and striving Apologies; But rather, to
set them forth plainly; And so, as there may appear an Harmony, and Constancy
in them, so that one part upholdeth another. And so I wish your Grace all
prosperity.

From my poor Lodging, this, etc. Your Graces, most dutiful, Pupil, and
Servant.

To my Lord of Essex.
My singular good Lord,
THe Message, it pleased your Lordship, to send me, was to me delivered
doubtfully. Whether your Lordship said, you would speak with me, at the
Starr-chamber, or with Mr. Philip. If with me, it is needless; For Gratitude
imposes upon me Satisfaction: If with Mr. Philipp, it will be too late;
Because somewhat must (perchance) be done that day. This Doubt not solved,
makes me Write again; The rather, because^ I did liberally, but yet privately
affirm, your Lordship would write; Which if I make not good, it may be a
Discouragement. Your Lordships letter, though it have the Subject, of Honor,
and Justice, yet it shall have the Secrecy, of a Thing done, upon Affection. I
shall ever, in a firm duty, submit my Occasions, though great, to your
Lordships Respects, though small: And this is my Resolution; That when your
Lordship does for me, you shall increase my Obligation; When you refuse to do
for me, you shall increase my Merit. So leaving the Matter, wholly, to your
Lordships pleasure, I commend your Lordship; to the preservation, of the Divine
Majesty.

From Graies Inn. Your Lordships ever most humbly bounden.

A CONFESSION OF THE FAITH: WRITTEN, By the Right Honorable, FRANCIS BACON,
BARON of VERVLAM, VISCOUNT St. ALBAN.

LONDON, Printed by F. Leach, for William Lee, at the sign of the Turks-Head,
in Fleetstreet, 1657.

A CONFESSION OF THE FAITH.
WRITTEN By the Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON, Baron of VERULAM, etc.
I Believe, that Nothing is without beginning, but God: No Nature, no Matter,
no Spirit, but one, only, and the same God. That God, as he is Eternally
Almighty, Only Wise, Only Good, in his Nature; So he is Eternally Father,
Son, and Spirit in Persons.

I believe, that God, is so Holy, Pure, and Jealous, as it is impossible for
him, to be pleased in any Creature, though the Work of his own Hands: So that,
neither Angel, Man, nor World, could stand, or can stand, one Moment, in his
Eyes, without beholding the same, in the Face of a Mediator: And therefore,
that before Him, with whom all Things are present, the Lamb of God, was slain,
before all Worlds: Without which eternal Counsel of his, it was impossible
for Him, to have descended to any Work of Creation; But He should have enjoyed,
the Blessed, and Individual Society, of three Persons, in Godhead, only, for
ever.

But that, out of his Eternal, and infinite, Goodness, and Love, purposing to
become a Creator, and to communicate to his Creatures, He ordained, in his
Eternal Counsel, that one Person, of the Godhead, should be united, to one
Nature, and to one Particular of his Creatures; That so, in the Person, of the
Mediator, the true Ladder, might be fixed, whereby God might descend to his
Creatures, and his Creatures might ascend to God: So that God, by the
Reconcilement, of the Mediator, turning his Countenance toward his Creatures,
(though not in ^quall Light, and Degree,) made way, unto the Dispensation, of
his most holy, and secret Will; whereby some of his Creatures, might stand,
and keep their state; Others might, (possibly) fall, and be restored; And
others might fall, and not be restored, in their Estate, but yet remain in
Being, though under Wrath, and Corruption; All with Respect, to the Mediator:
Which is the great Mystery, and perfect Center, of all Gods ways, with his
Creatures; And unto which, all his other Works, and Wonders, do but serve, and
ref^rr.

That he chose, (according to his good pleasure,) Man, to be that Creature, to
whose Nature, the Person, of the Eternal Son of God, should be united: And
amongst the Generations of Men, elected a small Flock, in whom, (by the
Participation of Himself,) He purposed, to express, the Riches of his Glory;
All the Ministration of Angels, Damnation of Devils, and Reprobates, and
Universal Administration of all Creatures, and Dispensation of all Times,
having no other End, but as the VVayes, and Ambages of God, to be furth^r
glorified in his Saints; who are one with their Head, the Mediator, who is one
with God.

That by the Virtue of this his Eternal Counsel, He condescended of his own
good pleasure, and according to the Times, and Seasons, to himself known, to
become a Creator; And by his eternal Word, created all things; And by his
eternal Spirit, does comfort, and preserve them.

That he made all things, in their first Estate, Good; And removed from
himself, the Beginning of all Evil, and Vanity, into the Liberty, of the
Creature; But res^rved, in himself, the Beginning, of all Restitution, to the
Liberty of his Grace: Using, nevertheless, and turning, the Falling, and
Defection of the Creature, (which to his Presc^ence was eternally known,) to
make way to his eternal Counsel, touching a Mediator, and the Work he
purposed to accomplish in Him.

That God created Spirits, whereof some kept their standing, and others fell.
He created Heaven, and Earth, and all their Armies, and Gen^rations; And gave,
unto them, constant, and everlasting, Laws, which we call Nature; which is
nothing, but the Laws of the Creation; which Laws, nevertheless, have had
three Changes, or Times; and are to have, a Fourth, or Last. The First, when
the Matter of Heaven, and Earth, was created without Forms: The Second, the
Interim of Perfection, of every Days Work; The Third, by the Curse; which,
notwithstanding, was no new Creation; And the Last, at the End of the World,
the Manner whereof is not yet fully revealed: So as the Laws of Nature, which
now remain, and govern inviolably, till the end of the World, began to be in
force, when God first rested from his Works; and ceased to create; But
received, a Revocation, in part, by the Curse; Since which Time, they change
not.

That notwithstanding, God has rested, and ceased from Creating, since the
first Sabbath, yet nevertheless, he does accomplish, and fulfill his Divine
Will, in all Things, great and small, singular, and general, as fully, and
exactly, by Providence, as he could by Miracle, and new Creation; Though his
working be not immediate, and direct, but by compass; Not violating Nature,
which is his own Law, upon the Creature.

That, at the first, the Soul of Man, was not produced by Heaven, or Earth, but
was breathed immediately from God; So that the Ways, and proceedings of God,
with Spirits, are not included in Nature; That is, in the Laws, of Heaven, and
Earth; But are reserved, to the Law, of his secret Will, and Grace; wherein God
works still, and rests not, from the Work of Redemption, as he rests from
the Work of Creation; But continues working, till the end of the World; What
time, that Work also, shall be accomplished, and an eternal Sabbath shall
ensue. Likewise, that whenever God does transcend, the Law of Nature, by
Miracles, (which may ever seem as new Creations,) He never comes, to that
point, or pass, but in regard of the work of Redemption; which is the greater,
and whereto all Gods Signs, and Miracles, do referr.

That God created Man in his own Image, in a Reasonable Soul, in Innocence, in
Free Will, and in Sovereignty: That he gave him a Law, and Commandment, which
was in his power to keep, but he kept it not: That Man made a total Defection
from God, presuming to imagine, that the Commandments, and Prohibitions of
God, were not the Rules, of Good and Evil; But that Good, and Evil, had their
own principles, and beginnings: And lusted, after the Knowledge, of those
imagined Beginnings; To the end, to depend no more upon Gods will, revealed,
but upon himself, and his own Light, as a God: Than the which, there could not
be a Sin, more opposite, to the whole Law of God. That yet, nevertheless,
this great Sin, was not originally moved, by the Malice of Man, but was
insinuated, by the Suggestion, and Instigation, of the Devil; who was the First
Defected Creature; and fell of Malice, and not by Temptation.

That upon the Fall of Man, Death, and Vanity, entered, by the Justice of God;
And the Image of God, in Man, was defaced; And Heaven, and Earth, which were
made for Man's use, were subdued to Corruption, by his Fall; But then that
instantly, and without Int^rmission of Time, after the Word of Gods Law,
became, through the Fall of Man, frustrate as to obedience, there succeeded the
greater Word, of the Promise; that the Righteousness of God, might be wrought
by Faith.

That as well the Law of God, as the Word of his Promise, endure the same^for
ever: But that they have been r^vealed, in several mann^rs, according to the
Di^pensation, of Times. For the Law was first imprinted, in that Remnant of
Light, of Nature, which was left after the Fall, being sufficient to accuse:
Then it was more manifestly expressed, in the written Law; And was yet more
opened, by the Prophets; And lastly expoun^ed, in the true perfection, by the
Son of God the great Prophet, and perfect Interpreter, as also Fulfiller of the
Law: That, likewise, the Word of the Promise, was manifested, and revealed;
First by immediate Revelation, and Inspiration; After by Figures, which were of
two Natures: The one, the Rites, and Ceremonies, of the Law; The other, the
Continual History, of the Old World, and Church of the Jews, which though it
be literally True, yet is it, pregnant of a perpetual Allegory, and shadow, of
the Work, of the Redemption, to follow. The same Promise, or Euangile, was more
clearly revealed, and declared, by the Prophets; And then by the Son himself;
And lastly, by the Holy Ghost, which illuminateth the Church, to the end of the
World.

That, in the Fullness of Time, according to the Promise, and Oath, of a chosen
Lignage, de^cended, the blessed Seed of the Woman, Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son o^ God, and Savior of the World: who was conceived, by the Power,
and Overshadowing, of the Holy Gho^t^ And took Flesh of the Virgin Mary: That
the Word, did not only take Flesh, or was joined to Flesh, but was made Flesh,
though without Confusion of Substance, or Nature; So as the Eternal Son of God,
and the ever-blessed Son of Mary, was one Person; So one, as the Blessed
Virgin, may be truly, and Catholiquely called, Deipara, the Mother of God: So
one, as there is no Unity in Universal Nature, not that, of the Soul, and Body,
of Man, so perfect: For the three Heavenly Unities, (wher^of that is the
second,) exceed all Natural V^i^ies: That is to say; The Unity, of the three
Persons, in Godhead; The Unity, of ^od, and Man, in Christ; And the Unity, of
Christ, and the Church; the Ho^y Ghost, being the Worker, of both these latter
Unities; For by the Holy Ghost, was Christ Incarnate, and quickened, in Flesh;
And by the Holy Ghost, is Man regenerate, and quickened, in Spirit.

That Jesus the Lord, became, in the Flesh, a Sacrificer, and Sacri^ice for
Sin; A Satisfaction, and Price, to the Justice, of God; A Meriter, of Glory,
and the Kingdom; A Pattern, of all Righteousness; A Preacher of the Word, which
Himself was; A Finisher of the Ceremony; A Cornerstone, to remove the
Separation between, Jew, and Gentile; An Intercessour for the Church; A Lord of
Nature, in his Miracles; A Conqueror, of Death, and the Power of Darkness, in
his Resurrection; And that he fulfilled the whole Counsel of God; Performed all
his Sacred Offices, and Annoynting on Earth; Accomplished the whole Work of the
Redemption, and Restitution of Man, to a State, Superior to the Angels;
(whereas the State of Man, by Creation, was Inferior;) And reconciled and
established, all Things, according to the Eternal Will, of the Father.

That in time, Jesus the Lord, was born, in the days of Herod; And suffered,
under the Government, of Pontius Pilate, being Deputy of the Romans; And under
the High Priesthood, of Caiphas; And was betrayed by Judas, one of the twelve
Apostles; And was crucified at Jerusalem; And after a true, and natural,
Death, and his Body laid in the Sepulcher, the third day, He raised Himself,
from the Bonds of Death, and arose, and showed Himself, to many chosen
VVitnesses, by the space of diverse days; And at the end of those days, in the
sight of many, ascended into Heaven; where he continues his Intercession; And
shall from thence, at the day appointed, come in greatest glory, to judge the
World.

That the Sufferings, and Merits of Christ, as they are sufficient, to do away
the Sins, of the whole World; so they are only effectual to those, which are
Regenerate by the Holy Ghost; Who breaths where he will, of Free Grace; which
Grace, as a Seed Incorruptible, quickens the Spirit of Man, and conceives
him anew a Son of God, and Member of Christ: So that Christ, having Man's Flesh,
and Man having Christ's Spirit, there is an open passage, and Mutual
Imputation; whereby Sin, and Wrath, was conveyed to Christ, from Man; And
Merit, and Life, is conveyed to Man, from Christ: Which Seed of the Holy
Ghost, first figureth in us, the Image of Christ slain, or crucified, through a
lively Faith; And then renews in us, the Image of God, in Holiness, and
Charity; though both imperfectly, and in degrees far differing, even in Gods
Elect; As well, in regard, of the Fire of the Spirit, as of the Illumination
thereof; which is, more, or less, in a large proportion; As namely, in the
Church before Christ; Which yet, nevertheless, was partaker, of one, and the
same Salvation, with us. And of one, and the same Means, of Salvation, with us.

That the Work of the Spirit, though it be not tied, to any Means, in Heaven,
or Earth, yet it is ordinarily dispensed, by the Preaching of the Word; The
Administration of the Sacraments; The Covenants of the Fathers, upon the
Children; Prayer; Reading; The Censures of the Church; The Society of the
Godly; the Cross, and Afflictions; Gods Benefits; His Judgments upon others;
Miracles; The Contemplation of his Creatures; All which, (though some be more
principal,) God uses, as the Means of Vocation, and Conversion of his Elect;
Not derogating from his power, to call immediately by his Grace; and at all
Hours and Moment^, of the Day; (That is, of Man's Life,) according to his good
pleasure.

That the Word of God, whereby his Will is revealed, continued in Revelation
and Tradition, until Moses; And that the Scriptures, were from Moses Time, to
the times of the Apostles, and Evangelists; In whose Age, aft^r the coming of
the Holy Ghost, the Teacher of all Truth, the Book of the Scriptures, was shut,
and closed, so as not to receive any new Addition; And that the Church, has no
power, over the Scriptures, to teach, or command any Thing, contrary to the
written Word; But is as the Ark, wherein the Tables of the First Testament were
kept, and preserved; That is to say, the Church, has only the Custody, and
Delivery over, of the Scriptures, committed unto the same; Together with the
Interpretation of them, but such only, as is conceived from themselves.

That there is an Universal, or Catholic Church of God, dispersed over the
face of the Earth; which is Christ's Spouse, and Christ's Body; Being gathered,
of the Fathers of the old World, of the Church of the Jews, of the Spirits of
the Faithful Dissolved, and the Spirits of the Faithful Militant, and of the
Names, yet to be born, which are already written, in the Book of Life. That
there is also, a Visible Church, distinguished by the outward Works of Gods
Covenant, and the Receiving of the Holy Doctrine, with the Use of the Mysteries
of God, and the Invocation, and Sanctification of his Holy Name. That there is
also an Holy Succession, in the Prophets, of the New Testament, and Fathers of
the Church, from the time, of the Apostles, and Disciples, which saw our
Savior in the Flesh, unto the Consummation, of the Work of the Ministry; which
persons, are called from God, by Gift, or inward Anointing; And the Vocation of
God, followed by an outward Calling, and Ordination of the Church.

I believe, that the Souls of those that dye in the Lord, are blessed, and
rest from their Labors, and enjoy the Sight of God; yet so, as they are in
Expectation of a further Revelation of their Glory, in the last Day. At which
time, all Flesh of Man, shall arise, and be changed, and shall appear, and
receive, from Jesus Christ, his Eternal Judgment; And the Glory, of the
Saints, shall then be full; And the Kingdom, shall be given up, to God the
Father: From which Time, all things shall continue for ever, in that Being, and
State, which then they shall receive: So as there are three Times, (if Times
they may be called,) or parts of Eternity. The first, the Time before
beginnings, when the Godhead was only, without the Being, of any Creature; The
Second, the Time of the Mystery, which continues from the Creation, to the
Dissolution of the World: And the Third, the Time, of the Revelation, of the
Sons of God; which Time is the last, and is everlasting without change.

FINIS.
A Perfect List, of his Lordships true Works, both in English, and Latin.
In English.
AN Apology, touching the Earl of Essex. The El^ments, of the Common Laws, of
England. Advancement of Learning. Essays: with the Colors of Good, and Evil.
Charge against Duels. History, of the Reign, of King Henry, the seventh.
Counsels Civil, and Moral. Or the Essays, revised, and enriched. Translation
of certain Psalms into Verse. The Natural History; with the Fable, of the New
Atlantis. Miscellany Works, containing, A Discourse, of a War, with Spain.
Miscellany Works, containing, A Dialogue, touching an Holy War. Miscellany
Works, containing, A Preface, to a Digest, of Laws, Miscellany Works,
containing, The Beginning, of the History, of K. Henry, the 8. History, of
Life, and Death, translated into English. De Augmentis Scientiarum, translated
into English, by Doctor Guilbert Watts, of Oxford. This present Volume, with
the Particulars, contained in the same.
In Latin.
DE Sapientia Veterum. Instauratio Magna. Historia Ventorum. Historia Vitae and
Mortis. De Augmentis Scientiarum. Historia Regni, Henrici Septimi, Regis
Angliae. Sermones Fideles, sive Interiora Rerum. Dialogus de Bello Sacro. Nova
Atlantis. Historia Naturalis, versa, et evulgata, oper^, et cura, Iacobi
Gruteri. Opera Philosophica, et alia, nondum, sed propediem, ( Deo favente,)
Typis mandanda.
As for other Pamphlets, whereof there are several, put forth under his
Lordships Name, they are not to be owned, for his.

Books Printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Turks-Head in Fleetstreet.
ANnotations upon all the New Testament. A Systeme, or Body of Divinity in 10.
Books, wherein the Fundamental and main Grounds of Religion are opened, in
Folio 1654, about 240. Sheets. The Saints Encouragement in Evil times, in 120.
1651. All written by Edward Leigh Esquire, Master of Arts in Magdalen Hall in
Oxford. An Exposition of the Prophecy of Haggee, in fifteen Sermons, by that
famous Divine John Reynolds, D.D. in 40. 1649. An Exposition of the Psalms of
Degrees. The Young man's Tutor, both wri^ by T. Stint, in 80. Herestography, or
a Description of all the Heresies and Secta^ies of these later times by Ephesians.
Pagit. 40. with new Additions 1654. of the Ranters and Quakers. Contemplations,
Sighs and Groans of a Christian, published by W. Styles Esquire, of the Inner
Temple. 120. The Saints Comfort in Evil times 120. Gods Revenge against
Murder, in thirty Tragical Histories, by I. Reynolds, in Fol. the third
Edition: Whereunto is newly added the Sculptures and Pictures of the Chief
Persons ^entioned in every Histo^y, graven in Copper Plates, and fixed before
each History; With a Satisfactory Epistle of the Stationer. Sylva Sylvarum, or
a Natural History, in ten Centuries. Whereunto is newly added, The History of
Life and Death, or the Prolongation of Life: Both written by the Right
Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, In Fo^io, 1651. The Magnetique cure of Wounds.
The Nativity of Tartar in Wine. The Image of God in Man. Also another Treatise
of the Errors o^ Physicians concerning Defluxions: both published in English^
40. 1650. With The Darkness of A^heism dispelled by the light of Nature. All
published by Dr. Charleton, Physician to the late King, 40. 165^. A Discourse
conce^ning the King of Sp^ins surprising of the Valtoline. Translated by the
Renowned Sir Thomas R^e, many times Ambassador in Foreign parts. 40 The Roman
Foot and Denaries, from whence as from two principles, the measure and weights
may be deduced, by John Greaves of Oxford. ^0. 1647. A Treatise of the Court,
Written in French, by that great Coun^ellour De Refuges, many times Ambassador
for the two la^t French Kings, Englished by John R^^^^ld. ^0. The Hebrew
Commonwealth, Translated out of Petrus Cun^us, in 120. 1653. Hugo Grotius his
two Treatises, Of God and his Providence, and Of Christ and his Miracles;
together with the said Authors judgment of sundry Points controverted, in 120.
Both Translated by Clem. Barksdal. Certamen Rel^giosum, or a Conference between
the late King of England, and the late Lord Marquess of Worcester concerning
Religion, 40^ 1652. The Battle of Agencourt, fought by Henry the 5th; The
Miseries of Queen Margare^, with other Poems, by Mic. Drayton Esquire 80. The Odes
of Horace, Selected and Translated by Sir Thomas Hawkins, in 120. The Spanish
Gallant, instructing men in their Carriage to be beloved of the People. Youths
Behavior, or Decency in Conversation amongst men; with new Additions of a
Discourse of Powdring of Hair, of black Patches, and naked Breasts, 80. 1651.
The Tillage of Light, A Treatise of The Philosophers Stone. 80. The Right of
Peace and War, in 3. Books, written in Latin by the Illustrious Hugo Grotius,
together with the Life of the said Author, in English, 80. large. 1654. A
Sermon of the Nature of Faith, by Barten Holyday Doctor of Divinity. 1654. The
Innocent Lady, or the Illustrious Innocent, written Originally in French by the
learned Father de Ceriziers of the Company of Jesus, rendered into English by
Sir William Lower Knight, 1654. A Disputation at Winchcomb in Glocestershire,
wherein much satisfaction given in many Fundamental Points of Religion, in the
presence of many Eminent Persons. 1654. A brief Discourse of changing Ministers
Tithes into Stipends, or into another thing. 1654. Plutarch's Lives in English,
with a New Addition of Twenty Lives, never before published in English, in Fol.
1657.
FINIS.

