The Soldiers MARCH TO SALVATION: Wherein is shown the lawfulness of
Soldiery in a necessitated War, the lawfulness of voluntary Serving upon
the assured knowledge of a just Cause. How far it is lawful and necessary for
pressed Soldiers to obey Authority in case of doubting. What innocence ought to
be in Soldiers, wherein is contained a plea against Plundering; in what cases
and with what Cautions it is lawful to Kill, imprison, or spoil an enemy; With
what courtesy enemies submitting are to be received, and with what fidelity
to be protected, with other things profitable to all men as well as Soldiers.

By Francis Bland, Minister.

Printed at York, Anno Dom. 1647.

The soldiers March to salvation
Luke. 13. 14. And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely, and be content with your wages.


THese words contain John Baps^tis answer to the soldiers search for
salvation, or question, what they might do to be saved; From whence may be
collected some things generallyobserveable for all men, some things more
pecular to military men: for the generals we may first note the fidelity of
John in Mores taxat and jubet assueta emendare vitia. Ar^t. stella.
taxing the faults of these soldiers, and enjoining them to amend and reform
their lives, if they would eschew the vengeance of God; as Observation.
he did also the extortion of the Publicanes, and the incest of Herod: whence
we learn, what fidelity and boldness ought to be in Pastors and Isa. 58. 1.
Preachers in reprehending sins, and calling for Matthew. 5. 13.
reformation. The Prophet must cry aloud, and and lift up his voice like a
trumpet; the Apostles must be salt because of Haec doctrina exigit
mortificationem carnis. Mar. Eccles. 12. 11.
their doctrine, which requires mortification of the flesh, faith and
repentance, which are not pleasant to a Carnal man. And the words of the wise
are as goades Junius and glos* Inter lin. in loc.
which sharply pricks the slow, and awakes the sleepy, that thereby the wicked
may be called from their ways, and the godly roused from their natural
sluggishnesse to follow their duty with greater diligence. The necessity of
this Ezekiel. 33. 7.
fidelity in all pastors and preachers may be learned from the duty of
watchmen, as the Prophet Ezekiel is taught by God himself.

Application. 2 Timothy 4. 2.
This first teaches us our duty as S. Paul did Timothy, that we must reprove,
rebuke, and exhort; Our Sermons must be rather ad planetum then ad placitum, to
call men to bewail their sins then to please them in their sins, according
to the saying of an ancient father (teaching one the right way of preaching)
Docente te in Ecclesia non clamor populi, sed gemitus suscitet.
when thou teach in the Church let not the shouts, but the sighs of the
people be stirred up: let the tears of the hearers be thy commendations.

Hence also arise a just reprehension of such as seem by silence to approve
and by flatteries to encourage wicked men in their evil ways, calling evil
good, and casting vailes over men's faces, and sowing pillowes under their
elbowes, and heal the wound deceitfully, crying peace peace when there is no
peace; and this is either through avarice and hope of gain, or cowardice for
fear of harm, if they should speak what they think, then which as S. Ambrose
said to the Emperor Theodosius, Nihil in sacerdote tam periculosum apud Deum,
tam turpe apud homines, quod sentiat non libere denunciare Epist. 5. 29.
There is nothing before God more dangerous, and before man more base.

Again, it serves to teach you that are hearers humility in hearing the word
of exhortation and reprehension, count not our plain-dealing malice, nor our
selves your enemies because we tell you the truth; call us not the troublers of
Israel for reprehending the vices of the times, scise us not our Sermons what
we should preach as those that said to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets
prophecy not us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits;
desire us not to say unto you in your bad ways as Ahabs Chaplains, Go up, and
prosper, least your ends be like his; for the Adulantium linguae alligant
animas in peccatis. Prosper. tit. Epigram. 86. Acts 10. 33. 1 Samuel 3. 17.
tongues of flatterers bind men's souls in their sins which prepares them to
chains of utter darkness; you should rather say as Cornelius to Peter, we
are all here in the presence of God to hear all things which are Commanded
thee of God: or as Eli did Samuel, charge them to conceal nothing of all that
the Lord has said unto them. We may further from this speech of John Baptist
to these soldiers, bidding leave their former practice and amend their ways,
by doing violence to no man, etc. observe, That in repentance to salvation
there must be a forsaking of sin, and amendment of your lives; to this the
Prophers and Apostles bear witness, Wash you, make you clean, put away the
evil of your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well, (thus Is^. 1. 16.
Isaiah) and then he promises forgiveness, that though our sins were red
like Scarlet or Crimson, yet theyshould be as white as Wool ar Snow: Isa. 55.
7.
and again, let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and return unto the Lord. Repent and turn you from all your
transgressions, Ezekiel. 18. 36. Acts 4.
faith Ezekiel. And the Apostles doctrine is, repent and be converted; and to
the same Ubi emendatio nulla, poenit^tia necessario est vana, quia caret fructu
cui Deus eam sevit. Ter^ull. Vera poenitentia sic plangit commisla ut non
committit plangenda. Bern. medi* Application.
purpose are the suffrages of the fathers, Where there is no amendment, there
repentance is surely vain, because it wants the fruit whereunto God has
appointed it: thus one: and another says, that true repentance does so lament
the faults committed, that it does not committ the faults which are to be
lamented; he is but a mocker, and not a true penitent that still does the
things which he lamenterh.

Let every one of us that desires repentance unto life, apply this unto his
soul, with a saying of S. Bernard: Si vis verus poenitens esse cessa a peccato,
and noli amplius peccare. Vbi supr^. John 5. 14. and 8. 11
If thou will be a true penitent, cease from sin, and sin no more: and let
every one of us think that saying of our Savior first spoken to him that was
diseased thirty and eight years, and after to the woman taken in adultery, to
be spoken to himself, Sin no more.

miserees, saying, God be merciful to me, without sincere endeavors of
reformation, to escape the damnation of hell; and let none of us speak to
himself in the language of the drunkard, I shall Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
have peace though I go on to add sin to wickedness, and wickedness to sin;
as drunken^sse to thirst, and thirst to drunkenesse; for the anger of the Lord
and his jealousy shall smoke against such an one: let us therefore bewail
and tremble at the word of the Lord, by the Prophet, Shall I Micah 6. 11.
count them righteous with wicked balances and the bag of deceitful weights?
which is as much as if it should be said, Shall I justify him that stills
keeps his sin? Non, sed condemnabo cum, sim justiciae regula. Gloss. int. in
loc.
no, but I will condemn him, seeing I am the rule of justice: and no less
dangerous then this is recidivation, falling back to the mire and vomitt of our
former filthiness, or finnes once forsaken, against which let us note well the
saying of the son of Syrack; He that washes himself after the touching of a
dead body, what avails his washing if he touch it again? Ecclus. 34. 26.
so it is with a man that fasteth for his sins, and goes again, and does
the same.

There is a lawful use of war. Non jubet arma abjicere, Sacramento suo
renunciare. Calv. apud Marlorat.
From these general observations, let us descend to some particulars, more
nearly concerning the questioners, and men of the same order of life. And
first, whereas John Baptist does not bid them lay down their Arms, nor
renounce their troth which they plighted; nor (as we say) fly away from their
colors. Hence is rightly collected Chemnit. Harmon. Brent. P. M. utyr. Austin.
apud Great. cause. 23. Aquin. 22. 9.40. Art. 1. Si Christiana disciplina omnia
bella culparet, hoc potius concilium Baptista dedisset; ut arma abjicerint,
seque militiae omnia subtraherent. Matthew 8. Act. 10.
by learned Authors in their expositions upon the place, and tractates upon
this subject of war, an Approbation of soldiery or warfare, and that there
is a lawful use of Arms, and war, and that even unto Christians; for, If
Christians discipline did disallow all wars, the Baptist would rather have
given them this Advice, that they should throw away their Arms, and withdraw
themselves from all manner of warfare; which he did not: nor yet did our
Savior forbid the Centurion, in whom was found greater faith then in Israel,
to continue in his Office; Nor the Apostle S. Peter teach any such lesson unto
the devoute Captain Cornelius his family and friends, that were gathered
together to hear all things that were commanded him of God; Ecclus. 2. 8.
And Solomon tells us, that there is a time of war, as well as a time of
peace. Besides all these, we have the examples of worthy and godly men, serving
God in military Affairs; Some of which are spoken of by the Apostle, as of
Gideon, of Heb. 3. 2.
Barak, of Jephthah, of Sampson, of David, and others who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in Battle, and turned to flight the Armies of Aliens; And we
find what good service Claudius Lysias who commanded in chief the Garrisons
and forces in Jerusalem, did unto the Church of God, by sending Paul away from
Jerusalem to Caesarea, with a guard of two hundred Soldiers, threescore and
ten Horsemen, and spear men two hundred; by which he safe escaped the
conspitacy of the Jews, that had bound Acts 2. 23.
themselves with an oath to kill him; And of Constantine the great, it is
recorded what help he Eusebius. de vit. Constan.
did make to the Christian's, by arms against the tyranny of Lycinius, and
other persecutors.

Again, as we have the concession of the Spirit of God for the lawfulness of
war, in not forbiding it, and the examples of worthy men serving God in it,
so have we the wisdom of the Spirit, in giving rules and laws for military
Deuteronomy. 20.
orders to be observed in the pursuit of war; which is another strong
Argument for Alioqui de hac re non ferret Leges Spititus Sanctus. Gualier.
the lawful use of Arms in needful cases: otherwise the Spirit of God would
not have given rules on this matter; And withal advising not to attempt any
thing in this kind, but with mature Prover. 20. 18. and 24. 6.
deliberation; Thus Solomon teaches, With good Advice make war, for that is
the way to safety.

War necessary in some cases.
Further, that the use of the sword is not only lawful, but in some cases
necessary, may be truly collected from the saying of the Apostle, that the
Romans 13. 4.
Magistrate or higher power bears not the sword in vain; there being two
*ends of the Magistracy, the one the good and defense of those that do good,
the other the punishment of those that do evil: unto which ends the use of the
sword is very necessary, for hereby the Magistrate is enabled to defend
himself and his Subjects; himself, in his just power, and his subjects in
their rightful proprieties, whereunto (without the use of the sword) he should
sometime be unable, by an over-powring strength of a foreign enemy, and
others: sometimes by the conspiring and conbining together of intestine foes,
and seditions persons, raising routs and rebellions to the oppression of the
people, subversion of States, ruins and alterations of Kingdoms and
governments, and other like mischiefs incident to human Omnino enim cum tanta
^it malorum turba, ut sunt necessariae lege^, ica and magistratus: atque etiam
qui his subsunt milites. Sacer. in locum apud Marlorat. 2 Samuel 18. and 20.
Affairs; for the prevention of which, laws, Magistrates and Arms are
equally necessary; Vndoubdtedly therefore seeing that there are such a
multitude of wicked men, as laws are necessary, so also Magistrates, and
likewise soldiers which are under them; And we find this practiced by David,
not only against the sorraigne foes of himself, and his people, the Philistines
and Ammonites: but also against the usurpation of Ishbosheth, as likewise
against the rebellion of Absalom, and Shebah, and their adherents.

Application.
From hence we may infer consolations and encouragments to those Princes and
Magistrates, whom open hostility of foreign enemies (as Jehoshaphat assaulted
by the Moabites, and Ammonites.) or the intestine disobedience of unnatural
Traitors and Rebels (as David by the 2 Chr. 20.
rebellions of Absalom, or Shebah) or the exigencie and distress of friends,
(as Lots captivity did Abraham) or allies and confedrates (as the Gibeonites
being in fear of the five Kings did Joshuah) do necessitate and compel to
draw the sword, and make war (for we do always think that, war ought to be
of necessity) and do propound Bellum debeat ess^ necessitatis.
unto themselves just ends, as defense of themselves and subjects, their
friends and confederates, in their just powers, rights, proprieties and
privileges from wrongs; Reparation of injuries, for which no reparation can be
had by peace, restraint of violence or confusion, arising by tumultuous and
factious men, restitution of peace and public Tranquiltie where it is
violated or broken, and conservation of it where it is assaulted; for war is
waged, that peace may be obtained; Bellum geritur ut pax quoeratur.
These ends I say, and not sinister and private Aims propounded, as enslaving
free Subjects, oppression of weaker states, invasions and conquests of others
dominions, enlarging private territories and treasures, and such like; which
ends do render a war lawful. And together with these ends, do not
prosecute their wars with a purpose to hurt, cruelly thirsting after revenge
with implacable malice, brutish rebellion, and desire of dominearinge; with
such other like Affections, of which it is said, that in wars Nocendi
cupiditas, irascendi crudelitas, feritas rebellandi, libido dominandi; and si
qua sunt similia, haec sunt quae in bellis jute culpantur.
they are justly condemnable, but being on the other side peaceably affected,
only seeking and demanding reparation of injuries, offering conditions of peace
and agreement, and having a mind prepared to embrace peace, when it shall be
offered; and purposes nothing more then to reduce those whom they shall subdue
unto peace Esto ergo bellando pacificus, ut quas expugnas, ad pacis unitatem
perduc^s. Gratian. cause. 23.
and unity, according to this direction; be a peacemaker by warring, that those
whom thou conquerest, thou may reduce unto the unity of peace; These I say
herein may be comforted and encouraged, their service herein is no less
acceptable to God, though it be done by the sword, then that which they
perform in the Administration of justice by the Scepter in times of peace and
greatest Tranquillity.

2. Consolation to Soldiers. Vir justus, si forte etiam sub Rege homine
sacrilego militet, recte potest illo jubente bellare, si vice pacis, ordinem
servans, quod sibi jubetur, vel non esse contra praeceptum Dei certum est, vel
utrum sit* certum non est; ita ut fo^tasse reum reddat regem iniquitas
imperandi, inocentem autem militem ostendat ordo serviendi. August. apud
Gratian. ubi supra.
Secondly, this consolation and encouragement extends unto all soldiers, that
are called to arms by just Authority, and do serve under their Princes in
the Lords Battles; The works of a just war duly managed, are no more
bywayes to true happiness, then the works of their ordinary vocations in
times of peace; yea, so it may be, that just and godly soldiers may serve
under a wicked King or Prince, and yet may be free from sin* A just man if
happily he serve under a King that is a sacrilegious man, may rightly war
under his Command, if instead of peace, keeping the order of war, he be
assured that the thing which is commanded him be not contrary to the
commandment of God, or be uncertain whether it be so or not: and thus the
unjust command may make the King an offendex, but the order of serving may show
the soldier to be innocent.

Unto the question which is sometime made, Seeing Princes do sometimes raise
wars from bad Affections, and for wicked ends and purposes, hom should the
consciences of the Subjects be satified?

Answer.
It is answered thus, or to this purpose; The Subjects either know the cause
wherein the King commands their service to be just or wicked, or else they are
ignorant or doubtful whether it be so or not; in case of sure knowledge, there
is no difficulty in answering, but they ought to obey, the cause being just,
and to refuse obedience, the cause* being apparently unjust; and any thing
commanded repugnant to justice, godliness and Religion, and are rather to
suffer his displeasure, then fulfill his will contrary to a good conscience,
remembering God is to be obeyed before man; but if they be doubtful, or
ignorant, then the Subject ought to be persuaded that the cause and intended
ends of such war are just, and that it is not undertaken contary to the word
of God; and because subjects cannot always understand the councels of their
Princes, here in the case Tene^ertu^, relinque incertum. Bu^ha. Magist. quast.
50
of doubting, the Rule must be followed, hold that which is certain, and leave
the uncertainty; but the certain is that Princes and Powers are to be obeyed,
which command nothing contrary to the word; and in so doing, as a Sanctuary or
Refuge was appointed by the Law to him that killed his Neighbor not wilfully,
or of set purpose, so the subjects are worthily excused, whilst in a doubtful
cause they obey their Prince.

3. Consolation to Volunteers.
Thirdly, this consolation and encouragement extends not only to Princes and
soldiers pressed and compelled to Arms by their Authority, but even unto
volunteers, such as upon the knowledge and persuasion of a just cause, for love
to uplhold the honor of God, and the King his vicegerent, and for the safety
of their country, Church, Laws, liberties, and Religion, or for the defense and
vindication of their friends, Allies and confederates, do of their own free
will and mere motion betake themselves to Arms; so as not being moved with
mercenary ends, respecting pay and hire, which are the Attractives of mercenary
soldiers, A sort of men condemned not only of divine but Cauponantes Bellum.
Tull. O^^ic. lib. 1. 18.
even humane Authors. As of the noble Pyrr^us it is said, that he would not
have Hucksters of war; That would sell their strength and kill for money. And
a Poet Satyrically thus declames against Nulla sides pietasque viris qui castra
sequuntur, Venalesque manus: ibi fas ubi maxima merces; ^re mer^nt parvo Luca^.
lib. 10. 406.
them.

Faith and devotion are of one account,
To men that Campe^ and mexcenary war
Frequent* there is right where greatest pay does mount,
For little hire they serve, that is all they care.
But not being drawn by this consideration of pay, or intent together wealth
by pillage and booty, respecting neither the cause for which they fight, nor
person, whether Turk, Tyrant or Traitor under Non enim militare dil^ctum ost,
sed propter praedam militav^ p^^catum est De verb. Dom. Sermon. 19.
whom they serve, which does render the war unlawfnll* according to the
saying of S. Austen; to war it is not a sin, but to make war or serve in
war for the prey or booty, is a sin. but those (I say) whose candid spirits
are free from such sinister and base intendements, their voluntary and
valourous endeavors, and adventuring their lives, and what is precious unto
them, (like those noble Volunteers the governors of Judge. 4. 9.
Israel that offered themselves willingly among the people) as their Act is
worthy of unfading honor, so may they receive infallible comfort and
encouragement, and know themselves as well as Non esse Homicidas, sed ministros
legis, nec ultores injuriarum suarum, sed salutis publicae defensores Aquin.
Caetena a^rea in locum.
others, Not to be murderers, but ministers of the Law; not Revengers of their
own priviate wrongs, but defenders of the public safety; As it is noted that
John Baptist did account these soldiers in our Text. I will stretch this line
no further, least I seem to flatter, only I crave leave to add this pithy
exhortation, which I have borrowed from an Author, not unlearned; and here
inserted it, being very profitable for all soldiers to observe; A profitable
exhortation to all soldiers.
Let the Christian soldier therefore be ever doing something, let him be
courageous, Semper itaque agat miles Christianus a liquid, sit strenuus,
fidelis, laboriosus; centurionibus obsequens, etc. Bullin. de Cad. 2. Ser. 9.
faithful, laborious, and obedient to his Commanders; Let him not slip any
occasion, but be excercised in military discipline, let him not be cowardly,
but valiant; not cruel and bloody, but yet severe and withal gentle, and
courteous, as times shall require; Let him spoil nothing that he can preserve,
and before all things, let him not neglect his daily and constant prayers unto
God, as well in safety, as in midst of danger: let him begin all things with
God, and, without God, attempt naught at all; if he taste Adversity, let him
not cast down his heart, and if he enjoy prosperity let him not be proud, but
ever thankful, and always use the victory with clemency and mercy; let him
totally depend upon God, and desire nothing more then the defense of the
Commonwealth, laws, Religion, Justice and the innocent; and thus fighting the
good fight, he shall at last obtain the crown of righteousness; and if the
Lord of hosts (which is the General of all Armies, and other Generals but his
Officers) at his coming shall find him thus doing, he shall be no less
happy, then if he were found employed in the works of his ordinary vocation;
Fuit ejus vitae socia virtus, gloria mortis comes. Epitaph. Freder, D. Bavariae
cogno. vivictorios. apud Ph. Camerar. oper. subsesivarum, Tr. 3. c. 22.
or at his prayers and exercise of his most pious and sacred devotions, and
upon his Monument may worthily be inscribed this Epitaph, Valor was the
Associate of his life and the Comerade of his death was glory.

Having seen the lawfulness of soldiery, let us now come to see what is
unlawful in soldiers, taught us by these words of John Baptist, Do violence
to no man, neither accuse any salsely, and be content with your wages; wherein
are observable, these things.

First, that they must hurt no man's person, oppressing the poor which cannot
defend themselves, wounding their Bodies, unduly affrighting them, or other
ways injuring them under pretense of their office; for it usually happens,
that those Arms which the Prince commands to be taken up for the defense of
the public orders, and honesty, are turned to the damage and ruin of the
inhabitants of city and country For oftentimes the soldiers do plunder and
burn houses, drive away the inhabitants, ravish the women, break open the
doors, and commic such like outrages; all which they think lawful for them
being soldiers.

Secondly, they must not accuse any man falsely, or lay some capital crime to
his charge, as some did, accusing the innocent, and making information against
them to the General, or other chief Commanders, that they might thereby lick
money out of the rich men, which they could not otherwise extort out of them,
and at the last some part of the goods that were confiscated, might accrue to
the Informer, for their labor, and for the hire of such information.

Thirdly, they must be content with their wages, such pay as was allowed unto
them by the Emperor for their labor and pains taken in war for the defense of
the commonwealth, or with such proportion of victuals as was appointed them,
for in times past soldiers had not their pay in money, but in victuals* and
with this John teaches them to be content, and not to extort men's goods from
them, or to grate gifts out of them, or to borrow any thing, or buy it of
them, and pay them either slowly, little, or naught at all; Thus A^et. Chemnit.
Gorram Stell. in ^o^.
the words are expounded by diverse Authors of great learning and famous in the
Church; from all which we learn, how innocent soldiers ought Observation.
to be, and to offend or wrong no man in body, name or goods, Not in body, They
must do violen^e Vivel fraud fiat injuria. Tull. Off. l. 1. ubi agr. de
bellicis Officiis.
to no man, not in name, They must not accuse any falsely, nor in goods by
force or fraud; for injuries may be done either by open force or cunning
subtility: but they must be content with their wages.

Eccles. 12. 11.
That I may drive this nail (as Solomon calls the words of the wise) to the
head, give me leave to beat it home with some reasons or Argument; I.
Christianity requires it. Matthew. 10. 16.
And first, because I speak unto Christians, this may be learned from Christ,
who commands us to be innocent or harmless as Doves. This we are taught to be
the foundation of our spiritual building up in a Christian practice and
upright Aedificanti itaque tibi spiritualem domum, non super levitatem arenae,
sed super soliditatem petrae, innocentiae inprimis fundamentum ponatur, super
quod possis arduum justitiae culmen erigere, maximam enim partem justitiae
imp^evi^* (...) Hieron. Epist. ad Celan. Novissimun^quod dabitur tali viro, est
pax. Munster.
living, by an Ancient Father thus speaking; Whilst thou art building thy
spiritual house, let the foundation be first laid not upon light sand, but
upon the solid Rock, upon which thou malest more easily rear up the high top
of Righteousness; for he fulfilleth the greatest part of righteousness, that
hurts no body; and he which shall lay the foundation of innocence, and proceed
on the high topp of Righteousness, howsoever he shall be tossed in tumultuous
wars and troubles for a short while in this life, yet shall he be sure to
find rest and peace at the last; if not in his life, yet at least in his death;
as we learn from David's words; Keep innocence and take heed unto the thing
that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last; or as the other
Translation reads it, Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the
end of that man is peace; or as another reade^, the last thing that shall be
given to such a man is peace. ^^^*^7. (...).


II. The nature and property of a godly war requires it.
A second Argument to induce soldiers to innocence, shall be the same that
Abigail used to restrain David from plundring and destroying Nabal, as he had
resolved, in revenge of a discourtesie, in Nabals refusing to send him some
small provision, which he requested of him in his great necessity; My Lord
(said she) fights the Lords 1 Samuel 25. 28. Si bella Jehovae Dominus meus
gerat, and malum non inveniatur in te. Junius. Cum praelia Domini Domin^ t^
praeliari^, malitia ergo non inveniatur in ^e. Vulgar.
battles, and evil has not been found in thee all thy days; it is thus read
by a learned Translatour; If my Lord fight the Lords battles, and evil should
not be sound in thee; And another thus, Seeing thou my Lord wagest the Lords
wars, therefore let not iniquity be found in thee: Teaching us, that those
that fight the Lords battles, (as all those do who fight under a just
Authority in a good and just cause) should be careful to be free from violence
and iniquity. It is a disgrace to an honest man to have wicked persons lodge in
his house, and to a Schoolmaster to have Rakehells under his tuition, and to a
General to harbor villains under his command; but most of all it is a
dishonor to the Majesty of the Lord of hosts, that wickedness and villainy
should march under his colors, and take up quarters in his leaguers and
garrisons.

III. Innocence preser^es from grief of heart, and torture of conscience.
A third reason may be collected also from other words of Abigail in the
pursuit of her business unto David, This shall be no grief unto thee, nor
offense of heart to my Lord (says she) either that thou have shed blood
causeless* or that my Verse 31.
Lord has avenged himself; if her former argument will not move, her latter
surely will prove effectual; though a man respect not the glory of God, yet
surely he will (even of self-love) have respect to his own comfort, and
freedom from a tormenting conscience, which by innocence is conserved; and
know all men assuredly, that those who now lay siege to Towns and Castles,
shall one day either in war or peace, in bed or battle be besieged with the
memory of their sins; Hic murus aheneus erit, Nil conscire sibi, nulla
pallelcere culpa. Horat. Ep. 1.
and then, This unto him shall be a Brazen Wall,
His Conscience to fear no sin at all.


A strong Fort (I say) it shall be, and impregnable to all the Hellish Furies,
to have a Conscience void of offense before God and man, when innocent and
causlesse blood, plundered Exugentes sanguinem Elephantorum eos occidunt, and
ipsi vicissim incbriati opprimuntur and commoriuntur. Plin. Hist. not. l. 8.
cap. 8. Violence in Soldiers makes the expedition unsuccesfull.
Goods, and unjust Booty, shall be unto the Actors thereof, as the Elephants
blood unto the Dragons, that sucking the blood of the Elephants, do kill them,
and they themselves, being drunk and therewith, oppressed, not able to digest
it, die also: So those that by violence, rapine and injustice have killed and
undone others, shall by such deeds be utterly and eternally undone themselves.

A fourth reason recalling soldiers from violence, may be taken from the
malignant effect or consequence hereof, that it makes the expedition
unsuccessefull, and prepares discomsiture to the whole Army, and that by these
particulars. Exercitus quem injuria and audacia antecedit plerumque cladem and
interitum ominaturi. Isa. 1. 51.


I. Their priyers are hindered.
First, hereby the access of their prayers unto God, and his acceptance of
them is hindered, according to the menace of the Prophet Isaiah, When you
spread out your hands I will hide mine eyes, yea when you make many prayers I
will not hear; your hands are full of blood. The necessity of innocent hands to
be presented to God in prayer, rhose that had only natural Theology well
perceived, and therefore the Persians arriving at Delphos with a Navy of a
thousand Ships, did present Religiosas potius quam rapaces manus. Val. Max. l.
1. c. 1, 2 Chronicles. 20.
in Apolloes Temple rather religious then rapicious hands. And for the practice
and efficacy of prayers in Armies, we have the examples of Jehoshaphat
assaulted by the Moabites and Ammonites, and of the Christian Emperors
Constantine, who appointed prayers unto his soldiers, and taught them to
ascribe the Victories unto God, and to crave his blessing and assistance for
the time to come; and Theodosius, who counted Eusebius. de vit. Constant. lib. 4.
c. 20.
his prayers his best and accustomed Forces: Besides, our own Chronicles relate
the effect of prayer in the Army of King William the Conqueror, who the night
and morning before the Ruffin. lib. 2. c. 1. 33.
Battle with Harold, did give themselves to acknowledge Stow.
their sins, prayer, and communicating the Lords Body; whilst Harold and his
Forces spent the whole night in drinking, singing and dancing.

II. Memory of former violence makes men Cowards.
2. The conscience, wherein remains the memory of former violence and injustice,
makes men Cowards, and afraid to grapple with death, which they must encounter
together with their enemies Merces malae conscienciae est timere eos, quibus
terro^i esse ^i^uit. In praelio cervi, in pace Leones. Beza in Annotat. Mar.
11. 32. apud Jun. in Bibl. Majo.
in the field; and so afraid of their enemies, as Deaths messengers: The reward
of an evil Conscience is to fear those unto whom a man might be a terror; and
this makes them to be as swift as Hearts in time of war, that are as stout as
Lions in time of peace; whereas a candid and clear conscience that is not
terrified with the memory of bypast sins, makes them that expedite a good
cause as bold as Lions. It was a noble saying of one Dercyllidas a Senator of
Lacedemonia, Siquidem Deus est qui minatur, non timeamus, nihil enim injuste
agimus; sin homo, norit quod viris minetur. Stob. de fortitud. cap. 7. Occidere
possunt, laedere non possunt.
hearing that Pyrrhus lead a great Army against them, and threatened sore, If he
be a God that threatens us, let us not fear, for we do nothing amiss; but if
he be a man, let him know that he threatens men. This (I say) is the fruit of a
guiltless conscience, which may encourage the possessor to say of his enemies,
Kill me they may, hurt me they cannot. But the evil conscience, fearing death,
not only as the dissolution of Nature, but as Gods Provost-Marshall, to arrest
him, bind him hand and foot, neck and heels, and so cast him into utter
darkness and eternal torments; no wonder it is if it beget a cowardice the
heart of Soldiers, and so they become either IV. Violence and injustice
causes God to withdraw his help from the whole army Propter impios and
sceleratos homines, caeteri Divina open destituti ab hostibus caeduntur. Joshua
7. Non ex infirmitate corporis, sed ex peccato vincebantur. Chrysostom. Hom. 14.
ad populum Tom. 4. Postquam in peccatum ceciderunt omnibus facti sunt
expugnabiles, and quos arma and equi, and milites, and tot machinamenta capere
non potuerunt, hos peccati natura vinctos hostibus tradidit. Sed quales oro
fructus metimus hodie ex hujusmodi semente? vincimur a Turcis, ludibrium sumus
omnibus gentibus, pareu^t, and Mahometismo subduntu^ regna; and
inexplicabilibus indiem malis involvimur. Bullin. Decad. 2. ser. 9.
Runawayes from their Colors, or in hot service to hang back, which gives
advantage to the enemy, discourageth their fellows, disorders the Army, and
hazzards all.

Thirdly, violence, rapine and injustice in some Soldiers causes God to
withdraw himself from the whole Army, and so for wicked and impious men the
rest are destitute of the help of God, and beaten of their enemies; yea,
although they otherwise prosecute a good Cause, as is apparent in the case of
Achan, whereunto I referr you; and of the Jews affairs in their wars, it is
observed by Chrysostom, that they were conquered not of the weakness of Body,
but of their wickedness and further notes, how the Midianites understanding
that the Israelites could not be vanquished by the sword, cunningly sought to
bring them into sin, by sending their daughters to commit whoredom with them,
and then after they fell into sin they became easy to be subdued of all* and
those whom Arms, and Horses, and Soldiers and so many enemies could not take,
the nature of sin betrayed them bound unto their enemies. And not unlike to
this observation of this Ancient Father is the observation and sad complaint of
the impiety and wickedness of some soldiers by a learned Author of latter
times, what fruit I pray you reap we from such seed? we are conquered of the
Turks, we are a scorn to all Nations; Kingdoms perish and are subdued to
Mahometisme, and we are daily involved in inexplicable miseries. Thus by
violence, rapine and other sins in soldiers, whilst their prayers are
rejected, their courage abated, and Gods favor and help alienated, are whole
Armies routed and discomfited, and thereby Kingdoms overthrown and ruinated.

IV. Violence and injustice are unfruitful in the end.
A fourth reason, and that a very forcible one to dissuade soldiers, and
indeed all manner of men from violence, rapine and injustice, may be taken from
the unfruitfulnesse of such Acts, and consideration of what benefit is gotten
by such deeds; suppose a man could get into his hands all the wealth of the
world, and bring the Kingdoms under his dominion, when he shall think to sing
a Requiem to his soul and to take his ease, having goods laid up for many
years, at last he must hear or feel what is spoken to the Luke 12.20.
Richman, Thou fool th is night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, then
whose shall those things be that thou have gotten? Those Kingdoms which thou
have subdued, those Lands and Houses which thou now possessest, having expelled
the old inhabitants, those clothes and jewels wherewith thou now arrayest and
adornest thy self, whilst the ancient owners go fortorne and distitute,
whose shall they be? thine they shall not be, for thy soul shall be fetched
away from thee* and for thy body, naked came thou out of thy mothers womb,
and naked shall thou return thither; All thy high Trophies and rich prizes and
booties left behind thee* and thou, if thy desires were as boundless as U^^s
Pellaeo juveni non su^^icit Orbis. Juvenal. Satyr. 10. Sarcophago contentus
oris.
Alexanders of whom it was said, that, One world does not the Pellaean youth
suffice.
Yet, Then with a Cophine thou must be content.


But if thy Ashes after thy death shall have the honor of a Statue, or a rich
Monument, yet time will consume it, or malice break it down. As Scipio
Africanus his Statue was broken down, and removed from the place where it was
first set, and the brazen urne wherein his ashes were put, with an Epitaph
inscribed, of which these verses were a part,

Whom neither Europe could resist, Cui non Europa, non obstitit Africa quondam,
Respice res hominum quam brevis urna tenet Epitom. Plutarch. per Darium
Tibertum.
nor Afrique in times past,
See men's Affairs, how him does hold a little ^^rn at last.
But might they so part with on even hands their acts of violence, plundering
and injustice, happy were they; but then comes their mischief, that (...) S.
Austen says, This is the unhappiness Ipsa est infelicitas hominum proprer
quod peccant morientes hic dimittunt, a^ peccata ipsa secum portant.
of men, that the thing for which they sin when they die, they leave here
behind them, But their sins themselves they carry along with them; and an
heavy burden will such a carriage be unto their souls. A^hans heap of
stones, which were cast upon him, were heavier sure then the Babylonish Hom. 2.
garments, and all the Gold and Silver that he had plundered at Hiericho: But
if those Joshua 7. 26.
stones were poysed, they would be found lighter by much then the guilt of
those sins, which by violence, plundering, rapine, and other Acts of
injustice, men do contract unto their souls, ^o heavy is it, as they are not
able to bear it, and yet so adhering that they were not able to shake it of.
Oh who is able to express with what unwillingnesse the soul at death does
undertake its necessitated departure, being loath to leave the things that were
precious to it, and appear before God with a conscience blotted with innocent
blood, and other acts of cruelty and injustice, which if it might, it would now
cast away with as much disdain and anguish of spirit, as Judas did the thirty
pieces of silver gotten for betraying Christ; and through the terror of an
accusing conscience, despairing, cry out, I have sinned in shedding the blood,
cheating, extorting, and plundering the goods, and in slandering and defaming
the credits and causes of just and innocent persons. There is an excellent
passage in S. Bernard, which we will borrow, being very profitable to the
pursuance of this Argument; When the soul Cum magno me^u, magis doloribus anima
separatur a corpore, etc. Meditat. Devot. cap. 2.
with great fear and mighty griefs is separated from the body, then do the
Angels command, arrest it, and bring it before the Throne of the dreadful
Judge, and then the silly soul remembering all the evil, yea the worst deeds,
which day or night it wrought, shall tremble and crave sparing, or (as we say)
cry quarter, saying, give me leave and spaning, if it be but for an hours
space; but then his sins (as it were) speaking, shall say unto him, Thou have
wrought us, we are thy deeds, we will not leave thee, but we will be always
with thee, and go with thee to judgment; Then his vices shall accuse his
soul with many and s^^dry crimes, and shall find many false witnesses against
it, though the true ones are enough to its condemnation; The devils also with a
terrible countenance and horrible aspect, shall affright it, and with a great
fury persecute it, and catch at it, desiring to keep and possess it, except
there be some to deliver it: then the soul finds the eyes and mouth and other
senses shut up, by which it was wont to go out and solace it self in outward
things, shall turn back into it self, and seeing it self all alone and
naked, shall (through despair) fail in it self, and fall under its own
self; And because for the love of the world and pleasure of the flesh it has
forsaken the love of God, it shall be forsaken of God in the hour of so great
necessity, and be delivered to the devils in Hell to be tormented. Thus far
S. Bernard, whose Meditation, (were it well thought upon and seriously
believed) would work undoubtedly a great restraint in men from many acts of
violence and injustice, which now without scruple of conscience they commit.

But supposing all that has been said to be spoken Que^t.
of friends, what may be done to enemies? sure it is lawful to ^se all
violence against them;

Hereunto I answer; First we are to consider Answ.
enemies as men opponent to peace and justice, and to these they are by wars
to be reduced; And no other ends in the pursuit of enemies by sword and
hostile Acts are to be sought for; According to the saying of Tully, For this
end are Ut in pace cum Justitia vivatur. Offic. lib. 1. Gratian. ubi supra. Pax
quaesita. Aust.
wars undertaken: that men may live in peace with justice. And S. Austen calls
a just war, peace sought, or a seeking of peace: These Authors from Nature
and Divinity, teaching us, that whatsoever is done in war ought to aim at
these ends of peace and justice: As first, to offer conditions of peace, as was
commanded by God unto Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
the people of Israel, and if they should be accepted, then their enemies were
to be preserved in safety; upon the performance of tribute or conditions agreed
on.

Secondly, if such conditions of peace should be Ibid. 12. 13
refused, then were the enemies to be prosecuted in hostile manner, as killing
the men and spoiling their goods; But here the Lord, though he gave the
Israelites liberty against their enemies, yet he gave them two rules of
restrainte;

First, the sword should nor touch the innocent, as women and children.

Secondly, regard was to be had of such things as were necessary to the
preservation of life, as fruit trees, of which respect was to be had, that they
were not to be cut down for any service in Deuteronomy 20. 19.
war or in a siege of a City; because the Tree of the field is man's life: The
like we may understand of corne-fields and Meadows, Gardens, and Orchards; by
the fruit and strength whereof man's life is preserved; and surely the
conservation of these, both in Leaguers and Marches, ought very heedfully to be
provided, whether they belong to friends or foes; If they belong friends, it is
inhumane to spoil or waste them; if they belong to enemies, it is great policy
to preserve them, that the Army may be supplied with necessaries; and here if I
could do it without seeming to digress, I would gladly plead for the safety
and immunity of the fruits of the ground from spoil and devastation in wars,
and make suite for a protection for the husbandman and his labors, together
with things belonging unto husbandry, that they might be safe from violence,
the necessity of Agriculture or husbandry being of such consequence, that by it
only both in wars and peace the life of Kings and Kingdoms is conserved; for
this cause there was an Camerar. Meditat, H^st. Tom. 1. cap. 5. Tom. 2. cap. 22.
Imperial Law, that husbandmen and such as were occupied in country
businesses, whilst they were resident in villages and country-Townes, should be
secure in any part of the Empire, so as none should be found that dare presume
to invade, take or violently carry away their persons, Oxen, instruments of
Husbandry, or whatsoever belonged unto the country-work; and if Council.
Lateranens.
any man should dare through rash boldness to violate and break this Statute,
he should restore what he had taken fourefold, should incur infamy by the
Law, and be further punished at the Generals or Emperors discretion: And as
the the commonwealth, so the Church according to its power did provide for the
privilege and safety of husbandmen among others, that, Those In agricultura
exist^tes and animalia quibus arant, and Semina portant ad agrum, congrua
securitate laetentur.
who were employed in Husbandry, and their cattle wherewith they tilled the
ground, and carried seed to the field, should enjoy convenient security: And of
Cyrus the great it is registered, that when he went to wars, he caused
proclamation to be made, that husbandmen should be spared, and that the
conquest should be so ordered, that they might still remain in their
possessions; and of Xerxes King of Persia in his expedition against the
Graecians, that he gave charge for the indemnity Armatis viris non pastoribus
bellum inferamus
of Country men, saying unto one Artabanus, Let us fight with armed men, and
souldirs, and not with shepherds; And of the ancient Indians it was counted a
wrong in wars, either to take the husbandmen, or to spoil their fields; and
such was their care for husbandry, that at one and the same time and place some
did meet and join battle with their enemies; when others did plow and dig,
and that without any danger. This course was taken by Charles the fifth, in his
wars with Francis King of France, in Piedmount; so as they kept either of
them a numerous Army, for certain years, otherwise provision would quickly
have been wanting to their Forces.

But to return from whence we digressed; women, and children being spared, the
ftuits of the earth conserved, and husbandmen kept indemnified, those, who by
force and Arms oppose peace and justice, to such armed powers as seek to
establish them, to kill and slay, none will deny to be Acts of Justice: or to
take them alive, and imprison or enslave them, and to appropriate their Goods,
Riches, and Possessions as a lawful prize unto the conquerors; And yet herein
much caution is to be had, whereunto it shall not be unprofitable I. How to
kill an enemy in war.
to observe these Rules.

First, in killing, slaying and taking away the life of the enemy, is much
regard to be had with what mind, intentions, and affections it is done. S.
Bernard has a distinction very profitable to this Si praevales, and voluntate
superandi vel vindicandi, forte occidis hominem vivis* homicida. Bern. ad
milit. Templ.
purpose.

First, If thou prevailest, and perhaps killest a man out of desire of conquest
and revenge, then thou live a Murderer; which name who is he that would not
be loath to carry among men, or that his soul should appear in the presence
of God with so grievous a sin upon the conscience, as the murder of a man:
that creature whereon God has set the glorious character of his own Image.

Secondly, There is nevertheless some which Est tamen qui non ulciscendi zelo,
nec vincendi typho, sed tantum evadendi remedio interficit hominem.
neither out of zeal, to revenge, nor desire of vistory, kills a man, but only
for remedies sake, of avoiding or eschewing some ill; as to suppress
Rebellion, to resist invasions, oppessions and the like; In which cases to kill
an enemy is undoubtedly lawful. And yet herein it shall much behove the
killer, (though necessity compel him to destroy the body of his enemy) to
wish well unto him that falls under his hand, and together with the wounds of
death which he gives him, to pray unto God to save his soul, and to grant
him repentance, faith, and every grace that is needful to everlasting life.

II. Clemency to be shown to subdued and conquered enemies.
Again, not only in taking away the life of the enemy, but also in imprisoning
or enslaving his person, and taking his goods, appropriating them to the
Conquerours themselves, is much moderation and gentle clemency to be used. And
that for these Reasons;

1. Humanity requires it.
First humanity requires it, the conquerours and conquered being both of one
Nature, and deriving their originals both from one Root, and that these wars
as other oppositions, are the consequents of man's fall, wherein the
Conquerours, and conquered had equal share, being in the loins of Adam, which
should move the Conquerours to pity those who by hostile Acts, whether force or
feats of war, are subdued; And 1 King. 20. 32.
to say of them as Ahab King of Israel, said of Benhadab King of Syria, subdued
by his Forces, and making suit for quarter, He is my Brother; and the
conquerours should behold neither the mortal wounds, nor the living miseries
of their subdued enemies, but with compassion. Thus of Aneas it is said, when
he saw the blood and fall of Ingenuit misarans, Virgil Aeucid Lib. 10. Pictatis
imago.
Lausus his enemy, slain by his own hand, He lamented him pitifully; and
therefore is called, The image of piety (I may say, of pity*) And of
Mar^ollas, which having conquered Si^ilie, which had stood out very obstinately
against him, and standing upon a high place that he might behold the condition
of that City, which of late was most rich and flourishing, but now most
miserable, he could not abstain from weeping, so as if some Quia (...)
incolumi stare fas non erat, leviter sub tam mansucto victore occidisti.
Humanitatis dulcedo etiam inefforata barbarorum ingenia penetrat; orbosque and
truces mollit hostium oculos, ac victoriae insolentissimos spiritus flectit,
vincit iram; prosternit odium, hostilemque sanguinem hostilibus lachrymis
permiscer. Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. Cum bella quae inter Christianos geruntur,
cum sint ejusdem religionis, etiamsi justa fuerint, plusquam civilia sint;
nostri magistratus (nisi obsteterint justae rations) (...) animos debent
habere propensiores ad misericordiam victis impetranda^. Pet. Mart. in qu.
occid. an serve. captiv. loc. 17. cla. 4*
man had seen him, and not known how the case had been, he would have thought
the victory to have been another; which made one say to distressed Sicilie,
This may be some gratulation or mitigation of thy griese, Because seeing thou
might not stand in safety, thou fallest so easily under so gentle a
Conqueror, Omitting other examples, these show us, that The sweetness of
humanity pierces the brutish dispositions of Barbarians, mollifieth the hard
and cruel eyes of enemies, and bends those spirits that are most proud and
insolent of their victory, it conquereth Anger, scals hatred, and mixeth the
blood of an enemy with his enemies tears.

Again, as humanity, so Christianity teaches us to be propense and ready to
clemency and mercy unto conquered enemies; Seeing those wars which are waged
amongst Christians, when they are of one Religion, are more then civil wars,
yea though they be just, our Magistrates (except their be just reasons that
withstand it) ought to carry minds so much more ready to show mercy unto those
that are conquered; And not only Magistrates and Commanders, but all soldiers
and military men, even for Christianities sake, (if so be they be Christians)
ought to be ready to show mercy and gentleness to those that are subdued, or
brought under their power: Excellent and imitable is the example of the valiant
and victorious first Christian Emperor Constantine, who in his wars, during
the battle, gave charge, Ne multorum fieret caedes, unde non magis, suorum,
quam hostium saluti prospexie. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 2. c. 13. Ut
captivorum misereantur, and cum homines essent, humanae naturae nequaquam ^os
caperet oblivio
That there should not be a slaughter of many, whereby he took no more care
for the safety of his own, then of his enemies; and when victory was gotten,
his charge was, That they should have mercy on the prisoners, and seeing they
more men, the oblivion or forgetfulness of humane nature should never overtake
them; And if at any time he saw the minds of his Soldiers to be very fierce,
he would refrain them with gifts; and further gave order, that if any could
take an enemy alive, he should be rewarded; by which means the wisdom of the
Emperor found out an alluring way for the conservation of men, so as infinite
numbers, even of very Barbarians, escaped safe; Of O clementiam nostra aetate
insolentem. Grynae Annot. in loc. Eusebius.
this rare goodness and mercy of the Emperor, one (as it were sighing) thus
speaks, Alas for this clemency and gentleness that it is out of fashion in
this our Age!

III. A motive to clemency will be to consider what may befall to the Conqueror
Further it would much induce the victors or conquerours to show clemency and
be kind to the conquered and subdued, if they should reflect upon themselves,
and seriously bethink what clemency or kindness they would desire if they
were in the same case, and therewith remember Math. 7. 12.
the speech of our Savior, whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
do ye even so unto Luke 6. 38.
them; and that with the the same measure that ^ee meet to others, it shall be
measured to you again, And surely such considerations may well at some time
take hold of them, as Julius Caesar, hearing this sentence, it may befall to
every one, that befall to any one; Cuivis contingere potest, quod cuiquam
contigire Pompei casum deploro, and meam fortunam metuo*
to any one; he fell a weeping and being demanded the cause of such tears, he
answered, I lament the fall of Pompey, and am afraid of mine ow^ ^ fortune:
And it is a very frequent, that the same quarter men give to others, they
receive back again from others, as in the case of Adonibezek Judges 17. 1 Samuel 15. 33. 1 King. 2. 33.
and Agag, General Ioa^ and others, may be seen. To be short, a warning piece
unto all men may be that severe threat of the Lord by the prophet Isaiah, we
unto theo that spoylest (or as we say plunderest*) and thou wast not spoiled,
and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously Isa. 3^. 1.
with thee: for when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled. In
which words the prophet seems to threaten the King of Assyria, or the land,
or Ninivelh, the chief city of Assyria, which did oppress, spoil and plunder
the Nations about them, that they should be spoiled afterward; As if it should
be said, Woe unto thee that spoilest and plunderest the Nations about Nunc tibi
grassari licet, nullae vir^^ relistunt, sed erunt aliquando qui vos vicissim
praedentur. Calv. in loc. Sic mortalium negotia Divina (fortuna) Providentia
versat. Val. Maxim. cap. i. de Pomp.
thee; Now thou may spoil and plunder at thy pleasure, there is no strength
to resist thee; but there will be some, one time or other, that will plunder
thee again; which came to pass when the C^aldeans did come and destroyed
Niniveh* so the Assyrians did plunder the Jews, and the Chaldees did plunder
the Assyrians; we will conclude with a sentence of an Heathen Author, a little
refined, Thus does the providence of God change the affairs and business of
men. IIII. Courteous usage (...) (...) to the conquered, draws others to
voluntary submission.
Unto these Arguments we may add this one, that gentle and courteous usage of
those that are subdued, helps to drew others unto a voluntary submission, to
lay down Arms, and embrace peace and justice; as Benbadab King of Syria his
servants moved their Master, that with sackcloth upon their loins, and Roaps^
about their necks they might grave pardon for him, and obtain 2 King. 20. 31.
a pacification at the King of Isreal's hands (whom he had unjustly by war
provoked) because they had heard that the Kings of the house of Israel were
merciful Kings; And of Tygrane^ King of Armenin his willing submission (as an
Pl^tarch.
Author reports) to Pompey, is ascribed to his assurance of Pompeys clemency;
whereas on the other part, if there be not a certain^ expectation of gentle and
kind usage upon submission it makes enemies that they will fight it out to the
last man, and rather choose to die in battle, then to submit, yea perchance
being death upon thems ^ Maccab. 14. 41.
selves, as Rhas^s, of whom in the history of the Maccabe^s it is reported,
That he first fell upon his own sword, then leaped down from, awall amongst
his enemies, and at last pulled out his own gutts, and threw them among them;
choosing rather such a death, then to fall into the hands of the wicked, and be
abused otherwise then beseemed him: or if captives be discourteously used, it
will drive them to work some feate to bring destruction upon their Victors or
Conquerours, yea though it be purchased with their own ruin also; As Sampson
pulling the Judge. 16.
house upon himself, and the Philistines, triumphing over him, so ^he became
revenged for the great indignity which he suffered and at his death he flew
more then he had done in his life. The sum of all these arguments is, that
Humaniti^, Christianity, consideration of like future condition, and the
motive to induce others opponents and enemies to voluntary submission, and
pacification, may plead for, and obtain clemency and courteous dealing with
enemies subdued and conquered.

Something would yet be spoken of dealing V. Humanity and kindness to be
shown to enemies after their death. 2 Samuel 2. 4.
humanely and courteously with a enemy, and that even after his death^ which
in a word is to commend his body to due burials; There was a law among the
Hebrews that they should not suffer the dead bodies of their enemies to lie
unburied; and we find how David did take in good part the action of the men of
Jabesh-Gilead that buried* Saul, who had been his enemy, and slain by
another hand; And of the worthy Judas Maccubaeus, that he used to bury the
bodies of 2 Mac. 12. 39.
his slain enemies; yea, we have the heroique Heathens, performing thus much,
as Caesar to his enemy Pompey, whose head being cut off and lying long
unburied, (forgetting that he had been an enemy) he caused to have an
honorable Oblitns hostis.
funeral fire perfumed with many precious and sweet spices; And Marcus.
Antonius gave the body of Marcus Brutus his late enemy, unto one that had been
Brutus his servant, that it might be buried; and to the end it might have the
more honorable rites, he gave him his own Jacentem non hostem, sed civem
deposito existimans odio.
Roabes to cover his Corpse in the funeral: His hatred being laid aside,
counting him, being dead, not as an enemy, but a Citizen; And Hannibat would
not suffer the bodies of his enemies Aemylius Paulus, Tiberius Gracchus, and
Marcus, Marcellus to lie unburied, but caused them to be Aliquanto ei plus
gloriae Paulus Gracchus, and Marcellus sepulti, quam oppressi attulerunt.
interred, saying, that Taulus Gracchus and Marcellus brought him somewhat
greater honor being buried, then being subdued by him. These examples from
holy and humane Stories, are enough to convince the inhumanitie of those who
rifle and strippe the bodies of their slain enemies, and so leave them naked
to be a prey to ravenous Birds and Beasts: I wish it might not be sometime
said of such, The dead Bodies of thy servants have they Psalms.
given to be meat unto the fowls of the Air, and the flesh of thy Saints unto
the beasts of the land.

VI. How to deal with enemies submitting and accepting peace offered unto them.
There are yet another sort of Enemies, which upon the offer of conditions of
peace, (which, as we have showed asore out of Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11. were to be made
at the beginning of War) shall accept of such conditions, and submit, or
shall desire to be received into protection, upon conditions to be agreed upon;
these upon the performance of such conditions, may challenge a greater measure
of kindness and gentle dealing, then any of which it is yet spoken, they are
not only to be suffered, but to be saved and kept harmless; Thus Josh^ah did
not only spare the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 2^.
that they should not suffer by any under his command, but did also protect
them against the Kings of the Amorites which came against them: And when Saul
out of his zeal to the 2 Samuel 27. 28.
Children of Israel, would have broken the League, and destroyed the
Gibeonites, God punished his attempt with three years Famine, and at last by
hanging up seven of Saul's Sons. And David was much offended, and cursed the act
of ^oab ^ who was General of his Forces against Ishbosheth) treacherously
murdering Abner, who had been in open and actual Rebellion against him, and
General of Ishbosheth his Forces, after he had granted him pardon. And of the
noble and victorious Emperor Constantine it is recorded, that Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. lib. cap. 10.
if those that were of the contrary part, finding themselves to weak to resist
his power, would come and lay down Arms, and falling down at his feet, crave
quarter and pardon, he would receive U^pote ex hominibus conservandis capie^s
voluptatem. Plutarch. Valor. Max.
them all, and keep them safe; As taking delight in saving of men. It would be
too long to relate all examples of this sort, as of Pompey, who having
conquered Tygranes King of Armenia, would not suffer him to be long craving
his favor, but with good words comforted him, and restored him his Crown,
which he had cast down at Pompey his feet, and restored him to his former
estate; Judging it alike honorable to create Kings, Aeque (...) esse judicans,
(...) vincere Reges and facere.
as to conquer them. And the famous act of Lucius Paulus, who hearing that
Perses, (who of a King in a short time was made a captive) was brought to him,
he went out to meet him, in his Impertiall Roabes, and when the captivated
King would have fallen on his knees before Lucius Paulus, he would not suffer
him, but lifted him up, bad him be of good comfort, brought him into his Tent,
made him sit beside him in his counsel, vouchsafed him the honor of his
Table, with other courteous Respects; In which Spectacle of Perse^ subjected,
and Lucius Paulus so humanely and kindly dealing with him, it may appear,
that if it be a famous Act to subdue an enemy, it Non minus laudabile
infelices seire misereri.
is No less praise worth to know how to take pity upon the affllicted and him
that is in misery. Thus from sacred and humane Authority may be learned, with
what gentle and courteous Respect to entertain, and fidelity to protect
enemies upon conditious of peace, and submission.

The Application of this which has been Applycation. I. To soldiers.
spoken will be of singular use to all soldiers, and all men whosoever are
employed in military Cum graviter peccant, hae solent a pe^^atis suis prima
vo^e se excusare, quod militant. In verb, Dom. ser. 19. (...) de coro^^ Militis.
Affairs, to prevent that excuse which S. Austen notes to have been common
among soldiers, and other officers of public businesses; when: they greatly
offend they excuse themselves at first with this saying, that they are
soldiers; as if then it were lawful for them to do any thing. Tertullian
speaking of soldiers, that are Christians, requires two things of them: the
one; That they commit nothing against God., the other, That they be ready to
suffer for God* For war ^^miseth neither impunity, nor freedom from
punishment Nec enim delictorum impunitatem, and Martyriorum immunitatem militia
promittit.
of sin, nor immunitie or privilege from Martyrdom: But some will say,
because they are soldiers, they must needs do so; but our Author will tell us,
There is no necessity to sin laid upon them, uponw hom lies the only
necessity not to sin at Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus est una
necessitas non delinquendi.
all; In that which has been said, we have seen the necessity of not sinning,
by violence and false accusations against any man, and how soldiers should
carry themselves to friends and enemies, rather to be helpful to both, then by
injustice hurtful to either; To hurt a friend is villainous, to help an enemy
(so it redound not to our own wrong) or to abstain from harming him, is a
token of a mind truly noble and valourous: such I wish were billeted in all
soldiers breasts, and that there could not be found any (among Christians
especially) which neither respect friend nor foe, so as their own pleasure or
profit Ut praedarentur quicquid possint, five essent bona amicorum, five
inimicorum, ut enim res pessime caderet, cogerentur ad restituendum; sed
interim aliquam praedae portionem residere apud rapto^em. Erasin. in annotat.
super locum.
may be promoted; such a one Erasmus says he once met with, and heard him
(being a Captain) thus advice his soldiers: They should plunder what they
could, whether the goods of their friends or foes; for howsoever the matter
should fall, at the worst they could but be compelled to restitution: and at
the least some part of the pillage would remain with the plunderer; But
leaving such to the Judgment of the Lord of Hosts; it shall bring more honor
to Soldiers in their life, and more comfort and hope at their death, if they
shall observe this counsel which Aurelianus Si vis Tribunus esse, imo si vis
vivere, manus militum contine, nemo pullum alienum rapiat, ovem nemo contingat,
^vam nullus auferat, segetem non deterat, oleum, sal, lignum nemo exigat,
Annona sua quisque contentus sit, de praeda hostis, non de ^achrymis
provincialium habe^t. Citatur a Bucano loc. de Magistra. quast. 50. Philip
Camerar. Meditat. Histor. Tom. 1. cap. 5.
the Emperor gave to his Tribune, or Sergeantmajor; If thou wilst be a
Tribune, yea if thou intendest to live, restrain the hands of the soldiers,
let no man steal another man's chicken, let no man touch another man's sheep, let
no man pluck another man's grape, let none thrash out another man's corn, let
every one be content with his own victuals, and let him have what he gets
out of the spoil of his enemies, and not out of the tears of such as are
under our charge, whom we should protect: And the Admirable discipline of the
Turks is worth learning (and I wish it rise not up in Judgment against
Christians) of which it is said. That no soldier dare take any thing injustly,
if he do, he is punished without pity: and that there are appointed Officers
to look to those things which are in way that the soldiers march, so as
bread, eggs, Fruits, Oats, and such like things are carried by Boys of eight
or tenn years old, and nothing touched; and Orchards full of fruit by the
wayside, yet none dare pluck an Apple without the owners consent; if he do,
his head is lost for it. Let Christian-souldiers think it a shame that
Heathens and Turks should outgoe them in just and innocent Actions and
demeanours; And let them study so to carry themselves, both in marches and
quarters, that they may say as Samuel, whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass
have I taken? 1 Samuel 12. 3.
who have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received
any bribes? And when they enter into Arms, take unto them the brave resolution
which Abraham carried in his noble breast, when he came to the assistance of
the King of Sodom, against Chedorlaomer, and to relieve his friend Lot, who
was taken prisoner, that he would not take from a thread even to a shoolatchet:
Let them walk in the steps of their father Abraham, and they shall march unto
salvation, and rest in Abraham's bosom; And as their Fame shall be honorable,
so shall their harmless spirits, holding a true faith in Jesus Christ, the
Captain of our salvation, when they shall sigh them out upon their bedds, or
dropp them out at their wounds, with their blood upon the field, so encourage
them, that they may say, Nec pudet viv^re, n^c piget most. II.
I neither shame to live, nor do I shrink or am afraid to die.

Secondly, if such innocence be required in What innocence is required of men
in times and places of place.
soldiers, what is required of men employed in places and vocations of peace,
and tranquillity in the Commonwealth, how innocent ought they to be, to Life
and Person, Name and Credit, Goods and Estates of their Neighbors, not to
wrong them, but according to their ability, to labor and endeavor to
preserve them, and neglect Duobus modis pe^catur in hominem, uno modo si
laedatur; alio modo fi cum potest, non ad^uve^ur. A. st^n de meribus e^clesie.
no means that may do them good; For by these two ways it is offended
against our Neighbor, either by commission of injuries, or omission of
kindnesses, according to the saying of S. Austen, By two ways we offend
against a man, one way if he bo hurt of us; the other is, if when it is in our
power, he be not helped of us; And another Non suflicit abstin^re a malo, nisi
fiat quod bonum est, and parum est nemini nocere, nisi studias multis prodesse,
Prosper. titul. Epigr. 77.
teaches us, that It is not sufficient to abstain from doing ill, except that
be done which is good; and it small avails to hurt no man, except thou studiest
to help and profit many. And it is observed by S. Ambrose, that of these
precepts, which John gave to his hearers, some were peculiar to particular men,
but the precept of mercy is a common precept, Mercy is necessary to all
offices; Omnibus Officiis, omibus aetatibus, necessaria, and ab omnibus
deferenda misericordia; non Publicanus, non miles excipitur, non agricola, vel
urbanus, dives and pauper, etc. Ambros. in locum. Luke 16.
and is of all men to be shown or performed, there is neither Publican nor
soldier excepted, nor countryman, nor citizen, nor rich, nor poor, none is
exempted: all men in general are admonished that they help him, that has not
of his own to help himself; The omission of this was the condemnation of the
Richman that gave no food nor Raiment to hungry and naked Lazarus, we find
no mention of any that he had oppressed, and yet is he found to be in Hell in
torments; and if it thus besell the neglect of mercy, what shall befall to acts
of cruelty? If the fruitless figtree be accursed, what shall become of
thorns and briars, such as murderers, fighters, quarellers, slanderers base
informers, and such others, and all, who (nor content with that portion that
God has given them) do by cheating, oppression and extortion, or any injust
way advance and enrich themselves with the damage, defamation and undoing of
others? If at the last doom for the omission of mercy, it shall be said, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; For I
was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in, naked, and ye clothed me
not, sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not; With what confusion shall it
be heard, if Christ shall say:

Go ye cursed Tyrants, oppressors, and persecutours into everlasting fire;
for the mean food which God had given me, ye took it from me; from the
poor and homely habitation which I enjoyed, ye expelled and banished me; of
the Raiment and Clothes, wherewith my nakedness was covered from the eyes of
men, and my weakness shielded from the violence of the weather, ye have
stripped me; of my health, wherein I chearefully walked with God, and served
my Neighbor in love and charity, ye have bereaved me, of my libortie, ye
have restrained me, and in close prisons and dungeons shut me up; and all
this though ye have not done to me in the members of my natural body, yet
have ye done it to these little ones, the members of my mystical Body; who
are as precious to me as mine own life; For their sakes I took upon me the
form of a Servant* I gave my spotless blood, and endured the bitter pains of
death and Hell for their Redemption.

Surely to hear this will much amaze and confound, for if he were speechless
(upon the check) who wanted the Wedding garment, needs must he be dumb and
without excuse whose garments are rolled in blood, and as red as Scarlet and
Crimson, Dyed in the blood and sufferings of the Innocent.

One short Observation more would I desirously commend to your Christian piety,
and therewith take leave, it being consolatory that I may be free, as in mine
own intentions, so in others estimation, from suspicion of having spoken or
written any thing which has not proceeded from unsaigned Charity, the proper
fountain of all Christian Action^* Whereas these Soldiers who had been
addicted to violence, rapine and other vices, and were men accounted the worst
alive (as before from sundry Authors is observed) now coming to John,
confessing and sorrow full for their fins, and desiring directions which they
might ob^erve in seeking salva^ion, are not rejected of John as men without
hope, but are rather received and instructed what to do, and how to demean
themselves for the future, with an intimation of safety upon the performance of
that which is prescribed; We collect, That great sinners Observation, Great
senners repenting may obt^in salvation.
repenting and reforming themselves, may obtain salvation; If there had not
been time of repentance and hope of salvation upon repentance and amendment, he
would not have exhorted these soldiers to amendment. S. Hierome has a
collection Hierom^. in Epist. adversi^^ (...). Revel. 2. 3.
not unlike hereunto upon the Epistles of Jesus Christ to some of the Churches:

First, the Church of Ephesus had left her first love; the Church of Pergamus
also was not free from all offense, for she had in her some which did hold the
doctrine of Balaam, which taught to eat things offered to Idols, and to commit
Fornication; and such as held the doctrine of the the Nicolaitans; and the
Church of Thyatira did suffer the false Prophetess Jezabel, which seduced
Ettamen hos omn^s Dominus hortatur ad poenitentiam, sub comminatione quoque
futurae poenae, nisi convertantur; non autem cogeret poenitere, fi non e^set
poenitentibus veniam concessurus.
men to commit Fornication, and to eat things offered to Idols; Yet all these
the Lord exhorts to repentance, and that under a threat of a punishment to come
upon them, except they did repent; but he would not have pressed to repentance
except he would grant pardon to them that repented. And another ancient Author
observes as much of other Churches mentioned in those Sacred Epistles; In the
Church of Sardis the imperfection of works; in the Laodiceans confidence in Et
tamen ad poenitentiam commonet, sub comminationibus quidem; non comminaretur
autem non poenitenti, si non ignosceret poenitenti. Tertul de poenitent. Exodus
34. 6, 7. Ezekiel. 18. 32.
riches is reprehended; And yet these he admonishes to repent, and that under
threatenings, except they repented; But he would not threaten him that repents
not, except he would pardon him that does repent. This arises from the
goodness of the nature of God, as may be seen in the Proclamation, which past
before his manifestation to Moses, The Lord merciful and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and sin. And the Prophet will tell us from GOD,
that he has no pleasure in the death of him that dies.

For this end Jesus Christ the Son of God came into the world, that he might
seek and save that which was lost, and that he might call the sinners to
Repentance, yea, even such sinners as in the eye of man none could exceed,
even them that put him to death, for whom he prayed, Luke 23. 34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; Of whom we find some
afterward (hearing their sin in crucifying and murdering the Lord of life,
taxed by Peter) pricked in conscience, and crying out (like the soldiers in
the Text) What Acts 2. 37.
shall we do? etc. and by Peter directed to this medicine of Repentance and
Baptism, with a promise of forgiveness of sins, and receiving the Aust.
Tract. 38. in in Ev^ng. secundum Jo^^^em.
Holy Ghost. Of these we may say, and infer with S. Austen; This people it
was of whom Christ was crucified, of whom he was hanged on a Tree, of whom,
hanging there, he was derided, of whom he was thurst through with a Spear, of
whom was given unto him Vinegar mingled with Gall to drink: yet for these he
prays, Father forgive them, for they know Quid autem converso non ignoscitur,
si fusus Christ^ ^inguis ignoscitur. Application. I.
not what they do, And what is there that is not to be forgiven to him that is
converted, when the blood of Christ being shed, was thus forgiven?

The application hereof shall be comprised in two words;

First, seeing great sinners repenting and reforming It calls sinners to
repentanoe. Ezekiel 18.
themselves, may be forgiven, it calls us to repentance, as the prophet
Ezekiel, first propounding and promising pardon, upon repentance and amendment,
calls them to reformation, and casting away their transgressions; and this he
does as it were by an expostulation, or reasoning the matter, For why will ye
die O house of Israel? As if he should say, If ye will not repent and (...)
and are guilty of your own destruction, and that not only by (...) committed,
but also by the remedy of Repentance neglected; And this also is confirmed of
God by ^n oath, As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure, in the death
of a sinner; but (...)
that the wicked should turn from his way, and live; Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways, for why will ye die O house of Israel! Hereon is thus Ergo
poenitentia vita est, cum praeponitur morti; came tu peccator ita invade, ita
amplectere, ut naufragus alicu^us tabu^^^ fidem; haec te p^ccatoru^ fluctibu^
mersum prolevabit, and in portum Divinae clementlae protelabit. Ter^ul.
depoenit. 2.
much noted; Repentance therefore is life, when it is perserred before death:
Thou therefore O sinner, so seize upon it, and so embrace it, as a shipwrackt
man does some trusty piece of a plank broken out of the shipp, this shall lift
thee up being sunk under the waves of thy sins; and draw thee into the haven of
Gods mercy.

Secondly, it comforts those that are truly penitent for their sins, wherein
they have long lived; or are of great guilt and offense in the eyes of God, as
Murder, Whordome, oppression, and such like, upon their repentance and
amendment they are pardonable, if they will wash and make themselves clean,
then though their sins Consolation to true penitents.
were as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, if they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Esai. 1. 18.
Wool: Can any blood or sin whatsoever die a deeper color then the sacred
blood of the Son of God? and yet we see that forgiven to the Jews repenting
and embracing the faith; For (...) de ^eccati sui remissionedesperet, quando
illi veniam meruerunt, qui occiderunt (...) Aust. in Tract. 31. in Evang*
secund. Jo^^n^m.
when they (wounded in conscience) they are directed to this remedy with hope
of cure and safety, Which may teach us, That*no man should despair of the
forgiveness of his sin, when they obtained pardon that killed Christ, as
says Saint Austen; we will end with a saying of the same Father, which may
serve unto us, both as a Cordial against despair, and a caveat against
presumption; No man therefore (although he be load^n with an huge burden of
sin^) Nemo ^gitur (quamvis ingenti pondere p^ccatorum prematur) de boni^ate
divinae pie^aris desperare debeat. Ibidem S r n de temp 53. Ideo non propt er
spem v^niae perseve an^er pec^are debemus. Utroque periculo evitato, and a malo
d^clinemus, and de pietate De^ ^eniam speremus.
ought to despair of the goodness of Gods mercy, but out of hope of that
assured mercy, with daily tears to beg their pardons; which they may rightly
expect, if they shall cease from acting their evil works. And on the
otherside avoid presumption* We ought not therefore to sin, or constantly
persevere in sin, because of the hope of forgiveness, but keeping our selves
in the golden mean and swimming in the clear stream of the living Waters, that
shall flow out of the belly of him that believes on Christ; Both dangers being
avoided, let us fly and decline that which is evil, and hope for pardon from
the mercy of God. Amen.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

