Indian Wheat

Indian Iar



THE DISCOVERY OF New Britain. Began August 27. Anno Dom. 1650. By Edward
Bland, Merchant. Abraham Wood, Captain. Sackford Brewster, Elias Pennant,
Gentlemen.
From Fort Henry, at the head of Appamattuck River in Virginia, to the Falls of
Blandina, first River in New Britain, which runs West, being 120. Mile
South-west, between 35. and 37. degrees, (a pleasant Country,) of temperate
Air, and fertile Soil.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for John Stephenson, at the Sun below
Ludgate. M.DC.LI.

TO THE HONORABLE, SIR JOHN DANVERS, KNIGHT: Great Favourer of the Western
Plantations, and a Member of the Parliament of England.
Noble Sir:
THE great Encouragement that I have found from your Worthy self to propogate
the Public Affairs, as well Foreign as Domestique, has imbolned me to
presume humbly to present this small Piece of the Discovery of the Western
Part of Virginia, wherein you shall find by the Industry of the Surveyors of
that Part, the great Benefit that may accrue to the English Plantation; in
regard of the many and several Commodities that may thence arise, by reason of
the fertility of the Soil, Nature having provided so plentifully for all
things, that with no extraordinary great Charge it may be effected, to the
great Profit, and more Glory of this English Nation: And whereas your self
has been, and still are a Chief Agent in that, and other Plantations, so
(under God) you may be a means for converting diverse of those poor Indians to
the Christian Faith. For the World does take notice you observe the Orators
saying; That you were not borne for your self, but for your Country: Which
that you may ever do, shall be the Prayer,

SIR, Of your most humble servant, J. S.

To the Reader.
WHo ever thou art that desire the Advancement of Gods glory by conversion of
the Indians, the Augmentation of the English Commonwealth, in extending its
liberties; I would advise thee to consider the present benefit and future
profits that will arise in the well settling Virginia's Confines, especially that
happy Country of New Britain, in the Latitude of 35. and 37. degrees, of more
temperate Clymate then that the English now inhabit, abounding with great
Rivers of long extent, and encompassing a great part, or most of Virginia's
Continent; a place so easy to be settled in, in regard that Horse and Cattle
in four or five days may be conveyed for the benefit of Undertakers, and all
inconveniences avoided which commonly commonly attend New Plantations, being
supplied with necessaries from the Neighborhood of Virginia.

That the Assembly of Virginia (as may be seen by their Order since my return
heereto procured) have conceived a hundred to be a sufficient force and
competence for the establishment of that Country in which Tobacco will grow
larger and more in quantity. Sugar Canes are supposed naturally to be there, or
at least if implanted will undoubtedly flourish: For we brought with us thence
extraordinary Canes of twenty five foot long and six inches round; there is
also great store of fish, and the Inhabitants relate that there is plenty of
Salt made to the Sun without art; Tobacco Pipes have been seen among these
Indians tipped with Silver, and they wear Copper Plates about their necks: They
have two Crops of Indian Corn yearly, whereas Virginia has but one. What I
write, is what I have proved; I cordially wish some more then private Spirits
would take it into their consideration, so may it prove most advantageous to
particular and public ends; for which so prays,

Your faithful servant, Edward Bland.

October 20. 1650. By the Assembly.
IT is Ordered by the Grand Assembly, that according to the Petition of Mr.
Edward Bland, Merchant, that he the said Bland, or any other be permitted to
discover and seat to the Southward in any convenient place where they
discover; and that according to his Petition for furthering his Designs he
be permitted to have correspondence with the Indians, and also receive the
benevolence of the well-affected, and use all lawful means for effecting
thereof, provided that they secure themselves in effecting the said Design
with a hundred able men sufficiently furnished with Arms and Munition.

John Corkes, Cler. Dom. Com.

Sir Walter Rawleighs Observation on 35. degrees Latitude.
PAradise was created a part of this Earth, and seated in the lower part of
Eden or Mesopotamia, containing also a part of Shinar and Armenia; it stands 35
degrees from the Equinoctial, and 55 from the North Pole, in a temperate
Climate, full of excellent fruits, chiefly of Palme-trees without labor; for
wherein soever the Earth, Nature, and the Sun can most vaunt that they have
excelled, yet shall the Palm Tree be the greatest wonder of all their works:
This tree alone gives unto man whatsoever his life beggeth at Natures hand.
The like are also found both in the East and West Indies as well as in
Paradise, which Countries are also blessed with a perpetual Spring and Summer,
etc. Rawleighs Marrow of History, Page 42.

By how much Adam exceeded all living men in perfection, by being the immediate
workmanship of God, by so much did that chosen, and particular Garden exceed
all the parts of the Universal World in which God had planted the Trees of
Life, and Knowledge, Plants only proper, and belonging to the Paradise, and
Garden, of so great a Lord. Ibid. p. 43.

The Discovery of New Britain.
AUgust 27. 1650. The Right Honorable Sir W. Berkly, Knight. being Governor and
Captain General of Virginia, Edw. Bland Merch. Abraham Wood Capt. Elias
Ponnant and Sackford Brewster Gent. four Men, and one Indian named Pyancha, an
Appamattuck for our Guide, with two servants, four Horses and Provision,
advanced from Fort Henry, lying on Appamattuck River at the false, being a
branch of James River, intending a South western Discovery.

This day we passed over a branch belonging to Blackwater lake, running South
east into Chawan River; at that place we were forced to unlade our Carriages
by reason of the great raines lately fallen, which otherwise is very passable
for foot, being firm gravelly ground in the bottom, and lies from Fort Henry
20. miles, and some 12. miles from this place we traveled unto a deep River
called the Nottaway Creek some 100. paces over sandy bottomes (and with a
little labor may be made passeable) unto a Nottaway Town liyng some two miles
from the River. Hither we came within night, and by reason of our sudden
approach and hallowing of Robert Farmer servant to Mr. Bland, the Inhabitants
ran all away into the Woods, with their Women and Children; therefore by us it
was named Farmers Chase. After our arrival there within a small space of time
one Indian man appeared, and finding of us peaceable, and the white flag bore
before us by our Guide whom they knew, he made a hallow and the rest came in
from their sculking holes like so many timorous Hares, and showed us what
courtesy they could. About two hours after came to us Oyeocker elder brother
to Chounterounte one of the Nottaway Kings, who told us that his brother
Chounterounte, and other of the Nottaway Kings would come to us next day by
Noone, and that the day before Chounterounte and all his men had been a
hunting, and it happened that Chounterounte had shot one of his brothers in the
leg, and that thereupon he was gone downwards. We stayed until next day at
Noone but he came not, and then we journyed unto the Town belonging unto
Oyeocker, who kindly invited us thither, and told us he thought that
Chounterounte would meet us there, and also of his own accord proffered us to
be our guide whithersoever we went. The Land generally to this Town is
Champion, very rich, and the Town situate in a rich level, well timbered,
watered, and very convenient for Hogs and Cattle.

August 28. We journied with our new entertained Guide Oyeocker, lying between
South, and South and by West, from the first Town upon a very rich level of
Land: sixteen miles from this place we came unto the River Penna Mount, being
another branch of Chawan River, eight miles on the South side it has very rich
Land and Cornfieldsd on both sides the River, and is about some 200. paces
wide, and runs out with elbowes: at the place of our passage over this River to
this second Town is shallow upon a Sandy Point, and with a very little labor
may be made passeable both for foot and horse, or any Carriage by Land, or
pentater with small Boats, and some two miles higher there is a sound passage
no deeper then a man's anckle: Within night came Chounterounte unto our Quarters
frowning, and with a countenance noting much discontent, down he sets, and
looks about him, salutes the English with a scornful posture, and then our
Appamattack Guide, and tells him, I am sorry for thee friend, thou will be
knocked on the head; after this some pause was made before any discourse,
expecting the English would begin, but finding us slow, he thus spoke: There
was a Wainoake Indian told him that there was an Englishman a Cockarous hard by
Captain Floods, gave this Indian Bells, and other petty truck to lay down to
the Tuskarood King, and would have hired him to have gone with him, but the
Wainoakes being doubtful what to do, went to Captain Flood for advice, who
advised them not to go, for that the Governor would give no license to go
thither; hereupon Chounterounte was by us questioned, when and who it was that
had told him so, and if he did know that Wainoake Indian, to which he answered
doubtfully, and demanded of us whither we did intend to go; we told him the
Tuskarood King had envited us to trade, and our Governor had ordered us to go,
and speak with an Englishman amongst them, and to enquire for an English woman
cast away long since, and was amongst those Nations. Chounterounte persuaded us
to go no further, alleging there was no English there, that the way was long,
for passage very bad by reason of much rain that had lately fallen, and many
rotten Marrishes and Swampps there was to pass over, in fine we found him, and
all his men very unwilling we should go any further; but we told them, that let
the ways and passages be never so bad, we were resolved to go through, and
that we were not afraid of him nor his Nation, nor any other, for we intended
no injury, and that we must go, for we were commanded by our King; these words
caused Chounterounte to assimulate a fear in his countenance, and after
delivery of himself, at our going away next day, when we had mounted our
Horses, Chounterounte came privately unto us, and in a most serious manner
intimating unto us, that he loved us, and our Nation, and that he lively
apprehended our danger, and that our safety concerned him, for if any accident
happened otherwise then good to us, he should be suspected to have a hand in it,
and withal wished us to go no further, for that he certainly knew that the
Nations we were to go through would make us away by treachery; we answered him,
that we were not afraid to be killed, for that any one of us were able to deal
with forty through the protection of our great God, for we were commanded by
our King.

August 29. We traveled from this second Town to Maharineck, eight miles upon
barren Champion Lands, and six miles further is a branch that runs South
west, with rich Lands upon it; and from thence some six miles further, is a
Brook some hundred paces over, and runs South and a little to the West, on
both sides of the Creek: for four miles or thereabouts, is very rich Lands,
well Timbered and Watered, and large dry Meadows, South and by West: From this
Creek is another, some eight miles off, that opens it self into diverse small
Guts, made by the inundation of Freshes of Waters; and the passage lies some
two hundred paces from the Path, and this Creek is some ten miles from
Maharinecke Town, and was by us named Newcombs Forest. It was night when we
entered into Maharineck, where we found a House ready made for us of Matts; and
Corn stalks laid in several places for our Horses, the Inhabitants standing,
according to their custom, to greet us: and after some discourse with their
Werrowance, a Youth, to whom we presented several gifts, we certified them
the cause of our coming was to Trade in way of friendship, and desired the
great men that what Wares or Skins the Town did afford, might be brought to our
Quarters next morning; and also a measure for Roanoak, which they promised
should be done, and so left us to our selves a while, until we had refreshed
our selves with such provisions as they had set before us, in most plentiful
manner; and afterward the great men and Inhabitants came, and performed diverse
Ceremonies, and Dancings before us, as they use to do to their great Emperor
Apachancano, when they entertain him in most solemn manner and friendship.

August 30. Being wearied with our last days travel, we continued at
Maharineck, and this day spoke with a Tuskarood Indian, who told us that the
Englishman was a great way off at the further Tuskarood Town, and we hired
this Turkarood Indian to run before, and tell his Werrowance we intended to
lay him down a present at Hocomowananck, and desired to have him meet us
there, and also wrote to that effect to the Englishman in English, Latin,
Spanish, French and Dutch, the Tuskarood promised in three days to meet us at
Hocomawananck. In the afternoon came two Indians to our Quarters, one of whom
the Maharinecks told us was the Werrowance of Hocomawananck River, seemed very
joyful that we could go thither, and told us the Tuskarood would have come
to us to trade, but that the Wainoakes had spoken much to dishearten them from
having any trade with the English, and that they intended diverse times to have
come in, but were afraid, for the Wainoakes had told them that the English
would kill them, or detain them, and would not let them go without a great
heap of Roanoake middle high, to which we answered that the Wainoakes durst
nor affirm any such thing to our faces, and that they had likewise spoken much
against the Tuskarood to the English, it being a common thing amongst them to
villefie one another, and tell nothing but lies to the English.

This day in the morning the Maharineck great men spoke to hear some of our
guns go off: Whereupon we shot two guns at a small mark, both hitting it, and
at so great a distance of a hundred paces, or more, that the Indians admired at
it: And a little before night the old King of Maharineck came to us, and told
us, that the people in the Town were afraid when the guns went off, and ran
all away into the Woods. This night also we had much Dancing.

August 31. We went away from Maharineck South East two miles to go over
Maharineck River, which has a bottom between two high land sides through
which you must pass to get over, which River is about two hundred paces broad,
and has a high water mark after a fresh of at least twenty foot perpendicular
by the trees in the breaches between the River, and the high land of the old
fields. This River is the Southerly last and maine branch of Chawan River, and
was by us named Woodford River, and runs to the Eastward of the South. On both
sides of Woodford River is very much exceeding rich Land, but especially on the
further side toward Hocomawananck. Imediately after the passage over this
River, are old Indian fields of exceeding rich Land, that bear two Crops of
Indian Corn a year, and has timber trees above five foot over, whose truncks
are a hundred foot in clear timber, which will make twenty Cuts of Board
timber a piece, and of these there is abundance.

As also exceeding rich Land, full of great Reeds thrice as big as the largest
Arrow Reeds we have about our Plantations; this good Land continues for some
six miles together unto a great Swampp, and then begins a pyny barren Champion
Land with diverse Branches and Pecosans, yet very passeable, running South and
by West, unto a deep River some a hundred paces over, running South, and a
little to the East, which River incloses a small Island which we named
Brewsters Island, some eighteen miles from Woodford River due South, and by
West, with very exceeding rich Land on both sides of it for some six miles
together, and this River we also named Brewsters River, it being the first
branch of Hocomawananck River: and a little lower down as the River runs, is
such another River as Chickahamine River (which is a mile broad.)

After we had passed over this River we traveled some twenty miles further
upon a pyny barren Champion Land to Hocomawananck River, South, and by West:
some twelve miles from Brewsters River we came unto a path running cross some
twenty yards on each side unto two remarkable Trees; at this path our
Appamattuck Guide made a stop, and cleared the Westerly end of the path with
his foot, being demanded the meaning of it, he showed an unwillingnesse to
relate it, sighing very much: Whereupon we made a stop until Oyeocker our
other Guide came up, and then our Appamattuck Guide journied on; but Oyeocker
at his coming up cleared the other end of the path, and prepared himself in a
most serious manner to require our attentions, and told us that many years
since their late great Emperor Appachancano came thither to make a War upon
the Tuskarood, in revenge of three of his men killed, and one wounded, who
escaped, and brought him word of the other three murdered by the Hocomawananck
Indians for lucre of the Roanoake they brought with them to trade for Otter
skins. There accompanied Appachancano several petty Kings that were under him,
amongst which there was one King of a Town called Pawhatan, which had long
time harbored a grudge against the King of Chawan, about a young woman that the
King of Chawan had detayned of the King of Pawhatan: Now it happened that the
King of Chawan was invited by the King of Pawhatan to this place under pretense
to present him with a Gift of some great vallew, and there they met
accordingly, and the King of Pawhatan went to salute and embrace the King of
Chawan, and stroaking of him after their usual manner, he whipped a bow string
about the King of Chawans neck, and strangled him; and how that in memorial of
this, the path is continued unto this day, and the friends of the Pawhatans
when they pass that way, cleanse the Westerly end of the path, and the friends
of the Chawans the other. And some two miles from this path we came unto an
Indian Grave upon the East side of the path: Upon which Grave there lay a great
heap of sticks covered with green boughs, we demanded the reason of it,
Oyeocker told us, that there lay a great man of the Chawans that dyed in the
same quarrel, and in honor of his maemory they continue green boughs over
his Grave to this day, and ever when they go forth to War they relate his,
and others valorous, loyal Acts, to their young men, to annimate them to do
the like when occasion requires. Some four miles from Hocomawananck is very
rich Champian Land: It was night when we came to Hocomawananck River, and the
Indian that came with us from Woodford River, and belonged to Hocomawananck,
would have had us quartered upon the side of a great Swampp that had the
advantage of several bottomes of the Swampp on both sides of us, but we
removed to take our advantage for safety, and retreat, in case any accident
should happen, which at that time promised nothing but danger, for our Guides
began to be doubtful, and told us, that the Hocomawananck Indians were very
treacherous, and that they did not like their countenances, and shape well;
this place we named Pyanchas Park: about three hours after we had taken up
our Quarters, some of the Inhabitants came, and brought us roasting cares, and
Sturgeon, and the Hocomawananck Indian that came with us from Woodford River,
came not unto us until next day, but his Warrowance told us before we came
from Woodford, he could not come until that day at night. The next day
morning after our coming to Hocomawananck the Inhabitants seemed to prepare us
a house: But we about eight of the clock set forward to go view the place
where they killed Sturgeon, which was some six miles from the place where we
quartered by Pyanchas Park, where there is a River Running very deep South,
exceeding deep, and four hundred paces broad. The high water mark of this
River between both sides of the River perpendicular, from the top of the Banck
to the River, is forty five foot upon a fresh; this River was by us named
Blandina River: from Pyanchas Park to the place where they kill Sturgeon is
six miles up the River running Northerly, and all exceeding rich Land: Both
upwards and downwards upon the River, at this place where they kill Sturgeon
also are the Falls, and at the foot of these Falls also lies two Islands in a
great Bay, the uppermost whereof Mr. Blande named Charles Island, and the
lowermost Captain Wood named Berkeley Island: on the further side of these
Islands the Bay runs navigable by the two Islands sides: Charles Island is
three miles broad, and four miles long, and Berkeley Island almost as big,
both in a manner impregnable, by nature being fortified with high Clefts of
Rocky Stone, and hardly passeable, without a way cut through them, and consists
all of exceeding rich Land, and clear fields, wherein grows Canes of a foot
about, and of one years growth Canes that a reasonable hand can hardly span;
and the Indians told us they were very sweet, and that at some time of the
year they did suck them, and eat them, and of those we brought some away with
us. The Land over against Charles Island we named Blands Discovery, and the
Land over against Berkeley Island we named Woods journey, and at the lower end
of Charles Island lies a Bay due South from the said Island, so spacious that
we could not see the other side of it: this bay we nameed Pennants Bay, and in
the River between Charles Island, and the maine Land lies a Rocky Point in the
River, which Point comes out of Charles Island, and runs into the middle of the
River: this Point we nameed Brewsters Point, and at this Point only, and no
other is there any place passeable into Charles Island, and this Brewsters
Point runs not quite from Charles Island to the maine Land, but when you come
off the maine Land to the Rivers side, you must wade about fifty paces to come
upon the Point, and if you miss the Point on either side, up or down the
River, you must swim, and the River runs very swift. Some three miles from the
River side over against Charles Island is a place of several great heaps of
bones, and here the Indian belonging to Blandina River that went along with us
to the False, sat down, and seemed to be much discontented, insomuch that he
shed tears; we demanded why those bones were piled up so curiously? Oyeocker
told us, that at this place Appachancano one morning with 400. men
treacherously slew 240. of the Blandina River Indians in revenge of three great
men slain by them, and the place we named Golgotha; as we were going to
Blandina River we spoke to Oyeocker our Guide to lead us the way, and he would
not; but asked our Appamattuck Guide why we did not get us gone, for the
Inhabitants were jealous of us, and angry with us, and that the Runner we sent
to the Tuskarood would not come at the day appointed, nor his King, but ran
another way, and told the Indians that we came to out them off; whereupon our
Appamattuck Guide stepped forth, and frowning said, come along, we will go see
the Falls, and so led the way, and also told us that the Woodford Indians lied,
and that Indian that came to us, which the Woodford Indian said was the King of
Blandina River, was not the Werrowance of Blandina River; whereupon we resolved
to return (having named the whole Continent New Britain) another way into our
old path that led to Brewsters River, and shot off no guns because of making a
commotion, and adding to the Natives fears. At Blandina River we had some
discourse with our Appamattuck Guide concerning that River, who told us that
that Branch of Blandina River ran a great way up into the Country; and that
about three days journey further to the South-West, there was a far greater
Branch so broad that a man could hardly see over it, and bended it self to the
Northward above the head of James River, unto the foot of the great Mountains,
on which River there lived many people upwards, being the Occonacheans and the
Nessoneicks, and that where some of the Occonacheans lived, there is an Island
within the River three days journey about, which is of a very rich and fertile
soil, and that the upper end of the Island is fordable, not above knee deep,
of a stony bottom, running very swift, and the other side very deep and
navigable: Also we found many of the people of Blandina River to have beards,
and both there, and at Woodford River we saw many very old men, and that the
Climate according to our opinions was far more temperate then ours of Virginia,
and the Inhabitants full of Children; they also told us that at the bottom of
the River was great heaps of Salt; and we saw among them Copper, and were
informed that they tip their pipes with silver, of which some have been brought
into this Country, and it is very probable that there may be Gold, and other
Metals amongst the hills.

September 1. About noone from Woods Journey we traveled some six miles
North East, unto the old Path that leads to Brewsters River: within night we
quartered on the other side of it, and kept good watch: this Path runs from
Woods Journey north and by East, and due North.

September 2. In the morning about eight of the clock, as every one was
mounted, came to our quarters Occonnosquay, son to the Tuskarood King, and
another Indian whom he told was a Werrowance, and his Kinseman, with the Runner
which we had sent to the Tuskarood King, who was to meet us at Blandina River
that night; the Kings son told us that the English man would be at his house
that night, a great way off; and would have had us gone back with him, but we
would not, and appointed him to meet us at Woodford River where he came not,
we having some suspicion that he came from Woodford River that night, and
that our Runner had not been where we had sent him, through some information
of our Nottaway guide, which afterward proved true, by the Relation of the
Werrowance of Blandina River, whom about four hours after we had parted with
the Kings son, we met on the way coming from Woodford River with a company of
men, thinking he should have found us at Blandina River that night, according
to his order and promise; with whom falling into discourse, he told us that the
King of the Tuskaroods son, and our Runner were the night before at Woodford
River; but the Kings son told us he came from Blandina River, and beyond, and
hearing we were gone before he came, he had traveled all night from Blandina
River to overtake us. This day about Noone we came to Woodford River Town, and
tarried there that night, we found the old Werrowance, and all his great men
gone, yet had courteous quarter; but not without great grounds of suspicion,
and signs that they were angry at us: at our coming back to Woodford River we
had information that some Spies of Wainoake had been there a little before we
came, and that the King of Wainoake and Chounterounte had sent Runners to all
the Nations thereabouts, informing them that the English were come to cut them
off, which we supposed to be some greater Politicians then Indian
Consultations, who had some private ends to themselves, and minded nothing
less then a public good; for we found that the Runner whom we employed to
carry our message to the Tuskarood King, ran to the Waynoakes, and he whom the
Woodford Indians told us was the Werrowance of Blandina River, was a Woodford
Indian, and no Werrowance, but done of purpose to get something out of us, and
we had information that at that time there were other English amongst the
Indians.

September 3. By break of day we journied from Woodford River to a path some
eight miles above Pennants Mount running North, and by East and North, North,
East, which was done by the advice of our Appamattuck Guide, who told us that
he was informed that some plots might be acted against us, if we returned the
way that we came, for we told Chounterounte we would return the same way
again: And this information our Guide told us he had from a woman that was his
Sweetheart belonging to Woodford River. This day we passed over very much
rich, red, fat, marle Land, between Woodford River Town, and the head of
Pennants Mount, with diverse Indian fields; the head of which River abounds much
with great Rocks of Stone, and is two hundred paces over, and has a small
Island in it named Sackfords Island. Between Pennants Mount River head, and
the head of Farmers Chase River is very much exceeding rich, red, fat, marle
Land, and Nottaway and Schockoores old fields, for a matter of six miles
together all the trees are blown up or dead: Here it began to rain, and some
six miles further we took up our quarters, and it proved a very wet night. At
the first other Nottaway old fields, we found the Inhabitants much perplexed
about a gun that went off to the Westward of them, the night before we came
thither, which our Appamattuck Guide conceived were the Wainoake Spies, set out
there to prevent our journyings, and we found several Agers about the place
where the Indians told us the gun went off.

September. 4. About 8 of the Clock we traveled North, North-East some six
miles, unto the head of Farmers Chase River, where we were forced to swimm our
horses over, by reason of the great rain that fell that night, which otherwise
with a little labor may be made very passable. At this place is very great
Rocky stones, fit to make Millstones with very rich tracks of Land, and in
some places between the head of Farmers Chase River and Black water Lake, is
ground that gives very probable proof of an Iron, or some other rich Mi^e.
Some sixteen miles from Farmers Chase, North, and by East, and North,
North-East, lies Black water Lake, which has very much rich land about it, and
with little labor will be made very passable. From Black water Lake we did
travel to the old fields of Manks Nessoneicks, and from thence some 12 miles
N.N East we came unto Fort Henry about the close of the Evening, all well and
in good health, notwithstanding from the time we had spoken with Chounterounte
at Pennants Mount, we every night kept a strickt watch, having out Swords girt,
and our Guns and Pistols by us, for the Indians every night where we lay, kept
a strict guard upon us.

The Discoverers, viz.
Mr. Edward Blande, Merchant. Abraham Wood, Captain. Mr. Elias Pennant. Mr.
Sackford Brewster. Robert Farmer, Servant to Mr. Blande. Henry Newcombe,
Servant to Captain Wood. Guides. Oyeocker, a Nottaway Werrowance. Pyancha, an
Appamattuck War Captain.

FINIS.

