THE ART OF HERALDRY, In Two Parts.

The Fisrt Concisely Comprehending all necessary Rules in the said ART, with
many useful Examples of Bearing, to facilitate the way of Blazoning any COAT of
ARMOR.

The Second Part giving a full Account of the Privileges, Dignities, etc. of
the Nobility and Gentry of ENGLAND.

TOGETHER, With the Achievements of each Degree, etc. According to the
excellent Method of GVILLIM'S HERALDRY.

The whole Illustrated with Fifty two proper Sculptures, for the better
Explanation thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Hannah Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill. MDCLXXXV.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir HENRY GOODRICK Of Ribston Park in Yorkshire, Knight and
Bar onet.
Honorable Sir,
THIS Treatise of Heraldry, though small in bulk, yet large in substance
comprehending all the chief and necessary Rules in the said Art, which (with no
small labor and pains) are digested in a methodical method (in way of an
Ordinary) in several Shields engraven on Copper Plates; and for the Explanation
thereof the several Coats in each Shield are Blazoned with the names of the
Bearers, except to those that are made use of only for Examples; and the number
of the Figures refers to the Coat in the Shield, which is reckoned from the
first in the Dexter chief. And under the said Heads, Coats of like Bearings may
be comprised, whether of themselves, or between, or charged upon any of the
Honorable Ordinaries; for it cannot be expected that this small Tract should
give Examples of all Bearings this being only designed for a small Pocket Book,
and only to give the Rules with Examples of Bearings, to teach the way of
Blazoning any Coat Armor.

The second Part is a Treatise of the Nobility and Gentry of England as to
their Privileges, Dignities, etc. And for Examples of Bearings I have inserted
Achievements of each Degree complete, that is, with all the external ornaments
as Mantle, Helmet, Crest, Motto, and Supporters, having given your Honor's
Achievement for the Example of a Baronet that Bears Supporters a peculiar
badge of Honor rarely granted to any under the Degree of a Nobleman.

Sir as on the one hand, I may presume to say that there has been nothing yet
extant of this nature so full in so small a Compass; so on the other it is my
ambition to takes this opportunity to express the great esteem I have for your
Honor, as well in respect of the nobleness of your Family which renders you a
person interessed in this work, as to testify my gratitude for your favors
showred upon me for the promoting some former undertakings, being indeed a
great favourer of all ingenuous Arts, and in particular to HERALDRY the Subject
of this Book. Sir your generous Spirit has ever aimed at a public Good, many
admire you, and most love and honor you. Sir you are generally beloved for
your generous and noble Actions, for your generous and noble Inclinations, and
for your generous and noble Principles so that I cannot but receive
Commendations for selecting you to the Patronage of this Work. Sir, if you
pardon this my ambition I have my satisfaction, and can be no better contented
than in that and in being styled

SIR, Your honors most humble Servant RICHARD BLOME.

The Art of HERALDRY teaching the blazoning of ARMS, is set forth in these
Shields. By which Examples any Coat may be Blazoned.
BOrdures plain and charged Folio 20 Files and Labells Folio 22 Abatements of
Honor Folio 27 Charges on which Rewards and Additions of Honor are placed
Folio 29 Crosses Folio 36 Cheifs Folio 43 Fesses and Bars Folio 46 Pales,
Pallets, etc. Folio 49 Cheverons Folio 51 Bends Folio 53 Saltiers Folio 57
Inescocheons and Orles Folio 60 Piles Folio 62 Partitions Folio 64
Counterchanges Folio 67 Ordinaries joined together Folio 70 Civil Artificial
things Folio 74, 81, 86 Military things Folio 91, 97, 101 Celestials Folio 106,
113 Vegetables Folio 118 Fruits and Flowers Folio 122 Parts of Man's Body Folio
128 Lions Folio 132 Lions Rampant Folio 139 Lions Passant Folio 144 Parts of
Lions Folio 147 Other Beasts in whole and in part Folio 150, 155, 159 Animals
Folio 165 Fowl and Birds Folio 173, 181 Fish Folio 189 Monstrous Creatures
Folio 195, 199
AN ESSAY TO HERALDRY.
CHAP. I.
This Chapter treats of the original and universality, the sundry
Denominations, and the original Discipline of Arms and Ensigns, with their use
and necessity: Their Sympathy with the Bearer^, and conformity with Names,
their Definition, Blazon, Distribution, Accidents and Parts, and lastly their
Abatements and Rewards of Honor.

THE Dignity and Estimation of Arms cannot but be great, if we alone consider
that it delights the Beholders, greatly Graces the places where they are
erected, and gives occasion to the Beholders to make inquiry whose they are,
and of what family the bearer is descended.

Before I proceed further, it will not be unnecessary briefly to begin with
some Observations suitable to this subject, and first, of those Marks or
Ensigns called Arms, in Latin Arma.

The word Arma as in Guillims Heraldry, is taken for very natural Instruments,
and in this sense Doctor Casius does use the same where he says, Arma bellius
natura dedit, ut Leoni Dentes, serpenti aculeum, etc.

It is also taken for all manner of Instruments that belong to Mechanical
Trades.

Instruments Military.
It is likewise taken for all sorts of Warlike instruments: But the word Arma
does not here signify any of these things, but is taken for Shields, Targets,
Millitary Cassocks, Banners, and other Martial Instruments on which they were
Engraven, Embossed or depicted, and these were peculiar only to Martial Men,
and professed Soldiers, which to this day is called Arms, from the Latin word
Arma. And Claudius Fauches says that Arms have their denomination, because
Military Men did bear their several Devices as aforesaid upon their Shields.

Guillim says that Arms were called Symbola, which signifies tokens or Marks,
which in the time of Hostility or civil Tumults were given to Soldiers by
their Captains or Chief Commanders, for distinguishing of particular Persons,
as well amongst themselves as from their Enemies.

These Armorial Notes so much in request now amongst us, are often times called
Ensigns, which comprizeth in general all Marks and Tokens of Honor due to
meritorious Persons, as well in respect of their Government, Learning, wisdom,
Magnanimity, etc. as for their Martial Prowes. Amongst these Ensigns are those
Marks and Shapes of Animals, that Martial Men used to adorn their Helmets
withal, to the end that they might appear more eminent in the Field, and be the
better taken notice of for their valorous Actions, when they encountered their
enemies in Battle, or should draw on their forces to fight.

Note the use of these Ensigns was yet further extended then the Adorning of
Shields and Helmets; for Ships were beautifyed with Arms on their Sterns, to
distinguish the one from the other, as the Ship where St. Paul went, whose Badg
was Castor and Pollux; also the fore-Deck of Europa that was carried away, had
the form of a Bull depicted thereon, which gave occasion to the fable, that a
Bull had stolen away Europa, nor did the Ancients only use it, but it has been
a Custom in all succeeding Ages, even to this day, and from thence does come
the names of Ships.

Definition of Arms.
Arms then, according to original use, are Tokens or Resemblances signifying
some Act or Quality of the Bearer, either by some worthy exploit performed in
Military Affairs (especially if bestowed by a Noble Prince) or else by their
Learning and Wisdom, which they do by spending their Spirits in continual study
to make themselves fit for the Patronage and defense of their Country.

Rebusses.
Sometimes there are Arms born, which may seem to have been devised (in their
first Institution) according to the Surname of the Bearer, as 3 Castles for
Castleton; three Gates for Yates; three Coneys for Conisby and the like, and
such Bearings are called Rebusses being very Ancient.

If there were two dictinct Families of one Surname, yet bearing several Coat
Armors, it is not evident that they were both extracted from one Ancestor, for
the Coat Armor is the express sign of Distinction.

As suppose there are two Families diverse in Name, and issued from several.
Parents, and both of them do bear one Coat Armor, and the name of one of them
is agreeable to the Coat Armor, and the other dissonant from the same; now the
question is, to which does this Coat belong; in answer it may according to
probability be conjectured, to belong to him whose appellation is agreeable
therewith, rather than to the other. And it is observable, that two distinct
Families ought not, nor are they allowed to bear one and the same Coat Armor,
but amongst the Welsh this Rule is not observed.

There is between the Arms and their Bearers a kind of Sympathy, Sympathy of
Arms with their Bearers.
insomuch as he who dishonourably or unreverently uses the Arms of any one,
seems to have offered an affront to the Person of their Bearer, insomuch that
according to the opinion of some Authors, their owner may right himself against
such an Offender, action injuriarum.

Ancient Bearing.
As touching the antiquity of Arms, I shall give you a Brief account of some
peculiar Bearings. The Romans chose the Eagle the greediest of all Birds: The
Phrigians the Sow, a hurtful Beast: The Thrasians Mars: The ancient Goths the
Bear: The People of Alani, that invaded Spain the Cat, a greedy and crafty
Beast: The Old French the Lion: The Saxons the same; but afterward the French
that inhabited France took the Toad, and the Saxons the Horse a warlike Beast,
and now the French have the Flower de-lis, which they say was sent them by an
Angel from Heaven to Clovis, the first Christian King of France: The Flemins
did bear the Bull, in token of valiantness and hardiness The Ensign of the King
of Antioch was an Eagle holding a Dragon in his claws: That of Pompey a Lion
with a Sword: That of Attilla was a Crowned Gennet, and the Romans themselves
that were saved by Geese that watched in the Capitol, could not be moved for so
great a Benefit received, to bear a Goose in their Ensigns.

There be of them also that set in their Shields Swords, Daggers, Halberts,
Axes, Towers, Castles, Engines, and many other Instruments of Homicide and
Destruction: Furthermore the Ensigns of the Persians was a Bow and Quivers,
likewise amongst the Heathen Gods, Jupiter chose Lightning; Neptune the tripple
toothed Mace; Mars the Javeline; Bacchus the Spear wrapped in Boughs and Ivy;
Saturn the S^eth, and every one of these Badges of Arms, according to the
nature of his Cruelty, Raving, Violence, Manhood, etc. As the Heralds do
appoint, are supposed some to be Nobler Bearings then others; for the more
cruel and fierce the Beast or Fowl is, the more Noble is that Shield esteemed,
and those Targets or Shields that have milder things thereon, as Trees,
Flowers, Plants, and the like, also the Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and other of
the Celestial Spheres, or such as be parted only with variety of colors, or
charged with any of the Honorable Ordinaries only, as also by any Artificial
things, made by the Invention of Man: These and such like things are not
esteemed so Noble as the former, and are not so Ancient Bearings.

Thus having briefly showed the first Original Institution and Use of Arms, I
shall proceed to the practick Exercise of these Armorial Tokens, which
appertain to the Office of a Herald, and is termed Armory, and may be thus
defined; Armory is an Art rightly prescribing the true knowledge and use of
Arms. Definition of Armory.


The skill of Armory consists in Blazoning and Marshalling.

Rules in Blazoning Coats.
By Blazoning is understood the displaying or expressing a Coats of Arms in its
proper Colors and Metals, for to lay Color upon Color, Metal upon Metal is a
great fault, and a different form of Blazoning makes the Arms not the same.

Rules in Martialling Coats.
By Marshalling is understood the joining of diverse Arms in one Shield, in which
you must have a great care, but of this more when I treat of Arms joined
together.

You must use no repetition of words, but comprise them in as few as you can.

A French Armorist says, that to Blazon, is to express what the Shapes, Kinds,
and Color of things born in Arms are, together, with their apt and proper
Significations.

In the Blazoning of any Coat of Arms, always observe this special Rule, first
begin with the Field, and then proceed to the Blazon of the Charge, and if
there be sundry things charged in the Field, whether they be of one or diverse
kinds, name that first which is most praedominate, and lies next the Field,
and then that which is most Remote.

The Blazon of Arms consists in Accidents and Parts; and such Accidents are
Tincture and Differences.

Tincture, Tincture.
as Guillim notes, is a variable hew of Arms, and is as well common to
differences of Arms, as to Arms themselves, and the same is distributed into
Colors and Furs.

Colors Colors.
he says is an external Dye, wherewith any thing is colored or stained; or
else is the gloss of any body beautified with light; and the Color here
mentioned is both General and Special; by General is understood the proper and
natural color of each particular thing, whether Natural or Artificial, of what
kind soever they are illustrated, or set forth in their external or proper
Beauty.

Things that are born in their natural Colors are to be blazoned proper, and
not to mention the Colors.

Other things there are in Armory which have only names attributed unto them,
and no Color specified in the Blazoning thereof, the name being sufficient to
express the same, although the form is all one and the same, which is in
Resemblance like a round Ball or Bullet, the names of which are as follows,
with Colors appropriate to them.

1. Besants, whose Color is Or. 2. Plates, Argent. 3. Hurts, Azure. 4.
Torteauxes, Gules. 5. Pellet or Aggresses, Sable. 6. Pomeis, Vert. 7. Golpes,
Purpure. 8. Orenges, Ten. 9. Guzes, Sanguine.
In these Nine are comprehended all the Colors usually made use of in Blazonry.

Terms for Colors.
Coats of Arms are Blazoned by Metals and Colors; when they belong to
Gentlemen, under the Degree of Nobiles Minores, as Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights
and Baronets; By Precious-stones, when to those of the Nobility, as Barons
Viscounts, Earls, Marquisses and Dukes; and by Planets, when to Emperors,
Kings, and Sovereign Princes.

Metals and Colors. Precious Stones. Planets. Or Topaz Sol Argent Pearl Luna
Gules Ruby Mars Azure Saphir Jupiter Sable Diamond Saturn Vert Emerald Venus
Purpure. Amethist Mercury Ten Jacynthe Dragons Head Sanguine. Sardonix.
Dragons Tail.

woodcut blazon or This in Arms is Blazoned Or, Or.
and signifies Gold and the black Specks in the Escocheon do express the
Color. This Metal is said to Inchant the Heart of Fools, and Blind the Eyes of
the Wise. Of the excellency of this Metal, Hesiodus thus writes, Aurum est in
corporibus, sicut Sol inter stellas; and as this Metal does exceed all others
in Purity, Value and Fineness, so ought the Bearer to endeavor to surpass all
others in Virtue and Prowes. The Precious Stone is Topaz, Topaz.
which Diascorides says asswages wrath and ill humors, and this Stone was set
in the Breast of Aaron.

The Planet to which Gold is resembled is Sol, Sol.
of which the Philosophers write, that as the Heart of Man is the Noblest, so
is this Planet more worthy then any other, and as it were the comfort of them
all.

woodcut blazon argent The Color White is resembled to Light, and is called
Argent, Argent.
this in Dignity and Worth is next to Or, and without these two Metals no
Armory can be good. It signifies Hope, Innocence, Continence and Temperance.
The Precious Stone is Pearl, Pearl.
which Plato says has a restorative Virtue, and is food to man, which is
verifyed by Josephus, who says, that when the City of Jerusalem was besieged
by Titus Vespasianus, the Jews lived some time only upon Pearls, and Aristotle
says it comfort the Brain.

The Planet is Luna, Luna.
which Pliny says is the Fairness of the Night, the Mother of the Honor, and
Lady of the Sea and Times, She is also said to be the changer of the Air and
Winds, and as the Scripture says, She is the Ripener of, and Increaser of
Fruits, as appears by the benediction of Joseph, who was blessed with the ripe
Fruits of the Moon.

woodcut blazon gules The word Gules Gules.
signifies Red, the Hatches downwards shows the Color, which is of that
Dignity, that it is used for a Vesture of Majesty and Dignity, and is used by
the Judges and Chief Magistrates in their Seats of Judicature.

The precious Stone is the Ruby, Ruby.
which neither Fire nor Water wastes or spoyleth.

Its Planet is Mars, Mars.
which of all others is the most Hot and Fiery, he is said to be the God of
Battle.

woodcut blazon azure The word Azure Azure.
signifies Blew, and is expressed by Hatches overthwart the Escocheon; It is a
Royal Color representing the Sky; it signifies Loyalty, Chastity, and
Fidelity. The Precious Stone is Saphir. Saphir.
which as Isidore says, is both Noble and Excellent, being a remedy against
Poison, and a Preserver of the Sight. The Planet is Jupiter, Jupiter.
which by his goodness, as Martianus says, abateth the Malice of Saturn, and
augmenteth the goodness of the others.

woodcut blazon sable The word Sable Sable.
signifies Black, and is expressed by cross Hatches as in the Escocheon, and
although it does represent Mourning, yet is of a good esteem in Armory. This
Color signifies Prudence, Constancy and Heaviness for the loss of Friends; the
Precious Stone is the Diamond, Diamond.
which of all other is of the greatest value, and is of that hardness, that it
cutteth all Stones and Metals. The Planet is Saturn, the most malevolent of all
others, and under whom are brought forth Grave Counselors, great Builders and
good Housekeepers.

woodcut blazon vert The word Vert Vert.
is Green, and is expressed by strokes thwart ways, as in the Escocheon: This
Color is most delightful and comfortable to the sight, it signifies Love,
Mirth, Peace, and Concord. The Precious Stone is the Emerald, Emerald.
which has in its self singular Virtues. The Planet is Venus Venus.
which is of temperature Gold and Moist, and does excite to Love.

woodcut blazon purpure Purpure Purpure.
is a Color consisting of much Red, and a little Black, it has its
denomination from a Fish called in Latin Purpura. The Precious Stone is the
Amethist, Amethist.
which for its preciousness was set in the Breast of Aaron. The Planet is
Mercury, which is of a goodly Temperature, being of quality good with good, and
goes with evil for Company sake.

Tenny Tenny.
or Tauny is a bright color, and made of Red and Yellow, and is expressed by
Hatches like the Purpure; Amongst the French this Color is much in use, but
not with us. The Precious Stone is the Jacynthe, Jacynthe.
which is said to be of singular Virtue. This Tenny is compared to the Dragons
Head, Dragons Head.
which although it be not a Planet, yet in some respects has the Nature of a
Planet, and keeps its constant course in the Zodiac as they do.

Sanguine Sanguine.
is much like the color of Murrey, and is made of Lake, with a little Spanish
Brown, it is also expressed by Hatches as the Purpure, It is a Color in use
amongst the Knights of the Bath, as also amongst the Sergeants at Law in their
Vestures. The Precious Stone to this Color is the Sardonix, which St. John in
the Revelations says, shall be the sixth Stone in the Heavenly Jerusalem. The
Dragons Tail Dragons Tail.
is appropriate to this Color, which though no Planet, yet in his Workings and
Movings has the effects of a Planet through all the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac.

Thus having treated of the Metals, and Colors used in Heraldry: I shall
proceed next to Furrs, used as well in Doublings of the Mantles pertaining to
Coat Armor, as in the Coat it self.

Furrs, Furrs.
according to Guillim, consists of one Color alone, or of more then one.

Furs that are Compounded of two Colors only, are sorted either. with Black
and are either Or Black mixed with White Or as Ermine, and Ermines
Black mixed with Yellow as Ermanois and Pean,

without Black such are according to Leigh. Vairy, Argent and Azure. and Verry,
Or and Gules, or the like Colors.



But for the better explaining them observe these Examples following.

Ermine and Ermenois.
woodcut blazon ermine and ermenois Ermine, that is the Field is Argent, and
the Powdering is Sable.

Ermenois, is when the Field is Or, and the Powdering is Sable.

Ermines and Pean.
woodcut blazon ermines and pean Ermines, that is the Field is Sable, and the
Powdering is Argent.

Pean is when the Field is Sable, and the Powderings are Or.

woodcut blazon vair Verry or Vairy, Verry or Vairy.
which is of two sorts, that is if your Vairy do consist of Argent and Azure,
then in Blazoning to say Vairy is sufficient, but if it be compounded of any
other Colors, they say Vairy of such and such a Color, naming them.

woodcut blazon potent-counter-potent This Example is Blazoned
Potent-Counter-Potent, Potent-Counter-Potent.
or Vairy Copy, and the Colors must be expressed as Azure and Argent, or the
like.

In Ancient times these Doublings or Furs were used for lineings of Robes, and
Mantles of Senators, Consuls, Kings and Emperors.

Having in Brief given you the Examples of Furrs, I shall next proceed to
Bordures.

Examples of BORDURES.
Bordures plain.
THE First is Gules, a Bordure Or, although this Bordure is plain, yet in the
Blazoning the word plain is to be omitted.

2. Sable, a Bordure Engrailed Engrailed
Argent, this is called Engrailed from the Latin word Ingred or, which
signifies to go in, or to make entrance, or else from Gradus, which signifies a
Step or Degree.

3. Argent a Bordure Invected Invected.
Azure This Bordure is quite contrary to the last, for as the other did enter
into the Field, so contrariwise this does, by the inversion of the points, into
it self.

4. Gules a Bordure Indented Indented.
Argent. This is so called as being as it were composed of Teeth, and in the
fashion of Indentures.

engraving of blazon showing plain and charged bordures folio. 20

Bordures, Plain and Charged.


5. Azure a Bordure Counter-Componed Counter-Componed.
Argent and Gules. Note that Counter-Compony does always consist of two Tracts,
and no more, whereas that of Checky does of three.

6. Vert a Bordure Vairy. Vairy.


7. Or a Bordure Checky Checky.
Argent and Sable.

8. Ermine a Bordure Azure, Bordures charged.
charged with eight Plates. Note that a Plate is always to be understood to be
Argent, without expressing the Color.

9. Gules a Bordure Sable, charged with three Bendlets Argent. What a Bend is
shall be showed when I come to speak of Bends.

10. Ermine a Bordure Gobonated Gobonatted.
Or and Sable.

This is so termed as being in small and equal Pieces.

11. Gules a Bordure Argent charged with Verdoy of Trefoils Verdoy of Trefoiles.
slipped proper, that is Vert.

12. Azure a Bordure quarterly composed of Purflew Ermin, and Counter-Compony,
Argent and Gules.

These Examples may suffice, the more curious may be further satisfied in
Guillims Display of Heraldry, in the Chapter of Bordures.

Examples of FILES and LABELS.
Files.
1. ARGENT a File with one Label Gules.

2. Azure a File of there Lambeaux Argent.

3. A File of five Points or Lambeaux, Azure.

4. Argent a File of three points in Bend Sable.

5. Three Files Bar ways Gules, the first having 5 Points, the Second 4, and
the Last Tripple Pointed.

6. Argent a File issuing out of the Chief, without any Intermission at all
Sable.

engraving of blazon showing files and labels folio 22

Files, and Labells.


Differences or Distinctions of Families in Coat Armor. The First House.
woodcut label of three points The Elder Brother during the Life of his Father.
Label.


woodcut upturned crescent The Second Brother. Crescent.


woodcut star mullet The Third Brother. Mullet.


woodcut martlet facing left The Fourth Brother. Martlet.


woodcut ring The Fifth Brother. Annules.


woodcut fleur-de-lis The Sixth Biother. Flowerdelis.


By these Differences every Brother or House ought to observe his due
difference for the avoiding of contention in Coat Armor.

2d. House.
The F^^st Brother of the Second House bears a Crescent charged with a Label.
The Second Son of the Second House, a Crescent charged with another Crescent.
The Third Son of the Second House a Crescent charged with a Mullet. The Fourth
Son of the Second House a Crescent charged with a Martlet. The Fifth Son of the
Second Hou^e a Crescent charged with an Annulet. And the Sixth Son of the
Second House, a Crescent charged with a Flower-delis.

3d. House.
The Mullet, which is the difference of the third House is thus charged; For the
First Son with a Label; For the Second with a Crescent; For the Third with a
Mullet; For the Fourth with a Martlet; For the Fifth with an Annulet; And for
the Sixth with a Flowerde lis.

4th. 5th. and 6th. Houses.
The Martlet, Annulet and Flower de lis, being the differences of the Fourth,
Fifth and Sixth Houses are charged for Distinctions, as the Mullet is.

But Daughters are allowed to bear the Arms of their Fathers, without any of
these Differences or Distinctions.

The PARTS of ARMS Parts of Arms.
are the Escocheon, and the Ornaments without the Escocheon, as the Mantle,
Helmet and Crest.

The Accidents Accidents.
in the Escocheon are Points and Abatements.

Points Points.
are certain places in an Escocheon, diversely named, according to their several
Positions, whereof some are in the Middle, and some Remote. Those in the Middle
are in or near the Center of the Escocheon, Middle Point.
and such are the Honor, the Fess and the Nombril Points.

The Fess Point Fess Point,
is in the exact Center of the Escocheon,

The Honor Point Honor Point.
is next above the same in a direct Line, and the Nombril Point is next
underneath the Fess Point.

Remote Points Remote Point.
are those that are placed at a further distance from the Center of the
Escocheon, and of these some are Superior, and some Inferior. The Superior are
those that have their being in the upper part of the Escocheon, and of these
there are Middle and Extremes:

The Middle is the precise middle of the Chief, between the two Extremes. The
two Superior Extreme Points do possess the Corners of the Chief part of the
Escocheon, and are called the Dexter and Sinister.

The Inferior Points Inferior Points.
do possess the Base of the Escocheon, and of these there are also both Middle
and Remote.

But for the better Explanation thereof, I have in an Escocheon placed Letters
that answers to every one of the said Parts or Points.

Parts in the Escocheon.
woodcut blazon

A. Signifies the Dexter. Chief-Point. B. The Precise Middle Chief. C. The
Sinister Chief. D. The Honor Point. E. The Fess Point. F. The Nombril Point.
G. The Dexter Base. H. The Dexter Middle Base. I. The Sinister Base Point.
The knowledge of these Points are of great concernment, and ought to be well
observed, for often times they are occupied with sundry things of different kinds
in one Escocheon.

engraving of blazon demonstrating abatements of honor folio 27

Abatements of Honor.


Examples of Abatements of HONOR.
AN Abatement is an Accidental Mark annexed to Coat Armor, showing some
dishonorable quality or stain in the Bearer, whereby the Dignity of the Coat
Armor is abased,

Abatements Abatements.
do consist in Diminution and Reversing. Diminution is a Blemishing of some
particular Point of the Escecheon, by reason of some Stain and Color which
they must be always of, as Sanguine and Ten, and never of Metal, for then
they are Additions of Honor. Now what these Abatements are, follows.

1. Argent a Delph Delph.
Ten: This Abatement is due to him that revoketh his challenge.

2. Or, an Escocheon reversed Escocheon reversed.
Sanguin, Due for deflowring a Maid.

3. The whole Coat Reversed Coat reversed.
(viz.) Sable a Lion Rampant, Argent due to a Traitor.

4. Or, a Point Dexter Point Dexter.
Ten, due for too much boasting of his Martial Acts.

5. Argent, a Point in Point Point in Point.
Sanguine, due to a Coward.

6. Or, a Point Campion Point Campion.
Ten, due to him that kills his Prisoner, after he has yielded himself and
craveth Quarter.

7. Argent, a Gore Gore.
Sinister Ten, due for flying from his Colors.

8. Or, two Gussets Gussets.
Sanguine, due to him that commits Adultry.

9. Argent, a Plain Point Plain point.
Ten, due to him that tells Lies to his Prince, or General.

engraving of blazon demonstrating rewards and additions of honor folio 29

Rewards, and Additions of Honor.


Forms of CHARGES: On which Rewards and Additions of Honor are often times
placed in COAT ARMOR.
1. GUles, a Canton Canton.
Or.

2. Argent, a quarter Quarter.
Azure.

3. Sanguine, a Gyron Gyron.
issuing from the Dexter-chief Argent.

4. Ermine, an Escocheon Escocheon.
Gules.

5. Argent two Flasques Flasques.
Azure.

6. Sable, a Star of eight Raise or Points Or, between two Flanches Flanches.
Ermin, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Henry Hobart of Blinkling in Norfolk,
Knight and Baronet.

7. Ten two Voyders Voyders.
Or.

CHAP. II.
Treats of the diverse kinds of Escocheons, what the Field and Charges are, the
Diversity of Charges, and their Common Accidents, with their Properties and
Forms: And lastly of the Bearing or Using the Ordinaries in COAT ARMOR;
together with diverse Notes, Rules and Observations to them belonging.

ESchocheons Escocheons.
are either of one Tincture or more then one. Those that are of more then one,
some are more predominate, and that is said to be predominate, when some on
Metal, Color or Fur is spread, or is understood to be spread all over the
surface of the Escocheon, which is termed the Field or Shield; And in such
Escocheons as have in them more Tinctures then one (as most have) the Field and
Charge must be observed. Tincture of the Field.
And in the Blazoning, first name the Field, and then the Charge thereon, and
if there be several Charges (as often times there is) then name the first which
is nearest the Field.

The Charge The Charge.
is that which possesses the Field, whether it be Sensitive or Vegetable,
Natural or Artificial, and is placed either throughout all the superficies of
the Escocheon, or else in some special part of the same.

The common Accidents Common Accidents.
of Charges are Adumbration or Transparency; or they are Transmutation or
Counter-changing.

The making of ORDINARIES Ordinaries.
consists of Lines diversely Composed. Lines are the matter whereof these
Ordinaries are formed, and according to the diverse Tracts and Forms of Lines,
they receive their diverse Shapes and variation of Names.

The property of these Lines are their Rightness or Crookedness.

A Right Line is carried equally throughout the Escocheon without rising, or
falling, contrary to which is a crooked Line.

A Crooked Line is either Bunched or Cornered, according to these Examples.

Engrailed. woodcut engrailed line, semicircles with points facing up

Invected. woodcut invected line, semicircles with points facing down

Waved. woodcut wavy line, sine wave

Crenelle or Embattuled. woodcut embattled line, square wave

Nebule. woodcut nebuly line, wavy line with exaggerated curvature

Indented. woodcut indented line, triangle wave

Dancette. woodcut dancetty line, trangle wave

Of these and Straight Lines are composed the Honorable Ordinaries; as also
Abatements and Rewards of Honor.

The Honorable ORDINARIES.
THE Honorable Ordinaries Honorable Ordinaries.
are the Cross, Chief, Fess, Bar, Pale, Cheveron, Bend, Saltier and Escocheon,
all which shall be treated of in order.

The CROSS Cross.
takes up the fifth part of the Escocheon, but if charged then the third, and
it is born as well Engrailed, Invected, Wavey, or the like as plain, also it is
born between a Charge, and charged, as the rest of the Ordinaries are.

The CHIEF Chief.
is said to be given to those, that by their high merits have procured them
chief places and esteem amongst men. It must contain the third part of the
Escocheon in depth, and it is divided into a Fillet, Fillet.
which contains the fourth part of the Chief, and stands in the Chief Point.

The FESS Fess.
contains in breadth the third part of the Escocheon, and does occupy the
Center of the Shield. This has fomerly been taken for the Girdle of Honor, as
dividing the Shield into two equal parts.

The BAR Bar.
differs from the Fest only in that it contains, but the fifth part of the
Shield, whereas the Fess does the third. It is divided into the Closet, Closet.
which contains the moity of the Bar, and the Barulet Barulet.
which is the half of the Closet.

The PALE contains the third part of the Eschocheon. It is subdivided into a
Pallet Pallet.
which is the half of the Pale, Pale.
and is never to be charged with any thing, either Quick or Dead, neither must
it be parted; and into an Endorse, Endorse.
which is the fourth part of a Pale, and is not used but when the Pale is
between two of them. If the Pale be upon any Beast, then you must say, He is
Debrused with the Pale, but if the Beast be on the Pale, then say, He is
Supported of the Pale.

The CHEVERON Cheveron
Represents the Rafters of a House, and was in Ancient time the Head attire of
Women Priests. It takes up the fifth part of the Field, and is subdivided into
the Cheveronel, Cheveronel.
which contains half a Cheveron, and a Couple Close, Couple-close.
which is the fourth part of a Cheveron, and is not born but by Pairs, except
there be a Cheveron between them.

The BEND Bend.
does contain the fifth part of the Field in Breadth if uncharged, but if
charged, then the third.

It is divided into a Bendlet, Bendlet.
which is limited to the sixth part of the Shield; Into a Garter, which is the
moity of a Bend; Into a Cost, Cost.
which is the fourth part of a Bend; and into a Ribon R bon.
the moity of a Cost.

There is also the Bend Sinister, Bend Sinister.
which goes thwart the Escocheon from the Sinister Chief, to the Dexter Base,
which is quite contrary to the other Bend; and this is subdivided into the
Scrape, Scrape.
which is half the Bend, and into the Battune Battune.
which is the fourth part of the Bend; And this is the most usual Badg of
Illegitimacy; but note that the Battune does not extend it self quite thwart
the Shield, but wants something at both sides, as by the example will appear.

The SALTIER Saltier.
Contains the fifth part of the Shield, but if charged then the third. The
Saltier is said to be about the height of a Man, and was formerly used to Scale
the Walls of a Town, and was driven full of Pins, which served for Steps.

This Ordinary as the rest is born Engrailed, Wavey, or the like, as also
between Or, charged with a Charge.

An Inescocheon An Inescocheon.
does contain the fifth part of the Field, and must be placed in the Fess
point: This is also termed an Escocheon of Pretense, Escocheon of Pretense.
and is so born by those that match with an Heiress, giving therein her Coat of
Arms.

Examples of the several CROSSES Most Usually born in Coat Armor.
1. ARgent a Cross sable born by Sir Richard Raynsford Raynsford 1.
of Dallington engraving of blazon showing crosses folio 36

Crosses.
in Northamptonshire, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court
of Kings Bench.

Or, a Cross Vert, born by the Name of Hussy. Hussy.


Ermine, a Cross Sable, by the name of Archer. Archer.


Argent, a Cross Sable between four Pellets, born by Sir Robert Clayton Clayton.
of the City of London, Knight, Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1680.

2. Sable, a Cross Potence Or, born by the Name of Alleyn. Alleyn.


Azure, a Cross Potence Or, by the Name of Branchley. Branchley


Gules, a Cross Potence Ermine, by the Name of Norton. Norton.


Ermine, a Cross Potence Azure, by the Name of Lemynge. Lemynge.


Per Bend, Or and Sable, a Cross Potence counterchanged by the Name of Alman.
Alm^n.


3. Azure, a Cross Potence or Potent Fitche Or, born by Etheldred, King of the
West Saxons.

4. Sable, a Cross Patee or Form Argent, born by Maplesden Maplesden


Gules, a Cross Patee Argent, by the Name of Cross. Cross.


Argent, a Cross Patee Flowery Sable, by the Name of Swinston. Swinston.


Per Pale, Or and Gules, a Cross Patee, Counterchanged by the Name of C^opton.
Clopton.


5. Or, a Cross Patee Gules, fimbriated Sable, that is edged with another Cross
of a different Color.

6. Or, on a Cheveron Gules, three Crosses Patee or Form of the Field, born by
William Peck of Samford-Hall in Essex, Esquire, Son and Heir of Edward Peck
Peck.
of the said place, Sergeant at Law deceased.

7. Ruby, a Cheveron between ten Crosses form Pearl, born by the Right
Honorable George Berkeley, Lord Berkeley, Mowbray, Segrave and Bruce, Baron of
Berkeley Castle, and Earl of Berkeley, Earl of Berkeley.
etc.

Ruby a Cheveron Ermine between ten Crosses form, Pearl is born by the Right
Honorable Mawrice B^rkeley, Baron Berkeley of Rathdown, and Viscount Fitz
Harden Viscount Fitz Harding.
of Bear haven in Ireland.

Also by the Right Honorable John Lord Berkeley, Lord Berkeley.
Baron of Straton in Somersetshire, etc.

8. Azure, a Cross Moline Or, born by Sir John Molineux Molineux.
of Tavershal in Nottingham-shire, Baronet.

Azure, a Cross Moline Argent, by the Name of Trelesk. Trelesk.


Gules, a Cross Moline Or, by the Name of Berneston. Berneston


Argent, a Cross Moline Gule, by the Name of Vudal. Vudal.


9. Sable, a Cross Couped or Pierced Or, by the Name of Grill. Grill.


Note that Piercings are born round, as in this example, as also four square,
and Lozenge ways.

10. Ermine, a Cross Patonce Sable, born by Jonathan Goddard Goddard.
Doctor in Physic, and Fellow of the College of Physicians.

Gules, a Cross Patonce Argent, by the Name of Latimer. Latimer.


Argent a Cross Patonce Sable, by the Name of Banester. Banester.


Verta Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Boydel. Boydel.


Sable, a Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Mannock. Mannock.


Azure, a Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Ward. Wa d.


Quarterly Gules and Azure, a Cross Patonce Or, born by Sir Richard Wenman
Wenman.
of Caswel in Oxford-sbire, Baronet.

11. Argent, a Cross Bottony Sable, born by Richard Winwood Winwood
of Ditton Park in Buckingham-shire Esquire; Son and Heir of the Right Honorable
Sir Ralph Winwood Knight, Principal Secretary of State to King James, and
Ambassador Ledger to the States of the United Provinces.

12. Argent, a Cross Flowery Sable, and is the Coat of Sir Godfrey Copley Copley.
of Sproadbrough in York-shire-Baronet.

13. Sable, a Cross Raguled Or, by the Name of Stoway. Stoway.


Argent, a Cross Raguled Sable, by the Name of Wroth. Wroth.


14. Argent, a Cross Wavey voided Sable, by the Name of Duckenfield.
Duckenfield.


15. Azure, a Cross Moline Or, voided throughout; this with the addition of
Cross Croslets Or, dispersed in the Field, is the Coat of Knowles, Knowles.
of which Family is the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Banbury, Earl of
Banbury.
Viscount Wallingford, and Baron Knowles of Greys.

16. Or, a Cross Croslet Gules, by the Name of Taddington. Taddington.


Argent, a Cross Croslet Sable by the Name of Wickerley. Wickerley


Argent, a Cross Croslet Gules, by the Name of Brightley. Brightley.


Vert, a Cross Croslet Or, by the Name of Bury. Bury.


Sable, a Cross Croslet Ermine, by the Name of Durant. Durant.


17. Argent, a Cheveron between three Cross Croslets Gules, born by Richard
Stern Stern.
of White Cliff in York-sbire Esquire, Son to his Grace, Richard late Lord
Archbishop of York Deceased.

18. Azure, a Fess Dauncette Ermine, between six Cross Croslets Argent, born by
Sir Thomas Barnardiston Barnadiston.
of Kediton in Suffolk, Knight and Baronet, By Sir Samuel Barnardiston of
Brightwel Hall in the said County Baronet.

19. Argent, a Cheveron Azure between three Cross Croslets Fitche Gules, born
by Sir John Buckworth Buckworth.
of London, Knight.

20. Argent, a Cross Couped Sable, charged with another Or.

21. Azure, a Cross Engrailed Ermine, born by Nathaniel Stoughton Stoughton
of St. John's near Warwick, Esquire.

22. Sable a Cross Engrailed Or, in the dexter quarter a Mullet Argent by the
Name of Peyton, of which Family is Sir Thomas Peyton Peyton.
of Knolton in Kent, Baronet.

By Sir -- Peyton of Doddington in Cambridg-shire, Baronet: and Sir Robert
Peyton of East Barnet in Hartford-shire, Knight.

23. Sable, a Cross Engrailed Argent, in the Dexter Quarter an Escallop shell
of the second, born by Justinian Pagit Pagit.
of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

24. Azure, a Taw Argent Ermine, or a chief indented Gules, 3 Taws Or, born by
Edward Thurland Esquire, only Son of Sir Edward Thurland Thurland.
of Reygate in Surrey, Knight, one of the Barons of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, Deceased.

25. Azure, a Cross Flury Argent, by the Name of Cheney. Cheney.


Sable, a Cross Flury Or, by the Name of Manox. Manox.


26. Gules, a Cross Pall Argent.

engraving of blazon showing chiefs with charges folio 43

Cheifs, with Charges thereon.


27. Azure, a Cross Avelane Argent.

28. Gules, a Cross Furche Or.

29. Or, a Cross Ankred Sable.

Thus much for Crosses which may be born between, or Charged with a Charge,

Examples of CHIEFS.
1. OR, a Chief Gules, born by Sir Martin Lumley Lumley.
of Bradfield in Essex Baronet.

2. Azure, a Chief Engrailed Or.

3. Argent, a Chief Invected Vert.

4. Saphir, a Chief Indented Topaz; born by his Grace James Duke, Duke of
Ormond.
Marquess and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Ossery and Brecknock, Viscount Thurles,
Baron of Arklow and Lanthony, Lord High Steward of his Majesty's Household,
Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, Lord Leiutenant of Ireland, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.

By The Right Honorable James Lord Butler Baron of More Park in England, and
Earl of Ossery in Ireland, Earl of Ossery.
Grand Child to his Grace James Duke of Ormond.

By the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Arran, Earl of Arran.
Viscount Tulough, Baron of Clougrenan in Ireland, and Baron Butler of Weston
in England, second Son to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, and Lord Leiutenant
of Ireland, Anno, 1683.

5. Azure, a Chief Nebule Argent.

6. Gules a Chief Crenelle or Embattuled Or.

7. Ermine, a Chief Dauncette Sable.

8. Vert, a Chief Wavey Or.

9. Ermine, a Chief Quarterly Or and Gules, by the Name of Peckham. Peckham.


10. Or, a Chief Checky: Argent and Azure.

11. Gules, a Chief Argent surmounted of another Or.

12. Argent, a Chief Sable, in the nether part thereof a Fillet Argent.

13. Sable, a Chief Or, charged with a Shapournet Ermine.

14. Azure, three Bars Argent, in Chief three Bezants, born by Sir Rich.
Atkins Atkins.
of Much Hadham in Hartfor-shire, Knight and Baronet.

15. Azure, on a Chief Or, three Martlets Gules, born by Sir William Wray Wray.
of Ashby in Lincolnshire, Baronet.

By Sir -- Wray of Glentworth in the said County Baronet.

This Ordinary is subject to a Charge, as the others are.

Examples of FESSES and BARS.
1. Azure a Fess Or, by the Name of Eliot. Eliot.


Ermine a Fess Gules, by the Name of Barnaby. Barnaby.


Or, a Fess Gules, by the Name of Colvil. Colvil.


2. Ermine, a Fess Dauncette Sable, by the Name of Pennington. Pennington.


Argent, a Fess Dauncette Sable, by the Name of West. West.


Azure, a Fess Dauncette Argent, by the Name of Bengham. Bengham.


Vert a Fess Dauncette Ermine, by the Name of Somner Somner.
of Kent.

Argent, a Fess Dauncette Gules, by the Name of Nevil Nevil.
of Leicester.

3. Gules, a Fess Wavey Argent.

4. Argent, a Fess Humid Sable.

engraving of blazon showing fesses and bars folio 46

Fesses, Bars etc.



5. Argent, a Fess per Fess Indented Vert and Sable, between two Cottizes
counterchanged, by the Name of Huddy Huddy.
of Dorsetshire.

6. Per Fess Indented Or and Azure, by the Name of Saunders. Saunders.


7. Parted per Fess Sable and Argent, a Fess Batile Counter-Battled,
Counterchanged.

8. Per Fess Or and Argent, a Fess Necule Gules, by the Name of Anteshed.
Anteshed.


9. Argent, on a Fess between a double Cottize Gules, three Griffons Heads
erazed Or, born by Sir Robert Dashwood Dashwood.
of Norbrook and Wiekham in Oxfordshire, Knight.

And by Samuel Dashwood of the City of London Esquire, now Sheriff of the said
City.

10. 4 Fussils in Fess Pearl, born by the Right Honorable George Lord
Carteret, Carteret.
Baron of Hawnes in Bedfordshire etc.

And by Sir Philip Carteret of St. Oven in the Isle of Jarsey Baronet.

11. Gules, a Fess Wavey between 3 Flower delis Or, born by Sir William Hicks
Hicks.
of Ruckolls in Essex, Knight and Baronet.

12. Or, on a Fess Azure, three Garbs of the Field, born by James Vernon of St.
Martins in the Field in Middlesex, Esquire, descended from the Vernons of
Cheshire.

13. Argent, a Bar Azure, born by Captain James Burkin Burkin.
of London, Esquire.

14. Topaz, three Bars Wavey Ruby, born by the Right Honorable James Earl of
Perth, Lord Drummond and Stobhall, Steward of Strathern and Balahidder by
Inheritance; Lord Justice General of the Kingdom of Scotland, one of the
extraordinary Lords of the Session, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council for the said Kingdom.

Barry Wavey of six Or and Gules, born by John Basset Basset.
of Heanton Punchardon in Devonshire, Esquire.

15. Ermine, a Croslet Sanguine.

16. Sable, a Barulet Argent.

engraving of blazon showing pales and pallets folio 49

Pales, Pallets etc.


Examples of PALES.
1. GUles, a Pale Or, by the Name of Grandmain. Grandmain.


2. Azure, a Palle Argent.

3. Vert, an Endorse Or.

4. Argent, a Pale Lozenge Sable, by the Name of Savage. Savage,


Gules, a Pale Lozenge Argent, by the Name of Manduit. Manduit.


5. Argent, a Pale indented Vert, by the Name of Dixon. Dixon.


6. Argent, a Pale Flory Counterchanged Sable.

7. Gules, a Pale Radiant Or, by the Name of Coleman. Coleman.


8. Party per Pale Argent and Sable, a Pale Counterchanged.

9. Argent, three Pallets Wavey Sable, by the Name of Downs. Downs.


10. Argent, a Pale between two Indorses Gules.

11. Paly of six Topaz and Saphir, a Canton Ermine, born by the Right
Honorable Robert Lord Shirley, Baron Ferrers, Lord Ferrers.
of Chartley, etc.

12. Argent, on a Pale Sable, a Congers Head Erected and Couped Or, born by Sir
Bernard Gascoyn, Gayscon.
Knight.

Note that such Ordinaries as are either of themselves, or else by reason of
some charge imposed on them, do challenge the third part of the Field, are
exempted from this kind of Bearing one besides another, of such the Field can
conteyn but one of them at once, but their Derivatives and Subdivisions may
well be sorted in the same Escocheon, as a Pale between two Endorses, a Bend
between two Cottizes, and such like.

engraving of blazon showing chevrons folio 51

Cheverons,


Examples of CHEVERONS.
1. GUles a Cheveron Argent, born by Thomas Fulford of Fulford Fulford.
in Devonshire Esquire.

Argent, a Cheveron Azure by the name of Swillington. Swillington.


Or a Cheveron Sable by the name of Heningfield. Heningfield.


Argent, a Cheveron Gules by the name f Try. Try.


2. Ermine, a Cheveron couped Sable, by the name of Jones. Jones.


3. Or a Cheveron in chief Azure.

4. Sable, a Cheveron Rompe Argent.

5. Azure a Cheveron engrailed voyded Or, by name of Dudley. Dudley.


6. Argent, two Cheverons Sable, born by Sir Joseph Ash Ash.
of Twittenham in Middlesex and of Downton in Wiltshire Baronet.

By Samnel Ash of Langley-Burwel in Wiltshire, Esquire.

By William Ash of Hatchbury in the said County Esquire.

And by John Ash of Fifield in the said County, Esquire.

Ermine, two Cheverons Azure, born by Sir Walter Bagot Bagot.
of Blithfield in Staffordshire, Baronet.

Or, two Cheverons Gules, born by Sir John Mounson Mounson.
of Burton in Lincolnshire, Knight of the Bath and Baronet.

Ermine, two Cheverons Gules, by the Name of Fanner. Fanner.


7. Azure, three Cheverons Argent, born by John Lewkenor of West Dean in Suffex
Esquire. Lewkener


Argent, three Cheverons Gules, born by Richard Lougher Lougher.
of Tytleston in Clamorganshire, Esquire.

Gules, three Cheverons Or, by the Name of Horn. Horn.


8. Argent, three Cheverons reversed Gules.

9. Argent, a Cheveron Enarched Gules.

10. Azure, three Cheverons braced in the base of the Escocheon, Or, by the
Name of Fitzhugh. Fitzhugh.


engraving of blazon showing bends folio 53

Bends.


11. Ermine, on a Cheveron Gules, three Cinquefoils Or, born by Skepper of
Skepper, Lincolnshire.

12. Gules, a Cheveron engrailed between three Owls Argent, born by Sir George
Hewytt of Pishobury in Hartfordshire, Baronet. Hewyt.


13. Per Cheveron Azure and Argent, in Chief two Falcons Volant Or, by the Name
of Stephens, Stephens.
and is born by Thomas Stepbens, Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Stephens
of little Sodbury in Glocestershire, Knight.

14. Vert, a Cheveronel Argent.

15. Ermine, a Coupee-Close, Gules.

Examples of BENDS.
1. OR, a Bend Azure, by the Name of Caltherupe.

Gules, a Bend Or, by the Name of Colembert. Colembert.


Argent, a Bend Vert, by the Name of Kendal. Kendal.


Or, a Bend Gules, by the Name of Cottel. Cottel.


2. Argent, a Bend Engrailed Sable, born by Sir Francis Ratcliff Ratcliff.
of Dilston in Northumberland, Baronet.

Argent, a Bend Engrailed Gules, by the Name of Culpeper, Culpeper.
and is the Coat of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Culpeper Baron of Thonway.

It is also born by Sir Thomas Culpeper of Preston Hall in the Parish of
Aylesford in Kent Baronet.

Argent, a Bend Engrailed Azure, by the Name of Grove.

Or, a Bend Engrailed Azure, by the Name of Clark. Clark.


Gules a Bend Engrailed Or, by the Name of Marshal. Marshal.


Gules, on a Bend Argent, three Crosses Patte or Form Sable, is born by Sir
John Rerersby of Thribergh in the West Riding of York shire, Baronet, Governor
of the City of York.

Argent, on a Bend Engrailed Sable, three Plates born by John Cutts Cutts.
of Arksdon in Essex, and of Childerly in Cambridgeshire, Esquire.

Argent a Bend Wavey Sable, born by Henry Wallop of Farleigh-Wallop Wallop.
in Hampshire, Esquire.

3. Gules, a Bend Wavey between two Cottizes Or Costs, Argent by the Name of
Etton. Etton.


Azure, a Bend Wavey Cottized Argent, by the Name of Keynes. Keynes.


Sable, a Bend Engrailed Cottized Argent, by the Name of Willington. Willington.


Azure, a Bend Engrailed Argent, Cottized Or, by the Name of Fortescue.
Fortescue.


4. Sable, a Bend Flory Argent, by the Name of High-Lord. Highlord.


Sable, a Bend Flory Or, by the Name of Bromfleet. Broomfleet.


5. Per Bend Sable and Argent, a Bend Ragule Counter changed by the Name of
Strangman. Strangman,


6. Vert, a Bend Lozenge Or, by the Name of Knight, Knight.
of Hampshire.

Sable, a Bend Lozenge Argent, by the Name of Lenthal Lenthal.
of Oxfordshire.

Ermine, a Bend Lozenge Gules, by the Name of Plumley Plumley.
of Devonshire.

7. Sable, a Bend engrailed between six Cinquefoyls Or, Povey.
born by Tho. Povey Esquire, one of the Masters of Requests to his Majesty King
Charles the Second.

8. Ermine, a Bend voided Gules, by the Name of Ireton. Ireton.


9. Or, two Bendlets Azure, by the Name of D'oyly, D'oyley.
and is born by Sir John D'oyley of Chisleyhampton in Oxfordshire, Knight, by
Christopher D'oyley of Alderbury in the said County Esquire, and by Laud
D'oyley of St. Giles in the Fields, in Middlese^ Gent.

Or, two Bendlets Gules, born by the Name of Tracy. Tracy.


Or, two Bendlets Engrailed Sable, by the N^me of Brantwait. Braintwaite,


10. Azure, three Bendlets Wavey Azure, Wilbraham.
born by Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in Cheshire, Baronet.

11. Bendy of six Pieces Argent and Gules.

12. Or, a Garter Gules.

13. Argent, a Cost or Cottize Sable.

14. Or, a Ribon Gules.

15. Argent a Bend Sinister Sable.

16. Azure, a Scrape Argent.

17. Gules, a Battune Argent.

engraving of blazon showing saltires folio 57

Saltiers,


Examples of SALTIERS.
1. PEarl, a Saltier Ruby, born by the Right Honorable Charles Lord Gerard,
Baron of Brandon and Earl of Maxfield, Earl of Maxfield.
etc.

By the Right Honorable John Fitz-Gerard, Earl of Kildare, Earl of Kildare.
Primier Earl of the Kingdom of Ireland.

By the Right Honorable Digby, Lord Gerard Lord Gerard.
Baron of Gerards Bromley, and Lord of Dutton.

By Sir Francis Gerard of Harrow-hill in Middlesex, Knight and Baronet.

By Gilbert Gerard Cossein of Br^fferton Hall in the North ^^ding of Yorkshire,
Esquire, Son and Heir to Sir Gilbert Gerar^, Knight and Baronet.

Ruby, a Saltier Peral, Bergavenny.
born by the Right Honorable George Lord Nevil, Baron of Bergavenny in
Monmouth-shire, but the Family of the Nevils bears in the middle of the
Saltier a Rose Gules for a Distinction.

Or a Saltier Sable, born by the Right Honorable Sir Edward Dering of
Surrenden Dering in Kent, Dering.
Baronet, one of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury, etc.

Argent, a Saltier Sable, born by Martin Baldwin of Castle Geshel in Kings
County in Ireland, Baldwin.
Esquire.

Azure, a Saltier Argent, born by Sir William York of Burton Pedwarding in
Lincolnshire, York.
Knight.

Gules, a Saltier Argent, charged with a Rose of the Field, born by the Name of
Nevill. Nevil.


Sable, a Saltier Argent, born by Thomas Ducket of Steplemorden in
Cambridgshire, Ducket.
Esquire.

Vert, a Saltier Or, born by the Name of Hunt. Hunt.


Per Pale Azure and Gules, a Saltier Argent, by the Name of Gage. Gage.


2. Pearl; on a Saltier Engrailed Diamond, 9 Annulets Topaz, born by the Right
Honorable Robert Leak Earl of Scarsdale, Earl of Scarsdale.
and Baron Deyncourt.

Vert, a Saltier Engrailed Argent, by the Name of Hawley. Hawley.


And is born by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Hawley, and by Henry Hawley
of Branford in Middlesex, Esquire.

Argent, a Saltier Engrailed Sable, born by Sir George Middleton of Leighton in
Lancashire, Baronet. Middleton


3. Parted per Saltier Argent and Gules, a Saltier Counterchanged.

4. Azure, a Saltier quarterly quartered Or and Argent, being the Arms of the
Episcopal See of Bath and Wells. Bath and Wells.


5. Per Pale Argent and Azure, a Saltier Counterchanged by the Name of
Hodbonel. Hodbonel.


6. Gules on a Saltier Or, another Vert, by the Name of Andrews. Andrews.


7. Gules, a Saltier Cleche, that is piered through, Or.

8. Per Pale, Argent and Gules, three Saltiers Counterchanged, born by Lane
Lane.
of London.

9. Girony of four Argent and Gules, a Saltier between as many Cross Croslets
all Counterchanged, Twisden.
born by Roger Twisden of Bradborn in Kent, Esquire, Eldest Son to Sir Thomas
Twisden, Knight and Baronet, one of his Majesty's Justices of Kings Bench.

Examples of INESCOCHEONS and ORLES.
1. ERmine an Inescocheon Gules.

2. Or, an Orle Azure, by the Name of Bertram. Bertram.


3. Argent, an Orle Engrailed on the Innerside Gules.

4. Gules, an Orle Engrailed on both sides Or.

5. Argent, an Orle of three Pieces Sable.

6. Argent, three Escocheons Sable, by the Name of Lowdham. Lowdham


7. Topaz, a Lion Rampant, and Treasure of Scotland Ruby, within a Border
gobonated Pearl and Saphir, this is the Coat of the Right Honorable engraving
of blazon showing inescutcheons and orles folio 60

Inescocheons, and Orles.
Alexander Earl of Morray, Earl of Morray.
Lord Down and Abernethe in Scotland, and one of his Majesty's principal
Secretaries of State for that Kingdom.

8. Topaz, a Lion Rampant cut in pieces at the Joints Ruby, within a Treasure
of Scotland Saphir, born by the Right Honorable Richard Lord Maitland, Lord
Maitland.
Lord Justice Clarke of the Kingdom of Scotland, one of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council for that Kingdom, and Eldest Son to the
Right Honorable Charles Earl of Lauderdale, etc.

9. Gules, an Inescocheon Argent, within an Orle of Cinquefoyls Or, Chamberlain.
born by Doctor Hugh Chamberlain Doctor in Physic in Ordinary, to his Majesty
King Charles the Second, and by his Brother Doctor John Chamberlain, Doctor in
Physic.

Examples of PILES.
THe Pile is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold Line, formed like a Wedg, and
is an Ancient Addition to Armory, being that which makes all Foundations and
Fortifications sure and Firm, especially upon Moorish and Watery Grounds.

The Examples follow.

1. Or a Pile Engrailed Sable, born by the Name of Waterhouse. Waterhouse.


2. Azure, a Pile Ermine, born by Sir Cyrill Wyche of Flansford in Surry, Wyche.
Knight, sometime Ambassador at Constantinople, for his Majesty King Charles
the First.

Azure, a Pile Or, by the Name of Aldham. Aldham.


Or, A Pile Azure, by the Name of Bagginton. Baggington.


engraving of blazon showing piles folio 62

Piles.


Sable, a Pile Ermine, by the Name of Moriswith. Moriswith.


3. Ermine, two Piles in point Diamond, born by the Right Honorable John Lord
Haughton, Lord Haughton,
Eldest Son to the Right Honorable Gilbert Earl of Clare, etc.

And is also born by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Holles, Lord Holles.
Baron Holles of Ifield in Sussex.

3. Argent three Piles, meeting near the base of the Escocheon Azure, by the
Name of Bryan. Bryan.


Or, three Piles Gules, by the Name of Basset. Basset.


Azure, three Piles Or, by the Name of Salbourn. Salbourn.


Azure, three Piles Gules by the Name of Gildesborough. Gildesborough.


Argent, three Piles waved Gules, by the Name of Candish. Candish.


Ermine, three Piles waved Gules, by the Name of Gernon. Gernon.


Ermyne, three Piles Engrailed Sable, by the Name of Cade. Cade.


5. Argent, three Piles, one issuing out of the Chief, between two others,
transposed, or reversed Sable, born by Captain Richard Hulse of Bethersden in
Kent, Hulse.
Esquire.

6. Argent, a Pile waved, issuing out of the Dexter Corner of the Escocheon
Bendways Or, by the Name of Aldham. Aldham.


7. Argent, a Pile in Bend, issuing out of the Dexter Corner of the Escocheon
Sable, Cottized Engrailed Gules.

8. Argent, a Triple Pile flowery on the tops Sable, issuing out of the Sinister
Base in Bend, toward the Dexter Corner.

9. Or, on a Pile Vert, three Wheat-Sheaves of the Field, born by Sir Anthony
Oldfield of Spalding in Lincolnshire, Oldfield.
Baronet.

Partitions of EXAMPLES.
PArtitions are such in which there is no Tincture, that is Metal, Color, or
Fur predominating in them, and are formed of sundry sorts of Lines of
Partition, engraving of blazon demonstration partition folio 64

Partitions.
occasioning often times Counter-changing and Transmutation, and these kinds of
Bearing are subject to be born Wavey, Engrailed, or the like: for Example.

1. Parted per Pale Argent and Gules, by the Name of Walgrave. Walgrave


2. Per Fess Or and Azure.

3. Per Bend Embattuled Pearl and Ruby, born by the Right Honorable Boil Lord
Clifford, Lord Clifford.
Eldest Son to the Right Honorable Richard Boil Earl of Burlington, and Baron
Clifford of Lansborough in England, Earl of Cork, Viscount Dungarvan, and
Baron Youghal of Ireland, etc.

And by the Honorable Robert Boil Boil.
of Staulbridge in Dorset-shire Esquire, Brother to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Burlington.

Per Bend Or and Vert, by the Name of Hawley. Hawley.


4. Quarterly Ermine and Sable, born by John Stanhope Stanhope.
of Elveston in Derbyshire, Esquire.

Some Blazon this Coat parted per Cross.

5. Per Bend Sinister Argent and Azure.

6. Per Cheveron Sable and Argent, born by Sir Willoughby Aston of Aston Aston.
in Cheshire, Baronet.

7. Per Pile in Point Or and Sable. The Pile part of this Coat may be charged,
but no other part thereof, and that may be used as one only Coat.

8. Per Pale Travers, Argent and Gules.

9. Parted Per Pile Transposed Or, Gules and Sable. This is a Bearing rarely
met with.

10. Per Saltier Gules and Ermine, by the Name of Restwold. Restwold:


11. Per Pale and Base Gules, Argent and Sable, a Bearing unusual.

12. Girony of 6 pieces Or and Azure.

13. Girony of eight pieces Topaz and Diamond, and is born by the Right
Honorable Alchibald Lord Lorn, Eldest Son to the Right Honorable Archibald
Earl of Argile, Lord Kintire Champbel and Lorn, Lord Lorn.
etc.

14. Per Pale and Cheveron Argent and Gules.

15. Chappe Or and Vert Counterchanged.

From Partitions I shall proceed to Counterchanges, which does also admit of a
engraving of blazon showing counterchanges folio 67

Counterchanges.
Charge, as these Examples will Demonstrate.

Examples of COUNTERCHANGES.
1. OR a Cross parted per Pale Gules and Sable, by the Name of Brook. Brook.


2. Per Pale, Argent and Sable, a Pale Counterchanged.

3. Per Pale Argent and Azure, per Bend Counterchanged; this the French
Armorist term Tranche.

4. Per Pale Argent and Gules, a Bend Counterchanged by the Name of Chaucer.
Chaucer.


5. Paly of six Argent and Sable, a Chief Counterchanged.

6. Per Fess Gules and Argent, a Pale Counterchanged by the Name of Lavider.
Lavider.


7. Parted per Pale Or and Gules, three Roundels Counterchanged.

8. Per Fess Argent and Vert, a Pale Counterchanged three Lions Heads Erazed
Gules, born by Sam. Argal Argal.
of Walthamstow in Essex, Doctor in Physic, Candidat and Honorary and
Physician in Ordinary to Her Majesty.

9. Per Fess Sable and Argent, a Lion Rampant Counterchanged by the Name of
Vaugham, and is born by the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Carbury Earl of
Carbury.
in Ireland, and Baron of Emlyn in England.

10. Per Pale Nebule Azure and Or, six Martlets Counterchanged by the Name of
Fleetwood. Fleetwood


11. Per Fess Argent and Gules, a Bar between three Crescents Counterchanged.

12. Paly of six Argent and Gules, a Bend Paly of as many Counterchanged.

13, Paly Bendy or and Sable.

14. Barry of six Indented the one into the other Argent and Sable, by the Name
of Gill. Gill.


15. Barry Bendy Argent and Vert.

16. Checky Topaz and Saphir, a Fess Ruby, fretty Pearl, born by the Right
Honorable Charles Lord Cheyne, Lord Cheyne.
Viscount of Newhaven in Scotland, etc. which said Dignity, upon the Death of
his Lordship, descends on his Son and Heir William Cheyne Esquire.

17. Checky Argent and Gules, a Chief Indented Azure, born by Joseph
Micklethwaite Micklethwait.
of Swayle in Holderness in Yorkshire, Esquire.

18. Checky Or and Gules, on a Fess Azure, three Escallops Argent, born by Sir
Robert Baldock Baldock.
of Talconeston in Norfolk, Knight.

19. Barry of six Parted per Pale Indented Argent and Gules, Counterchanged,
born by William Peyto Peyto.
of Chesterton in Warwick shire, Esquire.

20. Barry Pily of eight pieces, Or and Gules.

Thus much of Coat Armours that have an obscure derivation from some of the
Ordinaries, and do keep their Name. I shall next proceed to some Examples where
two or more Ordinaries are joined in one Shield, and which are Subject to a
Charge.

Examples of ORDINARIES Joined together.
1. GUles on a Cheveron Argent, three Bars Gemelle Sable, born by Sir Barnham
Throgmorton Throgmorton.
of Clower-wall in Glocestershire, Knight and Baronet.

2. Sable, a Pile Argent Surmounted of a Cheveron Gules, by the Name of Dixon.
Dixon.


3. Argent on a Pile Azure, a Cheveron Counterchanged Argent, and Sable, born
by Sir John Otway Otway.
of Igmire, in the West riding of Yorkshire, Knight, Chancellor of Durham,
Vice Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Lancaster, and one of his Majesty's
Council learned in the Law.

4. Argent, two Bars Gules, on a Canton of the second, a Cross of the first,
engraving of blazon showing ordinaries joined together folio 70

Ordinaries joined together.
born by Thomas Broughton of Broughton Broughton.
in Staffordshire Esquire; Son and Heir of Sir Bryan Broughton, Knight and Baronet.

5. Sable on a Saltier Engrailed Argent, an Escocheon Or, charged with a Cross
Gules, by the Name of Morris. Morris.


6. Or, a Fess between two Cheverons Sable, born by John Lisle Lisle.
of Moxhul in Warwickshire Esquire.

7. Gules, two Bars and a Chief Indented Or born by Sir Thomas Hare Hare.
of Stow-Bardolph in Norfolk, Baronet.

8. Argent a Cheveron and Chief Azure.

9. Paly of six Argent and Gules, a Cheveron Or, born by Sir Edward Barkham B
arkha.
of West Acre in Norfolk, Baronet.

10. Barry of six pieces Or and Azure, a Bend Gules, by the Name of Gaunt.
Gaunt.


11. Argent a Pale and Chief Gules.

12. Gules a Saltier Engrailed Argent, and a Chief Vairy.

13. Checky Or and Azure, a Fess Gules, born by the Right Honorable Hugh Lord
Clifford, Clifford.
Baron of Chudleigh in Devonshire, Son and Heir of the Right Honorable Thomas
Lord Clifford deceased, late Lord High Treasurer of England, etc.

14. Per Pale Argent and Vert, a Cheveron Engrailed Counterchanged.

15. Topaz, a Saltier and Chief Ruby on a Canton Pearl, a Lion Rampant Saphir;
born by the Right Honorable Robert Bruce, Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin,
Viscount Bruce Bruce.
of Ampthil, Baron Bruce of Whorltone, Skeleton and Kinloss, Lord Lieutenant of
the Counties of Bedford and Huntington, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

16. Sable, a Cheveron within a Bordure Engrailed Argent.

17. Barry of six Or and Sable, an Escocheon, Argent.

18. Gyrony of four Or and Gules, a Saltier Engrailed Ermine.

19. Barry of six Argent and Gules, a Pale Ermine.

20. Or a Fess Azure surmounted by a Bend Gules, born by Sir Gervas Elwes Elwes.
of Stoke juxta Clare in Suffolk Baronet, and by Sir John Elwes of Gravehouse
in the Parish of Fulham in Middlesex, Knight.

21. Gules, a Fess and three Piles in Chief Wavey Argent, born by Sir
Justinian Isham Isham.
of Lamport in Northampton shire, Baronet.

22. Quarterly Topaz and Ruby, a Bend Vairy, born by the Right Honorable
Charles Sackvile Sackvile.
Earl of Dorset Earl of Dorset.
and Middlesex, Baron Bruckhurst and Cranfield, one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Bed Chamber, and Lord Leiutenant of Sussex, etc.

This Coat is also born by Colonel Thomas Sackvile of Selscombe in Sussex, Son
of Sir Thomas Sackvile of the said place, Knight of the Bath.

23. Quarterly Or and Gules a Bend Sable, born by Sir James Clavering Clavering
of Anwel in the Bishopric of Durham, Baronet.

Quarterly Argent and Gules, a Bend Sable, born by Tho. Widrington Widrington.
of Fenham in Northumberland Esquire.

Quarterly Sable and Or a Bend Argent, born by G^orge Laughton of Laugton
Laughton
in Lincolnshire Esquire.

24. Argent a Cross Gules and Chief Vert.

25. Or, a Bend Ermine Perforated through a Cheveron Gules.

CHAP. III.
Treats of Goat Armor formed of things Artificial, to wit, such as are made by
Man, and for his use, which shall be reduced under several Heads, as they
Relate to the use of Civil Life, as the Ensigns of Dignity, both Temporal and
Ecclesiastical; or of Professions both Liberal and Mechanical, or as they
Relate to Military Actions, as well for the Land as Sea.

CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS.
1. JVpiter a Scepter Royal in Pale, insigned with an Eye Sol.

The Eye betokens Providence in Government, being the Watchman of the Body,
and the Scepter is an Emblem of Justice.

engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 74

Civil Artificial things.


2. Luna a Mound, Saturn environed with a Circle, and ensigned with a Cross
Evallane Mars.

This as Guillim notes, is an Ensign Representing Sovereign Majesty and
Jurisdiction of a King, and therefore it is blazoned by the Planets.

By the roundness of the Mound, and insigning thereof with a Cross, is
signified, that Religion and the Faith of Christ ought to be received and
embraced throughout his Dominions.

3. Sol, a Cap of Maintenance Mars turned up Ermine.

This is called a Cap of Maintenance, for that Pope Julius the second sent such
an one with a Sword to King Henry the eighth, for he had lately before that
written a Book against Martin Luther; and after that, Pope Leo the Tenth gave
him the Title of Defender of the Faith.

4. Luna, a Mantle of Estate, Mars doubled Ermine, ouched Sol, garnished with
Strings fastened thereunto fretways dependant, and tasselled of the same.

The Mantle is a Robe of Estate peculiar to Monarchs, and free Estates.

These Arms do belong to the Town of Brecknock Town of Brecknock.
in Wales.

5. Jupiter; a Mace of Majesty in Bend Sol.

It is called a Mace of Majesty to distinguish it from a Mace born by a Common
Sergeant.

6. Pearl three Garters Buckled and nowed Saphir, garnished with Diamonds.

This Garter is worn by the Knights of the Garter.

7. Gules three Tassels Or, by the Name of Wooler. Wooler.


8. Saturn an Imperial Crown Sol.

Of Crowns I shall speak more in the Chapter of external Ornaments.

9. Gules three Ducal Crowns Or, on a Chief of the second as many Laurel
Leaves proper, born by Sir John Berkeahead Berkenhead.
Knight, deceased.

10. Pearl a Sword of Estate in Pale, the point erected Ruby, hilted, and
pomelled Topaz; the Scaberd enriched with precious Stones proper.

The manner of bearing this Sword varieth according to the several Estates and
Dignities of the Persons for whom they are born.

11. Or, a Cardinals Hat with Strings pendent and plated in true-love, the ends
meeting in base Gules.

Such Red Hats are worn by the Cardinals at Rome and other Catholic Countries.

12. Venus, a Staff in Pale Sol, and thereupon a Cross Pattee, Luna surmounted
off a Pall of the last, charged with 4. like Crosses fitched Saturn, edged and
stringed as the second. This Coat belongs to the Archiepiscopal See of
Canterbury, to whose place it appertains to Crown and Inaugurate the Kings of
England.

13. Vert, three Gem Rings Or, enriched with Turkasses proper.

Though Custom and Time has made the Ring a common Ornament for every
Mechanic Hand, yet right none should use and wear them, but such as either by
Blood, Wars, Learning, or Office and Dignity were made capable thereof.

14. Azure; a Bishops Crosier in Pale Erect Or. The Crosier was given to the
Bishops as an Emblem to fetch and draw the Souls of men to their Lord and
Master Jesus Christ.

15. Or, Six Annulets 3 2 and 1 Sable, by the Name of Lowther, Lowther.
and is born by Sir John Lowther of Lowther-Hall in Westmoreland Baronet.

By Sir William Lowther of Pontefract in the North Riding of Yorhshire, Knight.

By Anthony Lowther of Mask in Cleaveland, in the North Riding of Yorhshire,
Esquire.

By Henry Lowther of Cockermouth in Cumberland, Esquire,

Azure six Annulets, 3 2 and 1 Or, born by Sir Phillip Musgrave of Edenhall in
Cumberland, Knight and Baronet, Governor of Carlisle Garrison.

By Sir Edward Musgrave Musgrave.
of Hayton Castle in the said County Baronet.

By Sir Christopher Musgrave of Eden Hall in the said County Knight, second Son
to the said Sir Phillip.

By William Musgrave of Musgrave Hall in Penrith.

By William Musgrave of Clea, both of the said County, Esquires.

And by Edward Musgrave of Ashby in Westmorland, Esquire.

16. Argent a Cheveron between, three Annulets Gules, born by Thomas Goreing
Goreing.
of Kinston in Staffordshire Esquire, and by Lovet Goreing of the Inner Temple,
London, Gent.

The Charge of Annulets are born several ways, and of greater or lesser
quantities, as by these examples may appear.

Argent, three Annulets in Chief Gules.

Azure, five Annulets in Cross Or.

Barry of six Argent and Azure, over all three Annulets Or.

Per Fess Argent and Sable, six Annulets Counterchanged.

Gules on a Chief Indented Argent, three Annulets Sable.

17. Gules, ten Billets, 4, 3, 2 and 1. Or, by the Name of Cawdrey. Cawdrey.


If the number of Billets be ten, or under, then in the blazoning Name, the
quantity of them, but if above, then the Number is not expressed.

18. Diamond a Bend Engrailed between six Billets Pearl, born by the Right
Honorable William Lord Allington, Lord Allington.
Baron of VVymondley in the Kingdom of England, and Baron of Killard in
Ireland, Constable of his Majesty's Tower of London.

19. Gules 3 Pens Argent.

20. Ermine 3 Wheels Sable.

21. Argent, a Cross Gules in the first quarter, a Katherin Wheel of the
second.

This Wheel differs from the plain, which is of use for Carts and other
Carriages, it having Teeth set round it, and was much in use in the primitive
Age of the Church for the torturing Christians, and took it is Name St.
Katherin, that suffered Martyrdom on such a kind of Wheel.

22. Gules 3 Katherin Wheels Argent, on a Chief of the second a Bulls head
couped Sable, born by Sir Phillip Matthews of Edmonton in Middlesex Baronet,
and by Joachin Mathews of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex, Esquire.

23. Or, three Text Esses Sable.

24. Vert, two Organ Pipes in Saltier between four Crosses Pattee Argent.

It is said that Jubal the Son of Lamech was the first that found out Musical
Instruments.

25. Azure a Harp Or, stringed Argent, this is the Arms of Ireland, quartered
in his Majesty's Royal Achievement.

engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 81

Civil Artificial things.


Other Examples of CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS.
1. PEarl, a Maunch Diamond, born by Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Earl of
Huntington
Baron Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaulx, Moulins, Moules, Homet and Peverel, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

The word Maunch is derived from the Latin word Manica, which signifies the
Sleeve of a Garment.

2. Argent, a Cheveron between three Maunches Sable, born by Sir Edward Mauncel
Mauncell.
or Mergan in Glamorganshire, Baronet.

3. Or a Purse Overt Gules.

4. Gules a Cheveron between three Irish Broges or Shoes, Or.

5. Azure a Plough in Fess Argent, by the Name of Kroge. Kroge.


6. Gules three Scithes in Pale Barways Argent, by the Name of Kemple. Kemple.


7. Sable, a Cheveron between three Tuns Argent, born by the Company of
Vintners.

8. Argent three Fusils upon Slippers Gules.

They are called Fusils from fucus, which signifies a Spindle of Yarn. Pliny
says it was a fashion and custom at Rome, that when Maids were to be Wedded,
there attended upon them one with a Distaff with dressed Wool, as also with a
Spindle and Yarn upon it, to put them in mind that Housewifery and Wivery were
to go together.

9. Argent, three Weavers Shuttles Sable, tipped and furnished with their
Quills of Yarn or Thread Or, born by John Shuttleworth Shuttleworth.
of Newby Hall in Yorkshire, Gentleman.

10. Argent a Cheveron between three Carpenter Squares Sable, by the Name of
Atlow. Atlow.


11. Argent a Fess between three pair of Pincers Gules.

12. Gules a Cheveron between three Malletts Or, born by John Soame Soame.
of little Thurlow in Suffolk Esquire.

13. Or on a Fess Azure, three Hawks Bells of the first.

These sort of Bells are of great antiquity, being worn by the Hebrews
Highpriests on the Skirts of their upper Garments, in their Divine Worship, to
move the People to Attention. And the great Bells were invented to hang in
Churches, to call the People to Divine Service.

14. Sable three Bells Argent, by the Name of Porter. Porter.


15. Argent three Bugle, or Hunters Horns Sable stringed Gules and garnished
Or, born by Alan Bellingham Bellingham.
of Leaven in Westmoreland Esquire.

Argent three Bugle-hornes Sable, stringed Vert and Garnished Or, is born by
Humfrey Wyrley Wyrley.
of Hampstead Hall in Staffordshire Esquire, one of the Prothonotaries of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas.

16. Vert, fretty Or, born by Sir Will. Whitmore Whitmore.
of Apley in Shropshire, Baronet.

By William Whitmore of Balms in Middlesex Esquire.

Sable Fretty Or, born by Sir John Bellew of Bellews Town in the County of
Mead in Ireland, Knight.

17. Gules a Frett Argent, born by Sir Daniel Fleming Fleming.
of Ridale in Westmoreland Knight, and by Edward Fleming of Inslow in
Devonshire Esquire.

Sable a Frett Argent by the Name of Harington. Harington.


Gules a Frett Engrailed Ermine, by the Name of Eyneford. Eyneford.


18. Or Fretty Gules, a Canton Ermine, born by the Right Honorable Edward
Noel, Viscount Campden, Baron of Redlington and Elmington, and Earl of
Ganesborough, Earl of Ganesborough.
Lord Leiutenant of Rutlandshire:

And with a due difference, is born by the Honorable John Noel of Luffingham
in Rutlandshire Esquire, third Son of the Right Honorable Baptist Noel, Noel.
Viscount Campden, etc.

19. Argent, a Frett of eight pieces Gules, each charged in the midst with a
Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Hamilden. Hamilden


20. Argent Frette Gules semy de Castles of the second by the Name of Nechur.
Nechur.


21. Argent three Weels, their Hoopes upward Vert.

22. Or three Dice Sable, each charged with an Ace Argent, by the Name of Ambes
Ace.

There is no Fortune in the Dice, but all Ominous, for he that loses is
tormented, and he that wineth is enticed to play on until he is ensnared, and
it may be loose far more then he formerly won, besides the ill Accidents that
often attend, even to murder it self.

23. Ermine on a Cross quarter pierced Argent, four Ferdemolins Sable, born by
Sir Edmond Turner of Stoke Rochford in Lincolnshire, Knight. Turner.


24. Azure a Fess between three Chess-rooks Or, by the Name of Bodenham.
Bodenham


This is a thing used in the Play of Chests, being for the defense of all the
rest, and stands in the utmost Corner of the Chest Board, or Frontier Castle.

Other Examples of CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS.
1. SAble three Cups covered Argent, bore by Edmond Warcup of North More in
Oxfordshire, Warcup.
Esquire.

2. Argent, on a Chief Sable, three Cups Covered Or, born by Sir James Butler
Butler.
of Lincolns Inn, Knight, Steward of his Majesty's Palace and Marshalssea Court.

And by Nicolas Butler of Hailes in over Rawcliff in Lancashire, and of the
City of London, Doctor in Physic.

3. Gules a Fusil Argent.

4. Saphir, a Cheveron between three Lozenges Topaz, born by the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Clarendon, Earl of Clarendon.
Viscount Cornbury, and Baron Hide of Hendon, and by the Right Honorable Laure
Hide, engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 86

Civil Artificial things.
Earl of Rochester, Earl of Rochester.
first Lord Commissioner of his Majesty's Treasury, and one of the Lords of his
most Honorable Privy Council.

5. Gules Mascle Argent.

The Fusil is longer then the Lozenge, having its upper and lower parts more
acute and sharp then the other two colateral middle parts.

The Lozenge differs from the Fusil in that it is not sharp at the top and
bottom, but all the Lines of an equal length.

A Mascle is in form and shape like the Lozenge, but that it is voided as in
the Escocheon appears.

6. Argent a Cheveron between 3 Fusils Ermenois, born by Sir John Shaw Shaw.
of Eltham in Kent, Baronet, and by Mr Thomas Shaw of the City of London,
Merchant.

7. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Mascles of the Field, born by Rowland
Carleton Carleton.
of Ampthil in Bedfordshire, Gentleman.

8. Pearl three Lozenges in Fess Ruby, within a Bordure diamond, born by the
Right Honorable Charles Mountague, Montagne Earl (...) M^e^
Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevil, Baron of Kimbolton.

By the Right Honorable Edward Montague, Earl of Sandwich, Earl of Sandwich.
Viscount Montague of Hinchingbrook, and Baron of St. Neots.

By the Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague of Boughton.

By Edward Montague of Horton in Northamtonshire Esquire.

And by William Montague Esquire, Son and Heir of the Right Honorable William
Montague, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

9. Argent a Rundle.

The Rundle is a thing much used in Coat Armor, but by different Names, it
retaining one and the same shape, and the Names appropriated to it, does
declare the Color without naming it; and of these Rundles, there are nine
sorts, (viz.) Bezants whose Color is Or. Plates whose Color is Argent.
Torteauxes, whose Color is Gules. Hurts, whose Color is Azure. Pellets or
Ogresses, whose Color is Sable. Pomeis is Vert. Golpes is Purpure. Oranges is
Ten, and Guzes is Sanguine.

And of these three are the usual bearing either in a Field by themselves, or
on, or between any of the Ordinaries, as by the Examples in the Escocheon does
appear.

10. Or three Torteauxes, born by Sir William Courteney Courteney.
of Powderham Castle in Devonshire Baronet.

And by John Courteney of Knowstone in the said County, Esquire.

11. Argent, three Torteauxes in Bend, Cottized Sable by the Name of Ince. Ince.


12. Or, on a Fess Sable three Plates, born by Sir John Bramston Bramston.
of Screens in Essex, Knight of the Bath, and by Francis Bramston of Sergeant
Inn London, Sergeant at Law, Brother to the said Sir John.

13. Sable, two Bars Argent in Chief, three Plates, born by Sir Edward
Hungerford Hungerford.
of Farley Castle in Hampshire, Knight of the Bath.

14. Ardent Six Plates, three, two and one.

15. Or, on a Pale Azure. 3. Bezants born by John Wildman of Beaucot alias
Becket in Berkshire, Esquire.

16. Argent a Cross Sable between four Pellets, born by Sir Robert Clayton
Clayton.
of the City of London, Knight and Alderman, late Lord Mayor thereof.

17. Sable ten Plates, four, three, two and one, on a Chief Argent, a Lion
Passant Sable, born by Sir John Bridgman Bridgman
of Castle Bromwick in Warwickshire, Baronet, Son and Heir of the Right
Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgman, Knight and Baronet deceased, late Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England.

By Orlando Bridgman of Within-Brook in Warwickshire Esquire, second Son of the
said Sir Orlando.

And by William Bridgman of York-buildings in the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields in Middlesex Esquire.

18. Gules on a Cheveron Or three Crosses Form Fitche Sable, between as many
Bezants, born by Erasmus Smith Smith.
alias Herez of St. Jones in the Parish of Clarkenwel in Middlesex Esquire, Son
of Sir Roger Smith of Edmonthorp in Leicestershire, Knight, deceased.

19. Argent, three Bars Sable in Chief, as many Torteauxes, all within a
Bordure Ermine, born by Sir Thomas Bludworth Bludworth
of Leather-head in Surrey Knight, Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Bludworth of the
said place, and of the City of London, Knight, Alderman and Lord Mayor, Anno
1666.

engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 91

Military things.


Having treated of CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS, next comes in Order Military things
as well for Offense as Defense.

Examples of MILITARY THINGS.
1. ARgent a Tower triple Tower'd Gules, chained Transverse the Port Or.

Castles and Towers are places of strength, and commonly seated on a lofty
Assent, and in places of strength both by Nature and Art, and do serve for
places of refuge and retreat, rather then for the valorous to perform any Noble
exploit in, and many times Castles and Towers have proved very pernicious to
those that have reposed trust in their safety.

2. Or a Tower Sable, having a Scaling Ladder raised against it in Bend
Sinister Argent.

3. Argent a Tower tripple Tower'd Sable, on a Mount proper, born by Sir
Richard Chiverton Chiverton
of London Knight and Alderman.

4. Or a Castle tripple Tower Gules, the Ports Displayed of the Field, leaved
Argent.

Mr. Guillim observes that when the Architecture or Masonry extends all over
the Field, from one side to the other, it must be blazoned a Castle.

5. Argent a Bridge of three Arches in Fess Gules masoned Sable, the streams
transfluent proper, a Fane Argent, by the Name of Trowbridge. Trowbridg.


6. Sable a Cheveron between three Tents Argent, by the Name of Tenton. Tenton.


Tents and Tabernacles were the Chief Habitation of our Forefathers, and such
kind of Habitations were best for their convenience for the often removing
their Seat, for the refreshing their Cattle with change of Pastures. And this
Custom is at this day observed by the Tartarians, and some other of the Eastern
People:

7. Gules three Single Arches Argent, the Capitals and Pedestals Or.

8. Azure three Banners disvelloped, or displayed in Bend Or.

Banners are very useful for every Band of Foot, or Troop of Horse to gather
their Company together, each Banner having some particular mark of distinction
for their better knowledge thereof.

9. Ermine a Cross Bow bend in Pale Gules, by the Name of Arblaster. Arblaster.


The Cross Bow is said to be first devised by the Grecians.

10. Gules a Cheveron Engrailed between three Trumpets Argent.

The Trumpet was made by the immediate direction and command of God to Moses,
and was to be used for the assembly of the Congregation, and for the departure
of the Camp. And the sound of the Trumpet is but as the loud voice of the
General, and although the Trumpeter fights not, yet his sounding does much
excite and encourage the Soldiers to valor.

11. Gules a Drum in Fess between three Drumsticks erected Argent.

This loud sounding Instrument is of like use with the Trumpet, and used by
many Nations.

Zizca that renowned Captain of the Bohemians being sick to Death, desired his
Soldiers, when he was dead, to flea him, and make a Drum of his Skin, asuring
them that when their Enemies should hear the sound thereof they would put them
to flight.

12. Sable, a Beacon fired Or, the flame proper.

Upon the Invasion of an Enemy the Beacons are set on fire, which presently
gives an Alarm to the whole Country, and such Beacons are placed upon high
Hills, as in Kent, Essex, and other Frontier Counties of England, for the like
occasion when need requires.

13. Argent a Culvering dismounted in Fess Sable, by the Name of Leigh. Leigh.


14. Azure three Murdering Chain shots Or.

15. Pearl three Battering Rams barways proper, headed Saphir, Armed and
Garnished Topaz, by the Name of Be rtie, and is born by the Right Honorable
Robert Earl of Lindsey, B^rtie. Earl of Abington.
Baron Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Lord Leiutenant
of Lincolnshire, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.

Also by his Lordships Brother the Right Honorable James Lord Bertie, Barron
Norris of Rycot, Earl of Lindsey.
Earl of Abington, and Lord Leiutenant of Oxfordshire.

This Coat with a due difference, is born by the Honorable Captain Peregrin
Bertie of Waldershire in Kent.

By the Honorable Captain Richard Bertie of Creton in Lincolnshire. And by the
Honorable Captain Charles Bertie of Vffington in Lincolnshire, Brothers of the
Right Honorable Robert Earl of Lindsey aforesaid.

The Battering Ram was an Instrument much used by the Romans at their besieging
Cities, or holds with purpose to surprise them; and such an Engine did Titus
Vespatianus Erect against Jerusalem, when he took it.

16. Azure three Lances in Bend Or.

Guillim observes that it was the custom of the Romans, before they waged War,
after a denial of restitution of things unjustly taken, or Satisfaction for
injuries offered, that their King at Arms should amongst other Ceremonies
throw a Spear headed with Iron, and imbrued with blood, and scorched with fire
into the soil of that People, against whom they intended Wars, to declare to
them that they would with Fire and Force severely punish them for injuries done
them.

17. Ruby three Clarions Topaz, born by the Right Honorable John Earl of Bath,
Earl of Bath.
Viscount Greenvile of Landsdown, Baron Greenvile of Kilhampton and Bidiford,
Lord Leiutenant of Cornwall, Governor of Plymouth, Lord Warden of the
Stanneries, Steward of the Duchy, Groom of the Stool, first Gent. of his
Majesty's Bed Chamber, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, etc.

The Clarion by some is said to be a rest for Lances, and by others a Musical
Instrument used in Battle and Tournaments like unto Trumpets, for in many old
descriptions of Tiltings, we find Knights to come in with Clarions.

18. Sable three Scaling Ladders in Bend Argent, by the Name of Shipstow.
Shipstow.


19. Argent a Sweep Azure, charged with a Ston Or, by the Name of Magnal.
Magnal.


This Instrument was used to cast Stones into the Towns, or Fortifications of
the Enemies.

engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 97

Military things.


Other Examples of MILITARY THINGS.
1. ERmine three Long Bows in Pale Bent Gules, by the Name of Bows. Bows.


2. Gules three Arrows Or, feathered and headed Argent, born by Sir Edward
Hales of Tunstal in Kent, Baronet.

By Sir Robert Hales Hales.
of Beakesborn in the said County Baronet.

And by Sir John Hales of Coventry in Warwickshire Baronet.

3. Sable a Cheveron Engrailed between three Arrows Argent, born by Sir Humfrey
Foster Foster.
of Aldermaston in Bark-shire, Baronet.

4. Saphir a Cross between 4 Pheons Topaz, born by the Right Honorable Richard
Jones Viscount and Earl of Ranelaugh. Earl of Ranelaugh.


5. Vert on a Cheveron Argent, three barbed Arrow-head Sable, born by Sir
Charles Keymis Keymis.
of Kaeven Mabley in Glamorgan-shire, Baronet.

The Bow and Arrows were Military Instruments, much used in former Ages, before
the Invention of Guns by the English, and great Execution was done thereby. And
it was the custom of the Persians when they went to war, for every one to put
an Arrow into a Chest for that purpose, placed before the Throne of their King,
and at their return, for every one to take forth an Arrow, and by those
remaining, the number of the slain did the better appear.

6. Argent three Spears heads Gules, a Chief Azure by the Name of Reyce. Reyce.


7. Sable a Cheveron between three Spears heads Argent, the points embrewed
proper by the Name of Morgan. Morgan.


8. Argent a Sword erected in Pale Sable, by the Name de Dymock. Dymock.


The Sword is a Weapon fitted for Execution, and has been used in all Ages.

9. Gules three Swords conjoined at the Pomels in Fess; their points extended
into the Corners of the Escocheon Argent, by the Name of Stapleton. Stapleton.


10. Azure three Swords, one in Pale with the Point upwards, Surmounted of the
other two, placed Saltier ways, with the points downwards Argent, by the Name
of Norton. Norton.


11. Sable three Swords, one in Pale, two with their points downwards, and the
middlemost upwards Argent by the Name of Rawlins. Rawlins.


12. Gules three Swords Barways Argent, the Hilts and Powels Or, born by
Chaloner Chute Chute.
of the Vine in Hampshire, Esquire.

13. Diamond, three Swords with their Points downwards, meeting in the middle
base point Pearl hilted Topaz, born by the Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Wiltshire, Earl of Wiltshire. Son and Heir to the most Honorable Charles
Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire,
and Baron St. John of Basing, etc.

14. Azure a Curtelasse in Bend Argent garnished Or, by the Name of Tatnal.
Tatnal.


15. Sable three Battle Axes Argent, born by John Hall Hall.
of Bradford in Wiltshire, Esquire.

16. Argent a Galley under full Sail Azure.

The first Ship that we read of was made by Noah, for the preservation and
increase of all living Creatures in the time of the Deluge, to wit the Ark, but
Jason first made the Galley, which Sesostris King of Egypt used after him.

17. Azure three Pieces of Masts Couped with their tops Argent.

18. Gules, a Ruther or Helm of a Ship Argent.

19. Vert three Sails Argent, by the Name of Cavel. Cavel.


20. Gules, an Anchor in Pale Argent, the Timber or Cross piece Or, by the Name
of Goodreed. Goodreed


The Anchor signifies succor in extremity.

engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 101

Military things.


Other Examples of MILITARY THINGS.
1. ARgent three Escocheons or Shields Sable by the Name of Lowdham. Lowdham.


2. Or three Escocheons barry of six Verry and Gules, by the Name of
Mounchensey. Mounchensey.


3. Argent a close Helmet Gules, garnished Or, by the Name of Kingsley.
Kingsley.


It was the custom of the Romans in their Wars, to cover the Head pieces of
their light harnessed Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot, with the skins of Bears;
and the Grecians used to cover their Heads with the skins of Otters, instead of
Hemets, and both to the end that they should appear more terrible and gashly to
their Enemies, and by such a surprise they might the better gain the Victory.

4. Azure two Bars Argent, between three Close Helmets Or, born by Gabriel
Armiger Armiger.
of North Creake in Norfolk, and of the Inner Temple London, Esquire.

5. Argent, three Helmets with their Bevers open Sable, by the Name of Miniet.
Miniet.


6. Azure a Morion proper. This is the Morion now in use for the Foot Sold^ers.

7. Pearl a Cheveron Ruby between three Morions or Steel Caps Saphir, born by
the Right Honorable Francis Lord Brudenel, Brudenel.
Son and Heir to the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Cardigan, Baron Brudnel of
Stonton, etc.

8. Saphir three left hand Gaunlets Topaz, born by the Right Honorable Charles
Fane Fane.
Earl of Westmoreland, Baron de Spencer and Burgwash, whose second Son is the
Honorable Sir Francis Fane of Fulbeck in Westmoreland Knight of the Bath.

9. Gules three Dexter Arms Vambraced proper, by the Name of Armstrong.
Armstrong.


10. Argent on a Pile Azure, three Dexter Gauntlets of the Field, born by
Thomas Joll ff Jolliff.
of Costen Hall in Worcestershire Esquire, and by William Jolliff of Craswel
Castle in Staffordshire, Esquire.

11. Ruby three Legs Armed proper, conjoined in Fess at the upper part of the
Thigh flexed in triangle, garnished and spotted Topaz. This is the Arms of the
Isle of Man, The Isle of Man.
and is quartered by the Right Honorable the Earl of Derby.

12. Vert a Bar Company Argent and Azure, between three Curasses, or
Brest-Plates of Armor of the second, on a Chief of the same, as many
Fermailes or Buckles, as the third by the Name of Baldberny of Scotland.

13. Argent three Saddles with Stirrups Gules.

14. Or, three Chaplets Vert, by the Name of Richardson.

Guillim observes that Chaplets were by the Romans, given as a Reward of
Honor for some Military Services performed, and they were of several sorts,
some were made of Laurel, others of Oaken Leaves, Palm, Ivy, Olive, and some
of Gold, and some of Silver, also some of Roses, Violets and such like Flowers.

15. Argent on a Cheveron Sable, five Horseshoes Or, born by Sir Nicholas
Crispe Crispe.
of Hamersmith in Middlesex, Baronet.

16. Argent, a Shackbolt Sable, by the Name of Newthal. Nevvthal.


17. Gules, three Waterbougets Argent, by the Name of Roos. Roos.


18. Gules, a Fess between three Waterbougets Ermine, born by Sir Thomas Meers
Meers.
of Lincoln Knight, one of the Commissioners of the Admiralty.

19. Argent, three Waterbougets Azure.

This kind of Waterbouget was anciently used in Cout Armor.

20. Vert, a Chevalier Armed at all points a Cape a pee Brandishing his Sword
aloft Argent, garnished Or, mounted on a Barded Courier, furnished throughout
as the second, garnished as the third.

CHAP. IV.
Treats of Common Charges in Coat Armor whereof some are Natural, and merely
formal as Angels, and Spirits, and others both formal and material as the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, also such Natures as are sublinar, as all kinds of Minerals
which have Life after a sort as Vegetables, and Sensitive Creatures which have
perfect Life.

COmmon Charges are things Natural, or Artificial; those Artificial are already
handled. Things Natural are Formal, or Material, and are of that great variety
that it cannot be expected in so small a Volumn to pass through all the
particulars of them, but only give some examples that may serve to instruct the
Reader to Blazon a Coat of the like charge.

Celestials are born single, or upon, or between any of the Honorable
Ordinaries, and then three are the usual number.

Examples of CELESTIALS.
1. MArs an Angel standing direct with his hands conjoined and elevated upon
his breast habited in a long Robe close girt Luna. his Wings displayed as
prepared to fly Sol.

Angels are incorporeal Essences of a Spiritual Nature void of all material
substances. They are the M^ssengers by whom God has manifested his Will and
Power to his Elect, and in Scripture they are said to be ministering Spirits.

2. Luna, on a chief Jupiter a Cherub displayed Sol.

The Cherubins were drawn with Wings before the place where the Israelites
prayed engraving of blazon showing celestial bodies folio 106

Coelestialls.
manifesting the great speed when they went about the Lords business.

3. Or a Sphere Azure beautified, and replenished with variety of Celestial
Bodies encompassing the Terrestrial Globe all proper.

These were the Ornaments wherewith the shield of Achilles was garnished.

4. Azure a Star of sixteen points Argent born by John Huitson of Cleasby in
Yorkshire Esquire, one of the Captains of his Majesty's Company of Foot Guards.

5. Sable a Fess Wavey between the Pole Stars Artick and Artartick Argent, born
by Sir Francis Drake Drake.
of Buckland Monachorum in Devonshire Bar! Descendant of the famous Sir Francis
Drake Knight that sailed about the World, making great discoveries thereof.

A Star commonly consists of six Points, or Rays, and then in the Blazoning
the number needs not be expressed; but if of more, then name of what number as in
the former examples.

Stars were Created by God to give light, and with their influences to be
assistant to the Sun and Moon in the Procreation, Production, and
Fructification of Seeds Plants and Herbs; as also for the designation and
foreshewing of Times and Seasons as the Sun and Moon were.

Stars are sometime peirced, and other whiles charged, and when peirced the
peircing is round.

6. Pearl, a Cheveron between three Stars Diamond, born by the Right Honorable
Charles Lord Viscount Mordaunt of Aveland, Lord Mordaunt.
and Baron of Rygate.

7. Saphir, three Stars and a Chief Wavey Topaz born by the Right Honorable
Charles Bodvel, Lord Bodmyn.
Viscount Bodmyn Grandson and Heir to the Right Honorable John Lord Robarts,
Baron of Truro, Viscount Bodmyn, Earl of Radnor, and Lord President of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel. And is also born by the Honorable
Hender, and Francis Robarts Robarts.
Esquires, Sons of the Right Honorable John Earl of Radnor, etc.

8. Gules, a Blazing Star, or Comet streaming in Bend proper.

The Comets have been observed to Prognosticate dreadful events of things to
come, as Pestilence, Famine, War and the like.

Sometimes the stream is born upwards as it was before the great Pestilence in
1665, but most commonly it is born downwards.

9. Argent, a Cheveron Sable between three Flames of Fire proper.

Fire in the Scripture is often times taken for a special token of Gods favor,
and that he is pleased with the Sacrifices that are done unto him, and Fire
betokens zeal. Some Writers affirm that none of the Mechanical Trades were
found out before they had Fire; but afterward daily was put in practice some
new invention or other, yet as it is a good Servant so it is (as also Water) a
bad Master.

10. Azure, a Crescent encircled within an Orl of Stars Or, a Border of the
Second, born by Thomas Burton Burton.
of London Esquire.

11. Azure a Sun in his Glory, by the name of Saint Clear. St. Clear.


The Sun is a glorious Body, the Fountain of Light, and the production of
Fruits, Plants, and all the Splendour that the Moon has she borrows from him,
and between both these there is a great conformity.

12. Gules a Chief Argent on the lower part thereof a Cloud, the Suns
resplendent Rays issuing thereout proper, by the name of Lesone. Lesone.


13. Azure one Raye of the Sun issuing out of the dexter corner of the
Escocheon Bendwayes proper by the name of Aldam. Aldam.


14. Or a Sun Eclipsed Sable.

The Suns Eclipse is occasioned by the interposition of the Moon betwixt it and
the Earth.

15. Gules an Increscent Or by the name of Descus. Descus.


This is the State of the Moon from her entrance into her first quarter, in
which time she is more and more illuminated until she has filled her Circle.

16. Gules, a Moon in her Complement Or Illustrated with all her Light proper
which is sufficient without naming the color which is Argent.

The Moon is the Mistress by which all moist, mutable, and inconstant things
are ruled, as a Woman, the Sea, Rivers, and Fountains The Ebbing and Flowing of
the Sea following the Moons motion.

17. Azure, a Moon decressent proper, by the name of De la Luna. De la Luna.


This is the state of the Moon in her Wain, the Horns must always be turned
toward the left hand of the Escocheon, as that in her Complement is toward
the right.

18. Argent, a Moon in her detriment or Eclipse Sable.

The Moon is eclipsed always in her full State, and is so occasioned by the
interposition of the Earth betwixt her and the Sun.

19. Azure, a Crescent Argent, born by Jacob Lucy Lucy.
of London Esquire.

20. Azure, three Crescents Or, born by Robert Rither, or Rider Rider.
of Scarcraft in Yorkshire Esquire. And by Thomas and William Rider of Bednal
Green in Middlesex Esquire.

Sable, three Crescents Argent by the name of Glove. Glove.


Gules, three Crescents Argent by the name of Perpoint. Perpoint.


Gules, the Crescents Ermine by the name of Fleming. Fleming.


Gules, three Crescents Or, by the name of Monnings. Monnings.


21. Pearl, a Fess between three Crescents Diamond born by the Right Honorable
Edward Henry Lee Earl of Litchfield, Earl of Litchfield.
Viscount, Quarenton, and Baron Spilsbury.

22. Diamond, a Fese Ermine between three Crescents Topaz, Coventry.
born by the Right Honorable George Coventry Baron of Alesborough in
Worcestershire, etc.

And by the Honorable Henry Coventry Esquire, Son to the Right Honorable
Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England.

23. Azure, a Fess Nebule between three Crescents Ermine born by Hum, Weld Weld.
of Lulworth Castle in Dorsetshire Esquire Governor of His Majesty's Isle and
Castle of Portland, and Sands Foot.

24. Gules, a Star issuing from between the Horns of a Crescent Argent.

Other Examples of Crescents.
OR on a Chief Indented Sable, three Crescents Argent, by the name of Harvey.
Harvey.


Sable, a Cross engrailed between four Crescents Argent by the name of Barnham.
Barnham.


Per Pale Sable and Argent, three Crescents counter-changed by the name of
Topcliff. Topcliff.


engraving of blazon showing celestial bodies folio 113

Coelestialls.


Barry of six Ermine and Gules, three Crescents Sable, by the Name of
Watterton. Watterton.


Or, five Crescents, one, three, one, by the Name of Hamond Hamond.
of Hampshire.

Argent six Crescents, three, two, one Sable, by the Name of Blare. Blare.


Per Pale Argent and Sable, six Crescents Counterchanged by the Name of,
Wickhalse Wickhalse.
of Devonshire.

Other Examples of CELESTIALS.
1. ERmine, a Mullet of six Points pierced Gules, by the Name of Hussenhul.
Hussenhul


Meteors are an imperfect kind of mixture engendered in the Airy Region of a
certain attracted fume drawn up by the operation of the Sun and Stars, and is
of a hot quality, which at length breaks into Fire, and so loses or wastes
it self, and such are Mullets or Flaming Stars.

Anciently Mullets were born of six Points, as in this Example, but now usually
of five.

2. Per Cheveron Or and Vert, three Mullets Counterchanged by the Name of
Hothe. Hothe.


3. Sable six Mullets, three, two, one Argent, by the Name of Bonvile. Bonvile.


Azure, six Mullets, three, two, one Or, by the Name of Welsh. Welsh.


4. Gules, on a Chief Argent, two Mullets Sable, Bacon.
born by Sir Edmond Bacon of Redgrave Hall in Suffolk Baronet.

By Sir Henry Bacon of Lounde in Lovingland in Suffolk Baronet.

By Sir Nicolas Bacon of Shrubland Hall in Codenham in the said County, Knight
of the Bath.

Pearl on a Chief Ruby, 2 Mullets pierced Topaz, born by the Right Honorable
Oliver Saint John Earl of Bullingbrook, Earl of Bullingbrook.
etc.

St. John:
And by Sir Walter Saint John of Lydiard Tregos in Wiltshire, and of Battersey
in Surrey Baronet.

5. Azure on a Cross Argent, five Mullets Gules born by Sir Ralph Verney of
Middle-Claydon in Buckingham-shire, Verney.
Knight and Baronet.

6. Argent two Bars between three Mullets of six points pierced Sable, born by
Phillip Dougty of York Buildings in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in
Middlesex Esquire. Doughty.


7. Per Bend Argent and Sable, three Mullets of six points in Bend
Counter-changed.

8. Argent, three Mullets pierced Sable, by the Name of Wollaston. Wollaston


Azure, three Mullets pierced Or, by the Name of Whittington Whittington.
of Lincolnshire.

Azure, three Mullets Or, by the Name of Grundin. Grundin.


Or, three Mullets Sable, by the Name of Pelton. Pelton.


Sable, three Mullets Argent, by the Name of Puliston. Puliston.


Gules, three Mullets Argent, by the Name of Hansard Hansard.
of Lincolnshire.

9. Sable, on a Bend Ardent, three Mullets Gules, born by Francis Glisson,
Doctor in Physic. G isson.


10. Azure, a Cheveron between three Mullets Or, Chetwynd
born by Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre in Staffordshire Esquire.

11. Or, a Cheveron between three Mullets pierced Sable, born by Thomas Davies
of Crissing-Temple in Essex Esquire. Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Davies of London,
Davies.
Knight and Alderman deceased.

12. Gules, a Fess between six Mullets Argent, born by Sir Denny Ashburnham of
Broomhal in Sussex Baronet, and by (...) Ashburnham Ashburnham.
of Ashburnham in the said County Esquire.

13. Argent, a Mullet Sable, on a Chief Gules, a Flower de lis Or, born by
William Rogers of Castle-Hale in the Parish of Panswick in Gloucestershire.
Rogers.


Other Examples of Mullets.
PEr Fess Or and Azure, a Mullet of eight points Counterchanged by the Name of
Scotto. Scotto.


Azure, three Mullets and a Chief indented Or, by the Name of Bright. Bright.


Azure, a Crescent between three Mullets Argent, by the Name of Minshal.
Minshal.


Per Pale Argent and Gules, three Mullets, Counterchanged by the Name of
Langford. Langford.


Per Fess Indented Gules and Or, three Mullets Counterchanged by the Name of
Eglington. Eglington


14. Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale Or, inflamed on both ends proper,
shafted Salterwise, and Winged Fess ways Argent.

15. Bar Nebule Or and Sable, born by the Name of Blunt. Blunt.


16. Argent, a Rainbow of diverse colors proper.

Examples of VEGETABLES: Under which Head all Trees, Flowers, Plants, Leaves
and Fruits are or may be comprised.
1. OR on a Mount in Base, a Pear Tree fruited Proper, by the Name of Pyrton.
Pyrton.


Argent, on a Mount in Base, a Pine Apple Tree fruited, by the Name of Pine.
Pine.


Vegetables have in them a living Power of Growing, Budding, Leasing, Blosoming
engraving of blazon showing plants folio 118

Vegelables.
and Fractifying, as Trees, Plants, Herbs, Grass, etc. and of ^hes^ some on
Trunks or solid Bodies, and some upon Flexible Stocks; some again grow upon a
single Stem, as commonly all Tr^e^ do, and some upon several Stems, as Shrubs,
Roses, and the like.

2. Gules, the Stem or Trunck of a Tree Eradicated, as also couped in Pale,
sprouting out two Branches Ardent, born by William Borough of Borough Borough
in Leicestershire, Gentleman.

3. Azure a Limb of a Tree Raguled and Trunked in Bend Argent.

4. Argent, three Stocks or Stumps of Trees, couped and eradicated Sable, by
the Name of Retowre. Retowre.


5. Gules, three Woodbine Leaves Pendant Or.

The Woodbine is a loving and amorous Plant, embracing all that grows near
it, but without hurting of that which it loves, and is contrary to the Ivy
(which is a Type of Lust rather then Love) for it injureth that which it most
embraces.

6. Sable, three Laurel Leaves slipped Or.

The Laurel was in Ancient times thought to be a remedy against Poison,
Lightning and the like, and in War used as a Token of Peace and Quietness.

7. Argent, three Woodbine Leaves Bend ways, two and one proper, by the Name of
Theme. Theme.


8. Or, three Holly Leaves Barrways, two and one, their Stalks toward the
Dexter part of the Escocheon proper, by the Name of Arnest. Arnest.


9. Vert, five Figg Leaves in Saltier.

10. Topaz, two Bars Ruby, each charged with three Trefoyles slipped of the
first, born by the Right Honorable Roger Palmer Earl of Castlemain, Earl of
Castlemain
and Baron of Limberick in Ireland.

11. Azure, three Quaterfoyls Argent born by Sir Anthony Vincent Vincent.
of Stoke-Dabernon in Surrey, Baronet.

As also by Samuel Vincent of Buckingham House in Norfolk Esquire.

12. Argent on a Cheveron Sable, three Quaterfoiles Or, born by N. Air Air.
of Wilton in Wiltshire, Gentleman.

13. Argent, three Cinquefoils Gules, born by Sir Thomas Darcy Darcy.
of St. Clerrs Hall in St. Oseth in Essex, Baronet.

14. Argent, three Cinquefoyls Gules, each charged with five Annulets Or, born
by Sir Robert Southwel Southwel.
of Kingsweston in Glocestershire Knight.

15. Or, a Cheveron between three Cinquefoyls Gules, born by the Right
Honorable Sir Thomas Chicheley Chicheley
of Wimpley in Cambridgshire Knight, Master of the Ordinance, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Anno 1681.

16. Argent on a Chief Gules, three Cinquefoyls of the Field, born by Sir
Thomas Bellot of Moreton in Cheshire, Bellet.
Baronet.

17. Saphir, a Cinquefoyl Ermine within a Bordure Topaz, born by the Right
Honorable Jacob Lord Astley, Lord Astley.
Baron of Reading, etc.

And is also the Coat of Sir Jacob Astley of Melton-Constable in Norfolk,
Baronet.

18. Argent, a Fess Engrailed between three Cinquefoyls within a Border Sable,
born by Tho. Foley Foley.
of Kidderminster in Worcestershire, Esquire. By Paul Foley of Stoak Court in
Herefordshire Esquire; and by Phillip Foley of Prestwood in Staffordshire
Esquire, Sons of Tho. Foley of Witley, of Court in Worcestershire, Esquire.

These Charges, as also Fruits, Flowers, etc. are born on, or between, any of
the Ordinaries.

Examples of FRUITS and FLOWERS.
1. ARgent, a Pomegranate in Pale slipped Prope.

This Fruit is esteemed very good in Physic, whose juice is used for the
allaying the heat of Burning or Feavorish Agnes.

2. Azure, three Pears Or, by the Name of Stukeley. Stukeley.


3. Gules, a Cheveron Ermine between three Pine Apples erected Or, by the Name
of Pine. Pine.


Under this head may be comprehended all other kind of Fruit.

4. Azure, a Garb or Wheat-sheafe Or, born by Sir Thomas Grosvenour Grosvenour.
of Egton in Cheshire, Baronet.

engraving of blazon showing fruits and flowers folio 122

Fruits, and Flowers.


Azure, a Garb Argent, by the Name of Holdesheafe. Holdesheafe.


5. Sable, three Garbs Or, born by William Stych Stych.
of Newbury in the Parish of Barkin in Essex Esquire.

Argent, three Garbs Sable, by the Name of Wanting. Wanting.


6. Azure, seven Garbs Sable, four, two and one Or, born by Sir Thomas Doleman
of Shaw in Bark-shire Knight, Dolman.
one of the Clerks of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Father of
Sir Humfrey Doleman, Knight.

7. Argent, on a Cheveron between three Garbs Gules, as many Bezants, born by
Tobias Eden Eden.
of the Inner Temple, London Esquire.

Azure, a Cheveron between three Garbs Or, born by the Right Honorable
Christopher Lord Hatton, Lord Hatton.
Governor of the Isle of Jarsey.

And by Mr. Roger Hatton of London, Merchant.

8. Azure, three Ears of Guiny Wheat couped and bladed Or, by the Name of
Grandgorge. Grandgorge.


9. Saphir, a Flower de lis Pearl, born by the Right Honorable George Earl of
Bristol, Bristol.
Baron Digby of Sherbourn, and by the Right Honorable Simon Lord Digby, Ld.
Digny.
Baron of Geashill in Ireland.

Or, a Flower de lis Azure, born by Sir William Portman Portman.
of Orchard in Somersetshire, Knight of the Bath, and Baronet.

Azure, a Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Stepkin. Stepkin.


Argent, a Flower de lis Gules, born by John Morden Morden.
of London Merchant.

Gules, a Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Palford. Palford.


Gules, a Flower de lis Argent, by the Name of Waldenfield. Waldenfield.


Vert, a Flower de lis Argent, by the Name of Fowk. Fovvk.


10. Pearl, a Cheveron Ruby between three Flower de lis Saphir, born by the
Right Honorable Thomas Lord Viscount Faulconberg, Lord Viscount Faulconberg.
Baron of Yarum, Lord Leiutenant of the North Riding of Yorkshire, and one of
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

And by the Right Honorable John Lord Belasis, Ld. Bellasis
Baron of Worlaby, etc.

Or, a Cheveron between three Flower de lis Sable, born by the Right Honorable
Evelyn Lord Viscount Fanshaw, Fanshaw.
his Majesty's Remembrancer of his Court of Exchequer, etc.

By the Honorable Henry Fanshaw of Dengy-hall in Essex Esquire: And by the
Honorable Charles Fanshaw of Dengyhall aforesaid Esquire, his Majesty's Envoy
extraordinary in Portugal, Sons of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Viscount
Fanshaw. deceased.

11. Topaz on a Fess Ruby, three Flower de lis of the Field, born by the Right
Honorable Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex, Earl of Sussex,
and Lord Dacres of Giles-land, etc.

Argent, on a Fess Gules three Flower de lis Or, born by Gervase Disny of
Norton-Desney Disney.
in Lincolnshire, Esquire.

12. Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first quarter a Flower de lis Argent, born
by Elias Ashmole Ashmole.
of the Middle Temple, London Esquire.

13. Sable a Fess Dauncette Or, in chief three Flower de lis Argent, born by
William Feak of Stafford in Staffordshire, Feak.
Gentleman.

14. Sable, three Lozenges Argent, on a chief Or, as many Flower de lis Gules,
born by Sir Nicholas Pedley Pedley.
of Abbotsley, and Tetsworth in Huntingtonshire, Knight.

15. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Columbines slipped proper by the
name of Hall. Hall.


16. Sable on a Cross between four Flower de lis Argent, five Pheons Azure born
by Caleb Banks of the Friars in Aylesford in Kent Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir
John Banks Banks.
of the said place Barronet.

17. Or on a Bend Engrailed between six Roses Gules, born by Edmond Warner of
Warner-Hall in Essex Esquire: And by John Warner Warner.
of Brokenthwait in the Parish of Kirby-overbow in Yorkshire Esquire, descended
from the Warners of Warners-Hall aforesaid.

18. Gules, two Swords with their points erected in Saltier proper, Hilts and
Pomels Or, between three Roses Argent, viz. one in Chief, and two in Fess, born
by Patrick Trant Trant.
of Saint Giles in the Fields in Middlesex Esquire.

19. Or, three Flower de lis Azure, a Bordure Gules charged with eight Roses
Argent, born by Sir Walter Clarges Clarges.
of Saint M rtins in the Field Baronet.

20. Sable, on a Cheveron Argent, three Roses Gules, seeded and Barbed proper,
in the dexter chief a Helmet close Bevered of the Second, born by Robert Rose
Rose.
of Hasland in Derbyshire, Gentleman.

Under this head all other Flowers may be comprised; some few more examples I
have here set down.

Argent, three Roses Gules, by the name of Young. Young.


Gules, three Flower de lis Argent, by the name of Wisemale. Wisemale.


Azure, a Vine with Fruit and Leaves all Or.

Per Pale, Ermine and Gules, a Rose Counter-changed, by the name of
Nightingale. Nightingale.


Sable, three Roses Argent, seeded Or, by the name of Powel. Powel.


Argent, six Roses 3, 2, and 1, Gules, by the name of Palton. Palton.


Argent, ten Roses 4, 3, 2, 1, Gules by the name of Payens. Payens.


Gules, three Flower de lis Argent, by the name of Mondeford. Mondeford


Or, five Flower de lis 2, 1, 2, Sable by the name of Spindelow. Spindelow.


Gules, six Flower de lis 3, 2, 1, Argent born by Sir Gilbert Ireland of Hut,
Ireland.
and Beausie in Lancashire, Knight.

Argent, three Gilly Flowers proper, by the name of Jorney. Jorney.


From Vegetables as Leaves, Trees, Plants, Fruits and Flowers, I shall next
treat of the parts of Man's Body.

Examples of the PARTS of MAN'S BODY.
1. JVpiter, our blessed Lady with her Son in her right hand, and a Scepter in
her left all Topaz, this Coat belongs to the Bishopric of Salisbury.
Bishopric of Salisbury.


2. Gules, a Saracens Head erazed at the neck Argent, environed about the
Temples with a wreath of the Second and Sable, by the name of Mergith Mergith.
of Wales.

3. Argent, three Blackamores Heads couped proper, banded about Gules, born by
John Tanner Tanner.
of Court in Cornwall Esquire.

Or, three Blackamores Heads couped proper, banded about Argent, born by Samuel
Mico of London Esquire, and by Edward and Aaron Mico Mico.
of London Merchants.

engraving of blazon showing human body parts folio 128

Parts of Man's Body.


4. Argent, a Cheveron Gules between three Peruques Sable.

Claudius surnamed Comatus when he gained the Government of France instituted a
Law that the French men should wear their Hair long (as his Arm was) in token
of Liberty, for shaving off the Hair was then a token of Bondage, and this was
observed by the Romans who used to shave the Hair of their Bondmen.

5. Or a Heart proper, a chief Sable, by the name of Scambler. Scambler.


6. Argent, a Fess Gules, between three Hearts vulned and distilling drops of
blood on the sinister side proper, by the name of Tote. Tote.


7. Azure an Armsinister issuing out of the Dexter point and extended toward
the sinister base in form of a Bend Argent,

8. Vert, three Dexter Arms conjoined at the Shoulders and flexed in Triangle
Or, with Fists clenched Argent born by Arthur Tremaine of Cullocombe in
Devonshire Esquire. Tremain.


9. Argent, three sinister hands couped at the Wrists and erected Gules, born
by Sir John Maynard Maynard.
of Gunnersbury in the Parish of Ely in Middlesex, Knight, Sergeant at Law to
His Majesty King Charles the Second.

10. Or, a Man's Leg couped at the midst of the thigh Azure, by the name of
Haddon. Haddon.


11. Argent, a Man's Leg erazed at the Thigh Sable, by the name of Prime. Prime.


12. Ruby, three Legs Armed proper, conjoined in Fess at the upper part of the
Thigh flexed in Triangle, garnished and spurred Topaz, this Coat is the Arms of
the Isle of Man, Arms of the Isle of Man.
and is quartered by the Earl of Derby as Lord of the said Isle.

13. Argent, Guttee de Sang, by the name of Lemming.

These Drops are seldom born by themselves alone, but upon or with some of the
Ordinaries.

Gutte de Sang without naming the Color signifies drops of Blood, and is
always Gules. Gutte de Harms drops of Tears which is Azure. Gutte de Hau drops
of Water which is Argent. Gutte de Poix, or Gutte de Sable; that is drops of
Pitch, and is Sable. Gutte de Or, drops of Gold, and is, Or

The form or shape of these drops are all as one, only the names change the
Colors.

14. Azure, a Pale, or, Gutte de Sang, born by Sir Thomas Player Player.
of London, Knight, late Chamberlain of the said City of London.

15. Or, on a Cheveron Gules, three dead men's Skulls, of the field by the name
of Bolter. Bolter.


16. Sable, a Shin-bone in Pale surmounted of another in Cross Argent by the
name of Bayns.

OF ANIMALS.
FROM the parts of Man's Body I shall proceed to Animals born in Coat Armor
both whole and in parts, which the following Examples will demonstrate.

And of Animals those of prey are of most Esteem, as the Lion, Tiger, Bear,
Wolf, etc. And in Coat Armor the bearing of whole Animals being more worthy
then the several parts, I shall first begin with them.

Of all Creatures apt to generation and corruption Animals are most worthy.

All Savage Beasts are naturally armed with something wherewith they may hurt
their Enemies as the Boar has Turks; the Lion Tallons, the Stag Horns, the
Serpent Poison, and the like.

All four Footed Beasts are esteemed more worthy of bearing then Fishes, or
Fowls in regard they contain in them more worthy and commendable significations
of Nobility: and the Males are esteemed more worthy then the Females.

Examples of BEARINGS of LIONS.
1. ARgent, a Lion Rampant Sable, by name of Stapleton. Stapleton.


Argent, a Lion Rampant Gules by the name of Verdon. Verdon.


engraving of blazon showing lions with various bearings folio 132

Lions.


Argent, a Lion Rampant vert by the name of Springs. Springs.


Or a Lion Rampant Sable by the name of Poley. Poley.


Azure, a Lion Rampant Or, by the name of Beckingham. Beckingham


Ermine, a Lion Rampant. Azure, by the name of Hardness of Kent.

Argent, a Lion Rampant Sable Crowned Or, born by Charles Morley Morley.
of Droxford in Hantshire Esquire, one of the Masters of Requests to his
Majesty King Charles the Second.

Azure, a Lion Rampant Crowned Or, born by Sir Francis Dayrel Dayrel.
of Castle Camps in Cambridgeshire Knight.

Vert, a Lion Rampant Or, by the name of Morgan. Morgan.


Ermine, a Lion Rampant Azure, crowned Or, born by Sir Henry Pickering
Pickering.
of Whaddon in Cambridgeshire Knight, and Barronet.

2. Azure a Lion Rampant Gardant Or, born by Fitz Hammond. Fizt Hammond.


Or, a Lion Rampant Gardant Gules, by the name of Horon. Horon.


Gules, a Lion Rampant Gardant Or, born by George Masters Masters.
of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire.

Gules, a Lion Rampant Gardant Argent, by the Name of St. Marney. St. Marney,


3. Gules, a Lion Rampant Regardant Or, born by John Morice Morice,
of London Esquire.

Or, a Lion Rampant Regardant Vert, by the Name of Hume. Hume.


Or, a Lion Rampant Regardant Gules, by the Name of Roberts. Roberts.


This Action of the Lion, manifests an inward and degenerate Perturbation of
the Mind, which is Repugnant to the generous Nature of the Lion, this denoting
a timorous Mind, yet it betokens a diligent Circumspection, and Consideration
of things to come.

4. Argent, a Lion Rampant Coward Purpure, by the Name of Rowch. Rowch.


This Cowardly Action of claping his Tail betwixt his Legs (as all Beasts do
that are affrighted) is contrary to the Noble Spirit of the Lion.

5 Or, a Lion Rampant Double Queen Azure, born by Sir Christopher Wansford
Wansford.
of Kirklington in Yorkshire Baronet.

Or, a Lion Rampant Double Queen Sable, by the Name of Wells. Wells.


Sable, a Lion Rampant Double Queen Or, by the Name of Kingston. Kingston.


Azure, a Lion Rampant Double Queen Or, by the Name of Bromhall. Bromhall.


The Forked Tail is an Emblem of Magnanimity, and Strennuousness.

6. Argent, a Lion Saliant Gules, by the Name of Felbridg. Felbridge.


Sable, a Lion Saliant Argent, by the Name of Sturmy. Sturmy.


Gules, a Lion Saliant Argent, by the Name of Salisbury. Salisbury.


When the Lion prosecutes his Prey, he pursues the same Leaping, or Saliant,
which action he never uses when he is Chased in Fight, but is always Passant.

7. Or, a Lion Rampant Double Lest Azure, born by Simon Mason Mason.
of Great Gransden in Huntington-shire Gent.

8. Sable, two Lion Cells Rampant Combatant Or, born by Nicholas Carter Carter.
of Willesborrow in Kent, and of London Dr. in Physic.

Leigh says, That these two Lions were of sundry Regions which strove for
Government, for the Lion is as desirous of Mastery, as a Courageous Prince is
ambitious of Honor.

Azure, two Lions Rampant Gardant Combatant Argent, born by Sir Jacob Garrard
Garrard.
of Langford in Norfolk Baronet.

9. Azure, two Lioncells Rampant Endorsed Or.

This Coat is said to be born by Achilles at the Siege of Troy; and Leigh
supposes it to be a Combat intended between two Valiant Men who both met in
the Field, but the Prince savouring them takes the Matter into his hands, and
then they turn back to back, and so leave the Field.

10. Or, a Lion Passant Gules, by the Name of Games. Games.


Or, a Lion Passant Sable, by the Name of Pynoke. Pynoke.


Sable, a Lion Passant Or, by the Name of Tailor. Tailor.


Sable, a Lion Passant Or, by the Name of Field. Field.


Ermine, a Lion Passant Gules, by the Name of Drew. Drew.


Ermine, a Lion Passant Sable, by the Name of Wither. Wither.


11. Azure, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, born by Sir John Bromfield Bromfield.
of Suffolk place in Southwark Knight.

Azure, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, born by William Thompson Thompson.
of the middle Temple London Esquire.

Argent, a Lion Passant Gardant Sable by the Name of Stone. Sto^e.


Argent, a Lion Passant Gardant Gules, by the Name of Querleton. Querleton.


Gules, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, by the Name of Brett. Brett.


Gules, a Lion Passant Gardant Argent, by the Name of Redeshall. Redeshall.


The Lion Passant seems to go with more Confidence and Resolution, but the
Gardant with more Vigilance and Circumspection.

12. Argent, two Lioncells Counter Passant Gules, the upermost toward the
Sinister side of the Escocheon, both Colored Or.

13. Gules, a Lion Sejant Argent.

Although this Gesture has affinity with the Lion Couchant, yet the difference
is easily to be observed.

14. Gules, a Lion between six Cross Crosslets Argent, born by Sir Halswell
Tynte, Tynte.
of Halswell in the Parish of Goat-hurst in Sommerset-shire Baronet.

The Lion must not be thought to be compelled to Couch, but that he has so
settled himself of his own accord; for it is contrary to his Nature, to be
compelled to any thing by Chastisement, and a generous mind is easier to be led
then drove.

15. Azure, a Lion Dormant Or.

It Is said, That the Lion sleeps with his Eyes open, being an Emblem to
Governors, whose Vigilance should show it self, when others are most at rest
and secure.

Some are of Opinion, That the Lion should not be made Gardant, affirming that
to be the property of the Leopard. The generous Nature of the Lion, is
discerned by his plentiful Shaggy Locks which cover his neck and shoulders, and
does show his Noble Courage, especially if curled and short; also the thickness
of the Lions Mane, is a Testimony of his generous Birth, and by the same he is
distinguished from the Bastard Race of Leopards, begotten by the Adulterous
Lioness and the Parde* which are Naturally deprived of this Noble Mark, nor
have they the Courage.

To Lions, Bares, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey, Nature has given sharp
Teeth and Tallons, for the seizing and keeping their Prey, and therefore in the
Blazoning of Beasts, their Teeth and Tallons must not be omitted, and for
expressing them, say Armed of such and such a Color, which is always Gules or
Azure, engraving of blazon showing lions rampant folio 139

Lions Rampant
and contrary to the Color of them.

All Beasts of Prey in their going do contract their Tallons within their
Flesh, to keep them sharp for the tearing their Prey, which otherwise would be
blunt, and so become useless to them.

Other Examples of LIONS RAMPANT.
1. SAphir, a Lion Rampant Pearl, born by the Right Honorable John. Lord Crew,
Ld. Crew.
Baron of Stean in Northampton shire, etc.

Argent, a Lion Rampant Sable, charged on the Shoulder with a Mullet Or, born
by Sir Thomas Mompesson Mompesson
of Bathampton in Wilt-shire, Knight.

Vert, a Lion Rampant Or, born by Arthur Shaen Shaen.
of Great Kewe in Surrey, Esquire; Son and Heir of Sir James Shaen of the said
place, Knight and Baronet.

2. Vert, a Lion Rampant between three Trefoyles Slipped Or, born by Thomas
Sheridan Sheridan.
of Cavan in the Province in Vlster in Ireland, Esquire.

3. Pearl, a Lion Rampant Ruby, between three Pheons Diamond, born by the Right
Honorable John Egerton, Earl Bridgwater, Earl of Bridgwater
Viscount Barkley, and Baron of Elesmer, Lord Lieutenant of Buckingham-shire,
and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

This Coat is also born by John Egerton of Broxton in Cheshire, Esquire, Eldest
Son of Sir Phillip Egerton Egerton.
of Egerton and Outon, in the said County Knight.

4. Argent, a Lion Rampant between three Cross Croslets Fitche Gules, born by
Sir John Bowyer Bowyer.
of Kingspersley in Staffordshire, Knight and Baronet.

5. Ermine, a Lion Rampant Gules, within a Border Sable, born by Sir William
Pritchard Pritchard.
of the City of London Knight, Lord Mayor thereof Anno. 1684.

6. Gules on a Pale Or, a Lion Rampant Sable, born by John Darnall Darnall
of the Middle Temple London, Esquire.

7. Barry of 10 Argent and Azure, over all a Lion Rampant Gules, born by
Richard Stratford Stratford.
of Hayling and Neither-Getting in Gloucestershire Gent. descended from the
Stratfords of Farmcot in the said County.

8. Azure, Flo^y a Lion Rampant Argent, born by Sir John Holland Holland.
of Quidenham in Norfolk, Baronet.

9. Pearl, Semy de Cinquefoyls Ruby, a Lion Rampant Diamond, born by the Right
Honorable William Pierrepont, Earl of Kingston Earl of Kingston.
upon Hull, Viscount Newark upon Trent, Baron of Holme Pierrepont, Manvers, and
Herris.

And by Gervas Pierrpmont of Tongue Castle in Shropshire, Esquire. Pierrepont.


Sable, Semy de Cinquefoils a Lion Rampant Argent, born by Sir Thomas Clifton
Cliffton.
of Clifton in Lancashire, Baronet.

10. Per Bend Sinister Ermine, and Ermines, over all a Lion Rampant Or, born by
Sir Roger Mostin Mostin.
in Flint-shire, Baronet.

This Coat is also born by Sir John Trevor Trevor.
of Brynkynalt in Denby-shire, Knight.

11. Girony of 4 or and Azure, a Lion Rampant Counterchanged, born by John
Gould Gould.
of Broadnemett in Devonshire, Gentleman.

12. Girony of 8 Pieces Ermine, and Ermines a Lion Rampant Or, born by Sir
Trevor Williams Williams,
of Langibby Castle in Monmouthshire Baronet.

13. Sable a Lion Rampant Argent depressed with a Bendlet Gules, born by Sir
John Churchill Churchill.
of Churchill in Sommorsetshire, Knight.

14. Argent, a Bend between two Lions Rampant Sable, born by Sir John Osborn
Osborn.
of Chicksands in Bedfordshire, Barronet.

15. Ermine three Lions Rampant Gules, by the name of Chudley Chudley.
in Devonshire.

16. Argent, three Lions Rampant, and a chief Azure, born by Samuel Grant Grant.
of Crundal in Hantshire, and of the Inner Temple London, Esquire.

17. Per Pale Saphir and Ruby, three Lions Rampant Pearl, born by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembrook Earl of Pembrook.
and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of Shurland, Cardist, Ross of Kendale, Parr,
Marmion, and Sir Quintin, Lord of the Lordships of Vsk, Carleon, Newport and
Treleg.

By the Right Honorable William Herbert Earl and Baron of Powis, Earl of Powis.
etc.

By the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert Ld Herbert
Baron of Cherbury, and Castle-Island in Ireland.

By the Honorable Arthur Herbert, Herbert.
Esquire, Admiral and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Seas Anno 1683, and one of the Right Honorable the Commissioners
of the Admiralty.

By Sir Thomas Herbert Herbert.
of Trinlern in Monmouth shire, Baronet.

By Sir Matthew Herbert of Bromfield in Shropshire.

This Coat is also born by Sir William Jones of Slowey in Sommersetshire,
Knight.

By Edward Proger Esquire, one of the Grooms of His Majesty's Bedchamber.

18. Pearl, six Lions Rampant Diamond, born by the Right Honorable Thomas
Savage, Earl Rivers, Earl Rivers.
Viscount Colchester and Rock Savage, Lord Darcy, and Baron of Chich, etc.

19. Ermine, on a Chief Azure, three Lions Rampant Or, born by Sir Anthony
Ancher Ancher.
of Bishopsbourn in Kent, Knight and Baronet.

Other Examples of LIONS PASSANT.
1. DIamond, a Lion Passant Gardant Topaz, between three Helmets Pearl, born by
the Right Honorable James Earl of Northampton, Earl of Northampton.
Baron Compton of Compton, Lord Leiutenant of Warwickshire, Constable of the
Tower of London, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.

2. Azure, a Lion Passant between three Pheons heads Or, born by Sir Thomas
Wolstonholom Wolstonholom.
of Minsingden in the Parish of Edmonton in Middlesex Baronet.

Three Sable, three Piles Argent on a Chief of the second a Lion Passant Gules,
born by Sir Andrew Hacket Hacket.
of Moxhull in Warwickshire Knight.

4. Or a Lion Passant Sable, in Chief, three Piles of the second, born by
Captain engraving of blazon showing lions passant folio 144

Lions Pasant
John Logan Logan.
of Ibury in Oxfordshire, Esquire.

5. Argent, on a Fess Gules between two Lions Passant Gardent Sable, a Flower
de lis Or, between two Crescents Argent, born by the Honorable Sir Henry
Goodrick Goodrick.
of R bston Park in Yorkshire, Knight and Baronet His Majesty's Envoy
Extraordinary to the King of Spain Anno 1682/3.

6. Argent, two Lions Passant Gardant Azure, born by Sir Thomas Hanmer Hanmer.
of Hanmer in Flitshire Baronet, and of Sir John Hanmer of the Middle Temple,
London, Knight.

Or, two Lions pasant Gardant Sable, born by Sir James Rushurst Rushurst.
of Milast Green in Essex, Baronet.

Gules, two Lions Passant Gardant Argent, born by Sir Nicholas L'estrange of
Hulston in Norfolk Baronet, and by Roger L'estrange L'estrange.
of Saint Giles in the Fields in Middlesex, Esquire.

7. Gules, two Bars Ermine in Chief a Lion Passant parted Per Pale Or, and
Argent, by the name of Hill Hill.
of Norfolk.

8. Ermine, a Saltier and Chief, Gules, on the last a Lion Passant Gardant Or,
born by Evers Armine Armine.
of Osgodby in Lancashire, and of Ketton in Rutlandshire, Esquire

9. Or, three Lions Passant Sable born by Sir Thomas Carew Carew.
of Hackcomb in Devonshire Barronet.

Sable, three Lions Passant Argent, born by Thomas English English.
of Buckland in Maidston in Kent, Esquire.

10. Argent, three Lions Passant Gardant Gules, born by Thomas Brograve Brogrve.
of Hamels in Hertfordshire, Barronet.

11. Ruby, three Lions Passant Gardant Per Pale Or and Argent, born by the
Right Honorable William OF Brion, Earl and Baron Insiquin, and Baron of Burren
in Ireland, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council
for that Kingdom.

12. Azure a Fess Wavey, between three Lions Passant Or, by the name of Hawes.
Hawes.


From whole Lions I shall proceed to the parts thereof.

engraving of blazon showing lion body parts folio 147

Parts of Lions


Examples of the PARTS of LIONS.
1. ARgent, a Lions head erazed Vert.

2. Ruby, a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Pearl, born by the Right
Noble Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington Baron Monk of
Potheridge, Beauchamps and Teys, Knight of the Garter, Captain of His Majesty's
Life Guard, Lord Leiutenant of Essex and Devonshire, one of the Gentlemen of
His Majesty's Bedchamber, and one of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.

Azure, a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Or, born by Sir Hugh
Windham of Silton in Dorsetshire Knight, one of the Justices of His Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster. And is also born by Thomas Windham
Windham.
of Tale in Devonshire Esquire, one of the Grooms of His Majesty's Bedchamber,
third Son of Sir Edmund Windham of Cathanger in Sommersetshire, Knight Marshal
of His Majesty's Household.

3. Or, three Bars Azure, on a Canton Gules, a Lions head erazed Argent, born
by Thomas Cox Cox.
M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty King Charles the Second. And is
also born by Daniel Cox of London Dr. in Physic.

4. Ruby, a Bezant between three Demi Lions Rampant Pearl, born by the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Arlington, Earl of Arlington.
Viscount Thetford, Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
household, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's Honorable Privy Council. And
is born by the Right Honorable Sir John Bennet Knight of the Bath, and Baron
of Oswestre, Lord Oswestre.
etc.

Bennet.
Also by John Bennet of Abington in Cambridgeshire, Esquire.

5. Azure, two Bars Wavey Ermine, on a Chief Or, a Demi Lion Sable, born by Sir
James Smith of the City of London Knight and Alderman. Smith.


6. Or, out of the midst of a Fess Sable, a Lion Rampant Naissant Gules, by the
name of Emme. Emme.


This Form of Blazon is peculiar to all living things that shall be found
issuing out of the midst of some ordinary, or common charge.

7. Vert, three Quarterfoils Argent, each charged with a Lions head Erazed,
Sable, born by Thomas Plot Esquire, Plot.
Secretary to his Highness the great Duke of Tuscany; descended of the Family
of the Plots Sparsholt in Berkshire.

8. Argent, two Lions Paws erected in Saltier, the dexter furmounted of the
sinister Azure.

9. Sable, two Lions Paws issuing out of a dexter and sinister base points
erect in form of a Cheveron Argent, by the name of Frampton. Frampton.


10. Gules, three Lions Paws or Gambes Erazed Argent, born by Richard Newdigate
of Arbury of Warwickshire, Newdigate.
Esquire.

11. Azure, three Lions Paws couped and erected Argent, by the name of Usher.
Usher.


12. Argent, three Lions Tails erected and erazed Gules.

The Lion has great strength in his Tail, and his much motion thereof is a
sure sign of Anger. When he intends to assail his Enemy he stirs up his
courage by often beating his back and sides with his Tail, and when he is
hunted the better to escape his Pursuers (with his Tail as he goes) he
sweepeth out his footsteps and leaves no tract behind him.

These and the like Parts of Lions, and all other Beasts are born on, and
between, any of the Ordinaries.

From Lions I shall proceed to Elephants, Horses, and other Beasts.

Examples of Other BEASTS in whole and in part.
1. GUles, an Elephant passant Argent, tusked Or, by the name of Elpington.
Elpington.


The Elephant is a Beast of great strength but of greater wit and docility
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 150

Beasts in hole and in Part.
surpassing all other Beasts, and is so ambitious that if they are praised they
will kill themselves with labor, his strength appears in that he carries on
his back in a Castle of Wood about thirty men, as is accustomary in the Eastern
Countries to make use of them in their Wars.

2. Or a Fess Gules between three Elephants heads erazed Sable, Fountain.
born by John Fountain of Melton on the Hill in Yorkshire, Esquire.

3. Purpure; a Proboscide Trunk or Snout of an Elephant in Pale couped, flexed
and reflexed in form of an S Or.

The Elephant has great strength in this part and uses it for his hand, as
well to feed himself, as for all uses of Agility.

4. Or, an Asses head erazed Sable, by the name of Hackwell. Hackwell.


The Ass is the lively Emblem of patience: From this Beast, and the Horse
comes the Mule which being so produced does not bring forth young as other
Beasts.

5. Pearl, three Bulls Passant Daimond, This was the Coat of the Right
Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Earl of Shaftsbury.
Baron Astley of Wimborn Saint Giles, Lord Cooper of Pawlet, etc.

The Bull is the Ringleader amongst ruther Beasts, and through hope of his
increase of breed he is privileged to rang freely in all Pastures.

The Bull being Gelt changes not only his nature but his name to an Ox. And it
is said that the Athenians to express their gratefulness for the laborious
travel of the Ox, did stamp it is Figure on a certain Coin called a Didrachma.

6. Sable, Cheveron Ermine between three Bulls head cabosed Argent, born by
Thomas Sanders of liitle Ireton in Derbyshire, Sanders.
Esquire.

7. Pearl, three Bulls head erazed Diamond, born by the Right Honorable Sir
John Skeffington of Fisherwick in Staffordshire, Barronet, Baron of Loughneugh,
Viscount Massereen, Lord Masserene.
Custos Rotolorum, and Governor of the County of Londonderry and Town of
Coleraine and one of the Lords of His Majesty most Honorable Privy Council for
Ireland

8. Gules, a Goat Passant Argent, by the name of Baker. Baker.


The Goat is not so hardy as politic.

9. Gules, a Stag standing at Gaze Argent, attired Or, by the name of Jones.
Jones.


The Stag is a goodly Beast, full of State in his Gate and View, and amongst
Beasts of Chase is esteemed the chief for Game. It is observed that when he
finds himself Fat he lodges in obscure places to avoid Chasing. This Beast
is endued with two excellent faculties above others to wit quickness of
hearing, and swiftness of Foot, which makes the Chase more long and difficult.

10. Argent, a Stag springing forward Gules.

Pliny says that the Horns of this Beast whilst they are growing are so
mollified with Wax that they may be made capable of diverse Impressions. All
Horns are hallow except toward the tip, but the Deers are solid throughout.

11. Vert, on a Cheveron between three Bucks tr^ping Or, as many Trefoils
slipped Gules, Robinson.
born by Sir Lumbley Robinson of Kentwell-hall in Suffolk Barronet, Son and
Heir of Sir Thomas Robinson, chief Prothonotary of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas, deceased.

The Buck is a worthy Beast, and has much of the properties of the Stag, but
comes short of his stateliness and boldness.

12. Or, three Bucks head couped proper, Colleton.
born by Sir Peter Colleton of Saint James's Fields in Middlesex, Baronet.

Bearing of the Head of any living thing betokens jurisdiction and Authority
to administer Justice, and to execute Laws.

13. Saphir, a Stags head Pearl, born by the Right Honorable George Leg, Baron
of Dartmouth, Lord Dartmouth.
Master General of the Ordnance, Leiutenant of Alceholt, and Wolmer Forest in
Hantshire, Master of the Horse to his Royal Highness James Duke of York,
Admiral of His Majesty's Fleet of Ships in the Mediterranean, Anno 1683, and
one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

14. Saphir, a Bucks head cabosed Topaz, vulned in the forehead proper, born by
the Right Honorable Kenneth, M' Kenzie, Earl of Seafort, Earl of Seafort.
Lord M' Kenzie and Kentail, Baron of Ardelu, Islandonan and Lews, Sheriff
principal of the Shires of Ross, and North Nass, etc.

15. Diamond, three Bucks heads cabosed Pearl, attired Topaz, born by the
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 155

Beasts in whole, and in part.
Right Honorable William Earl of Devonshire, Earl of Devonshire
Baron Cavendish of Hardwick Lord Leiutenant of Derby-shire, etc.

16. Azure, a Fess between three Tigers heads erazed Or, born by Sir Henry
Hunlock Hunlock
of Wingerworth in Derbyshire, Baronet.

17. Argent, a Cheveron between three Attires of a Stag fixed to the Scalp
Sable, by the Name of Cocks. Cocks.


18. Or, three Attires of a Stag born paly Barry Sable.

Other Examples of BEASTS in whole and in part.
1. SAble, a Fess between three Horses passant Argent, born by Sir Thomas Stamp
Stamp.
of London, Knight and Alderman.

A Horse erected, (that is bolt upright) may be termed enraged, but his noblest
Action is expressed in a saliant form. The Horse of all Beasts for man's use is
esteemed the most noble, and useful either in Peace or War, he is naturally
stubborn, fierce and pround, and of all Beasts there is none that vaunteth more
after Victory obtained, or dejected if vanquished, and none more prone to
Battle, or desirous of revenge.

2. Gules, a Horses head couped Argent, this was the Coat of Sir Thomas Marsh
Marsh.
of Darkes in the Parish of South Mimums in Middlesex, Knight deceased.

3. Argent, a Unicorn seiant Sable, horned Or, by the name of Harling. Harling.


The Unicorn takes his name from his one Horn which grows on his Forehead, yet
there is another Beast called a Rinoceros which has but one Horn, but that
does grow on his Snout.

The Unicorn is no less worthy of remark for his Virtue then for his Strength
in that his Horn is said to be a powerful Antidote against poison, in so much
as (according to the general opinion) the wild Beast (for fear of the venomous
Serpents) use not to drink before he has stirred the Waters with his Horn; he
is said to be of such a great and haughty mind that he will never be taken
alive, but rather will be killed; being by nature of so untamely a disposition.

4. Gules, an Unicorn triping Argent, armed Or, by the name of Musterton.
Musterton.


5. Vert, three Unicorns in Pale current Argent, armed Or, by the name of
Farington. Farington.


6. Sable, a Camel passant Argent.

This Beast does surpass the Horse, not only for strength (his common burden
being 1000 l. weight,) but for his swiftness in Travel.

7. Argent, a Bore passant Gules, armed Or, by the name of Trewarthen.
Trewarthen


The Bore though he wants Horns is no way defective in his Weapon of defense
or rather of offense, to wit his strong and sharp Tusks, being reckoned for the
most absolute Champion amongst the Wild Beasts. In his sight he is so cruel,
and stomackful that he foameth all the while for rage, and against the time of
any encounter he often whetteth his Tusks to make them more peircing, and he
bears the encounter with a noble courage.

8. Topaz, three Bores heads erazed and erected Diamond armed of the first,
born by the Right Honorable George Lord Booth Baron de la Mere Lord De la Mere.
of Dunham Massey in Cheshire.

And by Sir Robert Booth of Salford in Lancashire, Knight, Lord Chief Justice
of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas in Ireland, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council for the said Kingdom.

And is also born by Richard Booth Booth.
of the City of London, Esquire.

9. Argent, a Cheveron between three Bores head erazed Sable, born by
Theophilus Oglethorp Oglethorp.
of the Parish of Saint Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Leiutenant Colonel
to his Royal Higness's Troop of his Majesty's Horse Guards, etc.

10. Azure, three Cups, Or, out of each a Bores head erected Argent, born by
Sir John Bolles Bolles.
of Scampton in Lincolnshire, Baronet.

11. Azure, a Toison d' Or within a Treasure of Scotland Or, born by Sir Robert
Jason Jason.
of Broad Somerford in Wiltshire, Baronet.

12. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Rams heads erazed Azure, born by
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 159

Beasts.
Sir John Bendish Bendish.
of Steple-Bumsted in Essex Baronet.

The Ram is a Captain of the whole flock, and his strength consists in his
head.

Other Examples of BEASTS.
1. ARgent, a Tiger passant regardant, gazing in a looking Glass all proper.

The Tiger is said to be a Beast of great cruelty and exceeding swift of Foot,
whence some think the River Tigris took its name.

It is reported that when those that go to rob her of her young, do use a
policy to detain their Dam from following them, by casting sundry Looking
Glasses in the way, on which she uses to gaze long upon whether it be to
behold her own beauty, or because when she sees her shape in the Glass she
thinks she sees one of her young ones; but by this means they escape her.

2. Argent, a Bear Rampant Sable, musled Or, by the name of Barnard. Barnard.


The Bear by nature is a cruel Beast, and in its combats uses no less policy
then strength. The Female is most cruelly enraged against any that hurts her
young, or robs her of them.

3. Argent, three Bears heads erazed Sable, Musled Or, born by Sir James
Langham Langham.
of Cottes-brook, in Northamptonshire, Knight and Baronet.

By Sir William Langham of Walgrave in the said County Knight. And by Sir
Stephen Langham of London Knight, Sons of Sir John Langham, Baronet deceased.

4 Gules, a Wolf preyent Argent, born by Sir Edward Low Low.
of New Sarum, in Wiltshire K^. one of the Masters of the high Court of
Chancery.

The Wolf by nature is a greedy, ravenous and cruel Creature, and a great Enemy
to the poor harmless Sheep; insomuch that (for the public good) Laws have been
made to give a gratuity to those that kill, or take any of them alive.

Macidon Grandchild of Cham the Son of Noah bore a Wolf when he went under the
Conduct of Osius. And the Image of a Wolf was set up at Delphos before Apollo
who was called Lycoctones a Wolf killer and he was rewarded by the Laws of
Draco and Solon that killed or took alive this Creature.

5. Argent, on a Bend Vert, three Wolves heads erazed of the Field, born by Sir
Richard Middleton Myddelton.
of Chirk Castle in Denbighshire Baronet.

And by Sir Thomas Middleton of Stansted Mount-Fitchet in Essex Knight.

6. Vert, a Greyhound current Argent, collored Gules, studded Or, born by
Richard Blome of Abergwlly in Caermardenshire, Esquire, by John Blome Blome.
of Sevenoke in Kent, Gentleman, and by Richard Blome of London Gentleman, the
Author of this Tract of Heraldry.

The Dog whether it be for Pleasure and Game in the Field, as the Greyhound,
and the Hound (of which there are several sorts as the Buck hound, Blood-hound,
Harier, Greyhound and the like; or for safeguard at home as the Mastiff
deserves a very high estimation, and of all Dogs those of Chase are the most
deserving in Heraldry.

It is observed that there is scarce any virtue incident to a Man, but there
are some resemblances thereof in the sundry kinds of Dogs; and the Mastiff has
that undaunted courage and true love to his Master that he will take his part
even to death, insomuch that the Romans took Mastiffs hence to carry in their
Army instead of Soldiers; others there are that when they happen to be lost
will refuse meat to eat until they see their Masters again; others are to be
admired for their excellent properties in looking to their Masters Goods,
others in fetching, carrying, and finding out any lost thing that they are
enjoined to do; and others in pursuing any thing or Game in the Chase by the
scent of its foot.

7. Argent, three Greyhounds in Pale current Sable collered Or, born by Sir
Cleve More of More-hall, and Bank-hall in Lancashire Baronet, and by Sir John
More of London, Knight and Alderman, late Lord Mayor thereof.

Gules, three Greyhounds current in Pale Argent, collered of the Field, born
by Sir Thomas Mauleverer Mauleverer.
of Allerton-Mauleverer in Yorkshire, Baronet.

8. Argent, two Bars Sable charged with three Trefoils of the Field, in Chief a
Greyhound current of the second, born by William Palmer Palmer.
of Ladgrave in Warwickshire, Esquire.

9. Gules, a Talbot passant Or, a Chief Ermine, born by Thomas Chaffin Chaffin.
of Chettle in Dorsetshire Esquire.

10. Argent, two Reynards or Foxes counter-Saliant in Bend, the dexter
surmounted of the sinister Saltire wise Gules by the name of Kadrod-Hard
Kadred-Hard.
of Wales.

The Fox for his great wit and subtilty does surpass all Beasts, and is
compared to the crafty Lawyer.

11. Ermine, on a Fess Gales, a Fox passant Or, born by Sir Thomas Proby Proby.
of Elton-hall in Huntingtonshire, Knight. And by John Proby of the middle
Temple London, Esquire.

12. Or, three Foxes heads erazed Gules, a Border Argent charged with eight
Flower de lis Azure, born by Nevinson Fox Fox.
of Stadbrook in Suffolk Esquire.

13. Gules, an Ermine proper.

The Skin of this little Beast is an exceeding rich Fur used for the Lining of
Kings and Princes Robes, and is that Fur so much used in Heraldry called Ermine.

14. Argent, three Cat a mountains passant in Pale Sable, born by Sir Jonathan
Keat of Paul's Walden in Hertfordshire, Keat.
Baronet.

There is no Creature that contendeth so much for liberty as the Cat, and
therefore the Dutch formerly bore it for their Ensign.

It is also a Creature of such great use that no house can well be without one
for the destroying Vermin.

15. Argent, two Squirrels Sciant endorsed Gules, Samwell.
born by Sir Thomas Samwel of Vpton and Gayton in the County of
Northamptonshire Baronet.

This little Creature is much to be commended for his great industry in
gathering, and providing his food in the Summer for the Winter, which should be
an example to the slothful man who regards nothing but from hand to mouth.

16. Argent, three Coneys Sable, by the name of Stroud. Stroud.


From the Coney it is said that men first learnt the Art of undermining and
subverting engraving of blazon showing various animals folio 165

Animalls.
of Cities, Castles, and Towers, by the Industry of Pioneers.

From Beasts I shall proceed to Animals.

Examples of ANIMALS.
1. VERT, a Tortois passant, Argent, born by Sir Charles Gaudy of Crows-hill in
Debenham in Suffolk, Knight. and Baronet. Gaudy.
By Charles Gaudy of Stapeston, and by Anthony Gaudy of Ipswich both of the
said County Esquires.

Tortoises, live both by Land and Sea, and are much esteemed as well for their
Virtues, and operation, as for the delicacy of their Shells used for diverse
curious works, and their flesh to eat. They are Enemies to Vipers destroying
both Snails and Worms that eat the Fruits. The Shells of the Arcadian Tortoises
are very great of which they make Harps whereof Mercury is said to be the first
inventor, who finding a Tortoise upon the Rocks after the falling of the River
Nilus, the flesh being consumed, and the sinews dried up, he stroke them with
his hand, and making a kind of musical sound he framed it into a Harp.

2. Azure, a Tortoise erected Or, by the name of Cooper. Cooper.


3. Argent, a Cheveron between three Mouls, or Wants Sable, born by Richard
Twisleton Twistleton.
of Drax in the West Riding of Yorkshire Esquire.

This Animal is very pernicious in Gardens, Orchards, and other grounds casting
up the Earth in great hillocks with their Snouts. They are very quick of
hearing, and have a good smell.

4. Argent, three Toads erected Sable, by the name of Betereux. Betereux.


Toads and Frogs when they sit, hold up their heads without motion, which
stately action Spencer in his Shepherds Calender calls the Lording of Frogs.

5. Or, a Cobweb in the Center thereof a Spider proper.

The Spider may be said to be born free of the Weavers Company, for she
studieth not his Art, nor has his stuff having her thread out of her womb,
from whence she laboriously draws it, and through the Agility of her Feet she
weaveth gins and dilateth, contracteth and knitteth them in form of a Net, and
with the threads that she draws out of her body she repaireth the same, and
these Webs are framed with much artificial cunning, and yet are fit for no use,
but to entangle Flies; and as it is observed, the Execution of the Law is
compared to Cobwebs.

Laws like Spiders webs are wrought.
Great Flies escape, and small are caught.
The Spider is poisonous, yet her Web, although it be drawn out of her Womb, is
said to be an Antidote against it.

6. Argent, 11 Emets 3, 2, 3, 2, 1, Sable.

By the Emet, or Pismire, as indeed by the Spider may be signified a man of
great labor, wisdom, and providence in his Affairs: And to these little
Creatures the slothful man is sent to learn wisdom.

7. Vert, a Grass-hopper in Fess passant Or,

In the Summer Season the Male Grass-hoppers do sing, but the Females are
silent.

Amongst the Athenians Grass-hoppers were holden for a spe ial note of
Nobility, and therefore did use to wear in their Hair golden Grass hoppers.
Solomon reckons the Grass hopper for one of the four small things in the
Earth that are full of wisdom, but according to the Fable the Emet thinks him
otherwise.

8. Gules, an Add^r nowed Or, by the name of Nathiley. Nathiley.


The Serpent is very subtle and prudent, as well to hurt others, as to save
himself; and knowing, that his most principal and most weakest part to be his
head, he has the greatest care thereof; this here enfolded may seem as Guillim
notes to be one of the Locks of that Monstrous Dame Medusa, every Hair of
whose Head was said to be a Snake, and indeed Al^ertus says that the Hair of
Women taken at some Seasons and laid in Dung will become venomous Serpents,
which some have supposed to befall that Sex for the ancient familiarity it had
at first with that accursed Serpent.

9. Azure, a Cheveron between three Vrchins, or Hegdhogs Argent, born by
William Mainston of London Gentleman, lineally descended from Thomas Mainston
Mainston.
of Vrchinfield in Herefordshire Gentleman, who lived Temps Edward the Third.

The Hedghogs may be compared to a Man expert in gathering of substance, and as
it were one that makes Hay whilst the Sun shines.

10. Sable, a Fess between three House Snails Argent, by the name of Shelley.
Shelley.


The Snail though a slow goer yet in time by the constancy of her Course
ascends to the top of the highest Tower.

It is Fabled that when the Hare was to go a Journey for a Wager with the
Snail, the Hare too confident of his Foot manship resolved to take a Nap by the
way but the Snail well knowing that he had nothing to trust unto but his
indefatigable per^^verance came to his Journeys end before the Hare awaked.

11. Argent, a Cheveron Gules between three Scorpions reversed Sable, by the
name of Cole. Cole.


Scorpions are venomous yet the Oil made of them is an approved Antidote
against their own stinging.

Thus much of Animals under which head may be comprehended all those of four or
more Feet that lay as Eggs, as Crocodiles, Salamanders, Cameleons, Ewtes,
Lizards, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Treats of Fowls and Birds of all sorts, which may be termed Areal Animals, and
may be considered by their Feet, which are either whole, which resembles the
Palm of a Hand, and such are the Swan, Goose, Duck, and for the most part all
River Fowls: or divided as the Eagle, Falcon, Raven, and the like, and Birds of
the Air as shall appear by the following Examples.

ALL Fowls of what kind soever must be bore in their natural Actions, of Going,
Setting, Standing, or Flying.

Concerning the Beaks or Bills, and Feet of Birds all those that either are
whole Footed, or have their Feet divided, and yet have no Tallons should be
termed Membred; but the Cock and all Birds of Prey should be termed Armed; and
the Arming, or Membring them is always to be of a different Color from the
Fowl or Bird it self.

It is generally observed that the Females amongst Birds of Prey are the
noblest and most hardy which nature has so ordered, as being her part to take
care, and to provide for her young.

In the Blazoning of Fowls much used to fly, if their Wings be not displayed
they must be termed close.

The Parts and Members of Fowls are usually born in Coat Armor both couped and
erazed, and that on, or between, any of the Honorable Ordinaries.

Birds are of a more noble bearing than Fish for that they perticipate more of
the Fire and Air the noblest Elements.

engraving of blazon showing various birds folio 173

Foul and Birds.


Examples of FOWL and BIRDS.
1. GUles, a Swan Argent, by the name of Leigham. Leigham.


All River Fowls have their Tails shorter then other Birds, for the length of
the Tail does hinder their Swiming, Diving, or Running.

The Swan is a Bird of great Beauty and Strength, and it is said that he uses
not his Strength to Prey, or Tyranize over any other Fowl, but only to be
revenged on such, as first offer him wrong, in which case he often subdueth the
Eagle, and it is observed that he never encounters with any other of his own
kind, but in two cases, the one if any be a Rival in his Love, or offer to
Court his Mate, he will be revenged to death; the next is if another do
incroach upon his possession, or place of haunt, he is never quiet until he
has expulsed him.

2. Azure, a Bend Engrailed Argent, between two Signets Royal proper, born by
Sir Charles Pitfield of Hoxton in the Parish of Saint Leonards Shoreditch in
Middlesex Knight, Pitfield.
deceased.

Azure, three Swans Argent, by the name of Charlton. Charlton.


Gules, three Swans Argent, by the name of Bawdrip. Bawdrip.


Sable, a Swan with her Wings expanded Argent, Memhred Or, wichin a Border
Engrailed of the Second, by the name of More. More.


Azure, two Swans Argent, between as many Flanches Ermine, born by Samuel
Mellish of the Inner Temple, Mellish.
London, Esquire.

3. Sable, a Cheveron between three wild Ducks Volant proper.

The Wild Duck has many enemies, as Men, Dogs, and Hawks, yet by their shifts
in Flying, Swimming, and Diving, they often beguile the hope of their pursuers.

4. Argent, a Stork Sable, Membred Gules, by the name of Starkey. Starkey.


The Stork is a Bird most careful of her young, and therefore nature requiteth
her care; for their young do take the like care of them in their old Age,
whence it is that the Stork is the Emblem of a grateful Man, and a dutiful Son.
Aelian writes of a Stork, which bred in the House of one that had a beautiful
Wife, which in her Husbands absence used to commit Adultery with one of her
meaner Servants, which the Stork observing, in gratitude to him who freely gave
him House room he flying in the Villains face struck out both his Eyes.

5. Ermine, a Spread Eagle, or Eagle displayed Gules, Bedingfield
born by Sir Henry Bedingfield of Oxborough, and Beck hall in Norfolk Baronet.

The Eagle has a sharp and peircing sight, and soareth so high that often times
she transcendeth the sight of a man. She has a tender care of her young, and
when they are ready to fly takes them on her Wings, and so soareth with them
through the Air to teach them to fly.

6. Argent, a Spread Eagle wirh two Heads Sable, Glyn.
born by Sir John Glynn of Burcester alias Bisister in Oxfordshire Baronet.

7. Gules, a Bend between two Eagles displayed Or, Travel.
born by Thomas Travel of Saint Martins in the Fields in Middlesex, Esquire.

8. Vert, three Eagles displayed in Fess Or, by the name of Wynn. Wynn.


Other Examples of Eagles.
AZure an Eagle displayed Argent, born by Sir Robert Cotton de Bruce of Hatley,
Cotton.
Saint George in Cambridgeshire Knight.

Gules, an Eagle displayed Or, born by Edward Goddard of Standen, Goddard.
by Thomas Goddard of Swinden, Richard Goddard of Catford, and by Edward
Goddard of Ogbourn all of Wiltshire Esquires.

Argent, an Eagle displayed Sable, by the name of Millington. Millington.


Sable, an Eagle displayed Argent, armed Gules, by the name of Boyland. Boyland.


Argent, an Eagle displayed Vert, by the name of Bilney. Bilney.


Or, an Eagle displayed Sable, by the name of Kirkhill. Kirkhill.


Gules, an Eagle displayed Ermine, by the name of Waney. VV^ney.


Parted per Pale Or, an Argent, an Eagle displayed Gules, by the name of
Thompson. Thompson.


Parted per Pale Gules and Ermine, an Eagle displayed Or, by the name of
Bordam. Bordam.


Parted per Bend, Gules and Vert an Eagle displayed Or, by the name of Grave.
Grave.


Azure, three Eagles displayed Or, by the name of Billesworth. Billesworth


Or, three Eaglets displayed Gules, by the name of Eglesford. Eglesford.


Argent, three Eaglets displayed Gules by the name of Eaglesfield. Eaglesfield


Sable, six Eaglets displayed Argent, by the name of Barantine. Barantine.


9. Sable, a Goshawk Argent, Perching upon a Stock, fixed in the Base point of
the Escocheon of the second, Armed, Jessed, and Belled Or, by the name of
We Will. We Will.


Next to the Eagle which is reckoned the Sovereign Queen of all Fowls, the the
Goshawk, the Ger-Falcon, the Falcon, and other Birds of Prey are the Chief.

Gules, three Falcons Argent, Armed, Jessed and Belled Or, by the name of
Atherton. Atherton.


Azure, three Falcons Argent, Armed, Jessed, and Belled Or, by the name of
Pennington. Pennington.


Sable, a Falcon Argent, Armed Or, by the name of Yedling. Yedling.


10. Gules, a Cheveron between three Facons Argent, Hadley.
born by George Hadley of East Barnet in Hertfordshire Esquire.

11. Azure, three Bustards rising Or, by the name of Nevill. Nevill.


It is observable that all long Shank'd Fowl in their flight do stretch forth
their Legs at length to their Tails, but the short do truss their Feet up to
the midst of their Bodies.

12. Or, a Raven proper born by Sir John Corbet of Stoke upon Teane, Corbet.
and Adderley in Shropshire Baronet.

The Raven is said to give no food to it is young until she sees what color
they will be of, and when she sees them black like her self she is very
careful of them. This Bird is said to live about 100 years, and does take it is
name from it is rapine quality.

13. Gules, a Pelican in her Nest, with Wings displayed, feeding her young ones
Or, vulned proper, by the name of Carne. Carne.


The Egyptian Priests as Farnesius notes used the Pelican for a Hierogliphick
to express the duties of a Father to his Children.

14. Gules, three Cocks Argent, armed, crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of
Cock. Cock.


The Cock may not improperly be termed the Knight amongst Birds, being of a
noble courage, and also prepared to Battle, having his Comb for an Helmet, his
sharp and hooked Bill for a Faulcheon, or Courtlax, and as a complete Soldier
armed a Cap-a-pee, he has his Legs armed with Spurs. When he is Victor he
croweth which gives testimony of his Conquest, and when he is vanquished he
shuneth the light, or society of men.

15. Or, three Swallows, their Wings close proper, by the name of Watton.
VVatton.


The Swallow is the welcome harbinger, showing the approach of the Spring.

16. Argent, a Cross Gules between four Peacocks Azure, born by the Right
Honorable Francis Lord Carington, Lord Carington.
Baron of Wotton in Warwickshire, and Viscounth Barreford in Ireland.

The Peacock is so proud that when he erecteth his Fan of Plumes he admireth
himself, and does display them against the rays of the Sun that they may
glister with the greater Glory.

Other Examples of Fowls.
Argent, three Swans disclosed Sable, by the name of Folgnardly. Folgnardy.


Sable, a Heron Argent, by the name of Heron. Heron.


Argent, a Cock Gules, Armed, Crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of
Broncham. Broncham.


Argent, a Raven proper, by the name of Morton. Morton.


Sable, a Falcon Argent, Armed Or, by the name of Yedling. Yedling.


Azure, three Falcons their Wings expansed Argent, by the name of Nevile.
Nevile.


Argent, a Pelican in her Nest, vulned, and disclosed Sable, by the name of
Cantrell. Cantrell.


Azure, three Pelicans Or, vulned proper engraving of blazon showing birds and
bees folio 181

Birds.
born by Sir John Pelham of Lungton in Sussex Baronet. Pelham.


Argent, a Cock Gules, Armed, Crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of
Brougham. Brougham.


Argent, three Cocks Gales, by the name of Coliborn. Coliborn.


Argent, three Cocks Sable, Armed, Crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of
Pomfret. Pomfret.


Sable, three Heath Cocks Argent, Membred Gules, by the name of Has. Has.


Argent, six More Cocks Sable, Membred Gules, by the name of Fitz-Mores.
Fitz-Mores.


Other Examples of BIRDS.
1. PEARL, on a Bend Diamond, three Owls of the Field, born by the most
Honorable George Savill, Marquess Earl and Viscount Hallifax, and Baron of
Eland in Yorkshire, Lord Privy Seal, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.

The Owl was Minerva's Bird, and was born by the Athenians for their Armorial
Ensign. In Armoury he signifies Prudence, Vigilance, and Watchfulness by Night.

2. Sable, an Orle of Owls within an Escocheon Argent, born by Sir Henry
Calverley Calverley.
of Eryholme in Yorkshire Knight.

3. Diamond, Gutte de leau, on a Fess Pearl, three Cornish Choughs proper, born
by the Right Honorable Charles Lord Cornwallis, Lord Cornwallis.
Baron of Eye in Suffolk, etc.

4. Argent, a Cross Potance between four Martlets Sable, a Canton Ermenois,
born by Thomas Stringer Stringer.
of Bexwells in Essex Esquire.

5. Or an Escocheon within an Orle of eight Martlets Sable, born by Sir John
Brownlow Brownlow.
of Belton near Grantham in Lincolnshire Baronet.

The Martlet has Legs so short that they cannot go, and if they happen to fall
upon the ground they cannot raise themselves upon their Feet as other Birds do
to prepare themselves for flight, and for this reason they make their Nests
upon Rocks, and high places, from whence they may easily take their flight.

6. Per Fess Gules and Argent, six Martlets counterchanged, born by Sir Jo.
Fenwick Fenwick.
of Wallington in Northumberland Baronet, Cornet to the Queens Troop of his
Majesty's Guards.

7. Azure, a Cheveron between three Martlets Argent, born by Tolemach Duke Duke.
of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire, Exigenter for London in the Court of
Common Pleas.

8. Gules, a Cheveron embattuled Ermine, three Martlets Or, born by the
Honorable Sir Francis Withins Withens.
of Eltham in Kent Knight, one of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Kings
Bench Westminster.

9. Gules, a Ferdemolin Argent, between two Martlets Or, born by Sir William
Beversham Beversham.
of Millbeck-hall in Suffolk Knight, one of the Masters in Chancery.

10. Sable, on a Cheveron between ten Martlets Argent, five Plates, or Ogresses
born by Thomas Bard Bard.
of Caversfield in Buckinghamshire Esquire.

11. Azure, three Bees volant en arriere Argent, by the name of Bye. Bye.
The Be is a very profitable Insect for its Wax and Honey which is esteemed a
great preserver of Nature. To speak of the properties of the Be, and their
Government would be too tedious for this place.

12. Argent, three Eagles heads erazed Sable, by the names of Yellen. Yellen.


13. Argent six Ostriches feathers 3, 2, and 1 Sable, by the name of Jervis.
Jervis.


14 Gules, two Wings impailed conjoined in Fess, or two Wings in Lure Or, by
the name of Seymour. Seymour.


15. Sable, an Eagles Leg in Pale erazed a laquise Argent, the Tallons Gules,
by the name of Canhanser. Canhanser.


16. Or, two Eagles Legs barways erazed a la quise Sable, armed Gules.

Other Examples of Birds.
Argent, an Owl Gules, by the name of Herwart. Herwart.


Argent, a Cornish Chough proper, by the name of Trenethyn. Trenethyn


Gules, three Doves proper, by the name of Hodby. Hodby.


Az re, 3 Larks Or, by the name of Air. Air.


Argent, three Owls Sable, by the name of Bridge. Birdge.


Sable, three Owls Argent, armed Or, by the name of Boughton. Boughton.


Argent, three Coots proper, by the name of Coote. Coote.


Parted per Fess Argent and Sable, a Martlet counterchanged, by the name of
Remis. Remis.


Sable, a Martlet Argent by the name of Adam. Adam,


Argent, three Martlets Gules by the name of Fornival. Fornival.


Azure, three Martlets Argent by the name of Kirketon. Kirketon.


Sable, three Martlets Argent, by the name of Naughton. Naughton.


Gules, three Martlets Argent by the name of Wotton. Wotton.


Per Cheveron Or, and Azure, three Martlets counterchanged, by the name of
Edgeworth. Edgworth.


Sable, four Martlets two and two Argent by the name of Monter. Monster.


Argent, five Martlets three and two Gules by the name of Dowdal. Dowdal.


Sable, six Martlets 3, 2, 1, by the name of Apleby. Apleby.


Per Pale Indented Argent and Sable, six Martlets counterchanged, by the name
of Wren. Wren.


Sable eight Martlets 3, 2, 2, 1, Argent by the name of Stanton. Ltanton.


Argent, a Flower de lis between eight Martlets Sable by the name of Rochdale.
Rochdale.


Argent, an Escocheon within eight Martlets Gules, by the name of Vaux. Vaulx.


Gules, a Cressent Ermin between eight Martlets Or, by the name of Bohun. Bohun.


Gules, ten Martlets 4, 3, 2, 1 Or, by the name of Tochet. Tochet.


Sable, three Swans necks couped Argent, by the name of Squire. Squire.


Azure, three Peacock heads Erazed Or, by the name of Beconthorp. Beconthorp


Argent, three Cocks heads erazed Sable, Membred and Jolloped Gules, by the
name of White. White.


Gules, two Wings inverted and conjoined Ermine, by the name of Reney. Reny.


Sable, a pair of Wings conjoined, and elevated Argent, born by the Right
Honorable Robert Ridgway Earl of Londonderry, Earl of Londonderry.
and Barron of Gallon-Rigeway in Ireland.

Gules three Wings elevated Argent, by the name of Newport. Newport.


Gules three Wings pendant Or, by the name of Baud. Baud.


CHAP. VI.
Treats of watery Animals, being such as have their abode, and relief only in
the water, to wit Fishes of all sorts, which as they are of a less complete
nature then Earthy, or Aerial Animals, so are they of less esteem in Coat
Armor.

As Birds have their Plumes, Wings and Trains for their cutting their passage
through the Air; So are Fishes provided with Finns wherewith they guide
themselves in their swimming, and cut the current of the streams and waves for
their more easy passage wherein their course is directed by their Tail, as
Ships are conducted by their Helm, or Ruther.

Fishes are born after diverse manners, viz. directly upright, imbowed,
extended, indorsed, respecting each other, surmounting one another. Fretted and
Triangle, etc. All Fishes (says Leigh) that are born feeding shall in Blazon
be tearemd devouring, and that whereon they feed must be expressed.

All Fishes raised directly upright, and having Finns must be termed in Blazen
Hauriaunt, signifying to draw, or suck because that Fish do often times put their
Heads above Water to refresh themselves with the cool Air, but especially when
the Waters in the depth of the Seas do so rage, and as it were boil against
some Tempestuous Storm, that they cannot endure the unwonted heat thereof, All
Fishes being born transverse, must be Blazoned Naiant, or Swiming, for in such
sort do they bear themselves in the Water when they swim.

Of Fishes some have hard and crusty Coverings, others a more softer outside,
and these latter are of two sorts, some having only Skin and others Scales.

Fishes are also born in part, and on, or between, any of the Honorable
Ordinaries.

Of these several kinds, these following Examples shall suffice.

engraving of blazon showing fish and other sea creatures folio 189

Fish:


Examples of FISHES.
1. AZure three Dolphins Naiant extended in Pale Barry Or, by the name of
Dolphin. The Dolphin Dolphin.
is here in its natural form of swiming, and is said to Marshal their great
Troops in admirable order; for in the Vaunt-guard swim all their young ones, in
the middle the Females, and in the Rearward all the Males, like good Husbands
that have a care to their Wives and Children. The Dolphin is a Fish of such
great Strength, and Swiftness, that in his pursuit of other Fishes for his prey
(who make to the Rocks, or Shore for Shelter) he often receives danger. The
Naturalist say that the She Dolphin has Dugs, and gives suck to her young.
That the Dolphin is a great lover of Music, and loves the Company of men, but
that I leave to the Opinion of the Reader.

2. Sable a Dolphin Naiant Imbowed, and devouring a Fish proper, by the name of
Symonds. Symonds.


3. Azure, three Dolphins hauriant Or, born by Mr. Peter Vandeput Vandeput.
of London Merchant.

4 Per Cheveron Sable and Argent, in chief two Dolphins Naiant respecting each
other of the second born by Ambrose Atfield Atfield.
Dr. in Divinity; and Vicar of St. Leonards Shorditch in Middlesex.

5. Vert, two Barbels hauriant respecting each other Argent.

6. Gules, two Pikes hauriant endorsed Or.

7. Sable, three Salmons hauriant Argent, by the name of Salmon. Salmon.


8. Azure, three Trouts fretted in Triangle test ala queve Argent, by the name
of Trowtheck. Trowtheck.


9. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Crevices upright Gules, these are
not to be Blazoned hauriant as Fishes that have Finns but upright

10. Argent, a Lobsters Claw in Bend sinister Saltire like, surmounted of
another dexter ways Gules, by the name of Tregarthick. Tregarthick.


11 Per Pale Argent and Gules an Escallop Shell Or, born by Sir Humphry Wynch
Wynch.
of Harleford in Great Marlow in Buckinghampshire, and of Hamnes in
Bedfordshire Baronet.

13. Topaz, on an Chief Diamond, three Escallop-shells Pearl; Lord Preston,
born by the Right Honorable Richard Grayham, Viscount Preston, and Lord
Graham of Eske, Ambassador for his Majesty King Charles the Second to the King
of France, 1684.

13. Azure, three Escallops Or, born by Sir John Mallet Mallet.
of St. Andrems in West Quantox-head in Sommersetshire Knight.

14. Gules a Fess dauncette Or, between three Escallops Ermine, born by Francis
Dives Dive.
of Bromham in Bedfordshire Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Lewis Dive of the said
place Knight.

15. Or, two Bars Azure, in Chief, three Escallops Gules, born by Edward Clark
Clark.
of Chipley in Somersetshire Esquire.

Sable a Fess engrailed between three Welks Or, born by Sir John Shelly Shelly.
of Michelgrove in Sussex Baronet.

Other Examples of Fishes.
Gules, a Dolphin hauriant Argent, by the name of Fores. Fores.


Sable, a Dolphin naiant imbowed Argent by the name of Fitz James. Fitz James


Gules a Dolphin naiant Sable by the name of Visacher. Visacher.


Vert, two Dolphins indorsed Or, by the name of Hanner. Hanner,


Argent, three Dolphins naiant Sable, by the name of Darburg. Darburg.


Argent, three Pikes in Pale naiant Gules by the name of Pickton. Pickton.


Vert, three Dolphins naiant in Pale Or, by the name of Dolphingley. Dolphingley


Azure, three Congers hauriant Argent, by the name of Conghurst. Conghurst.


Argent, three Eeles naiant in Pale Barrey Sable, by the name of Ellis. Ellis.


Argent, three Dog-fishes naiant in Pale Sable, by the name of Guess. Guess.


Barry wavey of six Or and Gules, three Prawns naiant, in the first of the
second by the name of Sea, Sea.
or Atsea.

Argent, a Cheveron engrailed Sable, between three Sea Crabs Gules, by the name
of Bridger. Bridger.


Argent, an Escallop Gules, by the name of Prelate. Prelat^


Azure, an Escallop Or, by the name of Bayton. Bayton.


Gules, three Escallops Or, by the name of Pale. Pale.


Argent, three Escallops Gules by the name of Barnaby. Barnaby.


Argent, three Escallops Sable by the name of Strickland. Strickland.


Sable, three Escallops Or, Walcot. Walcot.


Azure, three Esccallops Or, by the name of Hartfield. Hartfield.


Gules, three Escallops Or, by the name of Palmer. Palmer.


Or, three Escallops Gules, by the name of Harbottle. Harbottle.


Azure five Escallops 2, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Rowton. Rowton.


Azure five Escallops 2, 2, 1, Or, by the name of Shorevile. Shorevile.


Azure five Escallops 2, 1, 2 Or, by the of Ratesden. Ratesden.


Azure five Escallops 1, 3, 1 Or, by the name of Barker. Barker.


Gules, six Escallops 3, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Scales. Scales.


Sable six Escallop 3, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Escot. Escot.


CHAP. VII.
Treats of Monstrous Animals such as are exorbitant from the general course of
Nature either for qualities or essence, and of these there are diverse sorts, as
Amphibia, that is such as live sometimes as if they were Water Creatures, and
other times as if Land Creatures. And those of a more Prodigious Shape, being
formed, or rather deformed with the confused Shapes of Creatures of diff^rent
kinds and qualities, and such are Monsters which St. Augustine says cannot be
rekoned amongst the good Creatures that God created before the fall of Adam.

engraving of blazon showing monstrous creatures folio 195

Monstrous Creatures:


Examples of Monstrous CREATURES.
1. ARGENT, a Beaver erected Sable, devouring a Fish, proper.

The Beaver has his Tail only Fish, which he keeps for the most part in the
Water, his hinder Legs are like a Swan, and his foremost like a Dog; so he
swims with the one, whilst he preyeth with the other.

2. Argent a Fes. between three Otters Sable, born by Simon Lutterel of
Lutterel Lutterel.
in the County of Dublin i^ Ireland Esquire. It is reported that in C^ina they
train up Otters as we do Spaniels which go into the Water and bring forth Fish
at the command of their Masters, which custom has been practiced of late
years by some in England.

3. Azure, a Musimon Argent.

This is a Bigenerous Beast of an unkindly procreation being engendered between
a Goat and a Ram; like as Tyterus is between an Ewe and a Buck Goat.

4. Gules, a Leonard passant gardant, Or, spotted Sable.

The Shape of the Leopard denotes his unkindly Birth, and to be degenerate
from the Lion, but more agreeable to the Pardus in his shape and spots; nor
has he the noble Courage of the Lion, to whom he is a mortal Enemy, and often
times by his subtle, treacherous policy does get him into a Snare.

5. Argent, on a Cross Sable a Leopards face Or, Bridges
born by George Rodeney Bridges of Keynsham in Somersetshire, Esquire. One of
the Grooms of the Bedchamber to his Majesty King Charles the Second.

6. Diamond, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads or Faces Topaz by the name
of Wentworth. Wentworth.


This with a Garter is born by the Right Honorable William Earl of Strafford
Earl of Strafford.
Viscount Wentworth, Baron of Wentworth Woodhouse Newmarch, Oversley and Rabby,
Knight of the Garter, etc.

This Coat with a due difference is born by Sir William Wentworth of Wakefield
Knight. By Jo. Wentworth of North Empsal Knight. By Jo. Wentworth of Wolley
Esquire, and by John Wentworth of Elmshel Esquire, all of the West Riding of
Yorkshire.

Pearl, a Cheveron Ruby between three Leopards Faces Diamond, born by the Right
Honorable Francis Viscount Newport of Bradford, Baron Newport of High Ercall,
Lord Viscount Newpert.
Lord Leiutenant of Shropshire, Treasurer of his Majesty's Household, and one of
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, etc.

Or, a Cheveron between three Leopards faces Sable, born by Sir Charles Wheeler
Wheeler.
of Burbury in Warwickshire Baronet, anciently of Martin Hussingshire in
Worcestershire.

Vert, a Cheveron between three Leopards faces Or, Stich.
born by Sir Thomas Fitch of Elthans, and Mount Mascal in Kent Knight.

Sable, a Cheveron between three Leopards faces Argent, born by Mr. Thomas
Hawes Hawes.
of London Merchant.

7. Argent on a Bend engrailed Gules, three Leopards faces Or, born by Nichoas
Barbon Barbon.
of London M. D. and one of the College of Physicians of London.

8. Sable, two Bars Ermin, in Chief three Leopards faces Or, born by Owen
Feltham Feltham.
of Grais Inn in Middlesex Esquire.

9. Gules on a Bend Argent, three Leopards faces of the field, born by Colonel
Robert Werden VVerden.
of Chester, Comptroler to the Household of his Royal Highness James Duke of
York, and first Lieutenant and Major of his Guards.

Or, on a Bend Azure, three Leopards faces Argent, Mingay
born by Jo. Mingay of Ginninham in N^rf^lk Esquire.

10. Gules a Cheveron between two Leopards faces in Chief, a Bugle horn in Base
Argent, born by Sir Thomas Slingsby of Skriven in the West Riding of Yorkshire
Baronet. Slingsby.


11. Sable a Leopards head Argent, Jessant a Flower de lis Or, born by Sir
William Morley of Halnaker in Sussex Knight of the Bath. Morley.


12. Argent a Cheveron between three Seals feet erected, and erazed Sable,
These Arms belongs to the Town of Yarmouth in Norfolk.

engraving of blazon showing monstrous creatures folio 199

Monstrous Creatures.


The Milk of the Seal is said to be very good against the falling Sickness.

Other Examples of Monstrous CREATURES.
1. AZure, a Griffon passant, and a Chief Or, born by George Evelyn of
Godstone, and Ditton in Surrey Esquire, And by John Evelyn Evelyn.
of Says Court near Deptford in Kent Esquire.

2. Ermine, a Griffon Segreant, or Rampant Saphir, born by the Right Honorable
Francis Lord Aungier, Earl, Viscount, and Baron of Longford in Ireland, and one
of the Lords of his Mjesties most Honorable Privy Council for that Kingdom,
etc.

Sable, a Griffon Segreant Or Rampant Argent, born by Edward Griffin of Dingley
in Northamptonshire Esquire, Treasurer of the Chamber to his Majesty King
Charles the Second, and Leiutenant Colonel of his Majesty's own Troop of
Horse-Guards.

Azure, a Griffon Segreant Or, by the name of Read. Read.
This Coat is also born by Mr. James Corsellis Corselis.
of London Merchant.

Argent, a Griffon Segreant Or, born by Owen Meverell Meverell.
Doctor of Physic.

Azure, a Griffon Segreant Sable, born by Richard Coling Coling.
of Coreley in Shropshire Esquire, principal Secretary to the Earl of
Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's household.

3. Or, on a Cheveron between three Cinquefoils Azure, as many Escollops
Argent, on a chief Gules, a Griffon Passant of the Third, born by Richard
Hawkins Hawkins.
of Marsham in Berkshire Esquire.

4. Argent, a Dragons head erazed Vert, holding in his mouth a sinister hand
couped at the wrist Gules, born by Sir John Williams Williams.
of Mustow house in Fulham in Middlesex Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas
Williams of Eltham Court in Kent Knight and Baronet.

5. Argent, on a Fess between a double Cottize Gules, three Griffons heads
erazed Or, born by Sir Robert Dashwood Dashwood.
of Norbrook, and Wickham in Oxfordshire Knight.

6. Sable, a Cheveron between three Griffons heads erazed Argent, born by Sir
John Cotton Cotton.
of Lanwade of Cambridgshire Baronet.

7. Argent, a Wivern his Wings displayed, and Tail nowed Gules, by the name of
Drakes. Drakes.


Like as the Griffin does partake of a Fowl, to wit an Eagle in the forepart
and a Lion in the hinder, so does the Wivern in the forepart the Wings and
Legs of a Fowl, and of an Adder, Snake, or Serpent in the Tail.

8. Sable, a Cockatrice displayed Argent, Crested, Membred, and Jolloped Gules.

The Cockatrice is of that pestiferous, and poisonous quality that he is termed
the King of Serpents.

9. Azure, a Harpey with her Wings disclosed, and her Hair flotant Or, This
Coat stands in the Church at Huntington.

10. Argent, a Mearemaid Gules, crined Or, holding in her right hand a Mirror,
and in her left a Comb, by the name of Ellis. Ellis.


11. Or, a Dragon Passant Vert.

12. Argent, a Reremouse or Bat displayed Sable, by the name of Bakster.
Bakster.


The Reremouse does partake both with the Beast and Bird, so that it cannot be
well said to which it does belong; for by her Wings and Flying she should be a
Bird, and by her body a kind of a Mouse. She brings forth her young, and
suckleth them with her Paps which Birds do not.

Under this head comes Montegres, Satyrs, Monk-fishes, as also Lion-dragons,
Lions-poisons, and all other double shaped Animals.

CHAP. VIII.
Having in these foregoing Chapters treated of the whole Body of Heraldry, with
Rules and Examples sufficient to blazon any Coat Armor; my next business shall
be to lay down some few Rules for the Marshalling and Impaling of Coats in one
Shield.

BY Marshalling of Coats Marshaling of Coats.
is to be understood an orderly disposing of sundry Coat Armours pertaining to
distinct Families, and of their contingent Ornaments with their Parts and
Appurtenances in their proper places. And of these some have their place within
the Escocheon, and some without: of those within some have their occasions
obscure, and others man^fest, as are those whose Marshalling (a^cording to
ancient and prescript forms) do apparently betoken Marriage, or some gift of
the Sovereign. Such as betoken Marriage do represent either a Match single, or
Hereditary: By a single Match, is meant the conjoyning the Coat Armor of the
Man with the Woman which is Impal^d on the sinister side of the Man's; but if
she be an Heiress then her Coat is to be born in an Escocheon of Pretense in
the midst of his Shield, and over the Charge, if there charged.

It is also accustomary for Bishops to Impale on the dexter side of their
Coats, the Coat belonging to their Episcopal See.

And if a Man has had more than one Wife, the way of Bearing them is to Impale
them betwixt his own, which is to be in the middle part of the Shield, Examples
of all which shall be given for the Readers better instructions therein.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by quartering, showing fret and garbs
He Bears, two Coats quarterly both by the name of Vernon, Vernon.
1. Argent, a Frett Sable, 2dly. Or on a Fess Azure, three Garbs Or, the 3d. as
the 2d. the 4th. as first. These Coats thus Marshalled are born by George
Vernon of Sudbury in Derbyshire, and of Haslington in Cheshire Esquire,
descended of the Vernons who were anciently Barons of Shibbrook in the said
County of Chester.

After this manner are a greater number of Quarterings born, as will appear by
the Examples given in the Second Part.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impalement, showing a cross and a
bear rampant He Bears Per Pale Baron and Femme, the first Argent, a Cross
Sable, by the name of Clayton, Clayton.
the second Paly of six Or, and Gules, on a Canton Argent, a Bear rampant
Sable, by the name of Trot.

These Coats are thus born by Sir Robert Clayton of Marden in Surry, and of the
City of London Knight and Alderman, Lord Mayor thereof Anno 1680, who is now
Married to Martha Eldest Daughter of Perient Trot of London Merchant.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling three coats, showing a bezant, lions,
fleur-de-lis, and wolves He Bears Baron, Impaled between his two Wives, first
in the midst Ruby a Bezant between three Demi Lions Rampant Pearl by the name
of Bennet. Lord Oswestre.


2dly. On the dexter side Topaz on a Pallet Saphir, three Flower de lis of the
Field, being the Coat of Elizabeth Countess of Mulgrave, and Daughter to the
Earl of Middlesex first Wife to the bearer hereof.

3dly. On the sinister side Topaz, a Fess between three Wolves heads couped
Diamond, born by Bridget How of the Family of Sir Gru^ham How present Wife to
the hearer hereof the Right Honorable Sir John Bennet Knight of the Bath, and
Baron Bennet of Oswestre in Middlesex.

woodcut blazon demonstrating escutcheon, showing hand, garb, mullets, and
sable He Bears Azure, a Wheat Sheaf Or Garb Or, by the name of Grosvenor, in
an Escocheon of Pretense the Arms of Davies viz. Or a Cheveron between three
Mullets pierced Sable; this with the Arms of Vlster is the Bearing of Sir
Thomas Grosvenor of Eaton in Cheshire Baronet, now Married to Mary sole
Daughter and Heir to Alexander Davies of the Mill-Bank in the Parish of Saint
Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Esquire.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by quartering and escutcheon, showing
lion rampant, pheons, torteaux He Bears quarterly, first Argent, a Lion
rampant Gules between three Pheons Sable, by the name of Egerton. Egerton.


2. Barry of six Argent, and Azure, in Chief three Torteauxes, a File Ermine,
by the name of Gray.

3. Sable, on a Bend between two Cottizes Argent, a Rose Gules between two
Amulets of the Field, by the name of Conway. the 4th. as the first on an
Escocheon of Pretense, Gules, two Helmets in chief Argent, and a Wheat Sheaf in
base Or, by the name of Cholmeley. These Coats are thus born by John Egerton of
Broxton in Cheshire Esquire, eldest Son of Sir Philip Egerton of Egerton, and
Outon in the said County Knight, which John is now Married to the Daughter and
Coheir of Tho. Cholmeley or Cholmondley of Vale Royal in Cheshire, Esquire.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impaling, showing leopards,
crescents He Bears Gules, on a Bend Argent, three Leopards heads, Or, faces
of the Field by the name of Werden, Werden.
Impaled with Sable, a Cross engrailed between four Crescents Argent, in right
of Jane Daughter of Edward Barnham of Cockhall in Kent Esquire; first Wife to the
bearer hereof; and in an Escocheon of Pretense Sable, two Swords Saltierwise
with their points downwards Ardent, Pomeled and Hilted Or, by the name of
Towse, in right of Margaret Daughter and Heir of William Towse of
Basingborn-hall in Essex Esquire, present Wife to the bearer hereof Colonel
Robe^t Werden of Chester, Comptroller of the house of his Royal Highness James
Duke of York, and first Leiutenant, and Major of his Guards.

This Example shows how a Man should Bear the Arms of his Wives the one being
an Heiress, and the other not. The other Examples show how the Coats of the
Wives are to be born.

Having given examples of the Marshalling of Quarterings, Impalings, and
Escocheons of Pretense for Wives. In the next place I shall treat of
Augmentations of honor bestowed on the Bearer by his Sovereign for Favor or
Merit, and of these some are Impaled with their Paternal Coats, and others born
only on a Canton, Quarter, or Chief.

woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impaling, showing fleur-de-lis,
lions passant guardant, wings The Lady Jane Seymour, Seymour.
afterward Wife to King Henry the 8th. Mother to the most noble Prince Edward
the Sixth, received as an Augmentation of honor to her Family by the gift of
her said Husband these Arms born on the dexter side of of the Escocheon, viz
Sol, on a Pile Mars, between six Flower de lis, Jupiter, three Lions Passant
Gardant of the first, Impaled with her Paternal Coat, viz. Mars two Wings Pale
ways inverted, Or two Wings in Lure Sol. This Coat is now born by the Right
Noble Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of Hertford,
Viscount Beauchamp, Baron Seymour, and Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter.

woodcut blazon with bend and escutcheon, showing crosses and lion Ruby, on a
Bend between six Cross Croslets Fitchee Pearl, an Escocheon Topaz, thereon a
Demi Lion peirced through the mouth with an Arrow, within a double Treasure
counter-floured of the first: and is the Paternal Coat of the Right Noble and
ancient Family of the Howards, which now flourishes in the persons of his
Grace Henry Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Norfolk.
Earl of Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk, and Norwich, Baron Howard, Fitz-Allen,
Matravers, Mawbrey, Segrave, Bruce, Clun, Oswaldstre, and Castle-Rising, Earl
Marshal of England, Constable of Windsor Castle, etc.

The Right Honorable James Earl of Suffolk Earl of Suffolk.
Baron Howard of Walden.

The Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Berkshire, Earl of Berk-shire.
Viscount Andover, and Baron Howard of Charlton.

The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carlisle, Earl of Carlisle.
Viscount Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacres of Gisland, Lord Leiutenant of the
Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland, Vice Admiral of the Coasts of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Durham, and Maritine parts adjacent.

The Right Honorable William Howard Viscount and Baron Stafford, Lord Stafford.
Anno 1680.

The Right Honorable William Lord Howard, Lord Howard.
Baron of Escrick.

The Honorable Charles Howard Charles Howard Esquire;
of Grastock in Cumberland Esquire, brother to his Grace Henry late Duke of
Norfolk.

The Honorable Sir Robert Howard Sir Robert Howard.
of Vastern in Wiltshire Knight, Brother to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Berkshir.e

And the Honorable Sir Philip Howard Sir Phillip Howard.
Knight, Captain of the Queens Troop of his Majesty's Guards, and Brother to
the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carlisle. And from these and their
Ancestors Loins, have issued forth diverse worthy Gentlemen as Stems to support
the Dignity of the said Family.

The said Augmentation on the Bend was Granted unto the Right noble Thomas Duke
of Norfolk and his descendants by King Henry the eigth, for his signal Service
as General of the Army which gave that remarkable overthrow at Floding to King
James the forth of Scotland; which said Duke was by King Henry the Seventh
created Knight of the Garter, and made Lord High Treasurer of England.

To all the Arms of all Baronets King James granted according to the first
Institution of that degree as an Augmentation of honor to them and their
descendants the Arms of Vlster, viz. a sinister Hand couped at the Wrist Gules,
to be born in a Canton or Escocheon Argent, which said Augmentation is placed
in the most convenientest place of the Shield.

woodcut emblazon demonstrating chief quartered, showing lion passant guardant,
fleur-de-lis The Field is Topaz, two Bars Saphir, a chief quarterly Jupiter and
Mars on the first two Flower de lis Sol, on the second a Lion Passant Gardant
of the last; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. This Coat
belongs to the Right Honorable John Manors, Earl of Rutland, Earl of Rutland.
Baron Ross of Hamlake, Trusbut, and Belvoyr, which was given in Augmentation
to this Family, being descended of the Blood Royal from King Edward the Fourth.

CHAP. IX.
In the former Chapters have been treated of such things in Coat Armor as are
within the Shield or Escocheon; I shall now treat of those external Ornaments
without the Escocheon, viz. Helmets, Torces, or Wreaths, Caps, Crowns, Crests,
Mantlings, and Escroles: and to Noble Men Supporters; of all which in order.

THE Helmet Helmet.
is placed next above the Escocheon or Shield to all under the degree of a
Noble Man, And to the Nobility there is a Crown, and the Helmet issiung out of
the said Crown.

The Helmet does distinguish the dignity of the Bearer, for to a Gentleman and
and Esquire the Helmet is placed sideways with the Bever close.

To a Knight, Knights Helmet.
or Baronet (which is all one) the Helmet is placed foreright with the Bever
open. The full faced Helmet does signify direction and command, the close
attention and obedience.

The open Helmet placed sideways with Bars does belong to all Nobles under the
Degree of his Majesty, and Sovereign Dukes, or those of the Blood Royal.

To Kings, Kings Helmet.
Sovereign Princes and Dukes of the Royal Blood the Helmet is placed foreright
with open Bars; all which will appear in the second Part of this Book in the
Chapters relating to that Degree they are of; as will the Crowns or Coronets by
which each Degree of the Nobility are distinguished.

Coronets.
The Barons Coronet Barons Coronet.
is with six Pearls of an equal height, and distance one from the other.

The Viscounts Coronet Viscounts Coronet.
is composed only of Pearls close set together and of an equal height without
Flowers or Points.

An Earls Coronet Earls Coronet.
is composed of Points and Flowers, but the Points are Spiry with Pearls on the
top above the Flowers.

The Coronet of a Marquis Marquess. Coronet.
is of Leaves, and Points, with the Leaves and Flowers above the Points.

The Coronet of a Duke Dukes Coronet.
is only Floral.

The Coronet of a Prince Princes Coronet.
is the same with the Crown of a King, only the Arches, Mound, and Cross are
wanting.

The Crown of a King is as a Dukes, but with Arches, Mound, and Cross.

To a Bishop instead of a Coronet does belong a Miter.

Torce or VVreath.
Next above the Helmet is the Wreath or Torce which is of the principal Metal
and Color in the Bearers Paternal Coat, this the Crest stands upon: besides
which it often times stands upon a Mount, Hill, Chapeau, Or Coronet.

Crests.
Crests are various each Family having one appropriate to themselves. About the
Shield reaching from the top of the Helmet to the bottom of the Shield is the
Mantle Mantle.
which is to cover or wrap about the same. And these Mantlings are of a
different shape, and composure, and at the will of the Bearer to be altered at
pleasure, those commonly made use of are the Cloaks Mantles (anciently used)
and the Folding Mantles.

On each side of the Shield are placed Supporters Supporters.
for Noble Men.

The Escrole is at the bottom of the Shield in which is placed the Motto Or
Device of the Bearer which is according to his Fancy, and may be altered at
pleasure, but most commonly it alludes to the Coat, Crest, Name, or Employ. And
on the Escrole stands the Supporters.

The End of the First Part.
HONOR CIVIL ACCORDING TO THE LAWS of ENGLAND. With Examples of the
Atchivements of each Degree of Honor: And for the better explanation thereof
one Example of each Degree is Blazoned: Which method is to be observed to all
others. The Second Part.
CHAP. X.
As in Man's Body for the preservation of the whole, diverse Functions and
Offices of Members are required, even so in all well governed Kingdoms a
distinction of persons is necessary, and the policy of England is such to have
made a threefold division of persons, first the King, under which name a
Sovereign Queen is comprised, Secondly the Nobles, viz. the Prince, Dukes,
Degrees of Honor.
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Thirdly
the Commons which comprehends Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, etc.

Our Laws contrary to other Countries calls Noble under the degree of a Lord,
and the Nobility are Peers of the Realm, and do sit together in the Kings great
Council of Parliament with his Majesty, and the word Nobility or Noble
signifies to express men of generosity of blood and degree, as also the Reward
of Virtue, but a word or two of each Degree in particular, and first of the
King the Fountain from whom all Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honor spring
Of the King or Monarch of Great Britain.

Monarchy is as ancient as Man, Adam being created Sovereign Lord of the
Universe, whose Office was to govern the World, and all Creatures therein, his
Posterity divided into Tribes, and Generations acknowledged no other dominion
then Paternity and Eldership, till men and vice multiplying, pride and violence
adumbrated filial Piety, and obedience, the powerful oppressing the feeble,
which necessitated the introduction of a Politic Government, and put an end to
the good old Age; the most valiant Stems, or Nations electing to themselves
Kings to command them in peace, and to lead them forth to battle, which the
Greeks call Monarchies; others became governed under a select number of
Majestrates which is called Aristocracy, and others were so unfortunate as to
fall under the yoke of Democracy.

The Island of Great Britain ab Origin owned a Regal Power as Caesar's
Commentaries, our Chronicles sets forth.

The Britains were at first divided into many Kingdoms which afterward were
contracted into two Monarchies, viz. the English and the Scots, and in the end
united into one, and the ancient name of Great Britain restored in King James
as the right Heir and Descendant of the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, and
Scottish Kings, from whom it descended to our immediate Sovereign King Charles
the Second, in whose Veins all those Sovereign Streams of Royal Blood are
conjoined to Unite those jarring Nations into one Body under a Head unto which
each one may justly claim an interest.

The King is Gods Vicegerent, and ought to be obeyed; if good he is a
blessing, if bad a judgment, against whom we are to use no other Weapons but
Prayers and Tears for his amendment, he is stilled Pater Patria and because the
protection of his Subjects belongs to his care, the Militiae is annexed to his
Crown that the Sword and Scepter may be both in his hand.

It is the manner for Kings to Write in the Plural number, which is Gods own
style, Mandamus, Volumus, etc. And the Scripture calls them Gods, in which
sense they may be styled Divi, or Dij, quia Vicarij, and Dei voce indicat: And
our Lawyers say, Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, which denotes his Power
in Causes Ecclesiastical.

The Ceremonies at the Coronation are many, and more solemn with us, then in
many other Countries, as the anointing with Oil, an Imperial Crown set on his
head (which is always done by the Archbishop of Canterbury, as a Prerogative
belonging to that See) A Scepter the ancient Ensign of Regality is put into his
hand to signify Justice, a Ring is put on his Finger to denote Faithfulness; a
Sword for Vengeance, and a Mound that is a Globe Crested with a Cross put in
his right hand, the Globe denoting his Dominions by Sea and Land, and the Cross
his Faith.

The Kings Office.
The Office of the King of England according to Fortescue is to fight the
Battles of his People, and to do them Right and Justice. To enable him to
perform this weighty office certain Powers and Privileges are allowed him by
the Law of the Land, amongst which he has the power of the Militia both by
Land and Sea, of making Peace and War, he has all strong holds as Castles,
Forts and the like; he has the power of calling, adjourning, proroging, and
dissolving Parliaments at pleasure; also the increasing the number of the
Members of both Houses by creating new Peers, or bestowing new Privileges to
Boroughs, to elect and send Burgesses by his Writ to Parliament.

The Bills that pass both Houses receive the name of Laws from his breath, and
are annihilated if he lays them by without giving a reason for it. He has the
sole nomination of all Commanders and Offices both Military, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, the power of conferring Honors, dispencing with Penal
Statutes, the pardoning of Criminals, the Coining of Money, the erecting and
making Cities, Universities, Colleges, Hospitals, Fairs, Markets, Forests,
Chases, etc. The Enfranchising of Aliens, the granting of Letters of Mart: he
has the regulation of Weights, and Measures, and the setting of prizes on
Provisions within the Verge of his Court, which is twelve Miles round, which
said office is executed by his Clerk of the Markets for the said Verge; he has
also the power to take Carts, Wagons, or Boats for the carrying his Goods from
one Palace to another paying the Rates allowed by the Statute.

And for declaring his Royal pleasure he issues forth his Proclamations which
ought to be strictly obeyed by all his Subjects.

Debts due to the King are first to be satisfied, and all Receivers of his
Money and Revenues, their Persons, Lands, Goods, Heirs, Executors, etc. are at
all times chargeable for the same, for Nullum tempus occurit Regi.

In doubtful cases no Statute restrains the King unless he be especially named
therein, no Escoppel can bind him, no Judgment final in a Writ of Right
Judgments entered against him are with Salvo jure domini Regis.

The King has the Custody of all Idiots and Lunaticks; to him belongs all
Estates for want or Heirs, by Forfeitures, Esch^ats, etc.

A Treasure, Trove, all Waifs, Estrais, Wrecks at Sea, and the like not granted
from the Crown belongs to him, the like does all waste Lands, Gold, and Silver
Mines, the Royalties of Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling.

In the Church his Prerogative Power is very great, he can all National Synods
for the making of Canons for the introducing of Ceremonies into the Church to
reform Heresies, Schism and the like.

He has the Patronage of all Bishoprics; and the making of all Bishops.

These with many other are the Prerogatives that belongs to the Crown of
England.

engraving of royal coat of arms, King Charles the 2nd, showing lions, unicorn,
helmet, coronet, harp, fleur-de-lis Folio 227

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. DIEU ET MON DROIT. Atchivement of his Sacred Malie.
King Charles the 2d. etca.


The ACHIEVEMENT of the KING.
THe Royal Achievement, or Armorial Ensign of Honor belonging to His Majesty
is as follows, Quarterly quartered first Jupiter three Flowers de lis Sol,
quartered with Mars, three Lions passant Gardant in pale Sol. 2dly, Sol within
a double Tressure counter flowred, a Lion Rampant Mars. 3dly, Jupiter an Irish
ha^p Sol, stringed Luna, the fourth and last quarter in all points as the
first; all within the Royal Garter, on a Helmet adorned with an Imperial Crown,
a Lion passant Gardant crowned Sol, mantled with Cloth of Gold, lined Ermine,
supported on the dexter side with a Lion Gardant crowned Sol, and on the
sinister with an Unicorn Luna, thereto a Chain reflexed over his back, and
armed Sol, and in a Compartment below this Motto DIEV ET MON DROIT.

Of the PRINCE.
THe Kings eldest Son (who is Heir apparent from the day of his Birth) is
entitled Prince, from the Latin word quasi principalis post Regem.

See Guillim Second part Chapter 3.
The first that is read of in England was Edward eldest son to King Henry the
Third, since which time the eldest Son of the King has been by Patent, and
other Ceremonies Created Prince of Wales, Prince of Wales.
Earl of Chester, and Flint, etc.

King Edward the Third added the Dukedom of Cornwall with the said
Principality, and made the Black Prince his Son Prince of Aquitane, and since
the Union of Scotland his Title has been Princeps Mag. Brittania, but
ordinarily Prince of Wales. As eldest Son to the King of Scotland he is Duke of
Rothsay, and Seneschal of Scotland from his birth, and so long as Normandy
remained in the Kings possession he was styled Duke of Province.

At his Creation he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who puts a
Coronet on his head, a Ring on his middle Finger, and a Verge of Gold into his
hand, as also his Letters Patents after they are read.

The Mantle that he wears in Parliament is once more doubled upon the Shoulder
then a Dukes, his Cap of State indented, his Coronet formerly of Crosses and
Flower de lis, but has now an Arch added, with a Ball and Cross in the midst
on the Summit, by order of his present Majesty King Charles the Second. And the
Coronet with Crosses and Flower de lis was then allowed to his Royal Highness
James Duke of York; and all immediate Sons and Brothers of the Kings of
England, but their Sons although they hold the Titles of Dukes are to use the
Coronet of Leaves only as other Dukes do.

The Prince is a distinct Person from the King, he is a Subject, and holds his
Principalities of the King, and is subject to the Law, in token of which
subjection he uses this Posie ICH DIEV an old Saxon word which signifies I
Serve, which is placed about a Flower de lis.

DUKES.
A Duke is called Dux a ducendo from being a General or Leader of an Army, but
of late days this dignity is given by the King to men of Blood and Merit by
Patent. And the first English Duke was Edward the Black Prince who was created
Duke of Cornwall by his Father Edward the Third.

Their Chapron, Chapron.
or head attire is of Scarlet doubled Ermine; their Coronet made of St awberry
Leaves, his Mantle guarded with four Guards, he holds a Verge of Gold in his
hand, and at his Creation has his Sword put over his Shoulders, or guided to
him which V scounts, and Barons have not.

Dukes Privileges.
He may in all places out of the Kings or Princes presence erect his Cloth of
Estate hanging down within half a yard of the Ground; his Duchess may have her
Train born up by a Baroness, and no Earl without his permission is to wash with
him.

By Courtesy all Dukes eldest Sons are engraving of achievement of Grace
Christopher, Duke of Albemarle, showing lions, helmet, coronet, griffin folio
231

HON SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. FORTIER FIDELIER FOELICITER. Atchivement of his
Grace Christopher Duke of Albemarle etc.a
styled Ma qu sses and the younger Lords, and take place of Viscounts; he has
that Title of Grace, and is styled most potent, and noble Prince.

Dukes of the Blood Royal are styled, most High, Mighty, and Illustrious
Princes.

The Kings younger Sons are styled Princes by Birth, but have their Titles of
Dukes, Marqu^sses, etc. from Creation.

The D ughters are styled Princesses, and the Title of Roy l Highness is due to
them all both Sons and Daughters.

I shall give you for example of the Bearing of a Duke the Achievement of his
Grace Christopher Duke of Al^emarle. Achievement of the Duke of Albemarle.


The Right N^ble Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk
of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teys, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, Lord Leiutenant of Essex and Devonshire, Captain of his Majesty's Life
Guards and Guards of Horse, one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and one of
the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council, etc. Bears within a Garter,
Ruby a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Pearl, Ensigned with a
Coronet, and Helmet befitting his Graces quality, thereon on a Cheapeau Ruby,
lined Ermine a Cat-a-Mountain passant per Pale Diamond and Pearl between two
Palm branches proper; mantled Ruby, double Ermine; supported on the dexter side
by a Lion, and on the sinister by a Griffon both Pearl, and holding on their
Shoulders a Palm Branch proper; and for his Motto in a Scrole FORTIER:
FIDELITER FOELICITER.

MARQUISSES.
A Marquess according to the Saxon word Markenreve signifies a Governor of the
Marches; he has the next place of Honor to a Duke; he is Created by girding
on a Sword, by putting on his Head a Chaplet of Gold, and delivering into his
hand a Patent under the great Seal for the said Dignity, his Coronet is partly
Flowred, and partly Pyramidal, his Mantle and Cheapeau is Crimson or Scarlet,
doubled Ermine, with three guards and a half on the Shoulders; his Title is
most Noble and Honorable Prince. In engraving of achievement of George Savil,
Marquis of Halifax, showing owls, helmet, coronet, talbots folio 233

BE FAST Atchivement of the most Honble. George Marquess of Halifax etca.
the absence of the King, or a Duke he may have his Clothof Estate reaching
within a yard of the Ground; and his Marquiness may have her Train born by a
Knights Lady in her own House, but not in the presence of a Duchess. His
eldest Son has the Title of Earl, and his younger Sons are Lords. Also his
eldest Daughter is a Countess, and his younger Ladies by courtesy.

For the example of the Bearing of a Marquess, I shall incert that of the most
Honorable George Savil, Baron of Eland, Viscount, Earl and Marquess of
Hallifax, Marquess of Hallifax.
Lord Privy Seal, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc. who Bears for his paternal Coat Armor Pearl, on a Bend Diamond
three Owls of the Field. Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine, and for his Crest on a
Coronet and Helmet befiting his Lordships Degree, on a Wreath or Torce of his
Colors, an Owl Pearl, supported by two Talbots Pearl, gorged about the Necks
with Ducal Crowns per Pale Pearl and Ruby. And for his Motto in an Escrole BE
FAST.

EARLS.
See Guilim Second Part Chapt. 6.
THe word Earl by the Saxons was called Erlig, or Ethlin; by the Germans Plsg
ave or Lantgrave, and by the Normans Counts, being esteemed companions for
Kings and Princes; they were Officers of great trust in former times in
England, and have those Ensigns of Honor as the Marquisses and Dukes, viz. a
Chapeau or C^p for the head with a Coronet of Gold which for distinction is
Pyramidal pointed and pearled, and between each Pyramide is a Flower much
shorter then the Pyramid. Their Body is adorned with Robes, viz. a Hood,
Surcoat, and Mantle of Scarlet as for a Marquess, but there is but three Guards
of Ermine Fur on the Shoulders; they are also begirt with a Swo^d and have a
Patent delivered them. Their Titles are the Right Honorable, and truly Noble
Lord, as also most Potent and Noble Lord, out of his Superiors presence he may
have a Cloth of State fringed with Pendants, and his Countess may have her
Train born up by an Esquires Wife.

engraving of achievement of George, Earl of Berkeley, showing crosses, helmet,
coronet, lions folio 235

VIRTVTE NON VI Atchivement of the Right Honble. George Earl of Berkeley etca.


For the Example of the Bearing of an Earl I shall make use of the At heivement
of the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley.

The Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley, Viscount Duresley Lord Berkeley,
Achievement of the Earl of Berkley.
Mawbray, Segrave and Bruce, and Baron of Be kel y Castle, and one of the Lords
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council Anno Domino 1678 descended from
Harding a younger Son of one of the K ngs of Denmark that came into England
with William the Conqueror. Who Bears for his Paternal Coat Armor Ruby a
Cheveron between ten Crosses form Pearl, above the same, on a Coronet and
Helmet befitting his Lordships quality a Wreath of his Colors, thereon a Miter
Ruby charged with his Honors Coat; mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine; supported by
two Lions Pearl, the sinister Crowned, and gorged about the neck with a Collar
and Chain reflecting over his back Topaz, and on a Scrole below, his Lordships
Motto VIRTVTE NON VI.

VISCOUNTS.
See Guill. Chap. 7.
VIscount (an ancient name of office now in being for such that are Sheriffs of
Counties) was about the eighteenth of King Henry the Sixth made a Degree of
Honor who conferred the Title on John Lord Beaumont by Letters Patents, by
which he was Created (as an Earl) having a Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle with two
Guards and a half of plain white fur on his Shoulders (whereas other Degrees
above this are Ermin'd) and has his Coronet and Chaplet with a row of Pearls
close set together on it. They have the Title of Right Honorable and truly
Noble, or potent Lord. His Viscountess may have her train born up by a woman
out of her Superiors presence.

Achievement of the Lord Viscount VVenman.
For the Example of the Bearing of a Viscount I shall incert the Achievement of
the Right Honorable Phillip Viscount Wenman of Tuam in the County of Galloway
in Ireland, and Baron Wenman of Kilmainham in the County of Dublin in the said
Kingdom of Ireland; who bears two Coats engraving of achievement of Richard,
Lord Viscount Wenman, showing crosses, greyhounds, cock's head, helmet, coronet
folio 236

OMNIA BONA BONIS Atchivement of the Right Honble. Richard Lord Viscount Wenman
etca.
quarterly, first Ruby and Saphir a Cross Patonce Topaz. Secondly, a Fess
between three Anchors Topaz, the Third as the Second, the Fourth as the first;
supported by two Greyhounds Ruby Collored, Topaz; Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine,
and for his Crest on a Coronet and Helmet befitting his Lordships Degree, on a
Wreath of his Colors a Cocks Head erazed Saphir, Crested and Jolloped Topaz;
And for his Motto in an Escrole OMNIA BONA BONIS.

The said Dignity of Viscount, and Baron Wenman is by Letters Patents, Created
on the Honorable Sir Richard Wenman of Caswell in Oxfordshire Baronet to
commence after the death of the said Phillip Lord Viscount Wenman.

LORDS SPIRITUAL.
EP scopacy is as ancient as Christian Religion, being ordained by the Apostles
who took that Office upon them, and commended it to their Successors where they
planted the Gospel.

They are Barons of the Realm by Writ, by Tenure, and by Consecration. They are
in Precedence next after Viscounts, and are placed upon the Kings right hand in
Parliament. They have the Title of Lords, and Right Reverend Fathers in God;
and their Sees by the Piety of former Ages are amply endowed with revenues
sufficient to maintain their Dignities. Archbishops, Bishops, Deans.
There are two Archbishops, viz. Canterbury, and York, under whom are five and
twenty Sufragan Bishops, six and twenty Deans of Cathredrals and Collegiate
Churches, sixty Archdeacons, and 544 Prebendaries.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is Metropolitan of England, has power to Summon
the Archbishop of York, with the Bishops of his Province to a National Synod;
he takes place of all Dukes, and great Officers at Court except the Royal
Family; his Office is to Crown the King. The Bishop of London is his Provincial
Dean* Winchester his Chancellor, and Rochester his Chaplain.

The Archbishop of York also has precedence of all D^kes e^cept those of the
Royal Blood, and of all Great Officers, except the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper; he has the Honor to Crown the Queen, and to be her Chaplain.

Archbishops ^ave the Title of Grace, and most Reverent Fathers in GOD. They
have their Armorial Ensigns of Honor which is the Coat of their Episcopal See,
on the Dexter side impaled with their Paternal Coat, and for External
Ornaments, there is placed above a Miter, with Keys Saltierwise, according to
this example.

TEMPORAL BARONS.
See Guill. Nar. 2d. Chap. 9.
A Baron is a Dignity next unto a Viscount, and our Law Books makes a difference
between Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Viscounts, which are allowed Names of
Dignity, and the Baron; for they affirm that such a Baron needs not to be named
Lord, or Baron by the Writ, but the Duke, Marquis, etc. ought to be named by
their Names and Dignity. This Dignity is very ancient, they were first called
Valvasors, which name the Saxons changed into Thanes, and the Normans to
Barons. And it is the received opinion that in those days every Earl had ten
Barons under him, every Baron ten Knights fees holden of him, and those that
had four Knights fees in Possession were usually called to the Degree of a
Baron.

Three sorts of Barons.
There are three sorts Or kinds of Barons, viz. by Tenure, by Writ, and by
Creation or Patent.

1. Barons by Tenure or Prescription are those that hold any Honor, Castle, or
Manor, as the head of their Barony of which there are two sorts Spiritual and
Temporal and these are the most ancient Barons.

2dly. Barons by Writ Barons by Writ.
are those to whom a W^it of Summons ^n the Rings name is directed to come to
Parliment, etc. which kind of Writ is the same as directed to Barons by Tenure,
as also to Barons by Patent, but those that are not Barons by Tenure not
Pa^ent, and have only such Writs, after the receipt of such a W it and place
taken in Parliament accordingly ought to enjoy the Name and Dignity of a Baron.

The first institution of them is supposed to be in the 49 of Henry the Third,
to supply the places of the R bellious Barons then engaged against him in a
Civil War.

3dly. Barons by Patent Barons by Patent.
are Created by the Kings Letters Patents to them and their Heirs Male lawfully
begotten, and this was begun in the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Barons have their Hood or Chapean, their Surcoat and Mantle which has two
guards of white Fur, on their Shoulders: Also a Coronet with six Pearls placed
at equal distance.

They have the Titles of Right Honorable and truly noble Lords, and the
Baroness may have her train born up by her Page.

For the Example of a Barons Achievement, I shall incert the Coat Armor of
the Right Honorable Digby Lord Gerrard, Baron of Gerrards Bromley in
Staffordshire, etc. who bears Pearl a Saltier Ruby, for his Crest on a
Coronet and Helmet befitting his Lordships degree, on a Wreath of his Colors a
Munky proper with a Chain over his back Topaz, Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine,
supported by two Lions Ermine crowned Topaz.

KNIGHTHOOD. KNIGHTS of the GARTER.
IT was the custom and policy of puissant Princes both ancient and modern to
carass men of Heroic Spirits and renown with remarks of Honor, Guillim. Part
2. Chap. 11.
viz. precedence of place, honorable Robes and engraving of achievement of
Digby, Lord Gerard of Bromley, showing cross, helmet, coronet, monkey with
chain, lions folio 242

Atchivement of the Right Honble. Digby Lord Gerard of Bromley etc.a
Badges, and additional Titles; amongst which none seems more ancient then that
of Knighthood, most Nations having diverse distinct orders, some Military, and
some Civil; but amongst all orders purely Military that of Saint George which
we call Knights of the Garter deservedly has the pre-eminence for it is
antiquity, glorious institution by that Triumphant King Edward, and for the
many Emperors, Kings and Princes that have thought themselves honored in
being admitted into the Fraternity.

It was instituted about the year 1350, by the victorious King Edward the
Third. The Patron of the order is Saint George a man of renown for Chivalry and
Christianity in confirmation whereof he suffered Martyrdom in Asia, to whose
memory many Temples and Monasteries were dedicated in the Eastern, and
afterward in the Western Churches. And the 23th. of April is assigned for his
Feast.

The number of Knights of the Garter are not to exceed six and twenty, but
there is usually left one or more vacancies for the gratifying a foreign
Prince, or Ally.

The Habit of the order are Robes of Crimson, and Purple Veivet Cassocks, with
Coll^rs to be worn over them on Feast and Solemn Days, and a Star of Stiver to
be embroidered on the left side of their Cloaks, or Coats. They are also to
wear the Image of Saint George on Horseback encountering with the Dragon to be
made of Diamonds set in Gold, whi h is to hang on a blue Ribon, and always worn
cross their Body or Shoulders, as also a G^rter on the left Leg Enamelled with
Gold, Pearl, and precious Stone with the Motto HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE. Or
instead th^reof a Blew Ribbon, of all which stately Rob s, together with the
Solemnities at their Instaulation, etc. is at large treated of by Mr. Ashmele.

The distinction of Honor in their Shields is always within a Carter according
to the examples following, born by the Right Noble Henry Duke of Beaufort
Marquess and E^rl of Worcester, Achievement of the Duke of Beaufort.
B^ron Herbert of Chipstow, Raglon and Gower, Lord President, and Lord
Leiutenant of Wales, and Marshes, Lord Leiutenant of the Counties of Gloucester,
Hereford, and Monmouth, and of the City and County of Bristol, Lord Warden of
his Majesty's Forest engraving of achievement of Henry, Duke of Beaufort,
showing spotted panther with flames, wyvern, helmet, coronet folio 244

HONI SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE. Mutare Vel Timere Sperno Atchivement of his
Grace Henry Duke of Beaufort etca.
of Dean, and Constable of the Castle of S. B^^avells K^ight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy C^uncel, etc. who bears with^n a Garter, F^^nce and England, quarterly
within a Bo^d^r Gobonaied Pearl and Saphir. Ensigned with a Co onet and Helm^t
befiting his Graces qua^t^, thereon on a Wreath of his C^lours a P^^^cullis
Topaz, mantled Ruby doubled Ermine, supported on the Dexter by a Panthur Pearl,
spotted of all Colors, collored, and chained Topaz, with Flames of Fire
issuing out of his Mouth and Ears proper. On the sinister side a Wivern
emeral'd, gorged about the Neck with a Crown Ducal, and Chain reflecting over
his back Topaz, holding in his mouth a dexter hand couped Ruby; and for his
Motto in an Escrole MVT ARE VEL TIMERE SPERNO.

KNIGHTS BANERETS.
THIS Order of Knighthood was in former Times reputed Barons, and had the
admittance amongst the Peers in Parl^ament, in the Saxon Regiment, amongst the
French the Honor was Hereditary, but with us now adays for Life only, yet they
retain some Ensigns of Honor, such as Supporters, and have Precedence of all
under the Degree of a Baron. But they must be such Banerets as are made under
the Royal Standard displayed, in time of battle the King or Prince being
present, of this Order, there is at present none that I can hear of living.

BARONETS.
THE lowest degree of Hereditary Honor is that of a Baronet, instituted by
King James, Anno 1611. They are created by Patent under the Great Seal as the
Nobles, to them and their Heirs male lawfully engraving of achievement of
William Portman, Baronet, showing helmet, fleur-de-lis, talbot Folio 247.

Atchivement of Sr. William Portman Bart.
begotten, without otherwise by a particular Clause: They are styled in all
Writs and Commissions Baronets, with the Addition of Sir, and the Title of Lady
to their Wives.

There are also Baronets of Nova Scotia Baronet Nova scotia.
for Scotland, but these of England, as an Armorial Ensign of their Honor,
bears on a Canton, or in an Escocheon placed in some convenient and perspicuous
Place of the Shield, the Arms of Vlster, (viz.) Argent, a sinister hand couped
at the wrist, Gules.

For the Example of the Bearing of a Baronet, I shall incert the Achievement
of Sir William Portman Sir William Portman.
of Orchard in Somersetshire Knight. of the Bath and Baronet, who bears for his
Paternal Coat Armor Or, a Flower de lis Azure on a Canton, the Arms of Vlster
as aforesaid: And for his Crest on a Helmet, befitting his Degree, a Wreath of
his Colors, thereon a Talbot Seiant Or, mantled Gules doubled Argent.

There are some Baronets that besides the Augmentation of a hand as aforesaid
by a peculiar Grant does bear Supporters; for an Example I shall make use of
the Achievement of the Honorable Sir Henry Sir Henry Goodrick
Goodrick of R^bston-Park in Yorkshire Knight. and Bar. His Majesty's Envoy
Extraordinary to the King of Spain, Anno Domini, 1682/3 who bears Argent, on
a Fess Gules, between Two Lions passant Gardant, Sable, a Flower de lis O,
between two Crescents Argent: For his Crest, on a Helmet, and wrea^h of his
Colors a Demy-Lyon Sable, holding a Pole Ax Argent, Mantled Gules, double
Argent, for his Supporters two Naked Boys proper, and for his Mo^to in an
Escrole FORTIOR LEONE JVSTVS.

KNIGHTS of the BATH.
THESE Knights are so called from Part of the Ceremonies at their Creation
which is at the Coronation of a King or Qu^en, or at the Creation of a Prince
of Wales, or of a Duke of the Blood Royal.

This Order says Froys^rd was instituted in Anno 1399. by K. H^nry the IV, but
others say they are of a longer continuance, being then revived after a
Disusage.

engraving of achievement of Henry Goodrick, Baronet, showing lions passant,
lion holding pole ax, fleur-de-lis, crescents, helmet, nude boys folio 248

FORTIOR LEONE JUSTUS Atchivement of the Honorable. Sr. Henry Goodrick etca.


They have R^bes and Ceremonies appropriate to them, they wear a Red ^ibbon
cross their left shoulder to which a Medal (being the Gift of the King or
Prince that creates them) is affixed.

There is no Badge of Honor in their Arms, being in all respects the same as
to external Ornaments with a Knight Bachelor.

KNIGHTS BATCHELORS.
KNights Batchelors are such that are rai^ed to this Dignity for their Prowess
and Merit being at first a Military Honor, and bestowed as well for their
Reward as to encourage others to Noble Achievements.

They are called Knights Batchelors, as S^lden in page 458. notes from
Buccellarii signifying in the declining Empire a Souldi^r or Servant must be
ready for Military Employm^nt, to which word Chevalier was joined to denote a
Soldier tried and fit for Hors^ S^rvice, and by their Honorable Achievements
obtained great repute throughout the Christian World.

In all Foreign Countries Knights have place according to their being Knighted,
a Privilege debarred Noblemen; for be they never so Noble and Ancient, they are
only reputed as Gentlemen in Foreign Countries, and cannot demand Place of the
youngest Knight there by Law of Arms.

The other Privileges and Honors allowed them in England is at large
discoursed in Guilims Heraldry, Second Part. Chap. 21.

For the Bearing of a Knight Bachelor, I shall incert the Achievement of Sir
Robert Dashwood. Achievement of Sir Robert Dashwood.


He bears Argent on a Fess between a double Cottize, Gules, 3 Griffons heads
Erazed Or, Mantled Gules doubled Argent, and for his Crest, on a Helmet and
Wreath of his Colors a Griffons Head Ermenois erazed Gules. This is the
Achievement of Sir Robert Dashwood of Norbrook and Wickham in Oxfordshire Knight.

engraving of achievement of Robert Dashwood, Knight Bachelor, showing heads of
griffins, helmet folio 250

Atchivement of S.r. Robert Dashwood Knight.


ESQVIRES.
ESQVIRE by the Latin Word Armiger seems to take it is Original from Bearing
the Armor of a King, Duke, or some great Warrier, as we find Saul and Jonathan
to have their Armor Bearers; likewise Troilus and Achiles and Clytus Alexander
the great in the same Office; so that amongst all Civil Nations such Men were
in use, and of such reputation in those ancient days, that their Posterity were
careful to own their Descent, and to continue the Title, and as in those
ancient Times, so are these in our days descended (for the most part) of worthy
Ancestors, that for their warlike Exploits, or for their merits and service of
the Commonwealth in times of Peace, had both the Title of Esquires, and Coat of
Arms allowed, or bestowed on them, and their Descendants as a Reward for the
same, of those that bear that Title amongst us are several sorts of Honors
that precede Knights, and such are the Eldest Sons of Viscounts and Barons and
Noblemens younger Sons of the second rank, are the Select Esquires of the Kings
Body, then Knights Eldest Sons. In a fourth rank are such as the King together
with the Title, gives Arms or Creates Esq^ires by Imposition of a Silver
Coll^r o^ SS, or by Patent Creamus te Arm^gerum; etc. and that but rarely.

In the first place are reckoned all such Gentlemen as by the Kings Patent,
under the Great or Privy Seal are so Entitled by reason of their public
Offices, etc. and such are all Sergeants at Law, Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs and other Officers and Commanders Military and Civil.

Lastly Esquires by Reputation, the Principal whereof are those that Attend
Knights of the Bath at their Creation, then Baristers at Law, Mayors of Cities,
Officers of Courts, etc.

The better sort of Esquires are styled Worshipful.

For the Example of the bearing of an Esquire, which is the same of a
Gentleman, I shall incert the Achievement of William Stych of Newbury in the
Parish of Barkin in Essex Esquire, who bears Sable three Garbs Or, Impaled
with the Arms of Longueville, viz. Gules a Fess Dauncette engraving of
achievement of William Stych, Esquire, showing garbs, cross crosslet fitchy,
helmet, eagle folio 252.

PRO PATRIA MORT Atchivement of William Stych Esqr.
Ermine between six Cross Croslets Fitche Argent, in right of his Wife Margaret
Maria, Daughter of Sir Thomas L^nguevile of Wolverton in Buckinghamshire
Baronet; and for his Crest on a Helmet and Wreath of his Colors an Eagle
Displayed Argent, Gorged with a Collar Azure, and holding in his Beak a Trefoil
slipped Proper, Mantled Gules doubled Argent, and for his Motto in an Escrol
PRO PATRIA MORI.

GENTLEMEN.
GEntlemen had their beginning either of Blood, viz. Such as were b^rn of
worthy Parents, or that had done some noble exploit in War whereby they
deserved to Bear Arms and to be accounted Gentlemen, but now a days whosoever
studieth the Laws of the Realm at any of the Inns of Court or Chancery, or who
is a student at the Universities, also he that professes the liberal Sciences,
or can live without manual labor, or by his Wealth can live and bear the Port
of a Gentleman, shall be called Mr. and may purchase a Coat of Arms to himself
and posterity. And the Saxons admitted none to the Estate of Gen^ry out of all
the Trades conversant in Gain, but such, only as increased their Wealth by
honest Husbandry, or plentiful Merchandise from beyond the Seas.

Some others there are that number up nine several sorts of Gentlemen. First,
those of Ancestry which must be Gentlemen of Blood. Secondly, those of Blood,
and not of Ancestry, as when he is the second degree descended from the first.
Thirdly, Gentlemen of Coat Armor and not of Blood, as when he bears a device
given him by the Heralds, and then he and his issue are so styled to the third
descent, who are Gentlemen of Blood. Fourthly Gentlemen of Coat Armor and not
of blood, as when the King gives them and their Heirs a Lordship by virtue
thereof they may bear the Coat Armor of the old Lord, the Heralds approving
thereof, and provided the said old Lords Family is extinct. Fifthly, a
Christian Soldier that in the Service of God and his Prince kills a Heathen
Gentleman he shall bear his Arms, and if he has issue to the third Degree,
then they are Gentlemen of engraving of achievement of Frances Stewart, Duchess
Dowager of Richmond, showing fleur-de-lis, wolves, coronet folio 255.

Atchivement of the Right Noble Frances Stewart Duchess dowager of Richmond
etca.
blood; but note that no Christian Soldier may bear another Christians Coat
although vanquished by him in Battle, but may bear his Coat, in the finister
Quarter with the proper Coat of such a Gentleman that he killed or put to
flight, provided it be done in an Army Royal. Sixthly, if the King Knight a
Yeoman he is then adjudged a Gentleman of blood. Seventhly, when a Yeomans Son
is advanced to Spiritual Dignity he is then a Gentlman, but not of Blood,
except he be a Doctor of the Civ l Laws. Eighthly, or such that are brought up
in a Cathredral or Abbey there serving in good office, or such as are of near
kind to the Bishop or Abbot. And, Ninthly, such as serve a Prince as a Page:
and afterward by their diligent and faithful service are advanced to higher
places although without badge by Birth are esteemed Gentlemen.

Thus you see the Scale of Nobility both Major and Minor. In the next place I
shall give you the Bearing of a Woman, not under Femme Covert

The Right Noble Frances Steward, Duchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox
bears two Coats quarterly; First, Saphir 3 Flower de lis Topaz within a
Border Ruby charged with Buckles Topaz. Secondly, Topaz a Fess checky Pearl and
Ruby within a Bord^r Engrailed of the Third the Third as the Second, and the
Fourth as the First, over all in an Escocheon of pretense Pearl, a S^l^er
Engrailed between Four C^^quef^yls Ruby, Impaled with Pearl, a B^nd E^grailed
Ruby surmounted by a Fess checky Pearl and Saphir, supported by two Wolves
proper. It will not be un^ecessary to take notice of the princ^pal Parts of
Honor and Virtue, that every Gentleman of what Degree of Honor soever, ought
to be endowed with, which are as follows,

To fear God, and walk after his Commandments, and to his Power to d^fend Holy
Church. To love Honor, to be loyal and serviceable to his Prince and Country.
To delight in Military Exercises, to frequent the War, and to prefer Honor
before worldly wealth. To be charitable to the distressed, and to support
Widows and Orphans. To reverence Majestrates, and those placed in A^^hority. To
cherish Truth, Virtue and Honesty, and to eschew Intemperance, riot, sloth, all
dishonest recreations and Company. To be courteous, gentle and of an affable
Deportment to all men, detesting Pride, and Haughtiness. To be true and just in
word and dealing, and to give no just cause of offense to any man. To be of an
open and liberal heart delighting in Hospitality and to promote and encourage
all public useful and honorable works, especially such as relate to the
advancement of knowledge and learning as the Printing of Books which are lively
Monuments Registring to Future Ages an honorable Account of such persons that
by whose generosity such undertakings were finished, for what greater
satisfaction can it be to any Gentleman to find in Books an Honorable and
Commendable Account of his Ancestors which certainly every one should be
ambitious of, for Books the Trumpet of Fame sounds forth their praise not only
in their own Country, but throughout the World, and that to Fu^ure Ages;
Whereas if no such Remarks were taken of their Families in process of time they
will be forgotten, nay probably in that part of their own Country where they
dwelt, especially upon removals of Families from one Country to another which
is very accustomary and that for several reasons.

PRECEDENCE.
PRecendency may be thus observed. The King who is the Fountain of Honor. The
Prince of England who is eldest Son to the King, and is born Duke of Cornwall,
etc. Princes of the Blood Royal who are the Sons, Brothers, Uncles and Nephews
of the King, The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, the Archbishop of York, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord
President of the Privy Council, Lord Privy Seal, Dukes, Marquisses, Dukes
eldest Sons, Earls, Marquisses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Viscounts,
Earls eldest Sons, Marquisses younger Sons, Bishops, Barons, Viscounts, eldest
Sons, Earls younger Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Privy Council that are not
Noblemen, Judges, Viscounts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons, Knights of the
Garter if not otherwise dignified as is rarely found, Knights Banerets,
Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Batchellors, Colonels, Sergeants at
Law, Masters of Chancery and Doctors, Esquires, and those may be comprehended
under five Heads, 1. Esquires, to the Kings Body, 2dly. The descendants by the
Male line from a Peer of the Realm. 3dly. The eldest Sons of Knights of the
Garter, Baronets and Knights, 4thly. The two Esquires attending on the Knights
of the Bath at their Creation, and 5thly. officious Esquires as Justices of the
Peace, Baresters at Law, Leiutenant Colonels, Majors, and Captains, and
lastly, Gentlemen of Coat Armor.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the NAMES of the NO^ILITY and GENTRY, whose COATS are
made use of for Paterns of BEARINGS in this Treatise of HERALDRY.
A
ABin^ton Folio 94 Adam Folio 185 Albemarle Folio 147, 231 Aldham Folio 62, 64,
110 Alleyn Folio 37 Allington Folio 79 Alman Folio 37 Ambesace Folio 85 Andrews
Folio 59 Antested Folio 47 Apleby Folio 185 Aran Folio 44 Arblaster Folio 93
Archer Folio 37 Argall Folio 68 Arlington Folio 148 A^miger Folio 102 Armine
Folio 145 Armstrong Folio 102 Arnest Folio 120 Ash Folio 51, 52 Ashburnham
Folio 116 Ashmole Folio 125 Astley Folio 121 Aston Folio 66 Atfield Folio 190
Atherton Folio 178 Atkins Folio 45 Atlow Folio 82 Atsea Folio 192 Ancher Folio
143 Air Folio 184
B
Bacon Folio 114 Baggington Folio 62 Bagot Folio 52 Baldberny Folio 103 B^ldock
Folio 68 Ba^^wyn Folio 58 B^n^u^y Folio 40 Band Folio 186 Banester Folio 39
Banks Folio 126 Ba^antine Folio 177 Barbon Folio 197 Bard Folio 183 Bark^r
Folio 193 Ba^kham Folio 71 Barnaby Folio 46, 193 Barnham Folio 112, 210 Barnard
Folio 160 Barnard^ston Folio 41 Basset Folio 47, 63 Bath Folio 96 Bawdrip Folio
174 Bayns Folio 131 Baynton Folio 193 Beckingham Folio 133 Beconthorp Folio 186
Bedingfield Folio 175 Bellasis Folio 124 Bellew Folio 84 B^llingham Folio 83
B^llot Folio 121 Bendish Folio 159 Bennet Folio 148, 207 Bengham Folio 46
Bergavenny Folio 57 Berk ley Folio 38, 235 B^rk^nhead Folio 76 Berneston Folio
39 Bertie Folio 95 Bertram Folio 60 Betereux Folio 166 Feve sham Folio 183
Billesworth Folio 177 B^ln^y Folio 176 Blare Folio 113 Blome Folio 161
Bludworth Folio 90 Blunt Folio 118 Bodenham Folio 85 B^dmyn Folio 108 Bohun
Folio 186 Bolles Folio 158 Bolter Folio 131 B^nvile Folio 114 Booth Folio 158
Bordam Folio 177 Boughton Folio 184 Bows Folio 97 Bowyer Folio 140 Boydel
Folio 39 Boyland Folio 176 Boil Folio 65 Bramston Folio 89 Branchley Folio 37
Brantwait Folio 56 Brett Folio 137 Bridge Folio 184 Bridger Folio 193 Bridges
Folio 196 Bridgman Folio 90 Bridgwater Folio 140 Bright Folio 117 Brightley
Folio 41 Bristol Folio 123 Brograve Folio 146 Bromfield Folio 136 Bromfleet
Folio 55 Broncham Folio 180 Brook Folio 67 Brougham Folio 181 Broughton Folio
71 Brownlow Folio 182 Bruce Folio 72 Brudenel Folio 102 Bryan Folio 63
Buckworth Folio 41 Bullingbrook Folio 114 Burkin Folio 47 Borough Folio 117
Burton Folio 109 Bury Folio 41 Butler Folio 44, 86 Bye Folio 183
C
Cade Folio 63 Caltherup Folio 53 Calverley Folio 182 Candish Folio 63
Canhauser Folio 184 Cantrell Folio 180 Carbery Folio 67 Carew Folio 146
Carington Folio 179 Carleton Folio 87 Carne Folio 179 Carter Folio 135 Carteret
Folio 47 Castlemaine Folio 120 Cavell Folio 100 Cavendish Folio 155 Cawdrey
Folio 79 Chaffin Folio 163 Chamberlain Folio 61 Charlton Folio 174 Chancer
Folio 67 Cheyne Folio 68 Chetwynd Folio 116 Chicheley Folio 121 Chiverton Folio
92 Cholmondley Folio 209 Chudley Folio 142 Churchill ibid. Chute Folio 99
Clarendon Folio 86 Clarges Folio 126 Clark Folio 54, 191 Clavering Folio 73
Clayton Folio 37, 89, 206 St. Clear Folio 109 Clifford Folio 65, 71 Clifton
Folio 141 Clopton Folio 38 Cock Folio 179 Cocks Folio 155 Cole Folio 169 Coling
Folio 200 Coleman Folio 49 Colembert Folio 54 Colisborn Folio 181 Colleton
Folio 154 Colvil Folio 46 Compton Folio 144 Conghurst Folio 192 Conway Folio
209 Cooper Folio 166 Coote Folio 185 Copley Folio 40 Corbet Folio 178
Cornwallis Folio 182 Corsellis Folio 200 Cottel Folio 54 Cotton Folio 176, 201
Coventry Folio 112 Courteney Folio 89 Cox Folio 140 Cranefield Folio 207 Crew
Folio 139 Crispe Folio 103 Cross Folio 37 Culpepper Folio 54 Cuts ibid.
D
Darburg Folio 192 Darcy Folio 120 Darnall Folio 140 250 Dashwood Folio 47,
200, Davies Folio 116, 208 Dayrell Folio 133 De la luna Folio 110 De la Mere
Folio 158 Dering Folio 58 Descus Folio 110 Devonshire Folio 155 Digby Folio 124
Disney Folio 125 Dive Folio 191 Dixon Folio 49, 70 Doleman Folio 123
Dolphingley Folio 192 Dorset Folio 73 Doughty Folio 115 Dowdall Folio 185 Downs
Folio 49 D'oyly Folio 56 Drake Folio 107 Drakes Folio 201 Drew Folio 136 Ducket
Folio 58 Duckenfield Folio 40 Dud^y Folio 51 Duke Folio 183 Durant Folio 41
Dymock Folio 98
E
Eden Folio 123 Edgworth Folio 185 Egerton Folio 140, 209 Eglesfield Folio 177
Eglesford ibid. Eglington Folio 117 Eliot Folio 46 Ellis Folio 192, 201
Elpington Folio 150 Elwes Folio 72 Emme Folio 149 English Folio 146 Etheldred
Folio 37 E^ton Folio 46 Evelyn Folio 199 Eyneford Folio 84 Air Folio 120
F
Falconhergh Folio 124 Fane Folio 102 Fanner Folio 52 Farington Folio 157
Fanshaw Folio 124 Feak Folio 125 Felbridge Folio 135 Feltham Folio 198 Fenwick
Folio 183 Ferrers Folio 50 Field Folio 136 Fitz Hamond Folio 133 Fitz Harding
Folio 38 Fitz Hugh Folio 52 Fitz James Folio 192 Fitz Mores Folio 181 Fleetwood
Folio 68 Fleming Folio 84, 111 Foley Folio 121 Folgnardly Folio 180 Fornival
Folio 185 Fores Folio 192 Fortescue Folio 55 Fo^^er Folio 97 Fountain Folio 151
F^wk Folio 124 Fox Folio 163 Frampton Folio 149 Fulford Folio 51
G
Gage Folio 58 Games Folio 136 Ganesborough Folio 84 Garnard Folio 135 Gascoyne
Folio 50 Gaunt Folio 71 Gaudy Folio 165 Gerrard Folio 57, 242 Gernon Folio 63
Guess Folio 192 Gildesborough Folio 63 Gill Folio 68 Gleve Folio 111 Glisson
Folio 115 Glyn Folio 175 Goddard Folio 39, 176 Goodred Folio 100 Goodrick Folio
145, 248 Goring Folio 78 Gould Folio 141 Grandgorge Folio 123 Grandmain Folio
49 Grant Folio 142 Grave Folio 177 Grayham Folio 191 Greenvile Folio 96 Gray
Folio 209 Griffin Folio 199 Grill Folio 39 Grosvenour Folio 122, 208 Grove
Folio 54 Grundin Folio 115
H
Hacket Folio 144 Hackwell Folio 151 Haddon Folio 130 Hadley Folio 178 Hales
Folio 97 Hallifax Folio 181, 232 Hall Folio 99, 126 Hamilden Folio 84 Hamond
Folio 113 Hanmer Folio 145 Hanner Folio 192 Hansard Folio 115 Harbottle Folio
192 Hare Folio 71 Harington Folio 84 Harling Folio 156 Hartfield Folio 192
Harvey Folio 112 Has Folio 181 Hatton Folio 123 Haughton Folio 63 Hawes Folio
146, 197 Hawkings Folio 200 Hawley Folio 59, 65 Henningfield Folio 51 Herbert
Folio 142 Heron Folio 180 Hepwart Folio 184 Hewit Folio 53 Hicks Folio 47 Hide
Folio 86 Highlord Folio 55 Hill Folio 145 Hobart Folio 29 Hodbonel Folio 59
Hodby Folio 184 Holdesheaf Folio 123 Holland Folio 141 Holles Folio 63 Horn
Folio 52 Horon Folio 133 Hoheie Folio 114 How Folio 207 Howard Folio 212 Huddy
Folio 47 Huise 63 Hume Folio 134 Hungerford Folio 89 Hunlock Folio 155 Hunt
Folio 58 Huntington Folio 81 Hussenhull Folio 113 Hussy Folio 37
I
Jason Folio 158 Jervis Folio 184 Ince Folio 89 Insiquin Folio 146 St. John
Folio 99, 114 Jollif Folio 102 Jones Folio 51, 97, 143, 153 Jorney Folio 127
Ireland ibid. Ireton Folio 56 Isham Folio 72
K
Kadredhard Folio 163 Kemple Folio 82 Kendal Folio 54 Keymis Folio 98 Keynes
Folio 55 Kildare Folio 57 Kingsley Folio 101 Kingston Folio 135, 141 Kirkhill
Folio 177 Kirketon Folio 185 Knight Folio 55 Knowls Folio 40 Kroge Folio 82
L
Lane Folio 59 Langford Folio 117 Langham Folio 160 Latimer Folio 39 Laughton
Folio 73 Lavider Folio 67 Lee Folio 111 Leg Folio 154 Leigh Folio 94 Leigham
Folio 173 Lemming Folio 37, 130 Lenthall Folio 55 Lesone Folio 109 L'estrange
Folio 145 Lewkener Folio 52 Lindsey Folio 94 Lisle Folio 71 Litchfield Folio
111 Logan Folio 145 Londonderry Folio 186 Lorne Folio 66 Lougher Folio 52 Low
Folio 160 Lowdham Folio 60, 101 Lowther Folio 77 Lucy Folio 111 Lumley Folio 43
Lutterell Folio 195
M
Magnall Folio 96 Mainston Folio 169 Maitland Folio 61 Mallet Folio 191
Manchester Folio 87 Manduit Folio 49 Mannock Folio 39 Manox Folio 42 Maplesden
Folio 37 St. Marney 134 Marsh Folio 156 Marshall Folio 54 Mason Folio 135
Masserene Folio 152 Masters Folio 133 Matthews Folio 80 Mauleverer Folio 163
Maunsell Folio 81 Maynard Folio 130 Maxfield Folio 57 Meers Folio 104 Mellish
Folio 174 Mergith Folio 128 Meverell Folio 200 Micklethwait Folio 69 Mico Folio
128 Middleton Folio 59, 16^ Millington Folio 176 Mingay Folio 198 Miniet Folio
102 Minshall Folio 117 Molineux Folio 39 Momp^ss^n Folio 139 Mondeford Folio
127 Monk Folio 147 Monnings Folio 11^ Montague Folio 88 Monter Folio 185
Mordaunt Folio 108 Morden Folio 124 More Folio 162, 174 Morgan Folio 98, 133
Morice Folio 134 Morley Folio 133, 198 Morrey Folio 61 Morris Folio 71
Morriswith Folio 63 Morton Folio 180 Mostin Folio 141 Mounchensey Folio 101
Mounson Folio 52 Musgrove Folio 78 Musterton Folio 157
N
Nathiley Folio 168 Naughton Folio 185 Nether Folio 84 Nevile Folio 180 Nevill
Folio 46, 58, 178 Newdigate Folio 149 Newport Folio 186, 197 Newthall Folio 104
Nightinghale Folio 127 Noel Folio 84 Northampton Folio 144 Norton Folio 37, 99
O
Oglethorp Folio 158 Oldfield Folio 64 Ormond Folio 43 Osborn Folio 142 Ossery
Folio 44 Otway Folio 70
P
Pagit Folio 42 Pale Folio 193 Palford Folio 124 Palmer Folio 120, 163, 193
Palton Folio 127 Payens ibid. Peck Folio 36 Peckham Folio 44 Pedley Folio 125
Pe^ham Folio 181 Pe^ton Folio 115 Pembrook Folio 142 Pennington Folio 46, 178
Perpoint Folio 111 Perth Folio 48 Peyto Folio 69 Peyton Folio 42 Pickering
Folio 133 Pick^on Folio 192 Pierrepont Folio 141 Pine Folio 118, 122 Pitfield
Folio 174 Player Folio 131 Plot Folio 149 Plumbley Folio 55 Poley Folio 133
Pomfret Folio 18 Porter Folio 83 Portman Folio 124, 247 Povey Folio 56 Powell
Folio 127 Powis Folio 142 Prelate Folio 193 Preston Folio 19 Prichard Folio 140
Prime Folio 130 Proby Folio 163 Proger Folio 143 Pul^ston Folio 1^5 Pyno^k
Folio 136
Q
Querlton Folio 137
R
Ranelaugh Folio 97 Ratcliff Folio 54 Ratesden Folio 193 Rawlins Folio 99
R^ynsford Folio 36 Read Folio 200 Redeshall Folio 137 Remis Folio 185 Reny
Folio 186 R^stwold Folio 66 Retowre Folio 119 Reyce Folio 98 R^chardson Folio
103 R^chmond Folio 255 R^d^^ Folio 111 Ringway Folio 186 Rivers Folio 143
Robarts Folio 108 Roberts Folio 134 Robinson Folio 153 Rochdale Folio 186
Rochester Folio 86 Rogers Folio 116 Roos Folio 104 Rose Folio 126 Rowch Folio
134 Rowton Folio 193 Rushurst Folio 145
S
Sackvile Folio 73 Salborn Folio 63 Salisbury Folio 135 Salmon Folio 190
Sanders Folio 152 Sandwich Folio 88 Savage Folio 49, 143 Savill Folio 181
Saunders Folio 47 Scales Folio 193 Scambler Folio 129 Scarsdale Folio 58 Scotto
Folio 117 Sea Folio 192 Seafort Folio 154 Seymour Folio 184, 211 Shaen Folio
139 Shaftsbury Folio 151 Shaw Folio 87 Shelley Folio 169, 191 Sheridan Folio
139 Shipstow Folio 96 Shirley Folio 50 Shorovile Folio 193 Shuttleworth Folio
82 Shiffington Folio 152 Skepper Folio 53 Slingsby Folio 198 Smith Folio 90,
148 Soame Folio 83 Somner Folio 46 Southwell Folio 121 Spindelow Folio 127
Spring Folio 133 Squire Folio 186 Stamp Folio 155 Stanhope Folio 65 Stanton
Folio 185 Stapleton Folio 98, 132 Starkey Folio 174 Stephens Folio 53 Stepkin
Folio 124 Stern Folio 41 Steward Folio 255 Stone Folio 136 Stoughton Folio 42
Stoway Folio 40 Strafford. Folio 196 Strangman Folio 55 Stratford Folio 140
Strickland Folio 193 Stringer Folio 182 Stukeley Folio 122 Sturney Folio 135
Stych Folio 25, 197 Sussex Folio 125 Swinston Folio 38 Symonds Folio 190
T
Taddington Folio 41 Tanner Folio 128 Tatnall Folio 99 Tailor Folio 136 Theme
Folio 120 Thomson Folio 136, 177 Throckmorton Folio 70 Thurland Folio 42
Topcliff Folio 112 Totte Folio 129 Touchet Folio 186 Towse Folio 210 Tracy
Folio 56 Trant Folio 126 Travel Folio 176 Tragarthick Folio 190 Trelesk Folio
39 Tremain Folio 129 Trenethyn Folio 184 Trevor Folio 141 Trewarthen Folio 157
Trot Folio 206 Trowbridge Folio 92 Trowtheck Folio 190 Turner Folio 85
Twistleton Folio 166
V
Vandeput Folio 190 Vaulx Folio 186 Verdon Folio 132 Verney Folio 115 Vernon
Folio 48, 205 Vincent Folio 120 Visacher Folio 192 Usher Folio 149 Vudall Folio
39
W
Walcot Folio 193 Waldenfield Folio 124 Walgrave Folio 65 Wallop Folio 55 Waney
Folio 177 Wansford Folio 134 Wanting Folio 123 Warcup Folio 86 Ward Folio 39
Warner Folio 126 Waterhouse Folio 62 Waterton Folio 113 Watton Folio 179 Weel
Folio 177 W^ld Folio 112 Wells Folio 134 Welsh Folio 114 Wenman Folio 40, 236
Wentworth Folio 176 Werden Folio 210 West Folio 46 Westmoreland Folio 102
Wheeler Folio 197 White Folio 186 Whitmore Folio 83 Whittington Folio 115
Wickerley Folio 41 Wickhalf Folio 113 Widdrington Folio 73 Wilbraham Folio 56
Williams Folio 141, 201 Willington Folio 55 Wiltshire Folio 99 Windham Folio
147 Windwood Folio 40 Wisemale Folio 127 Withens Folio 183 Wither Folio 136
Wollaston Folio 115 Wolstonholm Folio 144 Wooler Folio 76 Wotton Folio 185 Wray
Folio 45 Wren Folio 185 Wroth Folio 40 Wyche Folio 62 Wynch Folio 191 Wynn
Folio 176 Wyrley Folio 83
Y
Yedling Folio 178 Yelling Folio 184 York Folio 58 Young Folio 127
FINIS.

