A Soul-searching CATECHISM, Wherein is opened and explained, Not only the Six
Fundamental Points set down Heb. 6.1.

But also many other Questions of highest concernment in Christian Religion.

Wherein is strong meat for those that are grown, and milk for babes, in a very
short Catechism at the end, exceeding needful for all Families, in these
ignorant and unsettled Times.

Written by Christopher Blackwood, a servant of CHRIST.

The second Edition, with Addition.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good. 2 Timothy 1.12.
Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard. Luke 1.3, 4. It seemed
good to me to write, that thou might know the certainty of those things
wherein thou have been instructed. LONDON, Printed by J.C. for Giles Calvert,
at the black Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1653.

The Epistle to the READER.
TO preach unto people, and not to catechize them, I take to be a building
without laying a foundation. Hence the Apostle first laid the foundation of the
six Principles, Heb. 6.1, 2. Not laying again the foundation of Repentance from
dead works, of Faith toward God, of the doctrine of Baptisms, and Laying on of
hands, of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the eternal Judgment. After
which Pattern, I have proposed unto thee the Reader a form (I trust) of sound
words, wherein thou may instruct thy Family. That thou may do it the better
to thine own comfort, and their edification, take these Directions.

First, Cause thy children and servants to commit to memory the short Catechism
which is at the end of the Book.

Secondly, Every time thou do catechize in thy Family, which I would have
thee to do once every week at least, read and explain to them one or two of the
larger questions; and do them and me that favor, as to turn to the places of
Scripture, which, for brevity sake, I could not write down; and read them unto
them, and show them how the alleged Scriptures prove the point in hand.

Thirdly, If thy servants and children be more towardly, or more ingeniously
bred, or more quick witted, let them learn without book the larger Catechism:
but if they be more slow and incapable, let them only learn the second; and
often read and expound to them the former, remembering that narrow-mouthed vessels
can receive liquors poured into them only by degrees.

Fourthly, Pray for a blessing upon the Instruction, without which, thy pains
will not be effectual.

If thou art different in judgment from me in some one Point proposed, yet let
not that hinder thee from informing others in the rest of the Points wherein we
are agreed. If upon pretense of error in some one Point, thou shall conceal
the whole from thy Family, for fear they should be drawn away with error; take
heed that the things herein contained, which thou acknowledgest sound, be not a
witness against thy mis-guided Zeal (mingled with Cruelty) in the day of the
Lord.

And forasmuch as thou live in times wherein many, for want of sound
Principles laid at first, go a whoring from God after sundry, dangerous, and
destructive Errors; let it be thy care to train up thine in their youth, in
the way of Truth, that they may not depart from it when they are old.

So heartily desiring that the Spirit of Grace would make these Instructions
home to thy heart, which I present to thy eye and ear, I take my leave, and
rest,

Thine affectionate friend, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, Christopher
Blackwood.

A Short Catechism, As at all times useful, so especially in these unsettled
times.
Quest. WHat grounds have you to prove there is a God?

Answ. 1. By his Creation of Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 19 1.

2. By the confession of all Nations, Romans 1.20. no people so barbarous, that
are without a God, though most men are ignorant of the true God, Psalm. 19.3.

3. By the order of causes: of every effect there must needs be a cause, till
we come to the first universal cause. 1 Cor. 8.6.

4. By the Consciences of wicked men; who having sinned, are afraid of being
punished by some supreme Judge, Romans 2.15. John 8.9.

5. By the Providence of God, seen 1. in dispensing punishments to the ungodly,
Psalm. 9.16. and rewards to the righteous, Psalm. 58.11. 2. In making provision
for all Creatures, Psalm. 10 4. throughout. 3. In the fitting one thing for
another, as the eye and color, and light and the air, a thin body, through
which colors are sent to the eye. 4 The actions of unreasonable creatures
above their ability, as the Ant, Spider, etc. the ordering of contraries to
unity.

6. There is a Devil that suggests evil, therefore there is a God that suggests
good motions; and though he be not seen, no more is the wind, or soul of man.

Qu. What are we to consider in God?

Ans. 1. His nature; 2. his kingdom; 3. his work.

Qu. What are we to consider concerning his nature?

Answ. The Unity of the Essence, together with the Trinity of Subsistence; how
that the Godhead subsisteth in the being of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; yet
they are not three Gods, but one, 1 John 5.7. Matthew. 28.19.

Qu. Can we understand God in his essence, as he is?

Answ. No further then he has revealed himself; yet we know him, by
considering all the perfections that are in any creature; as wisdom, justice,
bounty, holiness, mercy, strength; and ascribing them all to him. 2. By
removing all the imperfections that are in any creature from him; so we say God
cannot die, nor suffer, nor sin.

Qu. How prove you the Father to be God?

Answ. 1 Cor. 8.6. There is to us but one God, the Father. Gal. 1.1. God the
Father, who raised him from the dead. 1 Pet. 1.2. Through the foreknowledg of
God the Father. Jude 1.

Qu. How prove you the Son to be God?

Answ. Because the Scripture calls him God over all, blessed for ever, Romans
9.5. Phil. 2.6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Besides, none
but God could make the world: now Christ made the world, 1 John 1.3, 10. Col.
1.15, 16. Heb. 1.2. Also the Saints have prayed unto him, as well as unto the
Father; Acts 7.59. Steven cried Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Heb. 1.6. When he
brings his first begotten into the world, he says, Let all the Angels of God
worship him.

Qu. How prove you the Holy Ghost to be God?

Answ. Because we are baptized into his name, and received into Covenant by
him, as well as by the Father and Son; and he promises pardon of sin, and
eternal life, Matthew. 28.19. Again, the Scripture calls him God, Act. 5.3, 4.
Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? thou have not lied
unto men, but unto God. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?
compared with 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy
Ghost? he that in one place is called the Holy Ghost, in the other is called
God. Heb. 3.7. compared with Isa. 95.7. in the Hebrew it is said, They tempted
the Holy ghost: in the Psalms, They tempted God. Acts 28.25. compared with
Isa. 6.8. in the Acts its said, The Holy ghost spoke to Isaiah: but in Isa. its
said, the Lord spoke unto him, ye^, the Lord whose train filled the temple. 1
Cor. 6.20. the Apostle says, We are not our own but the Holy ghosts: therefore
he has absolute power over us. Now God alone has absolute power over us. Yea,
he bids us glorify God with our bodies. Now what God means he, save the Holy
ghost, whose bodies he called his temple?

Further, his Godhead appears, because he searches all things, yea the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. As the mind of a man knows all the things of
man, because it is in him; so does the Spirit of God know the things of God.
Acts 7.51. You do always resist the Holy ghost, as your fathers did. Now whom
did their fathers resist in the Books of Moses, but God?

Besides, his Godhead was seen, in inabling persons to speak with tongues of
all sorts, without any teaching of them by man, Acts 2.

Q. Whether is the Holy ghost only a motion, action, or operation, whereby God
works effectually in the hearts of the elect; or whether is he an
understanding, willing, working substance?

A. He is an understanding, willing, working substance, because he is said to
be blasphemed, Matthew. 12.30, 31. Now an action cannot properly be said to be
blasphemed, but a person. Again, the holy Spirit is said to be a Comforter,
and to testify of Christ, John 15.26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will
send unto you, he shall testify of me: therefore a person, Acts 13.2. The Holy
ghost bad separate Paul and Barnabas for the work; yea, he sets overseers over
Gods flock, Acts 20.28. Acts 15.18. It seems good to the Holy ghost and to us.
If it seemed good to him, then he is a person endued with understanding Acts
16.6. The Holy ghost forbad the Apostles to go to Phrygia and Bithynia, and bad
them go to Macedonia; because he commands and forbids, he is a Substance. Romans
5.5. the love of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy ghost.
The Apostle herein puts a full difference betwixt the gifts of God, and the
Holy ghost. Besides, 1 Cor. 12.11. He distributes gifts to every one even as he
pleases: therefore he is a person or substance; Isa. 48.16.

Qu. Wether is the holy ghost equal with the Father and Son?

Answ. Yes: 2 Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and communion of the holy ghost, be with you. The Apostle joins the holy
ghost with the other persons in prayer. 1 John 5.7. these three are one: Psalm.
33.6. all the host of Heaven was made by the Spirit, as well as by Father and
Son, Genesis 1.2. The Spirit of God moved upon the waters. The holy ghost also
takes us into Covenant, and in his name are we baptized, Matthew. 28. which were
unlawful, were he not God equal with the Father. The holy ghost makes covenant
with us, Heb. 10.15, 16. the holy ghost is a witness to us: for after he had
said before, This is the Covenant that I will make with them: I will put my
Laws into their hearts, etc. Besides, being we are baptized into his name, we
are baptized into his worship, religion, faith, doctrine.

Q. What Scriptures prove unto us the Trinity?

A. These following: Isa. 63.7. 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. Isa. 61.1. Hag. 2.4, 5. Psalm.
33.6. In the New Testament, Matthew. 3.16, 17. Matthew. 28.19. Joh. 1.32, 33. Joh.
15.26. Joh. 16.3, 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 12.3. Ephesians. 2.18. 2 Cor. 13.13. Tit. 3.5,
6. Gal. 4.6. The same name of Jehovah, and the same works, are ascribed to each
person.

Q. What are the attributes of God?

A. There are many of them; as, 1. Spirituality, whereby he cannot be touched,
Luke 24.29. For a Spirit has not flesh nor bones; nor can he be seen, 1 Timothy
6.16. Whom no man has seen, nor can see.

2. Eternity, whereby he was from everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. Before the mountains
were brought forth, from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

3. Unchangeableness: There Is no shadow of turning with God, Iam. 1.17. 1 Samuel
15.29. Repentance attributed to God, signifies no change in Gods nature, but in
his actions mutably decreed from eternity. God is fain to speak to us as Nurses
to chilchildren, lispingly, because they cannot understand perfect speech.

4. Omnipresence; In that he is present everywhere, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall
I flee from thy presence? and also knows every thing and person, Heb. 4.13. All
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do: so
that he knows the very motions of the will of man, even before they move.

5. His Almightiness; in that he is able to do whatsoever he pleases, Psalm.
135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he. Yea, he is able to do more
then he pleases to do; he could have raised up of stones children to Abraham.
Matthew. 3.9. He could have given Christ 12 legions of Angels. Job 42.2.

6. His Self-sufficiency; in that he is complete in himself, not needing any
thing the creature can do, Genesis 17.1. I am God alsufficient.

7. His Knowledge; whereby God does perfectly know himself, and by himself, all
other things that are, were, shall be, or can be; and that not successively, as
men do, but by one act of understanding, Job 42.2. Joh. 21.17.

8. The Will of God; whereby he wills in a holy manner, and works all things
according to the counsel thereof, Ephesians. 1.11.

Q. What be the parts of Gods Kingdom?

A. Two: 1. his decree: 2. the execution of it.

Q. What is Gods decree?

A. It is Gods everlasting determination and purpose concerning all things and
persons, Act. 4.28. To do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before
to be done. Ephesians. 1.11. Predestined according to the purpose of him, who
works all things after the counsel of his own will. And as God decreeeth
concerning all things and persons, so does he decree the circumstance of place,
time, means, and manner, Act. 27.31. Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot
be saved.

Q. What is Predestination?

A. It is Gods fore-ordaining all reasonable creatures, whether Angels or Men,
to an everlasting estate either of salvation or damnation, 1 These. 5.9. God
has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Q. What are the parts of Predestination?

A. Two: 1. Election, which is Gods appointing some to Salvation through
Christ, Romans 9.23. He made known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy which he had prepared unto glory. Ephesians. 1.5. Having chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world.

2. Reprobation; which is Gods appointing some, both Men and Angels to
destruction, 2 Timothy 2.20. there are some Vessels to dishonor. Romans 9.22. To
show his wrath and make his power known, he endured with much long suffering
the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

Q. Is there no cause or inducement of Election in the Elected themselves, or
of Reprobation in the Reprobate?

A. No: Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will,
he hardens. 2 Timothy 1.9. He has called us with an holy calling, according to
his own purpose and grace. Ephesians. 1.9. He made known unto us the mystery of his
will, according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in himself.

Q. Is not Christ the cause of our Election?

A. No, not of Gods decreeing of it, for that he did of his own free will; but
of the execution of it: that is, our Salvation is for and through Christ, Ephesians.
1.4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world.

Q. Is not sin the cause of reprobation?

A. No: for then all men should be Reprobate, when God foresaw that all would
be sinners: but sin is the cause of the execution of reprobation.

Q. What use are we to make of our election?

A. It serves to humble us, that we had nothing of our selves.

2. It should breed in us love to God, for his love to us.

3. It comforts, that our Salvation stands not in our selves, who daily might
lose it; but in Gods unchangeable decree.

Q. Whether is God, decreeing the works of the wicked, the author of sin?

A. No: though God decrees the sinful works of the wicked (for else they had
not been) as the Jews crucifying of Christ, Acts 2.23. Him, being delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, etc. So Ioseph's selling into
Egypt, Genesis 45.7, 50, 20. yet is nothing sin, as God decrees it, or commands
it: Abraham's killing of Isaak, being commanded of God, was a duty; which else,
God forbiding it, was a sin ^ Gods decreeing of sin, being a way to manifest
the glory of Gods Justice, is a good thing.

Qu. What is the execution of Gods decree?

A. It Is an action of God, working all things in time, according to his decree,
Ephesians. 1.11. Acts 4.28.

Q. What are the parts of the execution of Gods decree?

A. Two: 1. Creation. 2. Providence.

Q. What is it to create?

A. To bring a thing from no being, to being Genesis 1.1. Also, to bring in a form
created of nothing, into a praeexistent matter.

Q. How did God create all things?

A. By his Word; Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord, were the heavens made:
also, ver. 9. Genesis 1.3, etc. Let there be light, and there was light. Heb.
11.3. The worlds were framed by the word of God.

Q. Of what made he all things?

A. Of nothing, Romans 4.17. Heb. 11.3. Things which are seen, were not made of
things which do appear. Which plainly appears, in that they are said to be made
in the beginning, that is, when there was nothing but God, Genesis 1.1. It was
either made of the essence of God, or of nothing: but Gods essence is
indivisible; ergo, of nothing.

Q. How long was God in creating the world?

A. Six days, and rested the seventh, Genesis 2.1. Exodus 20.11. In six days the
Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day.

Q. Why was God so long in creating the world?

A. That we might not lightly pass over the works of God, which he was so long
in creating.

Q. What is Gods creation?

A. It Is Gods action, whereby he made Nature, and all things in nature, whether
substances or accidents, in the space of six days; for his own glory, and
happiness of his Elect. Prove. 16.4.

Q. What grounds have we to believe there is a Providence?

A. 1. From Scripture, because nothing falls out without the determinate
counsel of God; no, not the crucifying of the Son of God, Act. 4.28. to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Matthew. 10.29,
30, 31. not a hair falls from our heads, nor a sparrow to the ground, without
the will of our Father.

2. The providence of God is seen. 1. In making innumerable contrarieties serve
to one end; as heat and cold, light and darkness, viz. the use of man. 2. From
the reasonable actions of unreasonable creatures; as the shifting Countries
according to the season of the year. 3. From the dependence of callings and
countries one upon another. 4. The fitting one thing for another: man has an
eye; color is the object of it, light discovers the color, the air is a clear
body through which it is seen. 5. The provident provision made for all the
creatures, as in bringing springs of water to all towns; the earth also
bringing forth grass for every creature. 6. The fit rewards and punishments
that are bestowed and inflicted on the deeds of men, so that no wicked man can
outrun Justice, Judge. 16.30. Esth. 6.4. Haman seeking to hang Mordecai, is
hanged. Psalm. 9.16. Act. 12.22.

Q. But if there be a Providence in the world, how comes it that ill men have
so much prosperity and good men so much adversity?

A. The prosperity of wicked men, tends to further the decree of God to their
destruction, Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Moreover,
the adversity good men endure, is very profitable in many particular respects;
as, to wean them from the world, and to keep their hearts humble; and that they
being empty of the creature, may the more fasten upon God: so that good men
have acknowledged their adversity good for them, Ps. 119.71. It is good for me,
that I have been afflicted. Romans 8.28. All things work together for good to
them; therefore the adversity is for their good: so that God does so dispose
his rewards to his people, and punishments to the wicked, that, to speak
properly, it never happens ill to the Godly, or well to the wicked in this life.

Q. What is the Providence of God?

A. It is an outward action of God, whereby he does govern and dispose all and
every thing which is made, both creatures and their actions, and faculties,
according to the counsel of his will, that in every thing he may be glorified:
As honors, Psalm. 75.6, 7. Punishments, Amos 3.6. periods of Kingdoms, Dan.
2.21. The wills of men, Jer. 10.23. yea of the greatest of men, even Kings,
Prove. 21.1. the counsels of men, as Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.14. yea, the smallest
thing, as a Sparrows falling, Mat. 10.30. yea, the most accidental thing, as
the killing of a man unawares Exodus 21.13. yea, the lot cast into the lap, is
wholly disposed of by him, Prove. 16.33.

Q. What are the parts of Gods Providence?

A. Three: 1. The keeping the being of things in their kinds, in a continued
succession, as long as he sees good, Act. 17.28. In him we live and move, and
have our being.

2. His government; whereby as a Monarch he governs all things, according to
the liberty of his own will: so that when any creature goes according to the
liberty of its will, it is because God suffers it so to do.

3. His ordination, or appointment; whereby God orders, brings, and disposes
all things, and the actions of things, how disorderly soever they may seem to
be, to certain ends, according as it seems good to him; for the bringing
about of which ends, he also appoints means.

Q. How is the providence of God conversant about sin?

A. 1. God preserves that nature and will, that produces sinful actions. God
has a concurrence about sinful actions, as appears, Genesis 45.8. It was not you
that sent me hither, but God. Deuteronomy. 2.30. God hardened the Spirit of Sihon King
of Heshbon. Psalm. 105.25. God changed the minds of the Egyptians, that they
hated his people. But as in a chain that breaks, there is no link in fault but
that which breaks; so in these concurrences of causes, none is to be blamed but
the next and immediate cause, which is the will of man; so that though God will
the being, yet man alone wills the nature of sin.

Q. What are the positive actions of God, in and about sin?

A. Three: 1. His withdrawment of his help and grace from the creature; both
the help of light, Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see; and also the help of supportance; 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
Hezekiah was left of God to his pride, that he might know what was in his
heart: which two helps being withdrawn, the creature sins necessarily, but
voluntarily; so that as the Sun causes darkness, not by overcasting the air,
but by hiding his light, as the staff falls to the ground being not forced by
the hand, but only forsaken of it; so God withdrawing either light or
supportment, man sins. God, who suffers sin, has the power of hindering,
without any obligation to us; and man has the power of doing, without any
compulsion: the action in God is without fault, the action in man without
excuse.

2. God works about sin, by removing the impediments that hindered us from
sinning. God took away good Jehoiada, and then Joash showed his wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. So God takes away a Master or Father, that kept such a person
from wickedness; who being removed, his wickedness appears.

3. God works about sin, by setting before us objects, whereby he knows our
corruption will be enticed, as a beautiful woman before an unchaste person, wine
or beer before a Drunkard.

4. God works about sin by setting bounds to sin, that it shall go so far, and
no further, Psalm. 76.10. The remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

5. God works about sin, in that he preserves the person, nature, and faculties
of the sinner, even whiles he is in sinning, Act. 17.28. In him we live, and
move: as an hors-man driving a lame horse, is the cause of his going, not of
his halting; so is God the cause of our moving, though not of the sinfulness in
our moving.

Q. What use may we make of Gods providence?

A. 1. See, that nothing befalls unto thee by chance; if we take chance as a
cause in opposition to God, as the Philistims took it, 1 Samuel 6.9.

2. To persuade us to the use of prayer, Genesis 24.12. Neh. 2.4

3. To free the heart from disquieting carefulness, Matthew. 6.32, 34.

4. Eye God in all thy affairs, Psalm. 145.15. Prove. 3.6. Psalm. 139.3.

5. Not to fear the terrors of men, and so neglect duty, Matthew. 10.28, 29.

6. To comfort us, that we are in covenant with him, that sits at the stern,
and governs all.

7. To comfort us in respect, 1. of our poor condition, 1 Samuel 2.7. 2. against
enemies plots, Luke 11.31, 33. See Exodus 34.24. 3. against fear of danger,
Matthew. 2.13. Job 29.4.

8. To work patience in afflictions, 1 Samuel 3.19. Psalm. 39.9. Job. 1.20, 21.

Qu. In what condition did God create man at first?

A. In an holy and happy condition, Genesis 1.26. Eccles. 7.29. God made man
upright: which uprightness consisted in a perfect conformity of the faculties
of the soul, and members of the body, to the will of God, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.

Qu. Did man continue in that state wherein he was created?

A. No: All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. Romans
5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned.

Qu. What death did Adams sin procure? was it only a temporal death, or was it
not also eternal?

A. Adams sin procured to his posterity eternal death, in respect of desert:
Romans 5.15. If through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace, has abounded unto many. As the grace of God, and
gift by grace, abounded unto many, that is, to eternal life, and to remission
of sins; so the offense on the contrary, abounded unto eternal death: and so it
is set down, verse. 25. that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace
reign through righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ: as if he
should say, As the one is, so is the other.

2. Such as the justification is, by the second Adam, such is the condemnation
by the first Adam.

But the justification by the second Adam, is a justification of life, that is,
of or to eternal;

Therefore the condemnation by the first Adam, is a condemnation to eternal
death, Romans 5.18.

Therefore, as by the offense of one, the judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life.

If any man object, that it is against equity that eternal death should be
inflicted for another man's sin;

A. The same may be said against temporal death: it is as unjust that natural
life should be taken away for the sin of another; yet the Objectors, whether
Socinians or Arminians, acknowledge this.

2. The will of God is the rule of righteousness; and if Adam would enter into
such an agreement with God, that if he stood, he and all his posterity should
stand eternally; and if he fell, he and his posterity should perish eternally:
Who has any thing to reason against it? Hos. 6.7. the words are, They like
Adam have transgressed the Covenant: so you have it varied in the margin. So
that a Covenant passed betwixt God and Adam, for the violation whereof on Adams
part, he and his incurred eternal death: and we hold it equitable in the Courts
of men, that for the treason of the Father, the Posterity smarts also. Levi, in
the loins of Abraham, is said to pay tithes, Heb. 7.9.

Qu. What did Adam pass over to his posterity, besides temporal and eternal
death?

A. Besides their being children of wrath (that is, not only persons with whom
God is angry, but upon whom his wrath abides, John 3.36.) they are children of
wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. signifying, not only that we are cursed, but that we
are so by nature or birth; natura being derived a nascendo, from being born. Of
Adam and Eve, it might be said, They were liable to wrath; but it could not be
said they were children of wrath: it might be said they were, upon their fall,
cursed; but it could not be said they were born cursed. So that besides
temporal and eternal death, there is a viciousnes of nature that passes from
Adam, to all his posterity: so that as a creature begotten, partakes of the
nature of the begetter, as an horse of the nature of an horse; so we partake of
the sinful nature of our first Parents all along: so that no man can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean, Job 14.4. for, we were shapen in wickedness, and
in sin did our mother conceive us, Psalm. 51.5. so that naturally we are
estranged from God from the womb, speaking lies as soon as we can speak, Psalm.
58.3. The looking-glass of our misery we may see, Romans 3.9. to the 20. which
the Apostle applies to himself, as well as others, verse. 9. What, are we better
then they? (that is, by nature) No, in no wise.

To say we become guilty by imitation only, as one Ox learns to plow by the
sight of another, is most false: For corrupt nature teaches many persons evil,
for which they never saw example; as Cain when he killed Abel.

To say the immediate will of the sinner is absolutely necessary to constitute
sin, is to tie the Creator to the Law of the creature, who had a sovereign
power in himself, to propose what Law he pleased unto his creature.

To say there is no such defilement upon our natures, because our consciences
accuse us not for it; no more does our conscience accuse us for sins of
ignorance, and many other sins; yet will we say they are not sins? The
consciences of the Jews did not condemn them for not dwelling in Boothes, in
the feast of the seventh month, which they had omitted welnigh a thousand
years, from the days of Joshua to the days of Nehemiah, Neh. 8.14. to the 18.
was it therefore not a sin?

And whereas some say, They cannot see how the sin of our first Parents should
be both a sin and a punishment: was not Pharaoh's hardness of heart both a sin
and a punishment? Was not the Idolatry of the Gentiles? Romans 1.21, 23, 24, 26,
28.

Q. Whereas some say, No Infant, no not of the Heathens, is damned merely for
original sin;

A. We know nothing of their damnation, but we speak of the desert of original
sin. I rather incline to judge of their salvation, they dying in Infancy,
because Christ says, Of such is the Kingdom of God. The innocence of all
Infants (in respect of actual sins) whether of heathen or christian Parents, is
the same: they may be saved, as the elect Angels are saved; or else God may
forgive that offense without satisfaction: for if that power be in a creature,
to forgive a debt without payment, much more is it in God: and I humbly suppose
there cannot be a more fit object to exercise the same, and to bring it into
act, then toward poor dying Infants.

But that which I most incline to, concerning the salvation of dying Infants,
is, that though God can pardon dying infants without satisfaction, yet that he
will not, because Christ Is the way to the Father, and No man comes to the
Father, without Christ, John 14.6. Now Christ's satisfaction becomes effectual
through believing only, to them that have the power of believing; but to dying
infants, it may become effectual by bare applying, without believing, because
infants cannot believe, Deuteronomy. 1.39. Joh. 4.11. That there is some way of
salvation for infants, the Scripture speaks, Luke 18.15, 16. but for any other
way of salvation for them besides Christ his satisfaction, we know not; nor for
the conveyance of satisfaction in behalf of infants any other way, then by
bare application on the Mediators part, and acceptance on Gods part, I cannot
conceive. And should infants be damned merely for original sin, then should God
deal more severely with poor dying infants, then with the Devils, who were
condemned to hell only for actual sins.

Q. Wherein does our natural defilement reside?

A. In every faculty of soul, and member of body, Psalm. 14.3. They are all gone
aside, they are altogether become filthy. So that the whole man stands in need
to be sanctified, 1 These. 5.23. the Understanding is full of blindness, Psalm.
14.2. the Will full of rebellion, Ioh. 5.40. and 8.44. the Affections of
disorder, Romans 7.5. the Conscience of benummedness and other defilements, Tit.
1.16. the Ears full of filthy listnings, the Eyes full of wanton gazings, etc.

Q. Wherein does our natural defilement consist, which we drew from our first
Parents?

A. In two things:

1. In an aversnes to every thing that is good, Psalm. 14.3. and 58.3.

2. In a proneness to every thing that is evil, Romans 7.5. So that corruption
takes occasion from the holy law of God, to stir us up to sin, Romans 7.8, 13.

Q. How came Adams sin to seize upon his posterity?

A. That man by nature is wholly sinful, nothing is more plain: but the manner
how he came to be so, is hard to understand. Now as when we are fallen into a
ditch, we stand not questioning so much how we fell in, as how to get out; so
should we see how to get out of this sinful condition.

But, to answer, some say the Parent begets the soul as well as body: but God
is called the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. See also Zach. 12.1. Number. 27.16.
Eccles. 12.7. Either the Parent in generation conveyes part of his soul, and so
the soul should be divisible, contrary to the nature of spirits, which are not
quantitative; or he conveys his whole soul, and so the Parent should be without
a soul; or else souls multiply: which is more then Angels do.

Therefore, 1. we become guilty by imputation, or by Gods ordination: in one
man, God ordained to adorn us all, if he stood; in one man, he ordained to
strip us all, if he fell.

2. By natural propagation or generation of that most filthy nature which Adam
had after his fall, Genesis 5.1. Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after HIS
IMAGE. What image had Adam then, save a corrupt image? Job 14.4. Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? no body: Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in
wickedness, and in sin did my mother conceive me. So that sinful man (by man, I
mean both man and woman; who though they be two in sex, yet are they one in
nature, and one in wedlock) I say, sinful man begets sinful man: so that sin is
in the seed inbidingly, as fire is in the flint, as some suppose. This power
that the body should have over the soul, being above nature, may be ascribed to
Gods justice, punishing Adams sin, in his base subjecting of his spirit to the
flesh. Through the seed, hereditary diseases of Gout, Stone, Consumption,
Leprosy, are conveyed, which are invisible; and why may not sin be conveyed by
the father to the child, in generation?

Though this answer may be satisfactory to many, yet I rest upon the former,
that we become guilty by imputation.

Qu. How does it appear, that Adams sin is imputed to all his posterity?

A. It appears, 1. Because sin was in the world before there was a Law given on
Sinai, as appears, in that all Adams posterity were liable unto a temporal
death, which is the fruit of sin, Romans 5.13. Until the Law, sin was in the
world; so that death reigned, from the time of Adam to Moses, verse. 14. now sin
would not have been imputed (and consequently death) when there is no Law. Now
if you say, What Law was there before Moses Law, without which sin would not
have been imputed? I answer, Though there was the Law of Nature writ in our
hearts by Nature; yet the Law the Apostle there speaks of, was this, mentioned
verse. 12. That by one man (Adam) sinning, all mankind should sin in him, and
by that one sin of that one man (Adam) death should come upon all. He speaks
not one word of the Law of Nature.

2. It appears that Adams sin is imputed to all his posterity, from the death
of infants. Romans 5.14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses (and so along) even
over them who had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression; which
cannot be meant otherwise, then of infants, who had not sinned actually, as
Adam had: so that the Apostle argues thus:

Where death reigned without guilt of their own actual sin, there necessarily
must be an imputation of the guilt of the first sin.

But before the Law, death reigned over those that had no guilt, from their own
actual sins, (meaning little infants, that could not sin actually, after the
similitude of Adams transgression:)

Therefore the guilt of the first sin, is necessarily imputed to infants; and
if so infants, much more to grown persons, and so to all.

Q. What may we learn hence?

A. That there is a sinning after the similitude of Adams transgression, or
actually. 2. That there is a sinning which is not after the similitude of Adams
transgression, or imputatively; which is called original sin.

Q What is original sin?

A. It is the corruption of all mankind, by the fall of our first Parents,
naturally propagated or derived unto all, making them guilty of temporal and
eternal death, and other punishments, unless forgiveness be made in Christ,
Romans 3.9. to verse. 25. Romans 5.12, 13, 14, 15. It Is called original sin, because
it was in being from the beginning, from the first man that ever was.

Q. What way is their to come out of this miserable condition?

A. Only by Jesus Christ, Col. 1.21, 22.

Qu. What is Jesus Christ?

A. The eternal Son of God, Mic. 5.2. made man, Romans 1.3, 4.

Q. How many are the Offices of Christ in relation to his Church?

A. They are three.

Qu. Which are they?

A. His Kingly office, whereby he rules in his Church, Psalm. 2.6. and in the
hearts of his people, Luke 17.21.

2. His Prophetical office, whereby he revealing his Fathers will, we are to
hear him in all things, Acts 3.22. Matthew. 17.5.

3. His Priestly Office, whereby he offers sacrifice for the sins of his
people, Heb. 8.3.

Q. What sacrifice did Christ offer?

A. His own body upon the Cross, Heb. 10.10.

Qu. Why did Christ offer his own body upon the Cross?

A. To make satisfaction for the sins of all those that believe on him, Romans
3.25, 26.

Q. What is faith?

A. It is a matrimonial act of the soul, Romans 7.4. 2 Cor. 11.3. Ephesians. 5.32.
whereby I do not only believe that there was such a person as one Jesus Christ,
who dyed and rose at Jerusalem; but I believe also that he dyed and rose again
for me: yea, my soul is willing to receive him, John 1.12. as my Lord and
Savior, Jude 21.25. and to rest upon his satisfaction, Romans 10.10, 11.

Quest. Whether does Faith go before the forgiveness of sins?

Ans. We are not first washed, and then believe; but in Scripture Language we
first believe, and afterward are washed: hence we are said to be justified by
Faith, Romans 3.28. and to be purified by Faith, Acts 15.9. and Christ is set
forth a reconciliation through Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. which blood,
though it have sufficient virtue to cleanse us from our sins, yet it does not
actually purge any, unless it be applied: when it is once applied, that the
soul looks believingly and mournfully upon him whom he has pierced, in that
day is there a Fountain set open to that soul, the Fountain of Christ his
blood, Zach. 12.10. compared with chap. 13.1.

Q. But whether is Faith or Repentance first in the soul?

A. Though Faith be in order before Repentance, yet in respect of time they are
both together in the soul; for in the same moment the Children of God believe
that Christ was crucified for their sins, they melt under the sight of their
sins, which were the cause of his crucifying, Zach. 12.12 13. compared with
chap. 13.1.

Q. How does the soul act in receiving Christ?

A. There is not only an assent of the understanding that Jesus is the Christ
that came into the World to save sinners, which may be in wicked men, Heb. 6.4.
and Devils, Jam. 2.19. but there is also an act of the will, whereby God
offering his Son as a Prophet to be our Teacher, as a King to take us into his
Government, as our Priest, by his death and intercession to wash away our sins;
we look upon this offer as worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. and so
receive Christ to be under his teachings, as our Prophet, Mat. 17.5. Acts 9.6.
rest and repose our selves upon his Sacrifice and satisfaction, as our Priest,
Psalm. 37.5. Acts 8.37. put our selves under his Government, and subject our
wills to his will, as our King, Luke 19.27. This accepting Christ by the will,
is that very receiving mentioned, John 1.12. because whosoever thus receive
him, have power to become the Sons of God.

Qu. What are the two parts of Christ his Priesthood?

A. 1. His death upon the Cross, whereby in respect of Gods foreknowledge,
Christ's merit, and Gods acceptance, he bore the sins of all the Elect upon the
Cross, ransoming them to God by his death. Mat. 20.28. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.

2. His Resurrection from the dead, together with his intercession in Heaven,
whereby as an Advocate he pleades their cause, 1 John 2.6. appearing in the
presence of God for them, Hebrews 9.24. presenting the merits of his own death,
whose blood speaks good things for them, Hebrews 9.24. So that he is able to
save them to the uttermost, Hebrews 7.25.

Q. How may a Believer know that Christ is his Advocate or Intercessor?

A. Hereby do we know that we know him so to be, if we keep his Commandments, 1
John 2.1, 2, 3* 4.

Q. How does a Believer keep the Commandments?

A. 1. He keeps them in his head Christ, in whose flesh sin was condemned,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.34.

2. He keeps them intentionally, having a respect to every one of them, Psalm.
119.6. without slighting or despising any of them; seeing the Scripture sets
down, that the slighting or despising any of a man's ways, does declare him to
be as yet under the state of death, Prove. 13.13. and chap. 19.16.

3. In that he will not deliberately sin against Conscience, for the escaping
of Crosses, or obtaining of enjoyments, Dan. 3.16, 17. having a full purpose in
his heart (through the assistance of grace) to choose affliction rather then
iniquity, Job 36.21.

Q. What measure of love must we love the Lord withal?

A. We must love him with a sovereign love, better then Father and Mother,
Lands and Living Wife and Children; yea, and our own Lives, Mat. 10.37. Luke
14.26.

Q. What denial of Christ is that which excludes a soul out of Heaven?

A. Habitual denial, when we, for the saving of our Lands, Liberties, Country
or Lives, have a purpose to deny Christ, or any part of his truth, Mat. 10.32,
33.

Q. What way it there to prevent this habitual denial of Christ, which is so
dangerous and destructive?

A. To learn to deny our selves in such a measure, that in the Lords strength
we resolve to take up every Cross that comes betwixt us and our duty, Luke
9.23. and to hate the best enjoyment we have, as friends, liberty, estate, yea
and life it self, if we cannot hold them and the Lord together, Luke 14.26, 27.
So that we are resolved in no wise in a plain Commandment to sin against our
Conscience, but are resolved to choose a fiery furnace, rather then worship a
golden image. Dan. 3.16, 17.

Q. What is repentance?

A. A change of heart, Ephesians. 4.22, 23. Romans 12.1, 2. whereby we turn from all
sin with an hatred thereof, Psalm. 119.128. purposing to walk in newness of
life, Psalm. 119.106.

Q What are the fruits of Repentance?

A. The Apostle sets down some, 2 Corinthians 7.11. as a care of pleasing God
in every thing; also a fear of displeasing him in any thing; also a clearing of
our selves both before God, not resting till we have got assurance of the
pardon of our sins; and clearing our selves before men, in a godly course of
life; also a desire to eye God in all things; also a zeal, rejoicing when his
name is honored, and sorrowing when it is dishonored; also an indignation
against sin, in a friend as well as an enemy, in a rich man as well as poor;
also revenge against our selves, in that, as we have abused Gods blessings to
our own lusts, so we endeavor hereafter to spend them to his Honor.

Q. What does the Scripture reveal concerning spiritual death?

A. It reveals unto us that we are under a threefold death.

1. A death of guiltiness, whereby we are bound over to eternal death, Romans
5.12. Luke 15.32. John 5.24. being wrapped therein by Adams sin and our own.

2. A death of filthiness, whereby naturally we all lie wallowing in carnal
courses, though some are more deeply in them then others, Ephesians. 2.1, 3, 3.
This life of holiness was also lost by Adam, Genesis 1.26. Eccles. 7.29. Ephesians.
4.25.

3. A death of discomfort, whereby naturally we are deprived of that sweet
Communion and enjoyment of God, which Adam had in innocence, and regenerate men
have in part, and glorified Saints have in fullness, Romans 3.23.

Q What does the Scripture reveal concerning spiritual life?

A. It reveals unto us, that there are three parts of spiritual life in
opposition to this death:

1. The life of justification, Romans 5.18. Gal. 2.20. so that whereas we are all
dead men by offending the Law, when God pardons we are alive, Col. 3.4.

2. The life of Sanctification, when a man is quickened up to all the ways of
God, Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 6.11, 13.

3. The of comfort, Psalm. 85.6. when the soul enjoyes a life in Gods favor,
Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 63.3. looking upon the absence thereof as death it self,
Psalm. 28.1. Psalm. 143.7.

Q What necessity is there of spiritual life?

A. It is so needful, that without it there is no Salvation, Joh. 3.5. All the
Body of Christ being living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. without this, thy conversion is
nothing, Ephesians. 2.5. thy Faith nothing, Joh. 11.26. thy Hope nothing, 1 Pet.
1.3. thy Repentance nothing, Acts 11.18. and thy duties of Religion nothing,
Psalm. 80.18. Mat. 13.15. yea, if thou be without this, thou have no share
(as yet) in Christ, 1 John 5.12.

Q. What kind of thing is spiritual life?

A. As it has respect to change of heart, there is an unseen working of the
spirit upon the souls of Believers, so that as there goes an hidden quality
from the Loadstone to the iron, that draws the iron to it; so is there a power
goes from Christ to draw the soul off from all sinful purposes unto himself,
John 6.44. John 12.31. So that the soul exalts Christ, though with the loss of
all lusts and all enjoyments, Mat. 16.24.

Q. In what faculty of the soul is spiritual Life seated?

A. Though wheresoever spiritual life is, it shows forth its acts and
operations, (as the natural life does) in the whole man; yet as the natural
life is more eminently in the head and heart: so is this spiritual life more
eminently in the faculties of the Understanding, Will, Conscience, Affections
and Memory.

Q. How may a person know his understanding it made alive to God?

A. When he does not only think of divine truths, John 5.39. and approve them,
Romans 2.18. which natural men may do; but also applies them to his own
Conscience, Job 5.27. meditates of them, Psalm. 1.2. ponders them, Luke 2.19.
remembers them, Psalm. 116.55. judges aright of Gods ways; Psalm. 119.128. 1
Cor. 2.13, 14. and is often inventing and devising how to honor God, and to
keep Conscience pure, Proverbs 14.22. Isa. 32.8.

Q. How may a man know his will is made alive to God?

A. Though the Saints of God have drawn comfort from their willing good, when
they could do no more but will, Romans 7.18, 19, 25. yet may there be wishings
and wouldings in a heart oftentimes, and yet it remain carnal, as in Balaam,
Numb. 23.10. and many others: now because many thousands deceive themselves by
their wishings and wouldings, know that wishing or willing good is an Argument
of spiritual life,

1. When the will brings forth earnest and diligent endeavors, 1 Cor. 15.10.
Heb. 13.18. Luke 15.18. compared with verse 32. against all hindrances and
pull-backs whatsoever.

2. When the will of a man is set for good absolutely, Psalm. 119.145. Dan.
1.8. though it expose him to the Cross, and he gave no thanks, but be hated of
men for the same.

3. When the inclinations and dispositions of the heart are for God, Psalm.
119.112. that what other men do with a dead heart, he does with a willing
disposition.

4. By the chusings and refusings of the heart; when we choose the ways of God
before all other ways, Psalm. 119.30, 173. Isa. 56.4. and refuse the ways of
all sin in the purpose of the heart, Psalm. 119.101, 104. but when men have good
things put to them by the word and Conscience, and in the purpose and frame of
their heart refuse them, this argues a dead will, Jer. 5.3.

5. By the cleaving of the heart; when the heart sticks so to its duty, that
nothing can pull it off, neither bonds nor imprisonment, Acts 21.13. Acts
11.23. so that though violence of torturing temptations may seem to carry the
soul off in a fit, as in some of the Martyrs, yet in the habit of the heart it
sticks so to God and his Word, that nothing can unsettle the habit, Psalm.
119.31. Dan. 3.16, 17. Dan. 6.10. though tentation may unsettle an act.

6. By the groanings and sighings of the heart under corruption, Psalm. 119.5.
David out of the unwillingness of his flesh, fetched a groan, saying, O that my
ways were made direct!

7. By the reachings of the will; living wills use to reach after God, Phil.
3.13. as a man that reaches as high as he can, and strives to reach higher; he
believes in some measure, and would believe more; opposes every known sin, and
would oppose it, more; follows all goodness, and would follow it more.

8. By the intentions of the heart, when they are set for God, so that the soul
says thus, So that I may keep close to God, and keep my conscience pure, and
may not be carried away with the world; this is that I desire: so that as
carnal men make honor and pleasure, and that which leads thereto, their ends:
so Saints make God, and that which lead to him, their end.

Q. How may a man know his conscience is made alive to God?

1. Urgency of conscience to press the soul to its duty, is no argument of
spiritual life, Numb. 22.18. nor yet trouble of conscience before or after the
committing of sin, Mark 6.26. Dan. 6.14. 1 Samuel 13.12. Mat. 27.41. Yea,
conscience awakened may make a man go against all outward by-respects, Numb.
22.18. Matthew. 27.4. and make a man look at God, Genesis 31.29. Ezra 1.2. Romans 10.2.

2. But then is the conscience alive, when not only conscience does his duty,
but makes a man do his duty toward God and Man, whether conscience do it with
much ado, or little ado; as to believe with all the heart, to love God
soveraignly, to serve God sincerely, etc.

2. When the conscience does not only excuse a man in part, Genesis 20.6, 7. Romans
2.15. but excuses him full out, that he stands guitless by faith in Christ,
Romans 8.2. and that every purpose of his heart is set against every sin, and for
every duty, Acts 23.1. Heb. 13.18.

3. When we are glad our conscience is so busy with us, Psalm. 16.7. yea we
call upon our conscience to be busy with us, Psalm. 103.1.

Q. How may we know our affections are made alive to God?

A. 1. When our principal treasure is in heaven, Mat. 6.20. and our affections
are set upon it, not upon the world, Col. 3.12. That though worldly occasions
may put off the heart from heaven for a time, yet no sooner are these
employments over, but the heart endeavors after its former enjoyment of God:
so that as the affections of dead men are ever and anon upon the world, because
they have a dead and worldly frame of heart; so the affections of men
spiritually alive, are ever and anon upon God, because they have a quickened and
heavenly frame of heart.

2. When the heart can relish good things, Romans 8.5. So that as carnal men
savor profit and pleasure, and carnal contents; so the affections alive can
savor communion with God, the face of God, the word of God, the sweetness of a
Spiritual duty.

3. When the heart esteems God above all enjoyments, Psalm. 73.25, 26. So that
thou will morgage any thing for God, and the things of God; so that thou will
count his glory dearer then thy credit, duty to him dearer then life to thy
self, Acts 20.24. to such affections, the promise, 2. Pet. 1.4. grace, Prove.
3.15. and Christ, 1 Pet. 2.7. is precious above all.

4. When thy greatest care is to please God, Tit. 3.8. and how to get thy heart
weaned from the world, and how to keep conscience pure, Acts 24.15. and thy
greatest fear is to sin against God, Genesis 39.10. so that thou fear him above
reproach, poverty, or death it self, Dan. 3.16, 17.

Q. How may we know our memory it made alive?

A. Whereas by Nature corrupt we are apt to remember foolish things, Psalm.
106.3. as foolish jests, and wrongs and injuries done to us, and are apt to
forget God and all his commands, Psalm. 78.7. the Spirit brings good things to a
regenerate memory, John 14.16. so that the soul remembers to practice, Psalm.
109.16. And as at other times he remembers his duty so especially in time of
tentation, Genesis 39.10.

Q. What ought to be the ground and motive of a Christians obedience?

A. 1. The command of Christ, with is the bond of the conscience, Romans 1.14.
Acts 20.22.

2. The love of God, from whence our obedience ought to flow, John 14.15. 2
Cor. 5.15.

Q. What does the Scripture reveal of the combat of the flesh and spirit?

A. It tells us that the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; so that we cannot do the good that we would do, Gal. 5.17.

Q. What my comfort a regenerate man in this combat of Flesh and Spirit?

A. This may comfort him, 1. That he hates the evil that he does, and loves the
good that he does not, Romans 7.15, 16.

2. That he delight in that law that forbids his evil, Romans 7.22. and consents
unto it that it is a good law, ver. 16.

3. He groans under his evil as a most heavy burden, Romans 7.24. and does not
allow himself in the least evil, verse. 15.

4. Though his flesh do too often serve the Law of sin, yet in his mind or
intention of his heart he still does serve the Law of Christ, Romans 7.25.

Q. But seeing many natural men have combats in themselves in respect of sin,
how shall I know that I combat aright?

A. The combats that Natural men have, are mostly,

1. Betwixt Reason and sensuality; so many are sorry they cannot refrain their
uncleanness, drunkenness, gaming, because they are contrary to reason.

2. Or betwixt natural Conscience, and natural Passions, as in Pilate, whose
conscience warned him not to pass sentence against Christ, yet he durst not do
otherwise, for fear he should lose Caesar's favor.

3. Or betwixt some outward evil for a time, or some gross sin all their life
long; mean time harboring some secret darling-abomination, as the love of
their estates, liberties and lives, more then Christ.

4. Or betwixt a purpose of continuing in sinful pleasures, and a desire to
enjoy eternal pleasures, as in Balaam, who desired to live in covetousness, yet
would fain have died the death of the righteous; so is this combat sometimes
betwixt these sinful pleasures here, and the fear of eternal vengeance
hereafter.

5. Their combat, how hot soever, is still joined with a custom and purpose of
sinning, so that they lay down the Cudgels to sin, saying, This is my nature,
and I must do it, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Now the combat in regenerate men, is,

1. Fierce, and in the purpose of the heart against all sin, though sometimes
it be defective in some act or acts.

2. In this combat they disallow the evil they do, not only from a principle
of natural conscience (which in some sins carnal men may do) but also from a
principle of spiritual life, because it is contrary to the life which they live.

3. They groan under their evils with many a sign and tear in secret yea such
evils as the world takes no notice of as dead-hartedness declining of affection
to God, want of former feelings, hard ness of heart, unbelief coldness and
distraction in good duties, vain hopes, vain fears, carking cases lumpishness
in Gods service, risings of revenge: also the tricks the soul has had to keep
off convincement in suffering times; also the by-ends in the good it has done.
One wears a chain as an ornament, another as a fetter, and would fain be rid of
it; so wicked men wear their lusts as ornaments to them, but Gods people wear
them as the heaviest chain.

4. If in the combat the Flesh get the upper hand, and they fall, they cannot
be quiet till they have turned to God, and recovered their acquaintance with
him, Psalm 51.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. but carnal men are not troubled but add sin to
sin, Genesis 37.24.

Q. Whether it be possible for a Christian to be assured of his union with
Christ, and of his acceptance into favor with God?

A. Yes: 1. because the Scripture bids us prove our spiritual estate, 2 Cor.
13.4. Gal. 6.4. 1 Cor. 11.28. Now the Spirit would not bid us search for that
which could not be found. 2. Because the Scripture reveals unto us many
evidences of our assurance, some taken from our union with Christ, and some
from the in-dwelling of the Spirit in us.

Q. What marks or signs does the Scripture reveal to evidence our union with
Christ?

A. The most demonstrative sign, or at least one of them, is sovereign love
to God, to the Lord better then any enjoyment of Lands, Liberties, Life, Wife
and Children, Mat. 10.37. Luke 9.23. and 14.26. Mat. 16.24. which evidence if
you leave out, the soul may be deceived in others severed from this. For
whosoever believes in Christ, his faith does work by love, Gal. 5.4. yea by a
love of this measure, Heb. 11.25, 26, 27, 35.

Q. What are the Witnesses that witness a Christians good condition to Godward?

A. They are two: 1. The witness of Gods Spirit: 2. The witness of our
regenerated Spirits, Romans 8.16. The Spirit bears witness with our Spirit,
that we are the children of God.

Q. What does the Spirit witness?

A. It witnesses God is our Father; for we having received the Spirit of
adoption, thereby cry Abba Father, Romans 8.15. it witnesses the things that are
freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.9, 12.

Q. After what manner does the Spirit witness?

A. Two ways; First, by the impressions and stamps which like a Seal upon the
Wax, it makes upon the soul, Ephesians. 1.13.

Secondly, by the fruits and effects thereof.

Q What are the impressions or stamps the Spirit makes upon the soul?

A. They are two: First, the stamp of Holiness, whereby the Spirit changes the
Saints into the image of God, from one glorious grace into another, 2 Cor.
3.18. so that as a seal destroys that image that was in the Wax before, so
does the seal or stamps of the Spirit destroy corruption in the soul in respect
of the reign of it, and set up grace in the reign thereof. Romans 6.14. This same
stamp of Holiness being throughout, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. and consisting in a change
of the whole man, 2 Cor. 3.18. and especially in a transformation of the mind,
Romans 12.2. and will, Acts 9.6. is one of the impressions of the Spirit.

Secondly, the impression of Comfort and Feeling, Psalm. 51.8.12. this being
given of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. as an occasional refreshing, not as daily food
for the soul to feed upon, Psalm. 6.8. Psalm. 31.22. does show the Spirit of God
is in us, 2 Cor. 1.3. yet does not the want of his feeling prove that the
Spirit of God is not in us; for God does sometimes hide himself from the soul,
Isa. 45.15. Psalm. 51.8. the Spirit in respect of this feeling, is one of the
three witnesses that testifies Christ to be our Savior, 1 John 5.8.

Q. whether is a Christians assurance and feeling all one?

A. No: The word and promise of a powerful, faithful, and willing God, with the
Notes and Evidences of a Christians good estate, as they are laid down in the
Scripture, are the grounds of a Christians assurance; and comfortable feelings
are the Crown thereof. A poor deserted soul that has little feeling, may have
a sovereign love of God, fear of sin, and an absolute purpose against it, Psalm.
44.18, 19. yea, he may have uprightness of heart, Job 1.1. compared with chap.
6.4. yea he may have faith in Christ, Psalm. 22.1. yea, an earnest thirsting
after Christ, Cant. 5.6. Now shall I have a purpose to deny credit, wealth and
life for Christ, yea and have all the forementioned gracious fruits, and shall
I not have grounds of assurance that my estate is good to Godward? When Christ
asked Peter whether he loved him, he did not say, Lord thou know we cannot
tell whether we love thee or no; but said, Thou know that I love thee.

Q. Whew does the Spirit seal the soul with comfort?

A. First, when the soul is cast down in humiliation, and earnestly longs for
the light of Gods countenance, Job 22.29. Isa. 29.19.

Secondly, upon self-denial of that which is pleasant, or suffering that which
is painful, Mat. 19.27.

Thirdly, after conflict with corruptions, or other temptations, and victory
over them, Apoc. 2.17.

Fourthly, when a believer takes pains with his heart, and puts forth his
strength in duty, Hosea 12.4.

Q What are the effects and fruits whereby the Spirit witnesses his in-being in
the soul?

A. They are diverse; as, 1. An inablement of the soul to do things above
nature, as to love the Lord Soveraignly, to love our enemies, to love the godly
for the Image of God in them.

2. When the Spirit is combating in us against all that is sin, Gal. 5.17. so
that we do not only suppress the same, but also lust after graces contrary
thereunto.

3. As the beams of the Sun show forth the presence of the Sun, so the sighs,
groans, and meltings in holy hearts, evidence that the Spirit is in them, Zach.
12.10. Romans 8.26.

Q. What is the testimony of our own spirit?

A. It is the Testimony of a renewed Conscience, witnessing us no be in the
state of grace, upon sufficient grounds Romans 8.16.

Q. What are those grounds?

A. 1. Because Faith evidences, Heb. 11.1. 1 John 5.10. That none can lay any
thing to my Charge, seeing Christ did not only dye for me, but rose again, and
ascended into heaven making intercession for me, Romans 8.33. So that he
appearing for me as my Advocate, Heb. 9.24. And his blood speaking good things,
Heb. 12.24. he is not only able to save me to the uttermost, though my sins be
great and many, Heb. 7.25. but is also willing, in that he promises in no wise
to cast off them that come unto him, John 6.37. which my poor soul does.

Q What other ground is there?

A. My union with Christ.

Q. How know thou, thou art united with Christ?

A. 1. By my sovereign love to him, 1 John 4.19.

2. By my being made a new Creature, and my crucifying the flesh, with the
lusts and affections thereof, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.24. which is not meant, as if
there were no oldness of nature in me, or that every lust were actually and
perfectly dead; but it is meant thus, my lusts are crucified, and I am new
intentionally, because it is that I aim at, and strive after daily.

3. He that is united to Christ, lives not in sin, 1 John 3.6. He that abides
in him, sins not; which is not meant simply of not sinning; for no man lives
that sins not 1 Reg. 8.46. therefore it is meant of a purpose of sinning: hence
those in Christ are said not to walk after the flesh, Romans 8.1. that is, though
sometimes they may slip, yet the constant purpose of their heart is after the
guidance of the Spirit.

4. He that abides in Christ, walks as Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. with an as
of similitude, though not of equality, 1 John 3.7. he endeavors to follow
Christ in every step, though he cannot take such long strides. As a young
writer begins and ends his lines, and makes his letters like his Master, though
he cannot write so fair; so every Member of Christ's body, having the same mind,
(in his measure) that was in Christ, Phil. 2.5. endeavors to follow Christ in
all graces and duties, and his so walking is evidential unto him: and to every
one that thus obeys Christ, he becomes the Author or Causer of eternal
salvation, Heb. 5.9.

5. He that abides in Christ, is fruitful, Joh. 15.5. which though Hypocrites
may seem to imitate, yet the fruitfulness of Christians is easily
distinguished, in that it is not from external motives, but from Christ, Hos.
14.8. nor for ends selfish and base, but for Christ, Romans 14.7, 8.

Q. What other ground of assurance for the soul?

A. I have this ground that my sins are forgiven me, because I have the other
branches of the new Covenant made over to me, as the taking away from me a
stony hard heart, and my heart and the Commandment closes together, and that I
know God with a relishing knowledge, and not only with a bare notional
knowledge; therefore I have this branch of the new Covenant, that my sins and
iniquities God will remember them no more, Jer. 31.34. Ezekiel. 36.25. Heb. 8.11,
12. for all the branches of the new Covenant are undivided, and my soul truly
repents, and therefore God has promised faithfully to forgive, Prove. 28.13. 1
John 1.8, 9. Luke 24.47. Acts 3.19. Acts 5.31. So that whatever evidences my
repentance, the same also evidences the pardon of my sin.

Q. What other grounds of assurance have you for your soul?

A. I find an universal change: in the understanding, from darkness to light,
Acts 26.18. in the judgment, from false discerning to a right discerning, Isa.
5.20. in the Conscience from benummedness to tenderness, 1 Samuel 24.5. in the
will, from wilfulness to evil, Jer. 14.16. John 8.44. to willingness for good,
Acts 9.6. Romans 7.19. in the imagination, from habitual running upon the World,
Phil. 3.19. to be often in Heaven, Col. 3.1, 2. in the desires, which formerly
were lawless, now awed by the eye of God, Job 31.23.

Q. But seeing there may be changes, as from profaneness to civility, and from
civility to a form of Religion without the power, how shall I know my change to
be right?

A. I know it to be a true change, because I go from one contrary to another,
that the things which I hated, now I love; and the carnal courses I loved, now
I hate, Romans 7.15. holy duties were tedious, now they are delightful, and now
my soul begins to relish that which formerly I loathed, Romans 8.5.

Q. What other ground of assurance have you?

A. This, that I have a true conversion, which appears,

1. By the humiliation and confusion of spirit I have for living so long a
stranger from God, Jer. 31.19. Luke 15.19. Romans 6.21. being sorry I begun no
sooner in Gods ways, and that since I have begun, I have made no greater haste.

2. By my high esteem of my present condition, in a converted estate, though
never so base, that I would not change my condition with the greatest man upon
earth, that is a stranger from the Lord, Heb. 11.25, 26. Acts 8.39.

Q. What other ground of assurance have you?

A. As the Saints of God of old have gathered comfort and assurance from their
uprightness, 1. Chron. 29. and Paul had rejoicing from their uprightness and
godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. so we may gather assurance from them, when

1. We ordinarily and usually look at the eye of God in the things we do, Col.
3.23. Ephesians. 6.6.7. and have a desire (if it might be) always to look at his
eye, Isa. 38.3. 2 Cor. 2.17. by-ends beings a grief unto us, Romans 7.15.

2. Uprightness is seen by a disposition to part with whatsoever God commands,
when we cannot hold Christ and such enjoyment together, Mat. 19.21.

3. When the same sins we avoid in public, we avoid in secret, out of
Conscience to God, Job 31.1. Genesis 39.10. and the same duties we do before men,
we labor to do them in secret before God, Mat. 6.6.

4. When a bare Command moves us to act in our duty, though no second respects
of credit or profit accompany, Esth. 4.16. Mat. 14.3. and contrary, though
second respects of credit and profit which are offered, move us to act against
duty, yet we will not act, out of Conscience of our duty to God, Genesis 39.10.

Q. But how do you allege all the forenamed signs? do you make the soul to
stay upon these as a righteousness to answer divine justice?

A. In no wise: but I make them evidences that I have the Spirit of Christ in
my heart; and having the Spirit, I also have the blood of Christ, because these
are not severed one from the other in justified persons, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Romans
8.30.

Q. What is that righteousness which answers Divine Justice?

A. It was the satisfaction of Christ upon the Cross; for the merit or desert
whereof, God did not only forgive us our sins, but did also blot out, take
away, and by nailing to the Cross, did tear all hand-writings of Mosaical or
Ceremonial Ordinances, which did publicly profess the misery and guilt of the
World, and also did blot out, take away, and tear the damnatory power of the
moral Law, which being contrary to us, did convince us of sin, and condemn us
for it, Romans 3.20. Gal. 3.10. So that as the Debtor is quiet when his Debt is
forgiven, and the Bond cancelled; so the heart of the Bel^ever is quieted, when
not only all his sins, both original and actual, are forgiven; but also all
hand-writings which may witness the same against him, are taken away, Col.
2.13, 14. yea, not only so, but also the same Lord Jesus did spoil, strip,
and disarme the principalities and powers of Hell, of all that power whereby
they prosecuted the bond of the Law against us, Col. 2.15. and made a
triumphant show of them so conquered to the Faith of the Believer, as the
triumphant Conquerors of the World were wont (of old) to lead the Conquered
bound before their triumphant Charets, all the people looking on, Col. 2.15.
And as in battle, where the General and chief Commanders are overcome, the rest
of the Soldiery are also subdued; so with the Devils, whatsoever did war
against us, was overcomed, as Law, Sin, Death, Hell, Heb. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.55.
so that none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, Romans 8.33.

Q. What is it to live by Faith?

A. To rest on Gods promises for justification, Gal. 2.20. for Sanctification,
John 15.2. and for temporal things, Psalm. 34.10. So that whereas carnal men
live by sense, believing no further then they see, and live by their lusts,
helping themselves by indirect means in time of want and danger, a Christian
lives upon a promise, Heb. 11.7. Genesis 32.9, 10, 11. Esther 4.4. Job. 13.15.

Q. Wherein is the life of faith seen?

A. In sundry particulars; as,

1. In drawing life and quickening from Christ, as the branches draw sap from
the root, John 15.5.

2. In believing pardon of sin, notwithstanding many circumstances of
aggravation alleged by Satan and Conscience, Gal. 2.20.

2. In comforting in afflictions: though I be afflicted, says Faith, yet it is
the hand of a wise God and tender Father, John 18.11. this Cup is a medicine
out of a Fathers hand.

4. In proposing God to the soul in the loss of all: when there is nothing in
the barn, nor in the field, faith sees enough in God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Hab. 3:16,
17. 2 Cor. 6.9, 10. When friends dye, and Credit is gone, Faith tells the soul
God lives, and there is praise with him.

5. In making a person let go the best of enjoyments for God: as credit, 1 Samuel
6.20. and estate, Heb. 10.34. and pleasures, Heb. 11.25. and life, Acts 21.13.
and causing him to suffer the worst of evils; as reproaches, Heb. 11.26.
banishment, Revel. 1.10. and tortures, Heb. 11.35. out of Conscience toward
God, 1 Pet. 2.19.

6. In making a person refuse sinful gain, Acts. 8.21. when it might be had
without any man's knowledge, Prove. 21.6.

7. In keeping the soul from the use of unlawful means to come out of trouble,
1 Samuel 26.9, 10. waiting till God open a door of deliverance, Isa. 28.16.

8. In eying God for a good issue out of the midst of troubles, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
because of his promise that he will never fail us, nor forsake us, Heb. 13.5.

9. In setting before the soul the recompense of reward, both in eternity of
joy, 2 These. 4.17. and property of interest, 1 John 5.12. all this is thine,
says Faith.

10. In freeing the soul from a slavish fear of death, Heb. 2.15. Psalm. 23.4.
men have found out comfort against other evils, as poverty, shame; but faith
only professes the Cure of the fear of death.

Of Sins against Knowledge and Conscience.
Q. WHat is it to sin against knowledge or Conscience?

A. It is when we take the fulfilling of a lust, or the performance of a duty
into consideration, and consider motives against the sin or to the duty; and
notwithstanding all these motives that would stop us, yet we commit the sin,
Dan. 5.22. Romans 1.24. or omit the duty, Jam. 4.17.

Q. Whether are all sins against Knowledge and Conscience alike, or are some
greater then others?

A. The more a person considers the issues and events of such a sin before he
commits it, Romans 1.32. and the more consultations thou have about it, Dan.
6.14. and the more warnings thou have against it, whether from God, Conscience
or men, and yet do commit it; the more heinous is thy sin, Mark 14.21. Mat.
17.18, 19. Yea, the more sorrow and reluctance in committing such an evil,
argues thou sinnest against greater knowledge, Mark 6.26. for this displeasure
of mind, arises, from the deep apprehension of the evil then a doing from
which thy knowledge would stop thee, but it cannot.

Q. Whether are sins committed against Conscience and Knowledge pardonable?

A. Yes, 1. Because they are not the sin against the Holy Ghost.

2. Because for the most voluntary sins, a Sacrifice was to be offered, Levit.
6.8. There were Sacrifices to be offered for him that denied a thing that was
given him to keep, in the day of Restitution; but if persons persecute the
Truth against light, and maliciously, then there is no pardon for that sin,
Heb. 6.4, 5. and 10.26, 27, 28, 29. Yet though sins against Conscience are
pardonable, yet this circumstance, that such a sin was deliberately committed
against light, makes the soul more guilty than ordinarily the sin committed
therewith.

Qu. Wherein is the greatness of sins against Knowledge soon?

A. In diverse respects, as 1. In such sins there is a great contempt of the
power of Knowledge, and Justice of God, Numb. 15.30. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Numb. 15.32,
33.

2. In such sins there is more of the Will, 1 Samuel 13.12. hence Saul for
sinning against Conscience was cast off, 1 Samuel 13.12. compared with 1 Samuel
15.14, 26.

3. In such sins, there is a greater resistance of that light the Spirit
kindles in us, Acts 5.3. Ananias and Sapphira lying against that light the
Spirit set up in them, were smit with sudden death for sinning so against their
knowledge, Acts 7.51.

4. In sins against Knowledge there are fewer pretenses, Matthew. 22.12. Joh.
15.22. In sins of ignorance men pretend they know not duty; but here is no place
for such pretense, Ioh. 9.41.

5. We may see the greatness of such sins, from the stripes proportioned to
them, Luke 12.48. Romans 1.15. such are beaten with many stripes.

6. In that by such sins we do at once quench the fire of the Spirit, and lose
the feelings of Gods Love, Psalm. 51.11, 12.

Q. Why do men venture upon sins against knowledge, seeing they are dangerous?

A. 1. Union of the heart to some lust, either of gain or pleasure, Matthew.
15.10. compared with verse 15.

2. Lothness to take up the Crosses that lie in the way of duty. Hence persons
lie, and do other evils against conscience, 1 Samuel 13.12. Job. 36.21.

3. Presumptuous hope of Mercy, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Romans 2.4, 5. Psalm. 68.21.

Q. Whether may not a child of God fall into sins against his knowledge and
conscience?

A. 1. There are some failings in duty, and stirrings of lust in godly men,
which are committed with knowledge, but not against it; for it is not in the
power of knowledge to prevent them, Romans 7.15, 18. these evils arise on a
sudden.

2. A godly man may sin against his knowledge through strength of passion, and
sudden furreption, before he has time to compose his heart; Conscience in the
act of it checks him, yet he cannot keep it back: so Peter denied Christ, and
Jonah, his Conscience told him he should not be angry, when God asked him if he
did well to be angry, Jonah 4.9.

3. A godly man may fall sometimes into deliberate sins against knowledge, when
that which he knows habitually, he does not actually think of; the violence of
the temptation blinding the judgment, and beating back the voice of Conscience:
so David is set forth (as a smarting spectacle of misery, lest any man should
venture as he did) to have fallen into the sins of adultery and murder, against
knowledge; David's mind was so taken up with Bathsheba, that he little thought
of what he knew.

4. A godly man exceeding seldom or never falls into a deliberate sin against
knowledge, when he does actually and deliberately think, and judge of what he
knows, 1 Ioh. 3.9.

Q But if sinning against knowledge be so dangerous, is it not best to remain
in ignorance?

A. Ignorance, when it is against a man's Will, may excuse from so much guilt,
Luke 12.48. yet will it not excuse wholly; Acts 17.30. But when it is an
ignorance of wicked disposition, that a man is either willingly ignorant, 2
Pet. 3.5. or winks and closes up his eyes against the light, Isa. 30.10, 11.
Matthew. 13.13, 14. Ioh. 3.20. so that they will not read such Books, nor hear
such Preachers, nor confer with such men as might discover truth to them; God
is wont not only Judicially to harden such in their blindness, Matthew. 13.14.
compared with John 12.40. but will also one day reckon with such wilful
ignorants, as if all their sins had been committed against Knowledge.

Q. What are the Covenants principally considerable, which God made with his
people?

A. Besides diverse other Covenants which he made, as with Noah, and with every
living creature, both fowl, and beast, that there should be no more a flood to
drown the Earth, of which Covenant he made the Rainbow a token, Genesis 9, 9, 10,
11. as also a Covenant made with David, that his seed should still rule over
Israel; with the Levites, that they should be his Ministers, Jer. 33.20, 21,
25, 26. And a Covenant to give the Land of Canaan to the Jews, Psalm. 105.9, 10.
there are two other Covenants, most considerable.

Q. Which are they?

A. 1. A carnal typical Covenant, or Testament, called old, Heb. 8.13. second,
Heb. 9.1. worse, Heb. 8.6. which was dedicated with the blood of beasts, Exodus
24.6, 7, 8. compared with Heb. 9.19. This was with all Israel, in the day when
God took them by the hand to lead them out, of the Land of Egypt, Heb. 8.9. 2.
A spiritual or new Covenant.

Q. What did this old Covenant signify?

A. 1. An obligation of the Jews to the Mosaical Law in general Exodus 19.5, 6,
7, 8. Exodus 24.6, 7, 8. in the perfect observation whereof, (it is thought) they
were to have Canaan here, and Heaven hereafter; but failing in one point, they
were under a curse, Gal. 3.10. the Ceremonial part of it also shadowed our
redemption by Christ, Heb. 9.18, 19.

Q. What was the proper effect of this old Covenant?

A. Bondage and slavish fear for not performing what this old Covenant did
require: this was signified by Hagar the bondwoman, Gal. 4.24, 25. and this
Mount Sinai in Arabia, a place without the bounds of the Land of promise, and
by the fleshly Jerusalem, which was in bondage with her children; all three
which resemblances signify, that the old Covenant begot children to bondage,
not only under the unsupportable burden of the Ceremonial Law, Acts 15.10.
(which was a yoke of bondage, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. also chap. 5.1.) but also under
the bondage of the curse, and of Gods wrath, for not performing what the Law
requires; for which cause the Law is said to work wrath, Romans 4.15. to be a
ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3.7. and to slay the soul, Romans 7.11. Now, as
when a Pitcher falls upon the stones, it is the weakness of the Pitcher not, of
the stones, that it is broken: So the reason why the Law ministers death, is
not because of the weakness of the Law, but the weakness of our flesh, Romans 8.3.

Q. What is the other Covenant called?

A. It Is that Covenant which the Scripture calls the second Covenant, Heb. 8.7.
and 9.1, 18. Heb. 10.9. or the new Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.25. Heb. 8.13, and 9.15.
or the better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. as being established upon better Promises,
Heb. 8.6. of which Christ was surety, Heb. 7.22.

Q. What is this new Covenant?

A. It is Gods free Promise, whereby he promises, not only pardon of sins, and
eternal life to them that are elect, or do believe the same; but also does
promise to to take away the stony heart, and to give them a new heart and a new
spirit, and to put his Laws in their minds, and to write them in their hearts,
so that all of them, from the least to the greatest know the Lord; yea,
vouchsafes to be their God, and takes them to be his people.

Q. What are the Articles, or Branches in particular of this new Covenant?

A. They are these: 1. Forgiveness of sins, Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.
So that the Elect have not only redemption from Original sin, but from all
transgression under the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. by sprinkling clean water
upon them, Ezekiel. 26.25. Christ's blood.

2. A second branch is eternal life, Romans 5.15. Heb. 9.15. Christ is the
Mediator of the new Testament, that by the means of death (that is, of Christ's
death) they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance:
in this inheritance no bond-slave of Satan does partake; which appears, Gal.
4.30. in the type, in that the son of the Bondwoman, which was Ishmael, did
not partake with the son of the Freewoman, which was Isaac; the message from
God being, Cast out the Bondwoman and her son; for the son of the Bondwoman
shall not be heir with the son of the Freewoman.

The third Branch is, softning of the hearth, Ezekiel. 11.19. that whereas in the
natural state the heart was so hard, that neither promise, threat, nor command,
mercy misery moved; Now this stony heartedness is taken away, that the soul
melts under the sense of Christ's sufferings, it is own infirmities, and Gods
mercies.

The fourth Branch is, Newness whereby Christ does not only cleanse the soul
from all filthiness in the reign thereof, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. compared with Romans
6.12, 15. but also puts a new spirit, or a new frame of a Spirit within; which
the Seripture calls transformation, or change of mind, Romans 12.2.

The fifth Branch is, the putting of his laws in the hearts of the elect, Heb.
8.10, 11. so that they shall not teach every man his neighbor, or every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know the Lord from the least
to the greatest; which is not meant of Notional knowledge (as if persons in
covenant with God stood in no need of being taught by Pastors, parents, or
neighbors) but of affective knowledge, that is, such a knowledge as carries
affection with it, whereby they relish and savor good things. For this, see
John 17.3. John 6.45. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. 1 John 2.27. this is such a teaching as God
teaches the Bees to work in their kind, whereby he puts an instinct in them so
to work.

The sixth Branch is, the writing of his law in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. The pen
wherewith he writes them, is his own Spirit, though the ministration be of men,
2 Cor. 3.3. Now this writing is nothing but the inclination of the will to
close with Gods law in the breadth of it, the which branch Ezekiel expresses
thus, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep
my judgments: so that whereas in the natural state there was an enmity betwixt
the heart and the law, the Spirit so bends the will, that the heart and the law
become suitable, answering one another, as the Seal and the Wax.

The seventh Branch is, I will be their God, and they shall be my people:
whereby God promises to communicate to us not only every good thing, Psalm
84.1.2. but also himself, and that we that were enemies and strangers, shall be
his people, Romans 9.25.26. Hos. 1.10.

Q. Who was the Mediator of this new Covenant?

A. Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.15. First, the promises were made to Abraham's seed,
not Seeds, but Seed; one Seed, which was Christ, Gal. 3.15, 16. And by virtue
of our union with Christ, we come to be heirs according to promise, Gal. 3.29.
the promises being first instated upon Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. as being heir of
all things, Heb. 1.12.

Q. Who are the persons that have benefit by this new Covenant?

A. All the elect from the beginning to the end of the world, Rev. 13.8. Genesis
3.15. In the times of the old Testament there were many children of the new
Covenant: and though Jeremiah, chap. 31.31. call it a new Covenant, yet does he
so call it, because it was clearly manifested by the Apostles preaching.

Q. But how can the Covenant be made with all the elect, seeing sundry of them
are not capable of diverse branches thereof, as infants, idiots? etc.

A. You must remember, that the new Covenant is called a Testament, ( Mat.
26.28.) or a Will: Now an Infant is capable of a Legacy. 2. Though they are not
capable of all the Branches of the Covenant, yet are they of some, as
forgiveness of sins, and eternal life; by these they are saved, though they
have not the other.

Q How does it appear the new Covenant was also a Testament?

A. Because as other Wills and Testaments are, it was confirmed with the death
of the Testator, Heb. 9.16. This was established in the blood of Christ Mat.
26.28. 1 Cor. 11.25. Besides, the word (...), properly signifies a Testament.

Q. What difference betwixt the two Covenants?

A. The old Covenant required perfect obedience, but gave no strength to do it:
hence called [Faulty] Heb. 8.7. not in respect of it self, but us; faulty with
a faultiness of imperfection, not of sinfulness: but in the new Covenant is a
promise of ability to do what God requires: As he requires love of us, Mat.
10.37. so he promises it; so does he for faith, Ephesians. 2.8. repentance, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. and Gods fear, Jer. 32.40. Hence called a Covenant of Grace, because
he does our part as well as his own.

Secondly, the old Covenant required obedience in the rigor, and cursed the
transgressor for every breach, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. the new Covenant
requires on the creatures part only the perfection of sincerity, which
consists principally in an universal purpose and endeavor for new obedience,
John 15.14. with an hearty sorrow if they be overtaken contrary to this purpose.

Thirdly, the old Covenant was much upon temporal promises, as Levit. 16.3.
Deuteronomy. 28.1, 17. but the new Covenant runs upon spiritual and eternal promises,
Heb. 8.6.

Fourthly, the old Covenant is abolished and come to an end, Heb. 8.13. Cast
out the Bondwoman and her son, Gal. 4.30. But the new Covenant is everlasting,
Heb. 13.20. in opposition to the abrogated covenant, so that as a wife is free
from her husband when he is dead, so we are freed from the old Covenant, it
being dead; and we being new married unto Christ. Romans 7.1, 2 3 4.

Fifthly, the old Covenant was very dark, 2 Cor. 3.13. Moses put a veil over
his face, to signify the children of Israel could not see Christ. Hence, as
those that learn the Rudiments or beginning of a language, are in bondage not
knowing what benefit will come by them: so were sundry Jews and others under
the bondage of the Rudiments of the world, Gal. 4.9. and could not with any
clearness understand it. Contrary, the new Testament is clear; the Ministers of
it use great plainness of speech, 2 Cor. 3.12, 13. and the children of the new
Covenant see with much plainness, as in a looking-glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Q But seeing you say the old Covenant is abolished, whether or no are we freed
from the Law of Moses?

A. Believers are delivered, First, from the curse for breach of it, Gal. 3.13.
Secondly, from the covenant of the Law, under which notion it seems to have
been delivered on Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.5, 6.8. Exodus 24.8. Thirdly, from the
handwriting of the Law, as it testified against us our guilt, Col. 2.14. as a
free Creditor not only forgives the debt, but also cancels the bond that might
witness it against his debtor. Fourthly, from the power it has to stir up to
sin, Romans 7.5, 8. the more the Law forbids sin to natural men, with much more
proneness they are carried to it. Fifthly, from the Mosaical institution of it,
as it was by Moses peculiarly appointed to the Jews, John 7.19. Did not Moss
give [You] the Law? John 15.25. It is written in [Their] law. And else why did
Moses command the seventh day from the creation to be observed, and we observe
the first day of the week?

Q How are we bound to observe Moses his Laws?

A. 1. As they are Laws of Nature: I call those laws of Nature, which men by
the light of nature practice, Romans 2.14. as that God is to be worshipped
parents honored, that no man is to take away the Wife or goods of another.

2. So far as they are Laws of equity and justice.

3. So far as they are Laws of holiness; for the Children of the new Testament
who lived under the old Testament, made great conscience of them, Luke 1.6. and
they tend to the perfecting of the new Creature, 2 Timothy 3.16. Romans 15.4. Hence
the Spirit writes the Law in regenerate men's hearts, Ezekiel. 36.27. Heb. 8.10.
which he would not do if it were not a rule of holiness; yea, all Gods Law is
holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. whereunto regenerate men, (as such) had
respect, Psalm. 119.6. yea are bound to have respect, James 2.10, 11. all which
proves the holiness of Gods Law, I mean the Scriptures penned by Moses, with all
other prophetical Scriptures which expound the same.

Q. What comfort may we draw from this new Covenant?

A. Much comfort: when thy lusts are prevailing, God will sprinkle clean water,
Ezekiel. 36.25. when hardness of heart assaults, God will take away a stony heart,
Ezekiel. 11.19. when old lusts assail, that God will give a new heart, Ezekiel.
36.26. so when thy heart begins to disrellish good things, that God will give
thee a savory heart to relish them, Heb. 8.11. if thy heart rise up against any
of Gods Commands, that God will write this Law in thy heart, Ier. 31.33. and
when thy heart shall doubt of Gods favor, remember that he says, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, Heb. 8.10.

Q What are the signs of the new Covenant?

A. They are two: 1. Baptism, 2. The Supper of the Lord.

Q. Declare in particular what Baptism is?

A. It is a sign of my fellowship with Christ in his death, burial, and
resurrection, that as my body is washed and buried in water, so I believe my
sins are washed away, and buried in the death of the Lord Jesus; and as I did
rise again out of the water, so I did rise again with Christ, being
discharged from my sins in his death and resurrection; and have already begun
and professed that I am bound to rise to walk with Christ in newness of life,
Romans 6.3 4* 5, 6. Col. 2.12.

Q. Who are the right subjects of Baptism?

A. Those that are made Disciples or Scholars of Christ, Mat. 28.19. that make
profession of believing with their whole hearts, Acts 8.37. Heb. 10.22, 23. and
of their repentance from dead works, Mat. 3.6. Acts 2.38, 39. and of their
right knowledge of the object of worship, that is, the Trinity, into whose Name
they are baptized, Mat. 28.19. and of their natural corruptions; without which,
they will see no need of washing, Mat. 3.14. and of their self-denial; without
which, they are not Christ's Disciples, Luke 14.26. and so not to be baptized,
by the very words of the Commission of Christ, Mat. 28.19. Make disciples all
Nations, baptizing them; for the Greek word signifies to make disciples, and
not barely to teach.) Also, they must make profession of their spiritual life;
without which, they are not members of Christ the living head; also, of the
resurrection of the body, which is also signified in Baptism, 1 Cor. 15.29.
and of the last judgment.

Q. May not infants be baptized?

A. No, in no wise; it being gross will worship, condemned, Col. 2.23. Mat.
15.9. the Scripture declaring baptism to be applied only to those that are
disciples, Mat. 28.19. and believe, Mar. 16.16. Acts 8.12, 37. and 18, 8. and
repent, Acts 2.38.39. and have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and have received the
Holy Ghost, Acts 10.41. We must not presume to apply it to any other.

Besides, infants understand not the new Covenant, therefore they have nothing
to do with the signs thereof, unless God had commanded otherwise: neither are
they in Christ's commission, and therefore excluded to the end of the world.

Q. Is not the command of circumcision to the Jews, a command to Christian
parents to baptize infants?

A. If you make the command of Circumcision to be the institution or command
for infants baptism, you hold forth Circumcision still, and so hold forth that
which typifies Christ to come in the flesh. Persons were circumcised upon a
fleshly covenant intailed to generation, not to regeneration: but now believers
are baptized upon a command of God, as a declaration of the washing away of
their sins in Christ's blood, Act. 22.16. Circumcision, with the rest of the
ceremonies, were abolished in Christ, Col. 2.17. Heb. 9.9, 10, 1. If we may
call back one, we may call back all. To say, So for a command binds us and so
far not without a plain declaration of Gods will, is high presumption. We are
therefore to stand fast in our liberty, Gal. 2.16, Gal. 4.10 11. and 5.1, 2, 3.
The Apostle, Col. 2.10 11, 12. to take the Jewish brethren wholly off from
Circumcision, does not say, We have another ordinance in stead of circumcision,
or by virtue of that command; but, We have Christ in stead of all; we are
circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, by the Spirit of Christ;
we are complete in him, verse 11. not with a compleatness of outward
ordinances, but by a compleatness of Christ alone. It is supposed by some, that
without a succession of some ordinance instead of Circumcision, we are not
complete in Christ, or not so complete as the Jews; but this is, 1. False,
because it is contrary to that the Apostle asserts, that we are complete in
Christ alone, because in him is the fullness of all that was shadowed. 2. It is
dangerous, because the same reason that will conclude we are not complete
without a succession of some ordinances in stead of Circumcision, will conclude
we are not complete without a succession of something instead of Temple,
Sacrifices, Altar; and so, after the Popish manner, all Jewish Rites will be
recalled, under new names. The question started at Colosse, was, not
universally, wherein a Christians perfection consisted; but wherein it
consisted in point of Justification; whether by Christ alone, or by the law and
circumcision joined with him. To this he says, We are complete in him.

Q. But may I not draw a proportion, that as infants in the time of the Jews
were circumcised, so infants of believers under the times of the Gospel may be
baptized?

A. In no wise. We must not make additions in worship from our conceited
proportions. Proportions of Gods making may be observed, as these following:
The Priests lips must preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7. so must the Bishops be apt
to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. As the Priests by offering sacrifice held forth Christ,
Heb. 9. so the Ministers by preaching, Gal. 3.1. as the Priest was to have a
Consecration, so the Ministers an Ordination: Will it therefore follow, that a
command to a Priest to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, should be a command to a
Gospell-Minister to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, as the Mass-priests do? Or
a command for a Priest to weat a linen Ephod, should be a command to a Minister
to wear a Surplice? or that there must be a Pope over the Church, because there
was an high priest in time of the law? or that we must receive the Supper with
unleavened bread, because the passover was so received? Yet do these as well
follow, as baptizing of infants, from circumcision of infants.

The true proportions flowing hence, are these: 1. none were circumcised, but
those commanded or exemplified; so none ought to be baptized but such. 2. As
Abraham believing was circumcised, and all the males of his house, both men,
and children of eight days old; both bond and free: so now any man believing
must be baptized, with all his household, both men and male-children of eight
days old, both bond and free. The formal reason why Abraham and the Jews
received Circumcision, was Gods command concerning infants baptism: if any
such command be, let it be produced.

Q Whether are the children of believers in covenant together with their
parents?

A. No: for the children are often out of covenant, when the father is in
covenant. It Is said, Gal. 3.7, 9. that they that are of the faith of Abraham,
are the children of Abraham; but nowhere has God made a promise to be a God of
believers and their seed, unless upon a presupposal that the Lord shall call
the seed as well as the father Acts 2.39. If the natural posterity of Abraham
were not in the covenant of grace by virtue of that promise, Genesis 17.7. as
appears, Romans 9.7. neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all
children; and verse. 8. These that are the children of the flesh, these are not
the children of God; but the children of the promise are counted for the seed:
much less are the children of other believers children of promise by virtue of
generation.

He that shall hear men preach, that children of believers are in the covenant
of grace, and they that are in the covenant of grace cannot fall away, may be
apt to conceive himself in that covenant of grace without repentance and faith,
and shall be saved without any obedience. And may not, on the other side, godly
parents, when they see their children live vitiously, doubt whether they
themselves be true believers, because they see not their children in the
covenant of grace?

There is a promise or calling home the natural seed of Abraham, Romans 11.27.
but God has not made any such promise to any, much less to all the natural
seed of any believing Gentile.

Q Are not the ordinances the outward part of the covenant? and is not the
title to this hereditary?

A. Is a box that conveyes a Jewel, the outward part of the Jewel? Is a
conduit-pipe that conveyes water, the outward part of the water? is Aaron's pot
the outward part of the Manna that it kept?

2. Suppose the ordinances were the outward part of the covenant, how is title
hereto hereditary, seeing that not only from particular persons, but even whole
Churches, as Ephesus, etc. these ordinances have been removed long since.

Besides, it is nowhere said in Scripture, The child shall be baptized by
virtue of his beliving fathers being baptized; or enjoy ordinances because his
father enjoyed them.

3. There is but one covenant now, Heb. 8.10, 11. the articles and branches
whereof are inward, and so is the seal thereof, the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. There
can be no ou^ward dispensation of an uncertain thing: now it is uncertain of
any individual infant, whether he be in the new covenant.

Q. But does not Christ say. Of little children is the Kingdom of God?
therefore they may be baptized.

A. 1. There Is two ways of belonging to Gods Kingdom. 1. By way of election;
which is secret. 2. By calling; which is manifest. The Ordinance of Baptism
ought not to be dispensed upon election, or remission of sins, which is secret;
but upon the manifestation thereof.

2. Christ baptized not, only laid on his hands on them, John 4.2. Had Christ
used to baptize infants, the disciples would not have kept them back.

3. The Kingdom of God being taken for the Kingdom of grace, the Kingdom of
glory, and the visible Church it would pose any man living to prove that the
visible Church should be meant here.

4. Besides, Luke 18.16. they were not infants, because Christ is said to call
them.

Q. What further reasons have you against infant baptism?

A. 1. The baptism of Christ is a burial in waters; the baptism of infants is
a sprinkling* Romans 6.3 4. Col. 2.12.

2. Baptism does not causally effectively or actively; I mean, it does not,
from the work done, confer faith; but refers to the new covenant, in by, and
through the unde^standing; therefore where it is dispensed, there ought to be
an understanding to conceive it.

3. The same benefit confirmed in the Supper that this, remission of sins, is
confirmed in baptism; therefore infants being excluded from the one, for want
of examination, they are also excluded from the other, for want of faith and
repentance.

4. Infant Baptism hinders baptism from being dispensed as John and other
Apostles dispensed it: they dispensed it upon profession of faith; but no such
thing can be in infants.

Q In what manner must baptism be administered?

A. The subject must be right; that is, not only taught, but taught so long
that he be made a disciple, Mat. 28.19.

2. Not by sprinkling, but by burying, Romans 4.5. Col. 2.12. not of the brow or
face only, but of the whole body, Heb. 10.22. in much water, Joh. 3.23. into
which the baptizer and the person to be baptized are to enter, Mat. 3.6. Acts
8.38. who is to be baptized into the name of Father, Son, and Spirit, Mat.
28.19. in token of remission of sins, Act. 2.38. the name of God being first
called upon, Act. 22.16.

Q. Do you judge it better to defer baptism till persons be able to make
profession of their faith?

A. Yes. Infants cannot give any ground to any dispenser of baptism why he
should dispense it to them. The dispencing it to infants, confounds the world
and the Church together; many hereby being made Christians in name who never
made choice of Christ nor have any love to Christianity: yea hereby the
Churches are filled with rotten members; many of which growing up, persecute
the true members.

By deferring baptism till persons know Christ, the Churches would in time
come to have a right matter.

Q. Have not infants faith?

A. No: they have not reason to discern good or evil Deuteronomy. 1.39. Jon. 4.11. had
they faith, they were presently to be admitted to the Supper: faith is an act
of the Understanding as well as of the Will.

Q. Whether is there any reason that Baptism should succeed circumcision,
because that as circumcision signed the spiritual part of the covenant that is,
circumcision of heart; so baptism should signify the same?

A. No: for the Manna, the water flowing out of the rock, the sacrifices under
the law, and the sprinkling of blood, signified the same; yet will not any man
say baptism succeeded these, because of the signification.

The Lords Supper signified the same; yet will no man say the Lords Supper
succeeds Circumcision in respect of any use: In nothing else, that I know of,
is there a likeness betwixt Circumcision and Baptism; and therefore to draw
infants baptism from it, is no consequence. And so much more, because the
state of the Jewish Church is at an end, which was national; and we have
Gospel-congregational-Churches.

Object. Circumcision was a seal of Abraham's faith; therefore baptism coming
in the room of it, ought to be dispensed to infants.

A. 1. Then none should be baptized, save those which have faith and the
righteousness of faith. Infants, though they may have a righteousness, yet they
cannot have the righteousness of faith, because they have no power to believe.
If there were any such succession then baptism should seal the righteousness in
faith; which it cannot in infants.

2. It is absurd that baptism should succeed Circumcision, in respect of
infancy, not mentioned in the text; and not in growth of stature, which now
Abraham had; nor in qualification of the righteousness of faith, which was the
qualification of Abraham: both which are mentioned in the text.

3. Baptism succeeds circumcision, neither, 1. In respect of subject: some
there were to be circumcised, that are not to be baptized; as bought servants:
and some to be baptized, that were not to be circumcised; as females. 2. Nor in
respect of society: Circumcision was an inlet into the Jewish Church, Baptism
into the Christian Church. 3. Nor in respect of use: for Circumcision engaged
Jews and Proselytes to the Jewish ceremonies; but Baptism is a declarative of
remission of sins.

Q. Who has the power of dispensing the ordinance of Baptism?

A. It seems to me, that, 1. Apostles, 2. Evangelists or Gospel-preachers, have
power herein.

Q. How prove you that there is any such Office in the Church as Apostles or
Messengers? for an Apostle is nothing but a Messenger.

A. 1. Because as God gave Pastors and Teachers, so did he give Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians 4.10, 11, 12,
13. therefore, it follows, that, Till all the Saints be perfected, till the
body of Christ be built up, this office is to remain in the Church. To
distinguish, that Pastors and Teachers are ordinary officers, but the Office of
Apostles and Evangelists is extraordinary; or that the work of perfecting
Saints and edifying Christ's body lies upon Pastors and Teachers, and not upon
Apostles and Evangelists, is to put a distinction where the Scripture puts
none: the twelve Apostles were given, before Christ his ascension; but these
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.10. were given after: see verse 8, 9.

2. Secondly, it appears from Gods own order, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some
in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers. If he
set them first, what are we, that we can either abolish them, or set them in
other places when God will give them?

3. Thirdly, we find (2) Apostles in sundry of the Churches, therefore they
are a standing Office: At Ephesus, Ephesians. 4.10. at Philippi, Phil. 2.25. the
Greek word is Apostolos: At Antioch, Acts 13.23. at Jerusalem, Act. 1.26. at
Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.13. See also 2 Cor. 8.23. or our brethren be enquired of,
they are the Apostles of the Churches. So in the Greek, Gal. 1.1. Paul an
Apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ; to show there were
Apostles by men, or of men's sending, besides those sent by Christ. Andronicus
and Junia were Apostles in Rome, or thereabouts, Romans 16.7. they were of note
among the Apostles, not only because they were of esteem, but because they did
laboriously preach: so were Barnabas, Silas, Timotheus, Luke, Mark, etc. though
none of the twelve.

Fourthly, Apostles are called to rejoice at Babylons destruction, Rev. 18.20.
Now if there were no Apostles but the first twelve, Babylon could do them no
wrong, seeing she was not in being till three hundred years after Christ:
therefore some Apostles must be meant, to whom Babylon had done mischief.

Fifthly, it appears from Reason; there is as much need of Apostles for to
gather persons from their natural and Babylonish estate, as there was to gather
them from Judaisme and Gentilisme.

Q. What is essential to an Apostle in these times?

A. 1. Abilities of grace and parts, Romans 10.

Secondly the choice and sending forth of a Church, 2 Cor. 8.19. the Messengers
that went along with Paul, verse 23. are said to be chosen of the Church;
Barnabas was sent by the Church of Jerusalem to go to Antioch, Acts 11.22.
Epaphroditus was thus sent by the Church at Philippi, Phil. 2.25. Paul by the
Church of Antioch, Acts 13.2.

Q. What is the office of such an Apostle?

A. 1. To bring the Doctrine of salvation, Acts 1.22. and 13.26 and 28.28.

Secondly, to baptize, Mat. 28.18. 1 Cor. 1.16.

Thirdly, to lay on hands, Acts 8.17. Acts 19.5 6 7. 2 Timothy 1.6. after Baptism.

4. Ordination of Elders and Deacons, and to lay hands on them, Acts 6.6. Acts
14.23. Titus 1.5. yea, he is to have a great hand in Church censures, 1 Cor.
5.4. 1 Timothy 1.21.

Q What is the difference betwixt the twelve Apostles called immediately of
Christ, and those called mediately of Churches?

A. The twelve or at least eleven, were called personally of Christ; the
Apostles of Churches are called virtually by Christ his command, or order,
E^hes. 4.10. He that can immediately make out his call, has enough to satisfy
his own and other men's conscience, though not called personally by Christ. Some
of the Apostles called by Christ personally, were penmen of Scripture, and so
were infallible 2 Pet. 1.21. yet were they not infallible in every thing Gal.
2.13. but had they so been, yet is sending of a Church and giftedness the
formal cause of Apostleship, as was proved before, and not infallibility.

Q. But were not miracles the signs of an Apostle? 2 Cor. 12.12.

A. No: The Apostle says not, wonders of miracles were signs of an Apostle,
(which many other believers could do) but he says, the signs of an Apostle
(which was conversion of souls, called the seal of his Apostleship, 1 Cor.
9.2.) were wrought by him in signs and wonders.

Q. Is not this Doctrine concerning Apostles, set down very barely in Scripture?

A. The Doctrine concerning Apostles, comparing it with the Doctrine of the
Resurrection and last Judgment, is not set down with such clearness; but
comparing it with the Assertions about the calling of Pastors and Elders, as
now practiced in the reformed Churches (as they are called) there is greatness
of light: for the call of the Ministers goes upon one of these three heads.

1. Succession of persons: as that the Ministers have been ordained by them who
have been ordained of others. Now this is most uncertain, having been
interrupted so often, and yet once were enough to make it a nullity. Besides,
that having been no Scripture writ for above this fifteen hundred years, all
that men can have for it is only humane testimony, which is no ground to him
that scruples, By what power and authority do you this? Besides, all succession
has gone through the filthy chapel of the Romish Churches, which have been for
many hundred years overspread with Idolatry, will worship, and false matter;
wherein the Teachers respectively, in whom successive power is supposed to
reside, were the chiefest sticklers, and deepliest guilty in those abominations.

2. Proportion; that because the Church chose an Apostle, therefore the Church
may now choose a Pastor; because that the Apostles Paul and Barnabas ordained
Elders in every Church, which they had been instrument^l to bring to the faith
Acts 14.23. therefore a Company of Synod-men or P^esbyters may ordain in every
Church; or because Paul left Titus in Crete to ordain Elders in every City
Titus 1.5. therefore other men may be deputed to ordain by the power of a
national or provincial Priesbytery: if then affirmations for the one be dark,
how much more dark is the other?

3. Radicality, that is, that though all Officers and Ordinances are lost, yet
that the power resolves it self into the Church, as the sap of trees in winter
goes into the root; and that the power of recovering Officers being there
seated, any Church or Company of Believers has authority from Christ to bring
this power into act: which being the best ground that I know the reformed
Churches to have from these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 3.21. Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. do
thereupon in sundry independent Churches choose and ordain Officers of Pastor,
Teacher, Deacon, Elder; and why not also may they choose Apostle and Evangelist,
or Messenger and Gospel-Preacher, being there is the same radical power for the
one that there is for the other?

Q. Who besides Apostles have power to baptize?

A. Evangelists or Gospel-Preachers: so Philip baptized the Eunuch, Acts 8.37.
and many of the Samaritans, verse. 12. now by Gospel-Preachers, I mean those who
though not sent by a Church, yet being gifted shall preach soul-savingly,
whether sent of the Magistrate when Churches are either defective or unable, 2 Chronicles. 17.7 8. or going of their own accord, as those who went out, John 3.
Epist. verse. 6, 7. such an one was Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.5. on whom hands were
laid, 1 Timothy 4.14. the difference betwixt these Gospel-Preachers and Apostles,
seems to be this, that as the Apostles were sent into the world to convert
persons to the faith, Mark. 16.15. so these Evangelists went unto the Churches
to accomplish the work the Apostles had begun: such were Titus, Mark, Tychicus,
Epaphras: yet were not Apostles limited only to the World, nor Evangelists to
the Churches.

Q. Whether may not other disciples baptize?

A. The Scripture does not so clearly set down herein yet it is more then
probable that Ananias, a Disciple of Damascus, baptized Paul, Acts 9.17, 18.
and that the three Brethren that came along with Peter from Joppa, baptized
Cornelius and his Company, Acts 10 48.

Besides, ordinary Disciples may make Disciples, Acts 11.21, 22. therefore they
may baptize, Mat. 28.18. if we say the eleven Disciples only were appointed by
the Commission to make Disciples, then it follows, that the Brethren that made
so many Disciples at Antioch, should have sinned in their so doing, for want of
a Commission. Yet may not women baptize, because they are forbid to teach, 1
Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12.

Q. But is not baptizedness in the dispenser of Baptism, essential to
Baptism, seeing we never read any unbaptized person did baptize?

A. Baptizedness in the dispenser is not essential to Baptism: for then, 1. an
Ordinance of God should be administered upon humane Testimony; for how can any
man be sure that there has been a line of baptized Persons from the Apostles
to him that baptized thee, especially seeing no Scripture has been given by
God for this fifteen years and upwards?

Besides John who baptized first, we read nothing of his Baptism, besides none
of those that were baptized in Scripture; as the Samaritans, the Eunuch, the
three thousand, Acts 24.2. Lydia, the Jailer, etc. never asked any of the
dispensers of Baptism (though strangers to them) whether themselves were
baptized; which had been most material, had a dispensers baptizedness been
essential to Baptism; especially, they living among the Scribes and Pharisees,
who were ready to question by what Power and Authority do you these things?

Besides, were baptizedness thus essential to Baptism, then the Commission
would have run; Let a baptized person make Disciples all Nations; but its
otherwise, make Disciples all Nations.

Besides, there should be a continual uncertainties, in respect of Baptism upon
the consciences of all Christians; seeing they could never be certain of a line
of Baptizers: especially, after two or three removes, and so still should they
be uncertain of their own Baptism.

Besides, an unbaptized person may clearly hold forth the Covenant of Grace,
and so Make souls Disciples; what should hinder them but that he may tender the
sign thereof to those parties that lay hold on that Covenant?

Besides, this would prove Baptism not to be of God, Acts 5.39. because it
comes to naught, for want of the knowledge of baptizedness in the dispenser.

Q. Whether is the doing of miracles essential to a dispenser of Baptism?

A. No: 1. John the first dispenser did no miracle, Joh. 10.41. Now an
Ordinance when it is first instituted or dispensed, the dispenser did bring it
in with all the essentials.

2. Then should the dispensers of Baptism always have wrought miracles before
they administered Baptism, in the sight of the person to be baptized, seeing
persons to be baptized ought to partake of every thing essential to Baptism;
but the Scriptures mention no miracle that Philip did when he baptized the
Eunuch, nor when John baptized in Jordan, or when Lydia was baptized.

Besides; if the essence of Baptism consisted in the dispensers doing a
miracle, then there is no true Baptism in the world, because no miracle has
been done this thirteen hundred years, Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in 2 Epistle to the
Corinthians.

Besides, miracles are not much useful to a person that is presently to be
baptized, seeing he is deemed a Believer already; but they are of use to
unconverted persons, Acts 8.6. 1 Cor. 14.22.

Lastly, miracles alone cannot confirm any one Ordinance, because false
prophets may do them, Deuteronomy. 13.1. Mat. 7.22. and 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. from all
which it follows, Miracle-working is not essential to a dispenser of baptism,

Concerning Imposition, or laying on of Hands.
Q. HOw many sorts of laying on of hands do you find in the New Testament?

A. Besides occasional laying on of hands, as on little children, Mat. 19.15.
and miraculous, when the Apostles laid their hands on the sick, and they
recovered, Mark. 16.18. Acts 28.8. there ore two usual laying on of hands.

First, in ordination of Officers, which is the pointing out of the person
chose to an office in the Church, whom the Church commends to God in prayer.
This is acknowledged by all.

Secondly, there is a laying on of hands after baptism, which is a praying for
an increase of the Spirit on baptized persons, 2 Timothy 1.6.

Q. Whether is laying on of hands after baptism, an ordinance of force,
obliging Christians in these times?

A. Reserving others of Gods servants to their light who think otherwise, and
acknowledging a dark revelation of this in comparison of other Fundamentals,
and professing ingenuously I could not suffer so much in the witness of this
point, as I could in plainer points and Articles, as of those concerning the
fall of man, redemption by Christ, the resurrection, and the last judgment,
etc. and declaring that though Teachers may not teach, nor people believe any
thing which has not some footing in the word of God, yet may they speak of
things which they know but weakly: These things being premised, I shall
acknowledge laying on of hands on baptized persons after baptism, to be an
Apostolical institution, or an Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

Q. What grounds have you to prove laying on of hands after Baptism, to be an
Apostolical institution?

A. These: First, because the Apostle makes it one of the six principles, Heb.
6.1. or word of the beginning of Christ, as in the Greek; nay, he makes it a
foundation-point as well as Repentance, Faith, Baptism, Resurrection, and last
Judgment. Now these being Fundamentals, wherein all converted persons are to
be practical in the belief, how can imposition of hands be excluded from being
so received? It is absurd to think that one of these six principles should
cease in a short time, and the other five to remain till the end of the world;
and yet the Apostle calls them all by the name of a Foundation, and places it
betwixt Faith and Repentance, the Resurrection and the last Judgment, so that
there is no coming to slight it, it being fenced on every side.

Q. But seeing we acknowledge a laying on of hands in Ordination, do we not
acknowledge these six principles?

A. No reason can be brought why laying on of hands in ordination, should be
from this Text acknowledged, and the other after Baptism on baptized persons,
excluded. Nay, it seems, that laying on of hands on baptized persons, should
be primarily meant, because the Apostle seems to couple these
foundation-Principles, so that as faith and Repentance go together, and the
Resurrection and last Judgment; so Baptism and Imposition of go together.

Q. But whether is there my command for laying on of hands?

A. There is as much commandment for laying on of hands on baptized persons
after Baptism, as on persons ordained to Office: for both of them we find
Apostolical practice.

Secondly, the Apostle calling it a foundation that was first laid, as appears
in these words [Not laying again the Foundation] has a virtual command in it.

Q. What other ground have you for laying on of hands?

A. We have the practice of the Apostles, Acts 8.14, 15, 16, 17. The Apostles
Peter and John laid their hands on those Samaritans whom Philip had baptized,
as verse 17. Then laid they their hands on them: The Antecedent to this
Pronoune Relative Them, could be no other then the baptized Samaritans. See
also Acts 19.6.

Obj. But in these examples there were visible gifts given; but there is not so
in yours in these times: therefore your laying on of hands is not the same with
theirs.

A. Those visible gifts given, were no parts of the Ordinance, much less
essentialities, but only the crowns and ornaments of it; God hereby confirming
the truth of that doctrine, and powerfulness of that person into whose name
they were baptized.

Secondly, it is a mistake to think that always when the Apostles laid on
hands, visible gifts were given: for Paul laid his hands on Timothy, and God
conveyed nothing therein, save inward gifts and graces, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the
gift which was given thee by the laying on of the hands of me. So in the Greek.
If any man say these gifts were conveyed on Timothy by Paul in ordination, and
not after Baptism, A. The contrary appears, because the gift given Timothy in
ordination, was by the hands of all the Eldership, 1 Timothy 14.14. but this gift
was given in laying on of hands by Paul alone: Therefore the laying on of hands
after Baptism is meant in this place.

Q. But if laying on of hands after Baptism be an ordinance of Christ, what is
conveyed in it?

A. An increase of the Spirit, so that as the Spirit is conveyed in the use of
prayer, and preaching, Luke 11.13. Acts 10.44. and Baptism, Gal. 3.28. and the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.16. so also is an increase of the Spirit conveyed in
laying no of hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift which is in thee, which was
given thee by the laying on of my hands. See, he had the gift or grace of God
in him before, and now in laying on of Paul's hands, it was increased; yet is
not laying on of hands the only or principal part of this Ordinance, but
praise is the principal part; in the use whereof the other being adjoined,
these forenamed Gifts and Graces of the Spirit are conveyed. I take it to be
vehiculum spiritus, or a channel to convey the increases of the spirit to
believing hearts.

Q. But what promise is there that there shall be an increase of the Spirit
given in laying on of hands?

A. 1. A Command is enough to receive an Ordinance, though there were no
promise annexed concerning any benefit; and we have proved a virtual Command
out of Heb. 6.2.

2. What promise there is of laying on of hands by the Elders, the same is
here; yet is it acknowledged by all, that the Spirit is conveyed in the
increases in the Elders laying on of hands.

3. Example of the conveyance of the Spirit into the Samaritans, and into
Timothy his heart in the laying on of hands, is an encouraging ground for
baptized persons to submit thereto, and expect the like benefit.

4. There is a promise of the increase of the Spirit to the prayer of Faith,
whenever poured out, Luke 11.13. and why not to the prayer of Faith, when now
poured out? now the promise of the Holy Ghost being made to all baptized ones,
Acts 2.38 39. such may well pray in faith for the same.

Q. But whether are these promises bound to the laying on of hands, so that
then when hands are laid on, and by that means, the Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit are conveyed, when the Churches, Apostle, or Apostles lay on their
hands: we must not invent a means through which promises must be applied?

A. 1. The promise is bound to the prayer of faith.

2. That not only in, but by laying on of hands, the Spirit is conveyed,
appears, 2 Timothy 1.6.

3. No man can say, that either Baptism, Supper, or imposition of hands apply
the promise; it is the Spirit and Faith alone that apply the promise; yet is
laying on of hands such a means as the Apostle calls a foundation, and a means
through which both on Gods behalf and our behalf, the promise may be applied,
because we read Believers to have received the promise herein; we say not of
laying on of hands that, it is a means through which the promise must be, God
being a free Agent) but a means through which the promise may be, and has been
conveyed into the soul, as in Timothy his case appears.

Lest any man think this a new Doctrine, let him consult the Fathers, who often
mention laying on of hands after Baptism. Tertul. de Baptismo, Cap. 8.
Cyprian. Epist. ad Inbaianum. Also his Epistle ad Stephanum. Tertul. lib. de
resurrect. Cap. 8. Aug. l. 3. Cont. Donatistas, and Cont. literas Petilliani.
Melchiades ad Episc. Hispan. Fabianus Epist. 2. ad Episcop. Orientis. Ambros.
de his qui Myster. initiantur. cap. 7. and lib. 3. de sacramento, cap. 2.
Vrbanus 2 Epist. ad omnes Orthodox. Clemens, Constit. Apostol. l. 7. c. 16, 17.
Eusebius. Histor. l. 6. c. 35. with others: and Estius in Heb. 6.1. says, that
all antiquity teaches laying on of hands after Baptism.

Q. But seeing the Apostles who laid on hands after Baptism, were such Apostles
as were immediately called of Christ, as Peter and John, Act. 8.17, and Paul,
Act. 19.5, 6. how will it hold from them to the Apostles of the Churches?

A. Very well: For first, Apostles of the Churches, though they have not an
immediate call from Christ personally on earth, yet they have a call from him
vertually, in that since his ascension into heaven, He gave some to be
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.12. for the work of the Ministry, that is, to do what
belonged to their office. What difference betwixt persons called to an office
by Christ immediately, as the eleven were, and persons called by him mediately
by the Church, when one and the same end is designed them, which is the work of
the Ministry, the perfecting the Saints, the edifying of the body of Christ,
and to witness Christ his resurrection? Acts 1.22. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. I would be
gladly informed (if any man could and would) whether there be any essential
difference betwixt the twelve Apostles and the Apostles of the Churches, and
wherein that difference does consist? If any man think it was because the
eleven were inspired to be penmen of Scripture, I answer, All of them were
not, nor the Apostles only. If any man think the doing of miracles: I answer,
They alone did not do them, but many believers, also, Mark 16.17.

2. Matthias, though chosen mediately of the Church, had the same power in
dispensations that the eleven had.

3. If imposition after Baptism were confined to Apostles only that were
immediately called, it would have been in vain, for the Apostle to have called
it a foundation, and to have conjoined it with such necessary truths, as Faith
and the Resurrection was, seeing the persons that had the power of administering
them, were all in a short time to be dead.

4. Every Church of Christ have the same power that the first Church had, both
for Officers and Ordinances, Mat. 18.17, 18, 19. the first Church therefore
having Officers to dispense any office; as Apostles, Acts 1.26. Prophets, Act.
15.27, 32. Evangelists, as Philip, Acts 6.5. other Churches may choose (having
fitting persons) the like Officers; and they being chosen, may execute acts
that belong to the respective Offices: so that as the first Church continuing
in the Apostles doctrine, Act. 2.42. (of which laying on of hands was part,
Heb. 6.1.) did choose an Apostle, Acts 1.26. and the Church at Antioch sent out
Paul and Barnabas, who before the sending, seem to have been of the number of
the Prophets, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. so may other Churches send out gracious and able
men; neither let any man say, the Prophets at Antioch sent out Paul and
Barnabas, for the whole Church fasted, and acted in the business.

Q. Who are this Church of Christ, and what is the essential note of them.

A. They are a company of Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Cor. 14.33. Gal. 1.22. Rev.
1.20. into which societies here on Earth though some Hypocrites creep, yet till
God discover them they are looked upon as Saints; the Saintship of which
company joined together in bodies respectively (leaving others to their light)
I take to be the essential note of the Church, because holiness is the most
special difference of the Church from the world.

Of the Lords Supper.
Q. WHat must a Christian do, that he may receive worthily and preparedly?

A. As he must examine himself, whether he be in Christ and the Spirit of God
dwell in him, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5. Also it is very expedient (I will not
say the not doing it is sinful) that every time before a person receives, the
said person judge it self before the Lord for what it has done amiss, 1 Cor.
11.13. but in any wise before thou come, examine to find good grounds of thy
union with Christ, without which neither presume to come to baptism nor the
Supper, lest they prove means of thy final hardness and impenitency.

Q. What was the end wherefore the Lords Supper was instituted.

A. For the continual remembrance of Christ his death (which we desire to show
forth to all men out of conscience so his command, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26.) and more
particularly for the remembrance of the new Testament or Covenant which is
established in his death, wherein remission of sins is bequeathed to believers
Mat. 26.28. 1 Cor. 11.25. Which I take (with submission to better judgment) to
be the prime end, yea (as to me seems) the only end of this institution.

Q. What mean you by calling the Lords Supper the new Testament in the blood of
Christ?

A. I mean, that whereas these was an old Covenant of works, which all men
transgressing are condemned, Romans 5.12. Gal. 3.10. Romans 10.5. God was pleased
to make a new Covenant with all the elect, to accept the sacrifice of Christ's
death, as a satisfaction to his justice for our breaches of the first Covenant,
Heb. 10.14, 16, 18. Heb. 9.15. Which Covenant is not only presented to us by
the Gospel in audible words, but also visibly to our sense in the signs of the
Covenant: so that as the Rainbow was a witness or sign betwixt God and the
Earth that he would no more drown it; and if he did, his bow should witness
against him: and as the blood of the passover sprinkled upon the Israelites
posts, Exodus 27.7. was a sign betiwxt God and the people, that God would spare
them, verse. 13. and if he did not, that blood should witness against him: and
as in covenants among men, they confirm them with some signs of memorial, that
when they forget the bargain, it may be said unto them. This is your hand or
sign; so as in Baptism, so in the Lords Supper (for one and the same thing
for number is signified in both) God for the strengthening our belief appoints
signs as witnesses against him if he go about to break his covenant, and as
witnesses against us if we forget our duty of faith, repentance, self-denial,
confession of Christ, etc. wherein we have in those signs by all deep
engagement obliged our selves.

Q. What is the danger of unworthy receiving?

A. In stead of receiving to comfort, Satan has a greater posession of such
persons, as in Judas (if he were at the Supper, as many learned men think) who
Luke 22.3. had Satan entering into him before his going to the Highpriests and
receiving the sop; but after the receiving the sop, the Devil entered further
into him, John 13.27, and v. 30. having received the sop, he went out
immediately, and came to a through resolution to betray Christ; besides, good
men receiving in part unworthily, receive temporal judgments, as sickness,
weakness, death, 1 Cor. 11.30. and wicked men having a total unworthiness,
receive eternal damnation.

Q. What is the manner of Christ his presence in the Lords Supper?

A. He is present spiritually to the Faith of the receiver, to increase by his
Spirit the Union and Communion of the soul with Christ, Ephesians. 3.19. 1 Cor.
10.16. Ephesians. 4.15, 16, 1 Cor. 12.13. he is also present by grace and operation
of feeling, in the hearts of his, as the Sun is present with us, by his light
and influence, though in Heaven: he is also present in the promise, Mat. 26.26.
Take, eat this is my body and my blood; as if he should say, I promise you in
the use of this Ordinance, you shall receive the virtue of my quickening death
and merit thereof, as verily as you receive bread and wine.

Q. What think you of that opinion, that the body of Christ is present, in,
with, or, under the bread, after an unperceivable manner?

A. It is an erroneous opinion, It is against the Article of Christ his
ascension into heaven, Act. 3.21.

2. Hereby they destroy the nature and truth of a humane body, which is both
finite and visible, making it infinite and invisible.

Q. Whether is the body of Christ really and substantially contained under the
kinds of bread and wine, in the same space where bread and wine were contained
before?

A. No: for 1. Bread in the Supper is six times after consecration called bread
still, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.

2. The truth of Christ's flesh is proved by sight and touching, Luke 24.39. but
in the Supper it cannot he touched: therefore it is not substantially or
fleshlily present.

3. Its a contradiction, that one whole body should be whole together in diverse
places, Mat. 28.6. he is risen, he is not here: the consequence had proved
nothing, if a whole body might be whole in diverse places.

Q. How often are we to receive the Supper?

A. Often: our own decays of grace requires often receiving; the Apostles
indeterminate Command, Do this as often, admits of no other limitation then
want of occasion and opportunity.

Q. But there are some that are not in charity with me, may I receive?

A. Yes, (supposing the uncharitableness on their parts) their sin cannot debar
us of the privileges and benefits Christ has purchased for us; if the sin be
on our part, we must lay aside our wrath, lest we double our sin by absenting
from Ordinances, and retaining wrath.

Q. Who are the persons to be received to the Supper?

A. Only Church Members. 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Cor. 11.20. holy things are not to be
given to Dogs, Mat. 7.6. in exposing the signs of the Covenant to those
concerning whom we have no ground to believe God promises any thing, we
profane them; they are not to be acknowledged for Covenanters with God, who
are his enemies.

Q. How are wicked men partaking, guilty of the body and blood of the Lord?

A. 1. They are guilty of rejecting it. 2. Because they profane the signs
that represent Christ's body; as they that despise Christ's Servants, despise
himself, Luke 10.16. 1 These. 4.8. or as a reproach done to the Ambassadors
redounds to the Prince or as he that commits Treason against a Princes Seal,
commits it against himself.

Concerning Prayer.
Q. WHat is prayer?

A. A pouring forth of the Soul to God, 1 Samuel 1. Psalm 62.8.

Q. What are the parts of prayer?

A. They are three: 1. Confession of sins: so Daniel, c. 9.6, 7, 8, etc. and
Nehemiah, c. 1, 6.7. 2. Petition for grace, Mat. 6.9. 3. Thanksgiving for
benefits, 1 Timothy 2.1. Phil. 4.6.


Q. What qualifications are requisite, that we may pray comfortably?

A. 1. We being bankrupt in Heaven, must come in the name of Christ, John
16.23, 24.

2. For things according to Gods will, 1 John 5.14.

3. With a heart purposing against all sin, Psalm. 66.18. John 9 41. Job. 11.13.

4. With a fervent heart, Iam. 5.16. crying mightily to God, Jon. 3. as a
Malefactor does for life before a Judge.

5. In Faith, Jam. 1.6, 7. believing we shall have from God so far as his
promise reaches; as a beggar never goes from a door, so long as he believes he
shall have an Alms, Mat. 7.7. and 21.22. to persons praying in faith, the
thing desired is done, or else its better for them not to be done.

6. With an humble and broken heart, Psalm. 34.17. content not your selves with
prayers void of humiliation and melting of heart; so Abraham, Genesis 18.27. the
Prodigal, Luke 15.18. If Satan fright thee from prayer, because thou art
unworthy, say then, Nay, but I will pray, because I am unworthy.

7. With watchfulness against distractions, both those that come from Satan,
Zach. 3. and those which come from spiritual fluggishness especially, Col. 4.2.
and watchfulness against drouziness, Luke 21.36. as a beggar is all awake when
he begs, so must we be when we beg of God.

8. With sighs and groans, though words answer very barely, Romans 8.26. Gal.
4.6. God answers not that which is in the froth of wolds alone; but that which
is in the sigh or groan, Psalm 145.19.

9. Pray with the Spirit, Jude 20. Ephesians. 6.18. which is not only to have the
gift of Prayer, (which artificial Christians may have, and not without some
show of spiritual life, being full of fit expressions from abundance of
notions) but also to have the grace of prayer, whereby the soul has many
sighs against the sproutings of lusts, and wrastlings for the removals of
corruptions; and secret springings of heart upon the receipt of spiritual
blessings, Psalm. 103.1. that such Prayers come from the Spirit, appears,
because when the Spirit intermits or forbears working, the souls of the best
become dull, Romans 8.15.

10. Let thy Person be holy, Psalm. 86. 2 John 15.7. no natural man can pray
acceptably, John 9.13. yet may there be passions in a soul, and yet that soul
holy, and that Prayer accepted, as in Elia's Case. Jam. 5.16.

Q. How shall a poor soul know whether God hears his Prayers?

A. He shall know it by these signs.

1. When he has the thing granted, he prayed for; the Church prayed for Peter,
and had him given when they were praying, Act. 12.5. Hanna prayed for a son,
and had one, 1 Samuel 1.27. see for this, Genesis 20.17. Jud. 13.8. 1 Kings 3.9. and
12. 1 Chronicles. 4.10. but because temporal blessings may be severed from the good
will of God, therefore we must judge of the answers of our Prayers, from the
grants we have in spiritual blessings; as when we pray for a melting heart, or
a thirsting heart, and have one given to us; and we may judge of temporal
blessings to be the fruits of Prayers answered, when those blessings are used
to a sanctified end.

2. By the enlargement of the heart to holy desires, Psalm. 10.17. Thou have
prepared their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear; when a man has a bag,
and he falls to stretching of it, its a sign he means to fill it: so God
enlarging the heart with more hunger and thirst, longings and breathings, then
ordinary; Its a sign he means to hear that prayer.

3. When we behold the face of God in Prayer. God sometimes answers the Prayers
of his People, with a cast of his countenance; see Psalm. 27.7, 8, 9. also
22.24. as Petitioners may often read their speeding, in the amiable countenance
of those they petition. Job gaves an undeniable reason, why God was his
salvation, Job. 13.16. which was, because an hypocrite did not come before him
as Job did: though every Creature come into his omnipresence, yet into his
special presence, to behold his face in prayer, and to come within the list of
his countenance, only upright men come, see Psalm. 104.13.

4. When the Conscience is able to commend the Prayer, setting aside the
infirmities; Jobs Conscience commended his Prayer to be pure, Job 16.17. If thy
conscience tell thee, thy Prayers are rotten, thy sins not purged, thy heart
not upright, it is the voice of God in thy soul; but if thy heart condemn thee
not, then have thou confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21. only note, sometimes
the Conscience may be misinformed under a temptation, to think God does not
hear them when he does, Job 30.20. Psalm. 22.1, 2. Lam. 3.8. sometimes they were
persuaded God heard their prayer, as verse 46, 57. sometimes they doubted
thereof as verse 44.

5. When though God denies us what we ask, yet God gives us a better thing;
Abraham prayed that Ishmael might live, and God gave him a better, even Isaac,
Genesis 17.18, 19. David prayed for the life of the Child he had by Bathsheba, and
God gave him a better, even Solomon, 2 Samuel 12.22.

6. By Gods drawing near unto us in our Prayer. God draws nigh to the Soul,

1. By removing discouragements, Lam. 3.57. Thou drawest near in the day that I
cried unto thee; thou said, Fear not. When God shall raise up the soul
against discouragements from former scandalous sins, from Gods justice, from
its own unworthiness, from dumbness and barrenness of expressions, from the
sinning against knowledge, from relapses, from secret despair, Psalm. 31.22.
this drawing nigh argues an answer.

2. God draws nigh by working, meltings, and brokenness of heart upon the soul,
so that as in old time, God was wont to give answer to the prayers of his
Servants, by sending fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices, 1 King.
18.24. 1 Chronicles. 21.26. 2 Chronicles. 7.1. so does he now testify by his holy
Spirit, who was typified by that fire, Mat. 3.11. working in prayer many
passionate meltings, that the heart melts under the displeasing such a loving
God, and the eye melts into tears, Psalm. 6.8. blessed be God who has heard the
voice of my weeping: how knew he he was heard? why, because he poured out
weeping prayers to God, Psa. 39.12. hold not thy peace at my tears. Isa. 38.5.
I have heard thy prayers and seen thy tears. Jer. 31.9. I will lead them along
with weeping and supplication. Also Christ when he was heard offered up strong
crying with tears, Heb. 7.5. the like did Nehemiah, when he prayed that God
would give him favor in the sight of the King, he wept in his prayer, Nehem.
1.4, 11. also Jacob wept and made supplication, and found the Lord in Bethel,
Hos. 12.3, 4. yea the Saints of God generally have been thus crowned with
answers in their prayers, as Ezra, c. 10.1. Job, c. 16, 16: Josiah, 2 Chronicles.
34.27. Paul, Acts 20.31. Ier. 9.1. and 13.17. Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.10. Peter, Mar.
14.72. not as if God did not draw nigh in other prayers wherein the eye melts
not into tears; for if the soul has other signs of its prayers heard, it ought
not to be discouraged; but this I say, prayers poured out thus with inward
meltings of heart, so that the eye shall weep in prayer, seem to me to be
crowningly answered. And so much the more, when a person is not inclining to
weep in other Cases, as many women, and some men are out of natural softness.
To conclude, consider whether it be safe to be without such a frame of heart
and eye in prayer, as so many of the Saints in the word are recorded to have
had, and wherein they found such comfort and success.

3. God draws nigh by chearing and inward comforting of the heart, Phil. 4.6,
7. inwardly warning it with the soul of his presence. Now all these approaches
of God to gracious souls are not alike; for sometimes he gives a stronger sense
of his favor in one prayer more then another, and sometimes in some one or
more Petitions of the same prayer, then in other Petitions thereof; yet when
God draws nigh to thy soul in a particular request, it is not certain that that
request shall be granted in that manner you desired, (as when a man prays for
the life of a sick friend, and God draws nigh in that Petition, and yet the
friend dies) but it is evidential to thee, that thy prayer is heard, and that
the thing thou ask is according to the approving will of God, though not
according to his decreeing will.

All these drawings nigh to the soul evidence the hearing of prayers, as
appears, Psalm. 69.17. hear me speedily; but what sign does he desire? why
verse 18. he says, Draw nigh to my soul.

7. Thou may know thy prayers are answered, by having a spirit of
perseverance in prayer, Psalm. 66.20. and 138.3. when a Petitioner comes to a
Prince or Nobleman, if the Prince embolden him in his speech, and let him speak
all he would, its a sign the Prince means to grant that man his Petition,
because otherwise he would not have endured to have heard him so long, but
would have commanded him to be gone: so when the soul comes to God in prayer,
if God dispatch it out of his presence, that the soul has no heart to continue
its suit, and prays deadly and dully, and is glad it has said its prayers and
has done; its a fearful sign that God answers not those prayers (though poured
out by a godly man) but if thou prayest, and God gives thee a spirit to hold
out in prayer; if thou prayest and have not done in thy prayers; but God does
further and further put in thee a warmth and heat of affection, that thy heart
is emboldened in its Petitions, and thou desire further Communion with God,
that thou art as it were loath to leave off the words of prayer, much less the
suits of prayer, it is a sign God will grant thy prayer to thee.

8. Thou may know thy prayers are heard, when in the close of thy prayer
thou have some comfortable answer suggested unto thee from God; for example,
God by his Spirit comes to some, suggesting on this wise, when they pray
powerfully, viz. I will be thy God, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, I
will do thee much good, I will be an everlasting God unto thee; so God
suggested to Paul at the end of his prayer, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient
for thee. Lam. 3.5.7. when the Church was discouraged out of sense of her
unworthiness, God drew near and said, Fear not: so Luther in Genesis c. 44. says,
O that I could call upon God with the same fervency, as often as I would; for
when I pray in this manner, (meaning fervently) this answer seems sensibly to
be given unto me, Fiat quod petis, let the thing be done which thou desire.
No man (says he) can contemn this prayer which proceeds from inward bowels and
affection; much less can it be in vain with God; for this last sign, I am
confident some of Gods Children have it; but whether all have it, I leave it to
further enquiry.

9. The manner of the falling out of things evidenceth prayer-hearing, when God
brings a thing to pass through many difficulties, contriving all the passages
in a business, whereof if any of them had been wanting, the business had not
been effected; so when the Church was delivered in answer to the Prayers of
Esther and Mordecai; so when Peter was brought out of prison, beyond
expectation, it plainly appears it was the fruit of prayer: when God makes the
way easy and plain after prayer, and the course of things begins to change,
and we meet with comforts in stead of former crosses, it appears it is from
prayers answered, Esth. 4.16. Acts 12.12, 13.

Of Gods with-drawments from the Soul.
Q. WHether may not God withdraw from his own Children?

A. Yes: if God forsake Christ his only begotten Son, Mat. 26.38. in respect
of comfort and joy, though not in respect of union of natures, then Believers
must not look to go free.

Q. Why does God withdraw from his children?

A. Careless and negligent use of means of grace, or an overly performance of
duties of Religion, Song 5.2, 2, 3, 4.

2. For grieving his Spirit, Isa. 63.10. either by scandalous sins, Psalm.
51.11. or treacherous denial of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.12. Christ will deny to such,
comfort as well as owning.

3. Not esteeming Gods presence, Job 15.11. we prize things in their absence.

4. To make us grow in a hatred of sin, as of that which deprives us of
Communion with God, Isa. 57.17.

5. That we may know what Christ underwent for us, in the absence of Gods
presence, Luke 22.

6. To try whether we will trust in God in the want of feeling, Job 13.15.

Q. What may comfort a soul, when God withdraws comfortable feeling and
influence of his presence, which the soul has formerly felt in Prayer and
other Ordinances?

A. There are diverse comforts, as,

1. Thy sadness for his absence does argue a former enjoyment of his presence;
and being once Christ's, thou art ever Christ's, John 13.1.

2. A man may fear God and have part in Christ, and yet feel little or no
comfort, Isa. 50.10.

3. As in the gloomiest day there is so much light, whereby we may know it to
be day, and not night, so a Christian whom God has in part forsaken, may
discern himself to be sincere, because he has a love to God and his glory, 1 Samuel 4.18. vehement desires after grace and Gods presence, Psalm. 63.1. and an
absolute purpose against sin, though he should dye without comfort, Psalm.
44.17, 18.

4. Consider, a Christian in a forsaken Estate, breathing out sighs and groans
for the return of Christ's presence, may be as dear to God, as he that enjoyes
Gods presence, Job 13.15.

5. Absence of accustomed feelings then only argue a backsliding heart, when
they are suffered in the soul without sorrow and grief, Psalm. 28.1. and 143.7.
yet are not thy groans and sorrows the causes of Gods return, but the
dispositions of persons to whom he does return.

6. Christ in his withdrawment, as well as in his return, aims at his souls
good; for upon his withdrawment, the soul is stretched with desire after him
Psalm. 42.1.

7. God withdraws from the spirits of Saints, only in crowning graces; as joy,
peace, feeling: not in saving graces; as faith, repentance, self-denial, etc.
these God never takes away.

Q. But why do you say, Faith, repentance, self-denial, etc. are never taken
away? are they not Creatures, and every Creature is subject to perish?

A. Grace of it self considered, may dye, for it is a Creature; but consider it
as united to Christ, so it cannot dye, Joh. 4.14. If believers were cut off
from Christ, grace should wither, as the branch being cut off from the root
does; but being knit to him, the sap must be in the branches, because it is in
the root; and life will be in the members, because it is in the head: waters
will never dry up, so long as there is a Fountain to maintain them.

Q. How may I recover the feeling of the Lords love to my soul?

A. 1. Cry mightily for his presence, Psalm. 4.6 7. and 27.9.

2. Enquire when, where, and why God withdrew, Jer. 14.8. as we do concerning
dear friends when they absent themselves from us.

3. Converse in all Ordinances wherein there is any in-comes of God. Some
receive comfort in reading, 2 Reg. 22.11, 19. others in Baptism, Act. 8.39.
others in hearing, Act. 10.44. others in conference, Luke 24.32.

4. Be humble and afflicted under Gods withdrawment, Luke 1.53. valleys are
blessed with the happiest influence of Heaven.

5. Call to remembrance thy former times of comfort, Psalm. 77.5, 6. assuring
thy self thou have to deal with an unchangeable God. Though in winter the sap
in plants goes into the root, yet will it at Spring spread it self in the
branches.

6. Count no condition in the world too much, though it were banishment,
imprisonment, reproach, or poverty, so thou may recover Gods countenance.
Many are so dainty, that they will not suffer any thing for God, and therefore
God inflicts that which is the greatest of sufferings, that is, the
with-drawment of himself.

7. Beware of resting contented in the comfort of any Creatu^e without God and
his sweet presence: the whole earth is a barren Wilderness without himself,
Psalm. 63.1.

8. Give not way to spiritual drouziness.

Q. But my heart is drouzy, how shall I keep it awake?

A. Use wakeful considerations, as of the shortness of life, the eternity of
glory, the danger of backsliding, Psalm. 39.3, etc.

2. Keep your selves in the light: darkness makes men fit to sleep.

3. Nourish Gods fear, which is a wakeful affection, as being conversant about
danger. Fear of God, and comfort of the Holy Ghost, go together, Act. 9.31.

4. Keep company with wakeful Christians, Heb. 3.13.

5. Consider the danger of a drouzy Estate. As first, Its troublesome to the
conscience, Song 3.1, 2, 3. Secondly, Its the forerunner of some great cross
or sin, Song 5.2. and 6.

Of Tentations.
Q. WHat is a Tentation?

A. As it is an act in the Creature, it is the moving of a man to some sin,
with some reason to enforce it, Prove. 7.18, 19. Genesis 3.5. Prove. 1.11, 12.

Q. Who are the tempters?

A. 1. The Devil, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 2. The World, by which I mean the wicked of
the World, Prove. 1.10. and the goods therein. 3. The flesh within us, Romans 7.18.

Q. What remedy against Satan's tentations?

A. 1. Dispute not with them things. Eve was foiled, Genesis 3.1. He has many
methods which we cannot fathom.

2. Get faith to quench his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. which is to be set a work
in believing that Satan was spoiled and stripped of his power over thy soul by
Christ on the Cross, Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15.

3. Use the Ordinance of prayer, for strength to resist, Psalm. 4.6. and wisdom
to discern his tentations, Jam. 1.5. and long-suffering, that he may not tire
us with the length of them. 2. Of the Word, Mat. 3.4. 2 Cor. 10.4. both in the
Command, Exodus 20.13, and in the promise, Jam. 4.6. Romans 16.20. set this
against all his proffers; and in the threathing: God telling Eve, if she eat of
the tree she should die, and she listening to Satan, minced of the matter to
this, Lest ye dye, Genesis 3.3. and so was overcome by Satan.

4. Avoid three-things, 1. Idleness. When persons are idle, Satan has an
opportunity to tempt, 2 Samuel 11.2. 2. Solitariness, this breeds melancholy,
Eccles. 4.9, 10. 3. Secrecy, this makes the wound of an afflicted Conscience
bleed inwardly, Jam. 5.16. But if thou can have ease from God, let no man
know the matter; but if not open thy Conscience to some grave and godly friend,
and herein be sure to discover that evil that turns the Conscience out of its
place.

5. O draw good out of Satan's tentations, and so he will have no courage to
tempt; as more strongly to believe there is a God, because Satan tempts us to
doubt whether there be a God; so the more to assure our selves we are Gods
people, because he so tempts us now, being he little tempted us when we were in
our natural state; in a word, learn by tentations, how to comfort tempted
persons.

Q. What must I do when Satan's temptation is past and gone?

A. As Mariners make their tacklings in a calm, firm against a storm come: so
when temptations are over, prepare for new a encounter, remembering Satan leaves
us only for a season, Luk 4.13. though Christ overcame Satan, yet he came again
and again. Satan will try whether we have lost our former strength, care, and
watchfulness; or whether God that would not suffer him then, will, for some
sins we have committed since, suffer him to have power over us now: Satan
sometimes politickly gives way for a season, when yet his temptation is not
overcome.

Q. What remedy against the temptations of the world?

A. If you mean by the World, the wicked of the Word; then consent not to them:
be you as importunate in resisting, as they shall be in tempting Genesis 39.10.
Prove. 1.10. But if you mean by World, the pleasures, profits, and honors of
the World; consider their uncertainty, their transitoriness, their inability to
fill the soul, 1 John 2.16. Let us love them only in reference to God and a
good Conscience.

Q. What remedy against the temptations of the flesh?

A. 1. Take heed of spiritual pride; God suffers such to fall, as appears in
Adam and Hezekiah.

2. Look not disdainfully upon any sin in others, seeing thy nature is not free
from the same, at least in the seed of it, Gal. 6.1. God gives many men over to
vile temptations, to cure their pride.

3. Watchfulness, Mark. 14. ult. Prove. 4.23.

4. Keep your selves from sinful occasions, Genesis 39.10. If thou will not keep
thy self from occasions, God will not keep thee from the sin; yea, if thou
venture on occasions, thou have a secret liking of sin, whatsoever thy
pretenses be.

5. Set against the motions that come from the flesh before Satan's suggestions
meet with them; when both forces are joined, they are so much stronger.

6. Resist the causing sin, and so the effect will cease: to cure passion,
resist pride.

Q. How is one sin the cause of another?

A. 1. By effecting or making it: so covetousness brings forth theft, as in
Achan.

2. By deserving it, when we deserve to be cast into some sin by God; not that
God does infuse the matter or form of a punishing sin: but by letting lust out,
and setting Satan loose upon us, we are corrected by one sin for another, Romans
1.24, 26, 28. When a sin deserves to have another sin made the punishment of
it, we must make our peace for the causing sin, before the effect will cease,
Psalm. 81.12, 13. This forsaking, suffering, and delivering up the Creature, is
an act of justice in God.

Q. What other remedies against fleshly temptations?

A. 1. Apply the threatenings and Commandments against it, and the promises in
case we do resist and overcome, Revel. 2.17.

2. Be earnest with God, to mortify it by his Spirit, Romans 8.13.

Make no provisions for thy flesh, Romans 13.14.

4. Cross thy flesh, by endeavoring to do clean contrary to what it suggests.

5. Resist the beginning of fleshly suggestions, Jud. 23. Cain not repenting of
envy, it came to murder. Judas not repenting of covetousness, it came to
murder: if a Serpent get in its head, it will soon get in its body.

6. Venture not upon any sin, because Satan tells you it is small, Mat. 5.22.
By listening to this suggestion, many exceedingly harden their hearts.

Q. When are temptations of lusts sufficiently resisted?

A. 1. When we hate them, pray, sigh, and groan against them; but sin reigns
where it is loved, Romans 7.15.

2. When we do not practice at all gross and presumptuous evils for which God
threatens out of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10 11. Titus 3.3. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. and when we
weaken less evils; which appears we do, when the judgment commands the will,
the will the affections, and the affections the actions.

Q. How may we know when temptations come from Satan, when from our lusts?

A. It is very hard, if possible to know, where the point of difference is; if
we reject them, whether they come from Satan or us, they shall not be imputed,
Romans 7.20, 21. Come the temptation which way it will, no more is imputed by God
then is seen and allowed.

Q. What remedy against unholy thoughts whether they come from Satan or
corruption?

A. 1. Complain of them to Christ, who had such inspired and cast into his mind
by Satan, though not arising from himself; pray as David Psalm. 19.12, 14.

2. Wash thy heart in Christ his blood, that it may be enabled to think good
thoughts, Jer. 4.14.

3. Study good thoughts. Carnal men have many good thoughts cast into their
hearts, which they cast out again as fast; but their hearts have no good
thoughts arising from them: contrarily Gods people, Act. 7.23. 2. Tim. 2.15.

Q. What means are there to govern our tongues?

A. 1. Pray to God to set a watch over them, Psalm. 141.3. Psalm. 19.14. Psalm.
51.15.

2. Get an holy frame of heart, Mat. 12.34, 35. Psalm. 37.30, 31. Prove. 16.23. A
good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things.

3. Let the purpose of thy heart be set against unholy speaking, Psalm. 17.3.
Psalm. 39.1.

4. Suppress sin when it is only in the motion, so will it not come forth of
the tongue, Prove. 30.32. Mat. 15.19.

5. Be sparing in thy words: men that speak much, must needs lash out, Eccles.
5.3, 7. Prove. 10.19. Prove. 17.27.

6. First think, then speak, Dan. 2.14. Prove. 16.23.

7. The sad account that men who speak idle words must give, Mat. 12.36. Jude 1
5. Psalm. 50. 19* 20, 21.

8. Consider, a happy life depends much on the well-Government of the tongue,
Psalm. 34.12. Prove. 21.33. And upon the mis-government of it, comes much of our
misery, 2 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. Prove. 18.21. Jam. 3.6.

9. Inure your selves to gracious and savory words, Col. 4.6. powdered with
salt; so that as salt draws out of meat putrefying humors, and makes it
rellishable for the palate, and fit for digestion: so should a principle of
grace in the heart purge rottenness out of the tongue.

Of Family Duties.
Q. WHat is the duty of a Master of a Family?

A. To provide for their souls, Genesis 18.19. and bodies of his Family, 1 Timothy
5.8.

Q. What is the Husbands Duty?

A. To love his wife as himself, affording comforts to her as to himself,
Ephesians. 5.28. and not to be bitter to her, Col. 3.19.

Q. What is the Wives Duty?

A. Submission to their Husbands, Col. 3.18. and reverence toward them, inward
in heart, and outward in carriage, Ephesians. 5.33.

Q. What are the Parents Duties toward their Children?

A. To train them up in Gods ways, Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. and to provide for
them, 2 Cor. 12.14.

Q. What is the child's duty?

A. To honor their Parents, Ephesians. 6.2. and to obey them in all lawful things,
Col. 3.20. and to requite their kindness, 1 Timothy 5.4.

Q. What is the Masters duty to his Servant?

A. To give them what is just and equal, knowing they have a Master in heaven,
Col. 4.1.

Q. What is the Servants duty?

A. To honor their Masters, 1 Timothy 6.1. and sincerely to do them service,
abhorring eye-service, Col. 3.22. doing service not only for the gain of
their wages, but principally out of Conscience to the Lord, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7.
Col. 3.23, 24.

Of the Resurrection and last Judgment.
Q. WHether shall th^re be a Resurrection of the Body?

A. Yes, John 5.28. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, some to the Resurrection of life, and some to the Resurrection of
eternal damnation, Acts 24.15.

Q. What Body shall rise again? the same, or another?

A. The same body in number, though with more glorious qualities; as the same
seed that is sown grows again, 1 Cor. 15.36. So that the godly when they rise
again shall see God, not with other, but with these same eyes, Job 19.25, 26,
27. He means the eyes of his body, because he says, I, and I my self, and not
a stranger; and because he mentions his skin, flesh, and the same eyes he then
had: It is just, that Jobs eyes that had wept tears, and Paul's body that bore
brands or marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. should be rewarded, and not a
new made body or new eyes, 1 Cor. 15.42. The Apostle pointing at his own body,
says, This corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality, John 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up; meaning
the Temple of his body. See also, Romans 8.11. John 11.24.

Q. How does it appear that the bodies of Saints shall rise the same bodies,
but with new qualities?

A. The Apostle makes it appear by a plain similitude, 1 Cor. 15.35, 37. of a
wheat-corn cast into the earth, which being rotten comes forth, not naked hard,
dry, and without life, as it was sown; nor rotten, as it was in the earth; but
keeping the same substance and kind, it comes forth with new qualities of ears,
husk and stalk, being living and full of juice; so the same body in number
shall rise again, but with more glorious qualities.

Q. What are those glorious qualities our bodies shall rise with?

A. They are these,

1. Incorruptibility, they shall not dye any more, Mat. 22.30.

2. Gloriousness, they shall shine like the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21.

3. Powerfulness, it shall be raised in power, able to move whither it will, 1
Cor. 15.43. 1 These. 4.16.17.

4. Spirituality 1 Cor. 15.44. not only because it shall not need meat, drink,
or apparel; but also because it shall be like a spirit in the nimbleness of its
motion, 1 These. 4.17.

Q. What follows the resurrection?

A. The last and general Judgment, John 6.39. I will raise him up at the last
day.

Q. Who shall be judged?

A. All persons shall come to judgment: the godly having their sins forgiven
them, shall come to a judgment of trial, 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 12.38. but the
wicked unto a judgment of condemnation, John 5.28.

Q. Who shall be the Judge?

A. Although the Trinity shall judge, yet the Exercise and Administration of it
is committed to the Son, John 5.22, 27. Acts 10.42. and 17.31. He is most fit
to be Judge; for as God he knows the secrets of all hearts, and he is fit to
speak to man, as being man.

Q. What are the rules Christ will proceed by in judgment?

A. Such as never had the Scriptures, shall be judged by the Law writ in their
hearts, they not having walked sutably thereto, Romans 2.13. and those that have
had only the old Testament, shall be judged out of that, John 5.45. and those
that have had the whole word, shall be judged out of it, Romans 2.16.

Q. What will Jesus Christ do after he is set in judgment?

A. All shall be called forth, and the sheep evidencing their faith in Christ,
not only by their words. Mat. 12.38. but also by their works, Mat. 25.35.
shall receive the blessed sentence of absolution: Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; but the Goats having neither faith nor
fruits, Matthew. 25.42, 43. shall be so straightly reckoned with, that they shall
be called to an account for every ungodly speech. Matthew. 12.37. Jude 15. and so
shall receive that dreadful sentence, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Q. But seeing there are some wretched men that deny the Scriptures, how shall
I know the Scriptures to be Gods Word?

A. There are many grounds to sway the Conscience to belief of them, as,

1. The Witness of Gods Spirit which is promised to be given to all the Elect,
together with the word, Isa. 59.21.

2. As natural bodies declare what they are; as Sun, Moon, Stars, Fire, Water,
Gold, Silver, Honey; so does the word, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, no book, but breaths
out holiness to the Lord, no Chapter hardly, but takes off our hearts from the
World; it sets forth his infinite mercy to his Saints, and infinite justice to
the wicked. The Scripture is like the light which not only shows other things,
but it self.

3. The agreement of the Scriptures one part with another, though the writers
lived remote one from another, and in several ages of the World. How could they
have so agreed, were they not written by one Spirit? Seeing two Historians, if
they write of any time or occurrence, through ignorance, partiality, and
forgetfulness, they will contradict each other, if they be only humane
writers; besides, for the old Testament we have the Jews, the utterest enemies
of Christianity, witnessing it; and, and for the new, it does harmoniously
agree with the old.

4. The impartiality of the penmen; they speak impartially to all, to Princes
as well as beggars. David speaks of his own murder, Psalm. 51.14. Moses tells
of the faults of his own Granfather Levi, Genesis 49.5, 7. whereas men naturally
raise up their Ancestors to the highest. Paul sets forth his blasphemy and
persecution, 1 Timothy 1.13.

5. By the end at which they aim: had these Penmen wrote as men, they would
have lifted up themselves; but every book throws down man as low as hell, and
exalts God with the highest excellence, Isa. 40.15, 16. and gives the glory of
all to God, 1 Cor. 15.10.

6. By the subject matter of the Scriptures. Hardly any writings of men, but
some lusts are scattered up and down, of pride, vainglory: But in the
Scriptures every word is pure, Prove. 30.5. more then silver seven times
purified, Psalm 12.6, 7. had men writ it, they would never have tied
themselves to such strict points.

7. There are many things in the Scripture that could never have proceeded from
the brain of man; for example, that in one essence or being, the Father, Son,
and Spirit should subsist, that our bodies turned to dust should rise again the
in same number, though with more glorious qualities; so the incarnation of
Christ by a Virgin, for the appeasing the justice of God. So, that all things
which befall a Christian shall work together for his good, in reference to
Salvation. If these and many other things could not enter into his brain, much
less could they proceed from his pen.

8. The powerful effects the Scriptures have upon the Conscience, prove them to
be of God; for example, they melt the heart in in reading them, 2 Reg. 22.19.
they strike a terror into the hearts of the ungodly. No writings of men can so
awe the hearts of men, as these, Psalm. 119.11. they overpower the will. One
verse of self-denial will make a man part with all his Estate, Friends, and
Life, and what not? they work a wonderful change in many persons, that they are
not the same they were; yea, they quicken dead hearts, and revive the dejected,
Psalm 119.49, 50. Heb. 4.12.

9. The books themselves bear witness, they are from God. In most books of
Scriptures, in the entrance of them, the names of the penmen, together with
the Author of the word, are expressed: See Jer. 1.1. Ezekiel. 1.3. Hos. 1.1. Joel
1.1. etc.

But you will say, its possible for false writings to have such Titles prefixed.

A. True, the name is not enough, were there nothing else; but this being
joined with other signs, is of great force. Shall we believe Aristotle's or
Plato's works to be their works, when they have their names affixt thereto, and
shall we not believe the Scriptures to be of them whose Title they bear, that
is the word of God by such and such a writer?

10. The death and sufferings of the Martyrs who have given their lives to seal
the truth, proves them to be of God, Revel. 6.9. and 20.4. Where do we ever
find any to dye, to defend the opinions of Plato, or the dreams of Mahomet?

11. Satan's malice proves it; he never tempts us to unbelief of any writings,
save these.

12. The fulfilling of the Prophecies proves them to be of God, Isaiah, chap.
44.28. named Cyrus to be the deliverer of Gods people an hundred and sixty
years before Cyrus was born. Jeremiah set the bounds of seventy years to the
Babylonish Captivity. Daniel lived only in the two first Monarchies, the
Caldean and Persian yet he prophesies of the Grecian and Roman Monarchies. So,
that Israel should be in Egypt four hundred years, and then come out; so that
he that should build Jericho, should lay the foundation of it in his eldest
son, Jos. 6.26. compared with 1 Kin. 16.34. Paul prophesied of Doctrines
forbidding Marriage and meats, 1 Timothy 4.1. And now its come to pass in the
Papacy. Jacob, Genesis 49. speaks of all the portions his Children should have,
assigning to one the Corn-Countrey, to others the Sea, to others the
vine-grounds, as they were after divided by lot certain hundred years after:
how could he come to the knowledge thereof, but by him that overrules all
lots? sure they could not be suggested by any but God, who knew what he would
do. The seeing so many of the Prophecies to be fulfilled, may assure us also,
that the rest shall be fulfilled, and consequently that they are all of God.

13. Either the Scriptures must be of God, or of man: not of man, because then
they must be either of bad men or of good; not of bad men, for they would never
have forbid evil so rigorously, nor command good so expressly, nor aimed so at
Gods glory; nor of good men, for they durst not have belied God, nor take the
glory so due to God (which is to rule in the Conscience) unto themselves:
therefore must they needs be of God.

14. The wonderful preservation of the Scriptures, notwithstanding, Tyrants
endeavor to abolish it, and Heretics endeavor to corrupt it, yet it has
been kept pure in both the Originals: the two Tables writ by Gods own finger,
were laid up in the Arc* Deuteronomy. 10.2. When Manasses and Ammon, that they might
the better draw the people to Idolatry, had suppressed the book of the Law; it
pleased God in the days of Josiah, that it was found in the ruins of the
Temple, 2 Chronicles. 34.14. Antiochus, 1 Match. 1.56, 57. rent the book of the Law
in pieces, and burnt it in the fire, and made it matter of death for a man to
have a Testament by him. Dioclesian the persecuting Emperor forbad the use of
the Scriptures, and burnt them; yet were the Scriptures still preserved.

If An Argument from man were any thing material, I might add, that the Jewish
Bible, who are the utterest enemies of Christianity, their old Testament agrees
with ours, and for the truth of the Jewish Bible, they have testimony from the
Samaritans, who were enemies to them, and an irreconciliable rent made betwixt
them; yet in the Samaritan Bible (as some of the learned affirm) there is no
difference at all to any purpose. Also the consent of the godly Fathers and
Christians from Christ his time, who have from hand to hand delivered them to
us, and enlightened them with their commentaries, whose commentaries we have to
show in every age, well-nigh from the Apostles time, some of whom confirmed the
truth with their Lives and Liberty.

A short Catechism FOR BABES.
Q. HOw does it appear that there is a God?

A. From the creati^n of heaven and earth, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.20.

Q. What is God?

A. A Spirit, John 4.23. immortal, 1 Timothy 6.16. infinite, 1 Kings 8.27. knowing
all things, Heb. 4.13. and present everywhere, Psalm 139.7, 8, 9.

Q. How does this God subsist?

A. In the being of Father, Son, and Spirit; who are all one God, 1 John 5.7.

Q. Whether is the Father Son or Spirit greatest?

A. There is an equality of glory, eternity, and power, in the Father, Son, and
Spirit, Romans 9.5. Phil. 2.6. Matthew. 28.19. 1 John 5.7.

Q. How did God make man at first?

A. Pure and holy, Genesis 1.26. Eccles. 7.29. but we all fell in our first
parents, Romans 5.12, 13, 14.

Q What befell unto us by Adams fall?

A. The judgment came upon all, to condemnation, Romans 5.15, 16.

Q. What is the condition of every man since the fall of Adam?

A. Dead in trespasses and sins and by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.1, 3.

Q What way is there to come out of this miserable condition?

A. Only by Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12.

Q. What are we to consider especially in Christ?

A. 1. His natures. 2. His offices.

Q. What are the natures of Christ?

A. They are two: 1. His Godhead. 2. His Manhood.


Q. Why was it needful that he should be God?

A. That he might make the sufferings of his Manhood of infinite worth and
virtue, Heb. 9.14. Act. 20.28.

Q. Why was it needful that he should be man?

A. That he might dye and satisfy Gods justice in the same nature that had
offended, Matthew 20.28. 1 Corinthians 15.21, 22.

Q. What are the offices of Christ?

A. They are three.

Q. Which are they?

A. His Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical office.

Q Why was Christ a King?

A. That he may reign in the hearts of his people, Luke 19.27. and in the
Churches, Psalm. 2.6.

Q. Why was he a Prophet?

A. To reveal his Fathers will; so that are to hear him in all things, Acts
3.22. Mat. 17.5.

Q. Why was he a Priest?

A. To offer sacrifice for the sins of his people, Heb. 8.3.

Q. What sacrifice did Christ offer?

A. His own body on the cross, Heb. 9.25, 26. wherewith he appears in Gods
presence for his people, Heb. 9.24. his blood speaking good things.

Q. What is faith?

A. A taking of Christ as a Lord and a Savior, and resting upon his
satisfaction, Romans 7.4. Joh. 1.12. Romans 10.7.8.

Q. What accompanies Justifying faith, without which it is not in the soul?

A. An holy disposition or intention of heart to confess the truth of God,
though with the loss of all we have in the world, Romans 10.10. Mat. 10.32.

Q. What is repentance?

A. A through change of the purposes of the heart, whereby they are universally
set against all sin, with an hatred of it, Romans 12.2. Act. 2.38. Isa. 30.22.

Q. What measure of love must we love the Lord with?

A. With a sovergaine love; better then father or mother, son or daughter, yea
then our own lives, Mat. 10.37, 38, 39.

Q. What denial of Christ is that which shuts persons out of heaven?

A. Habitual denial, or denial of Christ in the purporse of our hearts; when
we, for the saving of our lands, liberties, country, or lives, will deny
Christ, or any part of his truth, Mat. 10.33. 2 Timothy 2.12.

Q. What does the Scripture reveal concerning spiritual Life?

A. That whereas we are all dead men by Adams sin and our own, when God pardons
we are alive, Romans 5.18.

Q. What other life has believers?

A. A life of holiness, whereby believing souls are quickened up to all the
ways of God, Romans 6.13.

Q. What ought to be the ground of a Christian man's obedience?

A. The command of Christ, which is the bond of the conscience, Romans 1.14. Act.
20.22.

Q. What other ground is there?

A. The love of God, from whence our obedience ought to flow, John 14.15. 2
Cor. 5.15.

Q. What does the Scripture reveal of the combat of flesh and Spirit?

A. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; so
that we cannot do the good we would do, Gal. 5.17.

Q. What may comfort in this combat?

A. That we hate the evil that we do, and love the good we do, and hunger and
third to do the good we do not, Romans 7.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Q. What is the danger of sinning against conscience?

A. Such shall be punished with many stripes, Luke 12.48.

Q. What is it to live by faith?

A. To rest on Gods promise for every good thing, without using unlawful means,
Psalm. 84.11, 12. Isa. 28.16.

Q. What is the new Covenant?

A. It is Gods work, whereby he not only pardons all the sins of all the
Elect, and gives them eternal life through the satisfaction of Christ, but also
promises to take away their stony hearts, and writes his laws in their hearts,
and causes them to relish and savor good things, and vouchsafes to be their
God, and takes them to be his people. Heb. 8.10. 11, 12.

Q. What is prayer?

A. Pouring out of the soul before God, 1 Samuel 1.15. Psalm. 62.2.

Q. What are the parts of prayer?

A. They are sometimes divided in four parts, 1 Timothy 2.1. yet may we reduce
them to three parts: first, confession of sins. Secondly, petition for grace
and favors. Thirdly, thanksgiving for benefits. To which we may add
intercessions to turn away judgment.

Q. What principal Properties ought there to be in an holy prayer?

A. It ought to be offered from a believing soul, Mat. 21.22. in the name of
Christ, Joh. 16.23, 24. from the Spirit assisting with sighs and groans, Romans
8.26. for things according to the will of God, 1 John 5.14.

Q. What is baptism?

A. It is a sign of a believers fellowship with Christ in his death, burial,
and resurrection; that as his body is buried in water, so his sins are buried
through the satisfaction of Christ; and as he rises out of the water, so he is
bound to walk with Christ in newness of life, Romans 6.3, 4 5, 6. Col. 2.12.

Q. Who are the persons to be baptized?

A. Those who are made Disciples, and make profession of their faith and
repentance, Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.15, 16. Heb. 10.22. Act. 1.37, 38.

Q. What is the end why the Lords Supper was appointed?

A. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ's death, and
remission of sins which believers have therein, 1 Cor. 11.25.26.

Q. What must a Christian do, that he may receive worthily or preparedly?

A. He must examine himself, whether he be in Christ, and whether the Spirit of
God dwell in him, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. What is the danger of unworthy receiving?

A. Temporal judgment, if they repent; eternal, if they repent not.

Q. Wherefore are hands laid upon believers after baptism?

A. That they may receive a further increase of the Spirit therein, 2 Timothy 1.6.

Q. What is revealed concerning the resurrection of the dead?

A. That all shall rise again: the godly to the resurrection of eternal life,
the wicked to the resurrection of eternal damnation, Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.28.

Q. With what bodies shall the Saints arise?

A. with the same body in number, but with more glorious qualities, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44, 53. Phil. 3.21.

Q. What follows the resurrection?

A. The last judgment, wherein all shall be judged of every thing done in the
body, whether it be good or evil, Joh. 6.40. John 5.28. 2 Cor. 5.10. Revel.
20.12, 13, 14.

FINIS.

