THE COMPARISON OF PINDAR and HORACE Written in French By Monsieur BLONDEL,
Master in the Mathematics to the DAUPHIN.

Englished By Sir Edward Sherburn Knight.

LONDON. Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
WHAT here is recommended to him, is a Parallel of the two Princes of Lyrick
Poesy, Inimitable Pindar, and Incomparable Horace. It was first designed by a
French Gentleman, in his own Language, a Person well Versed in Mathematical
Studies, nor less in Historical and Poetical Learning; and by him delivered in
a Speech to the Premier President Monsigneur de LAMOIGNON (that Illustrious
Patron of good Arts and Sciences) in a full Assembly of the Beaux Esprits of
Paris, nor without a general Applause. And the Interpreter has reason to
believe, It may be no less acceptable in this English Dress to those of the
Nation, who have any share of Native Ingenuity.

He thinks it requisite further to add, that the Piece in its English Version
is rend'red much more useful to the Reader, than it was in the Original; For,
whereas there are very frequent Citations through the whole Treatise, from the
Greek and Latin; these in the French are set down without any Mark of
Reference, to show from whence they were taken. Which defect is, in this
English Edition, supplied by the Apposition of Numerical Figures, directing the
Reader where to meet with them in their respective Originals. And may with the
help of the additional Notes, be very advantageous to the Reader in General,
more particularly to the Curious and Ingenious, who shall take the Pleasure, or
the Pains to confer.

He holds it unnecessary to forestall by a larger Preface the particular
Ornaments of the Piece, He only adds, That it is Concise, Divertising, and
Instructive. And so freely leaves it to the Unpreposess'd Judgment of the
Discerning Reader.

E. S.

The Comparison, etc.
My Lord,
I Am very sensible that I have neither Wit sufficient, nor Ability capable, to
speak home and decisively as to the Merits of two of the greatest Lyrick Poets
Antiquity ever produced, Pindar and Horace. Since to do it as I ought, 'twou'd
behoove me to be as knowing in Poesy as themselves, to judge worthily of their
Writings. Nevertheless, I owe so blind an obedience to the Commands your
Lordship has been pleased to lay upon me to undertake their Comparison, that I
believe I ought not to demurr one moment, but tell you what the assiduous
Lecture of their Writings, and some others of the Ancients, may have furnished
me with, to present you upon this Subject.

Pindar lived more than 450 Years before Horace; and was Son of a Flute-Player.
Aelian reports, that a Swarm of Bees were his Nurses, as he lay exposed out of
his Father's House, who suckled him with Honey instead of Milk.

It is true that I have not met with that Exposure, save only in Aelian; and
all else, that speak of that Accident of the Bees, recount it after another
manner. Philostratus says, that Pindar was in his Cradle when that Prodigy
happened to him. And Pausanias, that being young, and going from Thebes to
Thespia in the great Heats, he was about Midday surpised with Sleep; and
stepping out of the way to repose himself, the Bees came and wrought their
Honey on his Lips; which was the first Signal of the Genius, and natural
Inclination, of ^indar to Poesy. For this Prodigy (which is said likewise to
have happened to Plato and St. Ambrose)* has always been looked upon as the
Presage of an extraordinary Sweetness in Discourse.

There is in the Greek Anthology an Epigram of Antipater, which says in a
manner the same thing.

(...)
(...).
Not vainly did the laboring Bees essay
On thy sweet Li^^, Pindar, their Sweets to lay.
The Birth of Horace was not more generous than that of Pindar. He was Son of a
Seller of Salt-Fish; and had the reproach of not being entirely freeborn. Quem
rodunt omnes ^ibertino patre natum.
Censured by All, Son of a Libertine.
In regard his Father, whom he calls Libertinum, was Son of a Free'd-man, or
perhaps himself a Free'd-man; for the Word in the Latin signifies both the one
and the other.

Among other Things, he recounts of himself an Accident something like that of
the Bees to Pindar, in that Divine Ode of his.

Descend Coelo, etc. L. 3. Ode 4. Which, for the most part, he has imitated
out of that Poet; where he says, Me fabulosae Vulture in Appulo
Altricis extra Limen Apuliae
Ludo fatigatumque somno;
Fronde nova puerum palumbes
Texere --
As under Vulture's shady Hill, one Day
Beyond Apulia's Bounds I lay,
A Child, o'er-charg'd with Sleep and Play,
Wild Doves (known Subjects of fond Fables!) strow'd
Me over with verdant Leaves --
But it is but a Fable by him invented, in imitation of that Accident of the
Bees, which happened to Pindar; which, perhaps, was likewise but a Fiction.

This is what I have to say of their Births. As for their Countries, Pindar was
of Thebes, the Capital City of Boeotia, of which the Inhabitants always passed
for gross witted and blockish among the other People of Greece, who usually
called the Thebans the Swine of Boeotia; as Pindar himself testifies in the 6
th. of his Olympionicks. Where he charges his Master of the Quire to cause
these Verses to be well sung.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Aeneas make thy Chorus first recite
Parthenian Juno's Praise; next them invite
To tell, by our Truth-sounding Muse, how we
Surmounted have that ancient Obloquy
Of the Boeotian Swine.
Horace was Native of Venusium, a small Town, on the Frontiers of Lucania and
Apulia; whose Inhabitants were always reputed notorious Thieves, perfidious
Persons, and given to Pillage and Plunder from the very Time of the Brutians,
of whom they were descended. For the Brutians, as Diodorus Siculus reports,
were no other than a company of Slaves and desperate Wretches; who having
assassinated their Masters, and pillaged and ravaged the
Neighbouring-Countries, seated themselves at last on these Mountains; of which,
by the Situation of the Place, and Force of Arms, they ever since kept the
possession.

To what I have said of the Countries of these two great Genii, I shall add,
That both of them, in the course of their Lives, were engaged in troublesome
Wars, and, with this Misfortune, to have been on the worse side. Pindar was
terrified (as others) at the Descent Xerxes made into Greece, and shared part
of the Infamy with his Countrymen, who made an early Accommodation with that
King against the common Consent of all the Greeks. Insomuch, that after the
general Defeat of the Barbarians, the Thebans were reckoned as Deserters, and
looked upon as People who had abandoned the Common Safety of their Country.

In like manner, the Family of Horace being under the Protection of the Iunii,
our Poet became engaged, after the Death of Julius Caesar, on Brutus his side;
who gave him the Command of a Legion. But he s^ow'd no great Proofs of his
Valor, having saved himself in the Battle at Philippi, by throwing away his
Buckler; which was the greatest Infamy that could befall a Soldier. He himself
acknowledges it. -- Et celerem fugam
Sensi, relicta non been Parmula.
L. 2. Ode 7. A hasty Flight I from Philippi took,
My Shield, un-Soldier-like, forsook.
For all the World knows with how great Care the old Soldiers preserved their
Bucklers; and the Joy Epaminondas had before he died, when he was told his
Buckler was safe by him. 'Twas the Command of the Spartan Women to their
Children going to the War, to return home with their Bucklers, or upon them.
And, in fine, it was one of the greatest Reproaches could be given a Man to
call him (...), A Shield-Quitter; as may be seen in diverse Places of
Aristophanes.

As to their Manners, it may be said, there was nothing of Likeness between
these our two Poets. And first, as to what relates to Piety, they were of v^ry
different Sentiments. For Pindar was extreme devout and religious toward his
Gods: And there may be seen diverse Evidences thereof in many of his Odes; as
when he says, It Is always good to speak well of the God* And elsewhere -- (...)
(...).
Absurd, it seems, to me at least,
To call, by way of Rallery and Jest,
A Gourmandizer any of the Blessed.
In which other Poets had not that Temper as Pindar; and, particularly,
Aristoph^nes, who vents a thousand Follies of the gourmandizing of the Gods,
and more especially of Hercu^^s.

Plato in his Dialogue, entitled Meno, calls Pindar Divine; and produces
diverse Testimonies from him, touching the Immortality of the Soul. Pindar (says
he) maintains the Soul of Man to be immortal; That it ceases sometimes to act,
by which they mean to die; and again is re-ingendred anew, but that it never
perishes.

There is, beside, a very fair Proof of his Piety in those excellent Verses of
his, in the Second Ode of his Olympionicks, where he speaks of the Pleasures
destined to the Heroes, and the Pains reserved for the Wicked in the Life to
come. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 2. The Wealthy, who true Virtue love,
Know that incorrigible Minds,
Whom nor the Fear of Future binds,
Nor Punishment for Sin;
Although their Crimes while here above,
They against the Lash of Justice skreen,
Shall find there is yet ordained by Jove
A Judge below, from whom shall come
Of their Misdeeds th'inevitable Doom.
The like may be found in infinite other Passages.

And there is sufficient grounds to make this appear, by the very Titles of
those Pieces of his that are lost; as his Hymns, his Dithyrambs, his Paeans,
and several other Works; which, for the most part, were no other than the
Praises of the God's and Heroes. He dwelt at Thebes, near the Temple of the
Mother of the Gods, whom he had in particular Veneration; and, as his Scholiast
affirms, He much honored that Goddess, being of an extraordinary Piety. He
built at Thebes a Chapel in Honor of Jupiter Hammon; for whom he caused a
Statue to be made by Calamis, one of the most famous Statuaries of those Times,
as may be seen in Pliny and Pausanias. The latter of which reports, that he saw
at Delphos an Iron-Chair, in which Pindar used to sit when he came to the
Temple, and which was preserved 'till his Time as a most precious Relick. But
that which made the Piety of Pindar yet more resplendent, and (as Pausanias
says) raised it to the highest pitch of Glory, was, That the Priestess of
Apollo at Delphos, at the instant that Pindar entered into the Temple, invited
him in the Name of that God, to come and dine with him; and commanded, that of
whatsoever was sacrificed, there should be an equal share assigned to him, as
to Apollo. And this occasioned that Belief, which then run through all Greece
(as Plutarch reports) that the God Pan was seen on the Arcadian Hills, to
divertize himself in Dancing, and singing one of Pindar's Songs, which they
called a Paean.

Pausanias likewise tells a Story, that Pindar in the decline of his Age had a
Vision of Proserpine, who reproached him, that she was the only Deity he had
not honored with a Hymn; but that she expected he should make her one when he
came to be with her. Soon after which, dying, he appeared in a Dream to an old
Kinswoman of his, and sung to her in Honor of that Goddess a Hymn; which his
said Kinswoman, awaking, wrote down in the same Terms she heard it sung.

But as for Horace, though in his Poem, entitled Carmen Saeculare, and other his
Odes, there are many Passages in Praise of the Gods, and that in the Sixth
Satyr of his First Book, he says, Assisto Divinis, not to be here taken in any
religious sense; meaning no more, than that he stayed to hear the ridiculous
chat of your Diviners and Fortune Tellers in the Grand Piazza, to close the
other Diversions of the Day. Vid. Dacier Notis in Horat. Gallic.
Assisto Divinis, I assist at the Sacrifices. Yet it is certain, according to
the judgment of those who believed they had penetrated into his veritable
Sentiments, That he was not thoroughly persuaded of the Religion of his Times,
nor the Credulity of the Vulgar, touching the Essence and Power of the Deity:
Since on the contrary, as he himself says of himself, he was of the Gods. But
Parcus Deorum Cultor and infrequens.
L. 1. Ode 34. A spare, and an unfrequent Worshipper. For notwithstanding what
he says afterward, -- nunc retrorsum
Vela dare, atque iterare cursus
Cogor relictos.
Ibid. Now I must backwards turn my Sails,
Enforced the Course I left to run.
He treats of the Causes of his Conversion in a manner so Buffoon-like, that
there is no Man but perceives he speaks not as he thinks! But in the Third
Satyr of the Second Book, he disguises not the Matter, where speaking of a
Superstitious Mother, who vowed to Jupiter to plunge her Child (sick of a
Quartan Ague) into the Tyber. He thereupon thus rallies her. -- Matter Delira
necavit
Ingelida fixum ripa --
L. 2. Sat. 3. In the cold Flood the doting Mother killed
Her Feverish Child.
Then asking the Question, how she came so out of her Wits? Answer is made, She
was possessed, Timore Deorum, with the Fear of the Gods. And in the Fifth Satyr
of the First Book, where he describes the Journey he made with Mecaenas to
Brundusium, and pleasantly rallies the Priests of Egnatia, who would persuade
'em, that in their Temple the Incense burned upon the Altar without the help of
Fire. He says, -- Credat Iudaeus Apella
Non Ego; namque Deos didici securum agere aevum,
Nec si quid miri faciat Natura, Deos id
Tristes ex alto coeli demittere tecto.
L. 1. Sat. 5. Believed the Jew Apella, but not I;
For Gods, I know, live in security:
Nor if some Wonder Nature does produce,
Do the sad Gods from Heaven convey't to us.
Which very well agrees with what he ingenuously acknowledges to his Friend
Tibullus, in the Letter he writes (...). Me pinguem and nitidum been curata
cute vises,
Cum ridere voles, Epicuri de grege porcum.
L. 1. Ep. 4. Come, if thou wilt laugh; and see me Fat and Fine,
Of Epicure his Herd, like a true Swine.


We know nothing of Pindar's Education, more than that his Father, or
Father-in-Law, Scopelinus was neither Father, nor Father-in-law to Pindar, but
his Kinsman; and was Father of a Son of the same Name with Pindar, and a Lyrick
Poet too; but nothing so eminent as this our Pindar; whose Father, according to
Suidas, was Daiphantus, though some others (as he says) have reported his Name
was Pagonidas; but that of Daiphantus seems to him the truer of the two.
Scopelinus, taught him early to play on the Flute: But perceiving the Genius
of his Scholar was carried to something above that, he put him into the hands
of a certain Lyrick Poet, Lasus by name, to instruct him in Poesy. And that
Pindar in a short time became therein more able than his Master. Suidas writes
that he was Scholar to Myrto. And there are others who report he studied some
time under the famous Corinna; to whom they gave the Surname of Divine, and the
Tenth Muse.

As to what concerns Horace, we have the particular Account of his Education
from his Satyrs, where he takes a Pleasure to set himself out in his own
Colors. In his Sixth Satyr he says Si neque avaritiam, neque sordes, nec mala
lustra,
Objiciet vere quisquam mihi; purus, and insons,
(Vt me collaudem) si and vivo charus Amicis;
Causa fuit pater his; qui macro pauper agello,
Noluit in Flavi ludum me mittere --
Sed puerum est ausus Romam portare docendum
Arts, quas doceat quivis eques atque senator
Semet prognatos.
L. ^. Sat. 6. If I Am not Covetous; if to my Face
None e're can charge me I Am Debauched, and Base,
If I live innocent, (that I may take
The freedom to commend my self) and make
The Friendship of the best; all this I owe
To my good Father: Who tho Poor, and low,
Would not to Flavio's Counting School send me,
But boldly brought me young to Rome, to be
Instructed in those Arts each Noble Knight
Would have his Sons learn.
And after this commending the Honest Equipage that was allowed him, he says,
-- Vestem servosque sequentes
In magno ut populo si quis vidisset, avitae
Ex re praebere sumptus mihi crederet illos
Ipse mihi custos incorruptissimus, omnes
Circum doctores aderat. Quid multa? Pudicum,
Qui Primus virtutis Honos, servavit ab omni
Non solum Facto, verum opprobrio quoque turpi.
Ibid. Had any seen my Clothes, the Train allowed
Of Slaves to follow me through Rome's vast Crowd,
They would have thought some fair Inheritance
Was left me to defray the great Expense.
My Father was my Tutor's Overseer,
Advised me to be Modest, and Sincere,
Virtues prime Honor! And so kept me still
Free from the Act, and the Reproach of ill.
Never was Child more dutifully Grateful toward a Parent than Horace was, as he
admirably proves it, where he says, -- Si Natura juberet
A certis annis aevum remeare peractum
Atque alios legere ad fastus quoscunque parents
Optaret sibi quisque: Meis contentus, honestos
Fascibus and bellis nolim mihi sumere --
Nil me poeniteat sanum patris hujus --
Ibid. If Nature should persuade me to call back
The Age that is past, and a new Birth to take
From Nobler Parents; I would leave that Pride
To others; with my own content abide.
Nor wise, repent I such a Father had.


It may likewise be said in general of these two Poets, that they were both
very honest Men, considering the Manners and Customs of the Times they lived
in; tho as to particulars, there were some Virtues, and some Defects more or
less remarkable in the one, than in the other. They were both naturally
Amorous, both passionate Affectors of Glory. They made no difficulty of
praising themselves, for those little Vanities give oftentimes a good Grace in
Poesy, and ought to be permitted to such great Wits as they were. They were
both admired in their Ages, by all those who were good Judges of what was
commendable, tho they were ill treated many times by the ignorance of the
Vulgar.

We have no sufficient knowledge of the particular Actions of Pindar to make a
certain Judgment of his good Qualities, nor can we make any reasonable Argument
thereupon, but from the high reputation he acquired in his Life time, and the
admirable Sentiments he has left us so happily expressed in his Odes, where
Virtue is always exalted, and Vice painted in all its Deformity.

His Discourses are so full of moral Sentences, and honest Thoughts, that it is
impossible such graceful Sentiments should proceed from a Soul ill-form'd, or
meanly persuaded of the Principles of Honor. There are Thoughts of so high a
Flight, that many have believed he drew them from their Divine Source, the Holy
Scripture. At least it is the Opinion of Clemens Alexandrinus, who in the third
Book of his Pedagogue will have it, that Pindar was assisted by reading of the
Proverbs of Solomon; and maintains, that in that part of his Works where he
says, (...),
Sweet are the stolen Ioys of Love.
He had in view that Passage in the ninth Chapter of the Proverbs, where he
speaks of the lewd Woman, who sits in the Door of her House upon a Seat in the
high place of the City to call them that pass by the way; and to the Fool she
says, stolen Waters are sweeter, and Bread eaten in secret is more pleasant. And
I wonder that the same Clemens Alexandrinus takes no notice of that other
Expression of Pindar. (...);
(...).
Pyth. Ode 8. Things of a Day we are: What Is one? What Is none?
Dream of a Shadow, nothing else is Man.
Which he has so visibly drawn from the Books of Solomon, and where he has
put nothing of his own, but the Antistrophe, which is familiar to him, calling
Somnium Vmbrae, the Dream of a Shadow, which Solomon terms, Vmbram Somnii, The
Shadow of a Dream. It Is the same Expression, which Sophocles (as his Scholiasts
report) has so happily imitated in his Ajax, where he makes Ulysses say, (...),
(...).
I see we are nothing else but empty things,
Imaginary Beings, and vain Shadows.
What does not Pindar in several places say of Justice? -- (...)
(...).
Justice the sure Foundation of all States!
What says he not of Valor? As when he cries out, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...);
Olym. Od. 1. Great Dangers the Faint-hearted not admit;
Since of necessity we Life must quit,
Why should not Generous Spirits rather try
By daring perilous Attempts, to die,
Than to inglorious Age their Lives extend,
And in sad Night their Days ignobly end?
As to Ingratitude, he says, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Pyth. Ode 2. Ixion to a Wheel fast bound
That Is ever turning round;
Is by the Gods bid to declare
To Mortals who ungrateful are,
To render the respects in Justice due
To those they once their Benefactors knew.
Which Virgil in the sixth of the Aeneids, has briefly imitated. Discite
Iustitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos*
Admonished, Justice learn, nor Gods despise.
As to Sincerity he tells us, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. Ode 2. The just and true tongued Man, is he
That Is fit for any Government;
Whether a Monarchy it be,
Or State to which the Vulgar's bent,
Or a Republic, where the best
And wisest, rule the rest.
We find in Athenaeus a Prayer made by Pindar to Jupiter, which shows the
sweetness of his Manners, and the desire he had to pass his Life virtuously.
(...)
(...).
O Jove! O Muses! Say what shall I do
To live beloved of you,
And spend my Hours in Ease, and Singing too?
Or as his Imitator Horace speaks, -- Nec turpem Senectam
Degere, nec Cythara carentem.
Lib. 1. Ode 31. Old Age but not dishonored grant,
And that my Lyrick Lyre I never want.
Whereupon Casaubon says, That Pindar made a kind of Divinity of that Euthymia,
or sweet Life. Cui optat (says he) curae esse, id est, ut honesta voluptate
frui possit; whom he implores to be kind to him, and grant him the Fruition of
honest Pleasures.

I should never have done, should I go about to report all the virtuous
Expressions in Pindar. And we are obliged to believe that a Man speaking in the
manner he did, spoke as he thought; for otherwise he could never have failed of
giving himself the Lie in some part or other of his Works. It being true what
he affirms, (...).
Olymp. Ode 13. Impossible it is to hide
Our innate Manners --
Because, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Ibid. Foxes and Lions never lay by
Their Natural Craft and Cruelty.
Or as Horace has it, Naturam furca expellas licet, usque recurrit.
Lib. 1. Epist. 10. Tho Nature with a Fork away you force,
'Twill still return to its old Course.


The Honesty and Humanity of Pindar appears throughout all his Works, and it is
that which gave occasion to that handsome Discourse of Agias in Plutarch his
Symposiacks, Where having censured the Banquets or Dinners of Homer as hungry
and thirsty Treatments, the Masters of whose Feasts, (or as he calls them
Kings) treat their Guests worse than our common Italian Hasts, upbraiding them
(even in the time of Fight, when they are encountering their Enemies) with their
Debauched Behavior, and reckoning up how many Glasses each of them drunk off
at Dinner. How much better (says he) are the Pindarick Feasts, where the Heroes
meet together and share their equal Entertainments soberly. This seems truly a
Community and Union of loving Friends, the other a kind of a discordant meeting
of Men seemingly friendly, yet not participating in any common Civility even at
their Meals.

As to Horace we can say in the first place; he was a very great Lover of his
Pleasures; and that very likely he was of an agreeable Conversation, and
consequently not displeasing to the Ladies of his Time, which he himself seems
to hint at in these Verses. Quem tenues docuere Togae, nitidique Capilli
(Vt scis) immunem Cynarae placuisse rapaci.
Lib. 1. Epist. 14. Fine Clothes, and perfumed Locks, taught me the way
Scot-free to please rapacious Cynara.
He cherished his Liberty to such a degree, that he could never suffer himself
to be constrained or made Captive, not even by Augustus, who would have had him
for his Secretary. As for Mecaenas to whom he owed so many Obligations, he had
for him all the tenderness and grateful respect that was possible. Nevertheless
see how he writes to him. Quod si me nolles usquam discedere; reddes
Forte latus nigros angusta front capillos,
Reddes dulce loqui, reddes ridere decorum, and
Inter Vina, fugam Cynarae moerere protervae.
Lib. 1. Epist. 7. If you will never have me leave you, give me then
My former Strength, and my black Curles again
On my low Forehead; my sweet Chat renew,
My graceful Smiles, and mirthful Raillery too,
And the amorous Vain to mourn the loss, in fine,
Of my coy Cynara, over a Glass of Wine.
After this, bringing in the Fable of the Fox which could not get out of the
Granary where he had fed himself fat, and the Weesels advice to make himself as
lean as he was when he crept in at the little hole. He adds, Hac ego si
compellar Imagine, cuncta resigno.
If by this Fable urged I am, no more:
Whatever you have given me, I restore.
And Inspice si possum donata reponere laetus.
See how your Gifts I gladly can lay down.
As to the Beauty of his Morals, it appears in a thousand Passages of his
Writings; and we should be forced in a manner to copy them all entire; should
we go about to show all we find in him to represent the Idea of an honest Man.
He testifies he is himself fully persuaded of the Honesty of his Manners, when
he says, Non patre praeclaro, sed vita and pectore puro.
Lib. 1. Satyr. 6. Not nobly born, but pure of Life and Heart. And elsewhere,
At fides, and ingenii,
Benigna vena --
Lib. 2. Ode 18. But of firm Faith, and of no niggard Wit. His frequent
Sentences, the Praises of Virtue and the Virtuous, and the perpetual Blame of
things Vicious, and an infinity of noble and elevated Sentences scattered
through his Odes, sufficiently testify the truth of what I say; but his
Ingenuity, and the free Acknowledgment he makes of his Defects in his Satyrs,
in a manner ravish me, as well as the justness of his sense every where
throughout. Never Man expressed himself more delicately upon Friendship. --
Amatorem quod Amata
Turpia decipiunt caecum vitia, aut etiam ipsum
Delectant --
Vellem in Amicitia sic erraremus, eique
Errori nomen virtus posuisset honestum.
L. 1. Satyr. 3. Fond Lovers in their Mistresses espy
No Blemishes, but blindly pass them by.
Or take Delight in them --
I wish that Error in our Friendship were,
And Virtue on that Error would confer
The Name of Honest. --
Elsewhere he handsomely decries those who are of too severe a Humor. -- Eheu!
Quam facile in nosmet legem Sancimus i^iquam.
Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur --
Ibid. -- Alas!
How easily on our selves hard Laws we pass!
For without Vices no Man's born. --
And speaking of some Peccadillo's, with which he might be reproached, and of
the Care he took to root them out of his Mind. He says, -- Mediocribus and queis
Ignoscas vitiis teneor, fortassis and illinc
Largiter abstulerit longa aetas, Liber, amicus,
Consilium proprium; neque enim cum Lectulus, aut me
Porticus excepit, desum mihi. --
L. 1. Sat. 4. I cannot say, I wholly blameless live,
Small faults I have, which you may well forgive:
Of which, Time, Books, Friends Counsels, and my own,
Have rid the greatest part: For when alone,
Or walking, or in Bed I musing lie,
I am not wanting to my self. --
How many excellent things has he of Frugality in the second Satyr of his
second Book? Against Avarice in the first Satyr of his first Book? Against the
Sottish Vanity of the Nobility in the sixth? Against Adulterers in the second?
Against other Crimes in the third Satyr of his second Book, and every where
else?

In fine, all that he says strikes the Mind, and makes an Impression not
possible to be resisted; since his gallant manner of treating in jest things
the most serious and grave, penetrates much more easily, and more efficaciously
than the severity of Precepts, which of it self is but odious, and as he says,
-- Ridiculum acri
Fortius and melius magnas plerumque seca tres.
Lib. 1. Satyr. 10. -- The Great, a Joke
Better reclaims, than sharply to provoke.
I shall not instance any thing further upon this Subject, since there needs
not so many Proofs to support a Truth confirmed by the judgment of all honest
Men; who had always a Love and Admiration for Horace. Nor was there any of the
great Wits of his Time who were not desirous to have a share in his Friendship.
Virgil first introduced him into the Acquaintance of Maecenas who would never
after live without him. Augustus called him Lepidissimum Homuncionem, his
pleasant little Man, and would have made him his Cabinet Secretary.

It appears not that Pindar ever spoke ill of any Man, and tho he had many
Enemies who gave him some trouble while he lived, we find not that he ever
sought to be revenged of them. He comforts himself against their Malignity by
only saying, (...).
Pyth. Od. 1. Envied than pitied is the better State. And he praises those who
never hearkened to Detractors and Backbiters. -- (...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. Od. 2. Then whom cannot be known
A more inextricable Pest;
A like pernicious to their own
And others Interest;
True Foxes; crafty to molest.
He mocks at their vain Efforts, comparing himself: (...)
(...).
Pyth. Od. 2. Immersable as Cork I keep
Upon the broad Seas wavy Deep.
It Is true he sometimes shows them his Teeth, as when he says, -- (...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
Ibid. To love a Friend, is Friendships due,
An Enemy, while such, I shall pursue
By all the ways I can, him to undo.
But he reproves himself elsewhere for it, saying, There comes always
Misfortune to ill Tongues. And in another place he avows it is his Endeavor to
avoid the bitings of the reproachful, for that he remembers he once saw the
Poet Archilochus in a horrible Perplexity. (...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. Od. 2. I saw Archilochus, unknown,
Into Vexatious Turmoyls thrown,
Eat with outrageous railing grown.
Which is the same thing Horace has said, Archi^ochum proprio Rabies armavit
Iambo.
Rage armed Archilochus with keen Jambies.


As for Horace, no Man ever had a Wit more apt for Raillery: and he seldom lets
pass an occasion when offered to exercise his Talent that way. I speak not of
his Satyrs, which he made expressly to be nipping and biting. Nay even in his
Odes he cannot resist the natural inclination he has to Satirize, as may be
seen in these, Parcius junctas quatiunt Fenestras,
L. 1. Od. 25. And, Audivere Lyce Dii mea vota --
L. 4. Od. 13. And in this where the Raillery is so fine, Beatus ille qui
procul negotiis --
Epod. 2. Sometimes he carries the Satyr to excess, as in that Ode against
Canidia, At O Deorum --
Epod. 5. Iam jam efficaci --
Epod. 17. And against Cassius Severus, Quid immerentes --
Epod. 6. Against Mena the Freedman of Pompey. Lupus and Agnis.
Epod. 4. And in diverse others, of all which one may say, -- Hic nigrae succus
loligenis, haec est
Aerugo mera.
L. 1. Sat. 4. It Is not but that he knew how to praise when he pleased and he
does it with an inimitable Grace in several places of his Odes. True it is that
Persons of Quality in his Time, were extremely delicate as to praise, and it
behooved the Incense that was offered to be exquisite if received, -- Aptus
acutis
Naribus horum hominum.
L. 1. Sat. 3. But this was true principally in respect of Augustus, who could
not endure your dull ordinary Praises, but would wince at them, to use the term
of our Poet. Cui male si palpere recalcitrat.
L. 2. Sat. 1. And therefore he is not praised by Horace but in few places; and
one may say, He does it not but upon occasion, and without dreaming on it.
Nevertheless his Praises are so fine, and delivered with such force, that there
can be nothing more high or great, as may seen in the Letter he writes to that
Emperor. Cum tot sustineas -- There is likewise a touch of mavelous Praise
for Augustus, in the Letter he wrote to Quintius, where he says, Si quis Bella
tibi terra pugnata marique*
Dicat, and his verbis vacuas permulceat aures:
Tene magis salvum populus velit, an populum tu,
Servet in ambiguo, qui consulit and tibi and urbi
Jupiter: Augusti lauds agnocsere possis.
Lib. 1. Epist. 16. Wars fought by Sea and Land should one recite,
And with this Wish thy empty Ears delight,
If more the People Thee, or People Thou
Wish safe and happy; that ambiguous Vow
May Jove who takes of Rome and Thee the Care,
Keep still ambiguous: It Is not you can share
Such Praises; who will not see These Caesars's are.
In the fifth Satyr of his second Book, he make Tyresias speak thus, Tempore
quo juvenis Parthis horrendus, ab alto
Demissum genus Aenea, terraque marique
Magnus erit.
L. 2. Sat. 5. A Youth, who from Aeneas draws his Birth,
Feared by the Parthians, then, over all the Earth
Grows great and powerful.
And in the first, he makes Trebatius thus speak to him: -- Aude
Caesaris invicti res dicere.
L. 2. Sat. 1. -- Dare
Unvanquish'd Caesar's Glories to declare.
To the end he might give him this Answer. -- Cupidum, Pater optime, voces
Deficiunt, neque quivis horrentia Pilis,
Agmina, nec fracta pereuntes enspide Gallos,
Aut labentis Equo describere vulnera Parth^.
Ibid. -- This my Good Father, still
I Am harping at; but my Wit fails my Will.
For it is not every Man that can display
Of Martial Troops the terrible Array,
Describe of vanquished Gauls the Fight, or tell
How wounded Parthians from their Horses fell.
Where it appears he knew very well to raise himself up to the Heroic, when
the Subject required it. Could there be any thing said more great of a Mortal
Man than this? Coelo tonantem credidimus Iovem,
Regnare, praesens divus habebitur
Augustus --
L. 3. Od. 5. We once believed the Thundering Jove
To govern Heaven with his Nod.
The present Age does now approve
Augustus for an Earthly God.
Can there be any thing seen more obliging for Mecaenas than the Answer our
Poet gives to the importunate Person who would have insinuated himself into the
Family and Service of that great Minister of State by corrupt and underhand
dealing. Domus hac nec purior ulla est
Nec magis his aliena malis --
L. 1. Sat. 9. No House than that is from base Intrigues more free,
Or more a Stranger to such Ills --
There are many other passages of the same height and vigor.

Come we now to that nobleness of Mind and that disinteressed concern, which
was much greater in Horace than in Pindar. Upon which 'twill not be amiss to
call to mind that Pindar was not born of Parents over well accommodated in the
World, and that Horace had lost the greatest part of the Estate his Father left
him after the Death of Brutus, as appears by these Verses of his, Vnde simul
primum me demisere Philippi,
Decisis humilem pennis, inopemque paterni
Et laris and fundi, paupertas impulit audax
Vt versus facerem. --
L. 2. Epist. 2. After Philippi's fatal Day was lost,
And I with it; all my poor fortunes crossed,
The small Estate my Father left me gone,
Bold Poverty to write first urged me on.
And yet they found the means both the one and the other to make their
Fortunes: But by ways very different. For Horace was not at all Covetous, and
Pindar on the other side naturally loved Money; as his Scholiasts expressly
affirm, and as may be seen in diverse places, calling it sometimes (...), the
best of Things, otherwhiles, (...)
(...).
Olymp. 2. Bright Star and veritable Light to Man. Upon which Score he employed
his Talent to acquire Wealth, selling his Compositions for ready Money, as he
himself says, speaking to his Muse. (...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. Od. ^^ Muse! Since thou have agreed
For a Price: proceed,
And see thy Song thy Bribe exceed.
Which he declares without being ashamed on it; since the Custom had been before
established by Simonides and others as he seems to testify in the beginning of
the second Ode of his Isthmioniques, where he says, (...),
(...)
(...). --
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
Isthm. Od. 2. Time was, O Thrasibulus! When
The Muses freely Chanted of Brave Men
The Glorious Acts; of all the Nine not one,
Was Covetous, or Mercenary known.
Now such Terpsicore her self appears;
Who never sweetly sings, but when she wears
A Mercenary Mask of Gold.
It was not so of old.
See what that sordid Spartan Maxim can! Pindar names not the Author of this
Sentence: But his old Greek Scholiast (as I find him particularly cited by
Schmidius in his Comment upon this place) declares from the Authority of
Alcaeus, that his Name was Aristodemns, a Spartan, without Fortune, or Friends;
of which he could not be seemingly long destitute, if he had thoroughly
inculcated his Principle into that State. These Times having clearly
demonstrated it, to have been a more certain and necessary Political, than
Poetical Improvement.

"'It Is Money, Money makes the Man.
But contrariwise there is nothing seen in all the Works of Horace but
Generosity. He mocks at the Covetous in a thousand places. He commends every
where Frugality and Moderation: He appears always content with his present
Fortune, and always ready to resign what he has from her. Laudo manentem; si
celeres quatit
Pennas, resigno quae dedit, and mea
Virtute me involvo, probamque
Pauperiem sine dote quaero.
Lib. 3. Od. 29. I praise her while she stays; if she will be gone
Her Presents I resign: And in my own
Virtue wrapped up, scorning her fickle Power,
Seek honest Poverty without a Dowre.
And when he asks any thing of Mecaenas, he does it with so much spriteliness
and address, that he seems to ask nothing, as Pauperemque dives
Me petit: Nihil supra
Deos lacesso, nec potentem Amicum
Largiora flagito,
Satis beatus unicis Labinis.
Tho Poor, I Am courted by the Rich; nor more
Of the Gods ask I: Nor pretend
For greater Favors from my powerful Friend,
Happy enough in my mean Sabine Store.
Where he well knows to put in practice what he advises Scaeva in a Letter he
writes him, giving him Precepts how to manage the design he had to fasten
himself to a great Person; telling him Coram Rege suo de Paupertate tacentes
Plus poscente ferent.
L. 1. Epist. 17. Who before his great Friend speaks not of his Want,
Gets more than they that ask. --
It Is very easy to perceive he was rather Prodigal than Covetous, as may be
judged by the Checks he gives himself for his lavish Humor. It appears by
diverse Odes that he often treated his Friends; and that he sometimes invited
Mecaenas to Dine with him. He invites Torquatus by a Letter to come and Sup
with him, and bring his Friends along with him, whom he pleasantly terms his
Shadows, saying, -- Locus est and pluribus umbris.
He had room enough for many such.
He knew besides how to serve his Friends, and the Complaint he makes that he
had not a moment of time at his own Disposal whilst he stayed at Rome, shows
clearly the facility and readiness he had to employ himself on their Behalves.
His Recommendations are ingenious and pressing as in that Letter to Tiberius,
Septimius Claudi -- By which he presents to him Septimius, who desired to be
entertained in his Service; and in another to Iccius wherein he recommends to
him one Grosphus, where he says so truly, Vilis Amicorum est Annona bonis si
quid
Deest --
Of Friends the Bounty's vile and scant,
That let us Good Men to suffer Want.
But what above all shows the Noble Humor of Horace, is the Pleasure he took
in Building; for which he blames himself under the Name of Damisippus, as one
undertaking things above his Power to perform. Aedificas: hoc est longos
imitaris, ab imo
Ad summum totus moduli Bipedalis.
L. 2. Sat. 3. Thou have a Vain of Building; though but low,
Scarce two foot tall; yet love to make a show.
Where we may observe by the way, that Horace was but little of Stature; or as
he himself says, Corporis exigui, which answers to the Word Homuncio, by which
Augustus used to call him.

What Stature Pindar was of I know not; but it is certain, he in many places of
his Works commends little Men, as when he speaks of a Wrestler. (...)
(...):
(...),
(...).
Isthm. Od. 4. He was not of Orion's mighty size,
Compared with him, he well might be disdained:
Yet with an Adversary joined, the Prize
Of Victory by strength of Arms he gained.
And when he speaks of Hercules in these Terms, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Ibid. Alemena's brave Son was of Stature low,
Not as the Giantlike Antaeus, tall,
But of a Heart inflexible to Foe,
And of a Strength, made all opposed it fall.
From Cadmian Thebes to Lybia's fertile Soil,
He to Antaeus Palace went;
And undertook the desperate Toil
That Gyant's bloody Custom to prevent,
Of fixing upon Neptune's sacred Fane,
The Heads of his sad Guests inhospitably slain.
It appears that Horace was something Choleric, by the Rebuke he gives himself
for it under the Name of Damasippus -- Non dico horrendam Rabiem: And by
another place where he acknowledges, Irasci celerem, tamen ut placabilis essem.
L. 2. Sat. 3, Apt to be Choleric, but soon appeased. Which is not the sign of
an Ill Disposition; since such as easily take fire, are ordinarily frank of
Nature, and without any Gall.

What is of greatest resemblance between our two Poets, is, That they were both
of a Complexion very Amorous; We find by Athenaeus that Pindar (...), Was
beyond measure Amorous. And he gives us a Song of his, where Pindar abandons
himself to Love. (...).
(...)
(...).
Come my Dearest, while we may
Let^s Live, and Love's Commands obey,
Nor vex our Thoughts with Antic Saws,
And practice of severe, unseasonable Laws:
The same Athenaeus tells us of another upon the subject of Theoxenus his
dearly beloved, of whom h^ says, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Who on Theoxenus fair Eyes
Shall fix his Look, nor feel the sweet Surprise
Which ravished Senses own;
Must have a Heart of Steel or Stone,
Or what is worse yet, None.
Whence may be concluded, how much we ought to regret the loss we have suffered
by the privation of the greatest part of his Works, since by this Scantling the
smiling Gaieties, the Graces and the Cupids are no^ only to be found in the
Odes of Sappho and Anacreo^ but that Pindar sometimes made a shift to lay by
tha^ Majestic Severity which appears in his Works now left us.

What shall I say of so many Odes of Horace? Spirat adhuc Amor
Vivuntque commissi calores
Fidibus. --
Where Love still breaths, and the sweet Fire
Lives sparkling by his Charming Lyre.
And where he seems to have drained himself of all h^ could think amourously
tender? As that which Scaliger so commends, Donec gratus eram tibi. Or of these
others, Qu^^ multum gracili --
Quem tu Lydia Telephi.
And a hundred more, Quae Venus --
Quinta part sui Nectaris
Imbuit.
Lib. 1. Od. 3. Where Venus pleased the Quintessence
Of her sweet Nectar to dispense.
I cannot yet but declare the horror I conceive of these two Poets most
disorderly Love of Boys, (tho in their Times, according to the Custom of those
Countries, that detestable Sin was very ordinary) and the care they took to
preserve to their last Breath the Character of amorous Persons. Pindar died in
the Arms of his beloved Theoxenus; and Horace before his Death, caused several
Glasses, or Mirrors to be plac^d on every side of his Chamber, that he might at
once see diverse Lascivious Postures, and entertain himself to the last with
voluptuous Thoughts.

And this is all I can remark of their Manners; as to what concerns the Conduc^
of their Lives, they were both of them extremely crossed and traversed by those
that envied them, before they could arrive to that degree of Reputation they
came to. A^lian reports, That Corinna at Thebes carried away five Times from
Pindar the Prize of Lyrick Poesy through the ignorance of the Judges. And
Pausa^ias (in Baoticis) tells us, That he saw at Tanagra the Statue of the said
Corinna, with a Diadem on her Head, in token of that Victory; and that it seems
to him she got not the better of Pindar otherwise than because what she wrote
was in the Aeolick Tongue, which was the Language peculiar only to the Populace
or Vulgar sort, and that Pindar made use of the Dorick Dialect, which was most
spoken by the Nobles an^ Gentry. Add to this, that Corinna was very Beautiful,
as one may judge (says he) by her Statue, and the Picture^ which the Citizens
of Tanagra caused to be drawn for her in their Portico's.

Athenaeus speaking of some kind of forced Verses, which they called Griphes;
to which some of the Ancients applied themselves, as may be seen in Simonides
his Egg, his Wings, and his Hatchet, and diverse other Fragments of Antiquity,
says, That Pindar drew upon himself the Jealousy and Aversion of the Poets of
his Time, for having composed an Ode which he calls, Yet Pindar was not the
first who wrote an (...) Poem; for Lasus Hermonensis before him, as Athenaeus
and Suidas testify, wrote Dithyrambs, and Hymns wherein the Letter S was not
to be found particularly in that entitled. The Centaurs, and another in praise
of Ceres, of which last the first Verse is produced by Heraclides Ponticus,
being this, (...). See Cae'ius Calc^gni^us in his particular Treatise De
^udicio Vocalium, in Answer to Lucian's Piece upon the same Subject. Guraldus
Dialog. 9. and Vossius de Poetis Graecis, c.4.
(...); that is to say, made without a Sigma; because, he says, 'twas thought
impossible they could leave out tha^ Consonant, or that they had no esteem for
that kind of P^^sie. And Strabo to show that the Sacrifices to Cybele, and
those to Bacchus, were equally understood by the Name of Coryban^es, produces a
Dithyramb which Pindar had made without doubt to mock those other Poet, of
which the beginning is as follows. (...)
(...)
(...).
Of old, O Mortals! In the Dithyramb,
Low Words, and the adulterate S were damned.
Which agrees with what Dionysius Halecarnassaeus elsewhere says of this (...)
(which Pindar perhaps calls a Theban Remnant ever since the Times of Cadmus and
the Phoenicians) That they willingly put no S into their Verses, because of its
hissing sound. And perhaps it is from hence that the double S, in the Attick
Dialect, came ordinarily to be changed into G, and which gave occasion to that
agreeable process of the Consonants in Lucian.

As for Horace, Quem rodunt omnes Libertino Patre nature.
Lib. 1. (...) 6. -- By All
Snapt at for being but a Freed-Mans Son*
As he says of himself; it may be very well presumed he wanted not Envy, and
that he was forced to surmount many Difficulties before he could see himself in
a condition to be able to say, Et jam dente minus mordeor invido.
L. 4. Od. 3. And now I Am less bit by an envious Tooth. By which I conceive he
means his close Enemies; such as swarm in great Men's Houses, Where (as Lucian
say^) ^eign Suspicions, Envy, Lies and Slanders, where great Hopes beget great
Iealousies, and raging Hatreds, and the continual application of searching out
means to ruin others.

Such Enemies as these, were they did Horace the greatest Mischief; who was a
Person, upon whom they durst not with impunity openly attempt any thing; and
whom they had reason to fear, for what he says of himself, Foenum habet in
Cornu, fuge.
He carries Hay on's Horn, avoid him --
And, Cave, Cave, namque in malos asperrimus,
Parata tollo cornua.
Epod. 6. Take heed, take ^eed, I against the ill
Have Horns prepared, and ready still.
And again, Si quis atro dente me petiverit,
Inultus ut flebo Puer?
Ibid. If any wrongs my Fame, shall I
Child-like sit down and pule and cry?


But if our Poets were hardly dealt withal by the Envions, they were
sufficiently recompensed by the Honors, and Favors they received from Persons
of Quality; for they were caressed in their Times by those of the highest
degree. For as Horace says, -- Tamen me
Cum magnis vixisse invita fatebitur usque
Invidia --
L. 2. Sat. 1. Yet this by Envy must be needs confessed,
I Have lived still with the Greatest, and the Best.
And what a Joy was it to find, Quod monstror digito praetereuntium
Romanae fidicen Lyrae.
That with the Finger he was pointed at
As Rome's famed Lyrick.
He knew the Greatness of his own Merit, while he says, Sum superbiam
Quaesitam meritis, and mihi Delphica
Lauro cinge volens Melpomene comam.
L. 3. Od. 30. Assume the Pride which thy just Merits raise,
And Crown my Head, my willing Muse, with Delphick Bays.
Pindar says no less of his own Works, which he thinks fit to style (...). (...)
(...).
Of flowing Nectar a rich Tide,
By the free Muses Bounty still supplied.
Sometimes he says, (...)
(...).
Pyth. 3. Hopes I assume that after Times,
Will with immortal Glory grace my Rhimes.
And then again speaking of them assures us, (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Pyth. 6. Not Winters Wrath, when he his stormy Showers,
From breaking Clouds like Armies powers,
Nor blustering Winds with their impetuous Rage
Can ever in o'erwhelming Floods engage.
Which Horace has happily imitated in this Ode. Exegi Monumentum are perennius
Regalique situ Pyrimidium altias
Quod nec imber edax, non Aquilo impotens,
Possit diruere, etc.
L. 3. Od. 30. A Monument which Brass shall yet outlast,
And Kingly Pyramids for height outvy;
Which neither eating Showers, nor Boreas Blast,
Nor Time it self shall ruin; raised have I.
They knew well enough their own value. Wherefore Pindar to that purpose
ingeniously answered one (as Plutarch reports) who to flatter him said, (...)
(...).
-- I study to spread abroad your Commendations upon all Occasions, and
endeavor to afford you the means of speaking Truth. 'Twas his only Wish, to
enjoy long the Fruit of that Reputation, and the Honor he received from
Persons of Merit.

To this we may add, his Reputation was so great after his Death, that the
Lacedaemonians, and long after them Alexander the Great, having taken the City
of Thebes, saved all the Descendants of Pindar from Slavery, and his House from
Burning, by placing this Inscription on the Door. (...). Burn not the Poet
Pindar's House. I had almost forgot to tell to this purpose what is reported,
That the Athenians publicly paid a Fine or Mulct which those of Thebes had set
upon Pindar for having praised the City of Athens, calling it (...)
(...).
The mighty City Athens, of all Greece
The Bulwark.
Upon which, I cannot sufficiently admire the s^range Humor of those two
Republics, who mortally hated one another in their Prosperity, and yet in
their Misfortunes rendered to each other those Services which they could not
have expected from their best Friends.

To return to our two Poets. Pindar flourished in Greece, when Honor, Virtue,
Wealth, and Arts were in their greatest Splendor. He appeared several times in
the public Assembly of the Olympic Games, where as Lucian says of Herodotus,
He received in one place the Universal Applause of all Greece, not published by
^^e Mouth of a single Crier, or Herald, but by those of as many Towns, as had
sent People to that Assembly.

As for Horace it is enough to say he lived in the Time of Augustus, and had, as
he himself says, the Approbation Romae principis Vrbium.
Of Rome the Queen of Cities.
As much as to say, That of the Whole World.

He seems to me, among other things to have had a great Advantage over Pindar,
in that he chose himself the Subjects he had a mind to treat of, and by that
could give a free Field to his Genius to range in, as to the Matters he made
choice of. Whereas Pindar was under a Constraint, having been always obliged to
praise Persons who for the most part were but of mean Merit. Which gave
occasion for those Parechases or Digressions, of which I shall speak hereafter.

And in Truth, it was requisite the Works of Pindar should have something
extraordinary, or rather Divine, to have pleased as they have done, by only
singing of Praises; which ordinarily to us, appear as flat, as Satyrs are
agreeable, by reason of that little principle of Envy which is in us, which
makes us believe Men take from us what is given to another by praising him, and
give to us what is taken from another by dispraising him. For Vrit enim fulgore
suo qui praegravat arts
Intra se positas --
L. 1. Epist. 2. Who by his Luster others Merits foils,
Becomes the Hate of those beneath him. --


There was a time nevertheless, when Pindar was not of that high Esteem. For we
find in Athenaeus, that in the Time of Eupolis the Comedian, the Works of
Pindar were fallen into Oblivion, by reason of the little liking was commonly
had of things worthy. And Casaubon says, that Eupolis deplored the Corruption
of the Wits of his Age. Quod mollia and lascivae aliorum Poetarum Erotopaegnia,
Pindaricae Musae, hec est, foedam Plumbi scoriam puro puto A to ant^ponerent.
i. e. Who preferred the Soft and Lascivious Erotopaegnia of other Poets, before
the Works of the Pindarick Muse, that is, more valued the dross of Lead, than
pure Gold.

And yet there was little more than a hundred Years between Pindar and Eupolis;
who according to Suidas perished in a Naval Fight in the Peloponnesian War.
Upon which occasion a Decree was made by the People of Athens, (...). That a
Poet should be dispensed with from going to the Wars.

And this is seen in some places of Aristophanes, who lived about the same time
as Eupolis; where his Scholiasts say, He mocks at your Dithyrambick Writers,
and particularly at Pindar, as in this place, where speaking of the Clouds, he
makes Socrates to say, (...)
(...),
(...).
Aristoph. in Nubibus, Act. 1. Scen. 4. These feed the Learned Sophists, wise
Physicians,
Maintain your Thuriomantists, sage Diviners,
Your Fidling Sparks, and Poets Dithyrambick,
Who utter migh^y Words to little purpose, etc.
And else where that Poet takes a Pleasure to form Dithyrambick Cadences out of
several Shreds or Pieces taken from diverse places of Lyrick Poets, and turning
them into ridicule; as in these. (...).
Moist Clouds impetuous Course daz'ling the Sight.
Upon which his S^holiast says, The Poet speaks against those that write
^^^^^rambs, and in another place, he more expressly mocks a^ Pindar upon those
frequent words of his (...) and (...), as in this place. (...)
(...).
Upon which the Scholiast says, (...). He mocks at Pindar.

And here we might take occasion to discourse of the Grecian Games, of their
Institution, and the fruit of those Exercises which are so well explained by
Solon in Lucian his Anacharsis. I might speak of their first Authors, the
Rewards of the Conquerors; who according to Pindar, were reputed happy for all
their Lives. And the time of their Celebration; particularly of the Olympicks
which have given Name to the Olympiads so often mentioned in Chronology, which
Celebration was performed during the 45 Days of Intercalation, proceeding from
the Account of the Excess of 4 Solar Years above 4 Lunar ones, each of 12
Lunations. There are several other things we might discourse of touching the
Errors of the Ancients as to that Supputation, and of the different Mutations
of the Epoche's or their Terms until the time of the Golden Number, or the
Enneadecateride of Meton, upon which the Ancient Poets made such pleasant
Raillery, whilst they feigned the Gods to have gone Supperless to Bed, having a
whole Day attended for the Smoke of the Sacrifices, which the reformed Calendar
put off to another time, but the Digression would be too great.

I shall not at all tell you of the Measures of Lyrick Verse, their Strophes
and Antistrophes, Epods, Systems and Antisystems. I might yet have many things
very curious to treat of upon occasion, touching the Modes of the ancient
Music, upon which the Odes of Pindar are composed: And I might Discourse
concerning the Report of agreement they might seem to have with our manner of
singing at this Day; and examine whether the Dorick Mode answer to our A mi la,
etc. Diatonick, as Glarean and Galileo (Father of the great Mathematician) are
of Opinion; or to D la re sol, and the Lydian to L F ut fa, and I might by that
explain that Verse of Horace, Modo summa
Voce, modo hac resonat quae chordis quatuor ima.
Lib. 1. Sat. 3. But to avoid prolixity, I shall only say what Plutarch reports
in his Book of Music, which is. That Plato admitted the Dorick Mode in his
Republic, as being more Masculine and Warlike than the other Modes, and by
reason of its severity more proper to restrain the Extravagancies of Youth,
than the Lydian and the Phrygian being too soft. And he commends the Poesy of
Pindar composed for the Dance which he calls (...), The Pindarick Tuna, which
agrees with what Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, That Pindar invented a sort of
Dance, and is confirmed by Athenaeus.

But I think my Lord! It may be now time to speak of the Works of our two
Poets. Pindar besides his Olympia, Pythia, Isthmia, and Nemaea, which we have,
(to which four Books the Ancients gave the Name of Period) had composed diverse
other Works which are now lost, and of which we have no Remains, but some
Fragments scattered in Eustathius, Athenaeus, Strabo, Philo-Iudaeus, Pausanias,
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Plutarch, Stobaeus, Suidas, and some others. Of
which see the account as given by Suidas. Pindar (says he) wrote 17 Books in
the Dorick Dialect, as his Olympionica, and Pythionica, Prosodia, Parthenia,
Enthronismi, Bacchica, Daphniphorica, Paeanes, Hyporchimata, Hymni, Dithyrambi,
Scolia, Encomia, Threni, Dramata Tragica, Epigrammata Heroica, and an
Exhortation in Prose to his Countrymen the Greeks.

In this Catalogue of Suidas we cannot but wonder he should only mention his
Olympionica, and his Pythionica, without taking notice of his Isthmica, and his
Nemeaea; and we may do well here to observe, that he calls, Olimpionica and
Pythionica, which almost all the printed Books call Olympia and Pythia. Which
last is an Error, which Casaubon has corrected in his Lections upon Theocritus,
speaking occasionally upon the words Olympionica and Pythionica, where he says,
Quas ego voces censeo esse reponendas in front singulorum Librorum Pindari,
pro eo quod nunc Legimus Olympia, Pythia; male opinor; non enim ludos laudare
Poetae est, ut loquuntur, intentio, sed ipsos victores. i. e. Which Words I am
of opinion ought to be inserted in the Title Pages of each of Pindar's Books,
instead of what we there read Olympia, and Pythia; unduly as I think, for it is
not the Poet's Intention to praise the Games, but the Victors in those Games.

These four Games, as we have already said, were called Periodus or the Period,
by way of Excellency; for tho most of the considerable Towns of Greece held
Assemblies for the Celebration of their particular Games, and had great
Concourse of Combatants and Spectators, from all parts, there were four yet
infinitely more celebrious than the rest, which they called Sacred, to wit, the
Olympian which were held at Pisa in Elis in honor of Jupiter, the Pythian, at
Cirrha in Phocis near Delphos in honor of Apollo; the Isthmian* at the Isthmus
of Peloponnesus near Corinth and Sicyonia, in honor of Neptune; and the
Nemeaean in the Valley of Nemeaea near Argos, in honor of Jupiter. The
Combatant who had been Victor in all these four Games (which they termed (...),
to gain the Period) teceiv'd thereby so great an Honor, that Pindar often
compares it to that of the Gods, and Cicero makes no difficulty to say, That
among the Gr^eks 'twas the same as to have Triumphed among the Romans.

Suidas says the Lyrick Poets called Prosodia the Poems that were sung at the
solemn Feasts of the Gods: Prosodion.
And Casaubon upon a place in Athenaeus, where there is a Speech made of the
Prosodia, says, (...), Carmen ab iis cantari solitum, qui ad Apollinem
accedebant, Apostolicus mod^s is est, qui convenit (...) vel (...) erant apud
Graecos praefecturae nauticae nomina, i e (...) Prosodion was a Song used to be
sung by tho^^ (...) made their Address to Apollo. The Apostolion belonged to
those they called Apostoli, Apostolion.
who were the Officers among the Greeks, who directed the Affairs of the Marine.

Which I understand after this manner. That the Prosodion was apparently that
which they sung in going to the Temple of Apollo, (...), and the Apostolion
what was sung, (...), by the Company of the Galleys going out to Sea.

The said Suidas says the Parthenia were Songs made in honor of Virgins,
Parthenia.
or the Eumenides, for both the one and the other are meant by the Word (...).
He calls the Paeans (...), or, as we may say in Latin Faustas Acclamationes,
Songs of Joy, good Wishes and Acclamations, or Benedictions, and he makes of
them two sorts: One which they sung in honor of Mars before the Combat, and
which they called, (...), the other after the Victory. Which yet in another
place he delivers after another manner; that the Ancients sung two sorts of
Paeans, one to Mars before the Battle, and another to Apollo after it. And it is
upon this the Scholiast of Sophocles speaks, upon these Verses in his Oedipus
Tyrannus. (...) --. That they who are in Health, make Sacrifices, and sing
Paeans, for their being freed from Sickness; and they who are stricken with
Sickness make Complaints of their Maladies. For as Suidas in another place
says, The Paeanism is that which is sung for being delivered from the Evils
they are threatened with.

I have likewise found in several Authors, Paean.
that the Paean was not composed by the Ancients but for the Gods only. And one
of the principal Heads of the Accusation Demophilus made against Aristotle at
Athens, was that of Impiety, with which he was charged for having made that
excellent Ode we find in Athenaeus, and Diogenes Laertius, in honor of one
Hermias Tyrant of Aternae, which Demophilus maintained to have been a Paean,
though Aristotle made the contrary appear by several Reasons, of which the
principal was, that there wanted in it the Acclamation of (...), which is, as
one would say, the very mark of a Paean.

They which came after Aristotle were no such rigid Observers of that Ceremony,
which passed from the Gods to Heroes, and from them to Mortal Men, by the
Flattery of the Athenians, who were the first that caused one to be sung in
honor of Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, and another after that, in honor of
Ptolemy King of Egypt.

Macrobius in the 17th Chapter of his first Book of Saturnals, produces a very
curious Origin of that Acclamation, (...), or (...); for they are both used,
because Apollo is called (...), or from (...) to heal, or from (...), from his
shooting off Letiferous Shafts; and (...), a feriendo, to strike; or, (...),
from his mitigating of Pains.

Athenaeus, as to the Origin of this Word, recounts a very pleasant Story. He
says, That Latona having brought her Children from Chalcis in Euboea to
Delphos, resolved to repose her self near the Cave where the Serpent Python had
his Den; whence that Serpent issuing out with fury to devour her, she was
thereupon so extremely afrighted, that snatching up Diana in her Arms, she
hastily fled away, and got upon a Stone, which serves (says he) as a Basis to
the Statue of that Goddess, and whereupon was engraven the whole Story of that
Accident, and Apollo being happily present, armed with his Bow and Arrows,
distressed Latena cries out several times, (...), i. e. Shoot Child, Sh^ot. And
from thence came that Acclamation ordinarily made use of by those who are in
danger.

Plutarch in his Book of Music says, There is great difference between a Paean
and the Hyporchema, Hyporchema.
as may be seen (says he) by the Works of Pindar, who has composed both the
one and the other. Those Works of Pindar which are styled Hyporchemata, I call,
Songs for the Dance. For as much as the Ancients have written they were the
same with the Carmen Saliare of the Latins; which according to the
Interpretation of Dalecampius upon Athenaeus, Saltantibus accinebatur, Was Sung
to the Dancers. Or, as Lucian says, Were Songs composed for the Dance of the
Persons in the Chorus, and called Hyporchemata; although Casaubon thinks
otherwise, and calls them Saltationes Voci subservi^ntes, Dances composed to
the Voice. But it is easy to reconcile that Diversity by what the same
Athenaeus in another place says, The Hyporchema was a kind of Dance, where the
Persons, whether Men or Women who composed the Chorus, Danced Singing: And that
among those Dances the most considerable were Prosodia, Apostolia, the
Parthenia, and the like; for as for the Hymns, and particularly those to Venus
and Bacchus, as likewise the Paeans, some of them (says he) were danced, and
others were not.

Where it may be noted that these Songs we have but now spoken of, (which were
sung in Processions, or in public Shows, and Ceremonies, or at Naval
Imbarkments) were not only sung, but that there were Dancers likewise who
showed several Gestures and Motions as Signs and Marks expressive of the sense
and meaning of the Things that were sung. And he (says Athenaeus) who made any
Gestures or Motions not answerable to the Subject or Sense of the Letter, or
danced without measure, or ^ut of just Cadence was hissed at. Whence it came
(says he) that this kind of Dance was called in Greek (...), as one would say,
(...). A Dance after the Air or Sense of the Song. Or, as he says in another
place, an imitation of the Things expressed by the Letter of the Air or Song.

He further says, Dances proper to Theatrical Poesy.
As there are three sorts of Dances proper to Theatrical Poesy, that is to
say, the Tragical, the Comical, and Satirical; so likewise there are three
kinds proper to the Lyrick Poesy, to wit, Dances proper to Lyrick Poesy.
the Pyrrick, the Gymnopedike, and the Hyporchematike The Pyrrhick has much of
resemblance with the Satirical, being both Danced with a quick and swift
Motion, the Pyrrhick being a Warlike Dance. The Gymnopedike, has some relation
to the Tragical, which they call Emmelia, as being serious, and that there is a
kind of Gravity, and Majesty in both of them; the Hyporchematike, or Comical,
which they call Cordax, in regard they have both of them something more Jolly
and Frolic. I make use of that Term to express the Ridicule of the Cordax,
which sometimes went to a vicious excess, and at length past for Infamous among
the Greeks, by reason of the dishonest and Lascivious Gestures of the Dancers.
Of which Horace seems to take notice when he complains, Motus doceri gaudet
Ionicos
Matura Virgo, and fingitur artibus.
L. 3. Od. 6. Virgins Mature, Ionick Measures try,
And Supple Joints in wanton Gestures ply.


I could wish we had the Works of Pindar which are lost, that we might know the
true difference between those he had composed in honor of one and the same
Deity, as between the Daphnephoria, the Paeans, and Prosodia, which were all
made in honor of Apollo, or between the Bacchicks and the Dithyrambs which
were made in honor of Bacchus whom they called Dithyrambos, because he was
born by two Gates, that is, from the Belly of his Mother, and the Thigh of
Jupiter. Perhaps they differed not but in the Cadences and Measures of the
Verse, or other Expressions; at least it appears throughout, that the
Dithyrambs were full of Figures extremely swelling, great Dictions composed of
several others, and a sense perpetually imbroil'd and intricate, in so much as
not easily to be understood. For as Suidas writes, The Composers of Dithyrambs
spoke not but of Things elevated as of the Clouds and Meteors, and in Terms
made up of compound Words, and ways of speaking new, hardy, and extraordinary,
as Horace says, speaking of Pindar, Seu per audaces nova Dithyrambos
Verba devolvit, numerisque fertur
Lege solutis.
L. 4. Od. 2. Whether new Words he rowls along
Through hardy Dithyrambs, or forms his Song
In such a numerous Strain,
As does all Laws disdain.
Which comes to what Aristophanes says, who calls them (...), Charlatans who
endeavored to puzzle their Auditors with mighty Words, and vain Discourses in
the Air. And as his Scholiast adds the Dithyrambick Poets made use of compound
Elocutions and extremely imbroil'd. Which occasioned the Proverb, (...).
Thou have no more Sense than a Dithyrambick Poet.
Which is applied to Things very difficult to be understood.

I observe these Dithyrambs were well esteemed of, while comprised within the
Bounds of reasonable and moderate Expressions. But were looked upon as
ridiculous, when carried on to Excess, as we have seen above in those Remnants
and Pieces which Aristophanes has maliciously tacked together in his Clouds;
where his Scholiast says, that the Dithyrambs were not made but to ruin good
Poesy.

At least they believed not they could be suffered any where but in a Society
of Drunkards, as Philochorus in Athenaeus declares, That the Ancients sung not
Dithyrambs in any of their Libations or Sacrifices, but only in those they made
to Bacchus, and when they were well whetted. And we have some Verses of
Archilochus to this Purpose. (...)
(...).
A Dithyramb I have to sing,
In Praise of Bacchus our Great King,
When a large Draught of Sparkling Wine
Has Thunderstrook these Brains of mine.
Which comes up to that Fragment we have of Epicharmus who forbids, (...),
There should be any Dithyrambs for your Water-Drinkers.

There is yet another sort of Poetry in the number of those attributed to
Pindar, which was not Sung but in their Cups; and these were the Scolia's of
the Ancients, which Suidas calls, Scolia, what kind of Poesy.
(...), as one would say, Drunken Catches; of whom the Inventor according to
Pindar in Plutarch, was one called Therpander, and 'twas principally at Nuptial
Festivals that these kind of Songs were made use of. And as the Ancient Greeks
did eat lying, and not sitting as we do, they dressed for that purpose several
little Beds round about a Table, upon which the invited Guests lay down, and at
the end of Dinner a Branch of Myrtle was given to him that was at the end of
the Table, who immediately began to sing some little Sentences or Pieces of
Love in Verse, and after that gave the Branch to him that was next him, who
having sung his Song, gave it to another, and so it passed from Hand to Hand
till it came to the Master of the Feast; and as it passed from one to another,
it made a round about the Table, which they called, (...), a winding or turning
March, by reason of the little Beds set round the Table, and from thence the
Sonnets had the Name of Scolia's.

I call them Sonnets after the manner of Suidas, who says, The Scolion was a
Song of few Verses, which was ordinarily made in praise of some brave Action,
or in dispraise of some Vices; for as Casaubon says, Verissimum est Scoliorum
Argumenta fuisse (...), and vitae praecepta sunt, quae pleraque illorum facta
ex dictis septem sapientum quae (...) olim dicta sunt, quia moris erat ea
cantare in Convivis, i. e. It is most certain that the Arguments or Subjects of
these Scholia's were instructive to Life, and were full of Moral Praecepts.
They were for the most part taken out of the Sayings of the Seven Wise Men,
which were heretofore called Adomenes, because it was the Custom to sing them
at Feasts. Which is confirmed by what Suidas and Aristophanes report of
Pericles, who had written the Laws of Athens in form of little Songs after the
manner of Scolia 's, to the end they might be sung, and so be more easily
remembered; and is further verified by a number of Scolia's in Athenaeus.

That Author says moreover, as does likewise Suidas, That there were three
different Manners of Singing at the Table; the first when all the Company sang
together one and the same Song; the second when they sang round one after
another; and the third, when they only who were skilful Songsters sung each of
them a Song, and that Interruption (says he) which was made passing from one
skilful Songster to another, leaving the rest of the Guests vacant, and going a
Traverse, or Skipping, gave the Name Scolion to that manner of Singing.

I shall say nothing of that Great Scolion of Pindar, which he made in Praise
of the Corinthian Courtezans; nor of that Eustathius speaks of in his Comment
upon the Odysses, That there were two kinds of Scolia 's, whereof one they
called, (...), or rallying, made purposely to mock at the Vicious; and the
other (...), or Serious, in Commendation of Virtue and Virtuous Persons. Among
the last he puts those which they called, (...), or Lugubria, which were sung
at the Solemnity of the Dead by those of the Family, about the Funeral Pile. I
have read in an Interpreter of Athenaeus that these Scolia's were like those
Verses which from the Italians we at present call Stanzas, Sonnets, and
Madrigals.

But I may seem to have been too long upon this Matter, and that it is time to
return to our Subject.

See therefore the Judgment Quintilian has given of Pindar's Poesy in the
first Chapter of his Tenth Book, where he says, Novem vero Lyricorum long
Pindarus princeps, Spiritus magnificentia, sententiis, figuris, brevissima
rerum verborumque copia, and veluti quodam Eloquentiae flumine, propter quae
Horatius eum credidit nemini imitabilem, i. e. Pindar is far beyond any, Prince
of the Nine Lyrick Poets, for the Height and Majesty of his Thoughts, the
Gravity of his Sentences, the Beauty of his Figures, the Copious Brevity of his
Words and Matter, and as it were a Flood or Torrent of Eloquence; for which
Horace thought him inimitable.

It seems Quinctilian took all this Discourse from Dionysius Halicarnassaeus
his Book de construction. verbonim where he thus speaks, Pindar is Admirable
for the choice of his Words and Thoughts, he has Grandeur, Harmony, Affluence,
Order, and vigor of Expressions, and all that, accompanied with a certain
grave yet close Delivery, mixed with an agreeable sweetness; is mavelous for
his Sentences, his Energy, his Figures, his address in describing manners, his
Amplifications, and Elocution, and above all for the Honesty of his own
Manners, which appears in all his Writings, where his Temperance, his Piety and
the Greatness of his Mind shine throughout.

By which it appears to me, that Author was perfectly acquainted with the
Character of Pindar, for he has omitted nothing that could be considered in his
Works, where the Sublime (of which Longinus has written) is in its greatest
Luster, and of which Horace says, Multa Dircaeum levat aura Cycnum
Tendit Antoni! Quoties in altum
Nubium tractus.
L. 4. Od. 2. When for a noble Flight he does prepare,
Raised on a mighty Tide of favoring Air,
The Theban Swan with Soaring Wings,
Up 'bove the Cloudy Region springs.
Athenaeus likewise never speaks of Pindar, but he gives him this Epithete,
(...), The great-voic'd Pindar.

And now it might be proper for me after what these Men have said, to hold my
Tongue; but my Lord! I cannot forbear telling you of some Passages in Pindar,
which I never yet could read without being extremely concerned. As where he
describes the Joy the Good Old Aeson had when he reviewed his Son Jason, and
beheld him to be a Person so well made and accomplished, after he had mourned
for him as Dead. -- (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
Pyth. 4. As soon as entered, his old Father's Eye
Strait found him out; and a glad Shower let fly
Of joyful Tears, to see a Son so brave,
So beautiful; who well the Prize might have
From all of Humane Race.
Or when he recounts the brave Action of Antilochus (...), who undertook by his
own Death to save the Life of his Father Nestor, where the Relation is so
tender, so touching, and so lively, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus notes, That
they seem not the things told, but the very actions themselves, as if done in
our Presence. There is no body but trembles for the poor Nestor, to see him
distressed in his Chariot, stopped by the wounding of one of his Horses, and
pursued by Memnon with his Lance a tilt; but who would not at the same time be
struck with equal Joy and Grief to see Antilochus so courageously oppose
himself against him, and die combating for the Life of his Father? (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Pyth. ^^. The Entreaties of his Father weighed not he,
Firmly resolved, the Godlike Youth remained,
By his own Death, his Father's Life to free;
And in the brave Performance fell, yet gained
The highest Honor that was ever known,
Of Childrens Piety to Parents shown.
Can any thing be seen more soft than what he says of the Birth of Aristaeus.
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
The Hours upon their soft Knees took
The Newborn Babe; and as he lay,
Sweet Nectar gave the Child to suck,
And fed him with Ambrosia.
See how richly he commends the Excellent Sculptures of the Rhodians? (...).
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 7. The Noble Statues their fair Streets adorn,
Seem (not as framed, but born)
To Live, and Move.
With what Force and Vigor does he describe the Hostile Desolation of a
fruitful Land? (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
10. The inhospitable Epian King, too soon
Beheld his Country overrun
With Fire and Sword; his City sacked by Foes
As merciless as Those;
And sunk into Misfortune more than low,
A sad Abyss of Misery and Woe.
With what agreeableness does he paint the Joy of an Old Man at the Birth of a
Son to inherit his Estate? (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
Ibid. As when an Aged Person gets a Boy
On a Young Wife, his Solace, and his Joy.
How does he spring into n^w Youth again!
Seeing a Son Born, likely to maintain
His fair Estate: For at one's Death, no pain,
No Thoughts so odious, and distracting are,
As leaving Riches to an unknown Heir.
And the Shame and Grief of the Combatants overcome in the Pythian Games? (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. 8. No Pleasure take they to the Pythian Plain,
Where they were foiled, to return back again,
Nor willingly to their own Homes repair,
Since they to cheer their Parents Hearts despair
With mirthful Iollity, still before their Eye
They seem their Conquering Rivals to espy,
And shun the sight of them: With Shame pursued,
And the Calamity of Men subdued.
The Description he gives of Mount Aetna has something of Divine, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Pyth. 1. From Aetna's Caverns Deep and Low,
Inaccessible Springs of Unquenchable Fire,
In boiling Torrents upward flow:
These Floods of Flame, as they by Day aspire,
Like Cloudy Vortices of Smoke appear.
By Night the flaming Deluge grows more clear,
Dreadfully bright, when from the Mountains vast
And glowing Furnaces out cast,
A burning Stream of melted Rocks
And liquified Quarries
Down to the Sea with horrid Cracks,
Its blazing Current carries.
Which Virgil has imitted in the 3d of his Aeneids after this manner. -- Sed
horrificis juxta tonat Aetna ruinis
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad Aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo, and candente favilla,
Attollitque Globos flammarum, and sidera lambit.
Interdum scopulos avulsaque viscera Montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemitu glomerat, fundoque exestuat imo.
Hard by with horrid Ruins Aetna roars,
Dark Clouds now with hot Cynders forth it pours,
Now Pitchy Fumes rising in rapid Curls,
And Globes of Flame high as the Stars it hurls.
Hard Rocks, its Entrails, from its Sides now rends,
And melted Stones with Fiery Belchings, sends
Up into Air: Now dreadful Groans expires
From its deep Gulfs exestuating Fires.
Which is one of the Places Phavorinus (in Aulus Gellius) says Virgil had not
put his last Hand to, and where he finds much to say against it, but chiefly
for taking upon on him to imitate Pindar. Ejusmodi sententias and verba molitus
est, ut Pindaro quoque ipso, qui nimis opima pinguique esse facundia
existimatus est, insolentior hoc quidem in loco' tumidiorque sit, i.e. He seems
to have attempted the same Words and Expressions as Pindar, who had an
Eloquence esteemed too Rich and Pompous, and in this place to have outgone him
in Terms more insolent, and more swelling.

It is worth seeing what Pindar says of Fortune, -- (...);
(...)
(...),
(...).
Olymp. 12. Fortune of Humane State the Fostress! Thou
Swift-sailing Ships (the Seaman's Joy) do guide
Through the Seas boistrous Tide,
On Earth now wastfull Wars do manage; now
Over Peaceful Councels do preside.
And speaking of the Graces he says, (...),
(...):
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 14. What e're amongst Men, Delightful is and Sweet,
Blessed Graces! Is your due.
In them, if Wisdom, Beauty, Splendour meet,
All this they owe to you.
Horace has imitated very nearly the Verses of Fortune in his Ode. O Diva
gratum quae regis Antium. And those of the Graces, which he attributes to the
Muses, in this, Discende Coelo and dia age Tibia -- As likewise that excellent
place of Pindar, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 2. Actions or just or unjust, past and gone,
Not Father Time who has all Acts begun,
Can ever make or render them undone.
Which he turns so happily after this Manner, Cras vel atra
Nube polum, Pater occupata
Vel sole puro; non tamen irritum
Quodcunque retro est efficiet, neque
Diffinget, infectumque reddet
Quod fugiens semel hora vexit.
L. 3. Od. 29. To morrow Jove may cloud the Skies,
Or make a smiling Sunshine rise;
But all his Power can never make void
The Thing that has been once enjoyed,
Nor ere again reduce to naught
What the past Hours have with them brought.
And several other excellent Passages, whence Horace and Virgil seem to have
drained his Sublime Sentiments, and rich Expressions, being ravished and
carried away with another Enthusiasm, in the same manner (says (...), S. 11.
ex edit. Langban.
Longinus) as the Priestess of Apollo upon the sacred Tripod, is possessed with
the Spirit of that God.

'Twould take up too much time should I enter upon the particularizing what is
observable in the Works of Pindar, and speak of the Austerity of his Diction,
his Sentences, his Figures, and particularly his Hyperbata, his Metaphors, his
Allegories, his Hyperbole's, which so much enrich his Thoughts, as likewise of
those graceful Words, (...). Tempest-footed and indefatigable, which leave us
the penetrating Ideas of the lightness and swiftness he speaks of.

I shall only tell what Quinctilian reports of the Hyperbole in the 8th Chapter
of his 10th Book, where he says, Exquisitam figuram hujus rei deprendere apud
principem Lyricorum videar, in libro quem inscripsit (...), Is namque Herculis
Impetum adversus Meropas qui in Insula Co dicuntur habitasse, non igni, nec
Ventis, neo Mari, sed fulmini dicit similem fuisse, ut illa minora, hoc par
esset, i. e. I find an Exquisite Example of this Figure, in the Prince of
Lyrick Poets, Pindar, in one of his Hymns, where speaking of the impetuous
Assault made by Hercules against the Meropes, Inhabitante of the Island Chios,
he assimilates the Action not to Fire, Winds, or the Sea, but to Thunder; the
others seeming less, this only equal to it.

And what Dionysius Halicarnassaeus has upon the Subject of the severity of
his Diction in his Book of Demosthenes his Eloquence, where having explicated
at large what he calls austere Harmony, he concludes, that the Diction of
Aeschylus among the Tragic Poets, and that of Pindar wholly and entirely among
the Lyricks, may afford sufficient Examples.

The same Author in his Book of the Construction of Words, says, 'twill suffice
to mention only Pindar among the Poets, and Thucydides among the Historians,
for they are two, who have most happily made use of that Harmony and austere
Construction in Discourse; begin we (says he) with this Dithyramb of Pindar,
etc. And after having recited the Verses of the Poem, he adds, There is no Man
who sees not but that the Expression is Strong, Nervous, Sententious, Grave,
and very Severe, which is heard and goes off without Distaste, and agreeably
strikes the Ear.

These are the Beauties of Pindar; for which, in an Epigram of the Greek
Anthology, he is sometimes called, -- (...).
Leonid. in Anthol. L. 3. The Servant of the Sweet-voic'd Muses. And again,
(...).
Antipat. L. 3. Anth. Gr. The Muses Trumpet, sounder of grave Hymns. Which gave
occasion of this further Encomium, (...)
(...).
Antipat. Anth. G^ L. 4. Far as a Trumpets sound outgoes the Flute,
So far all others yield unto his Lute.
Upon which Score Horace writes, Monte decurrens velut Amnis, imbres
Quem super notas aluere ripas,
Fertur, immensusque ruit profundo Pindarus ore.
L. 4. Od. 2. As when a Torrent pouring from some Hill,
Which Rains have made beyond its Banks to swell;
So Pindar his impetuous Vein, that knows
No Bounds, with a deep, noisy Current flows.
And Longini^, That Pindar seems sometimes to set all on Fire with his
Vehemence. It Is true yet what the same Longinus immediately after says, That
that Ardor of his was sometimes ill-quench'd, and fell unhappily. As much as to
say, That amidst the great Beauties of Pindar, there were some Defects taken
notice of by the Critics, of which we shall reckon up the most considerable.

The first is, that Faftus of Words, and that perpetual height of Expressions,
full of excessive Hyperbole's, as we have already remarked out of Favorinus,
speaking of the Judgment he gave upon Virgil, That Pindar 's Eloquence was too
rich and swelling.

And truly there is in Pindar some Fashions of speaking so hardly, and so far
from our common use, that a Man can hardly consider of them, without finding
them ridiculous. As when having excessively praised one of his Combatants, and
fearing he might be thought to have said too much, he leaves off. (...).
Olymp. 8. Least Envy should throw Stones at him. And when he praises another
for having been Victorious, he uses this Expression, (...).
Isthm. 2. He fell upon the Golden Knees of Victory. After the same manner
having spoken of another Victor in the Olympic Games, he adds, (...)
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 6. Know, Sostratus his Son has in this Shoe,
A happy Foot.
And some others of the like Nature which are, as I have said, very far from
the Notion of Sublime, in our manner of speaking. And we can give no other
reason for it, but that of the Mode and Gusto of the Times. But to condemn all
upon that Principle, were to be too quick, and to do like those who having
never been out of their own Homes, cannot without Laughter look upon strange
fashioned Clothes.

What besides they find ill in Pindar's Works, are the enormous Digressions or
Excursions he makes, which have for the most part so little of Rapport to the
principal Subject of the Ode, that they appear like large pieces of Cloth of
Gold sowed to some Stuff, of less value.

Upon which, It Is to be remembered what heretofore we have said, That Pindar had
occasion to praise Persons who were ordinarily but of mean Merit, and therefore
had not much to say of them. So that he was obliged to search for Matter
abroad, upon which he might elevate his Thoughts; forasmuch as those wretched
Combatants he praised, would have long Odes for their Money; and 'twas in this,
that the Artifice of Pindar principally appeared, (...).
To speak great Things on little Subjects.
Which he calls, (...), The Effect of an extraordinary Genius: And upon this
Subject I cannot forbear to say what sometime has come into my Mind, that in
all likelihood Pindar at his Leisure composed upon several sort of Cadences his
different Works in Praise of the Gods and Heroes: And that when a Victorious
Combatant came to ask him for an Ode, he went to search among his Compositions
for a Piece that was most proper, and would be most suitable for the Person he
was to praise, either in respect of his Country, or the place of his Victory,
his Beauty, Age, or some other thing that might serve him as a Connection to put
together what he had formerly prepared, with that he had thought to say upon
the account of him he was to speak of.

In the mean while, his Transitions are so just, that his Artisice therein
appeared not at all, and is what he acknowledges in diverse places. As for
Example, at the end of that long and admirable Narration of the Argonauts which
is in the 4th of his Pythioniques, where he says, (...)
(...)
(...):
(...).
Pyth. 4. But to our Subject; whence we have strayed too long,
Time calls back our Excursive Song;
Which on a short return has hit,
To teach to others Dextrous Wit.
And in another place, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 2. Shafts in my Quiver of Invention, store
I have, but only fitted for the Wise:
Whose Sense, the Vulgar never can explore,
But need Interpreters to undisguise.


They take notice likewise of some Faults of Pindar in Chronology; as where he
recounts the taking up of Pelops, to the Palace of Jupiter, where, says he,
(...), Ganymede afterward arrived, instead of saying, (...), where Ganymede
had been before; because Ganymede was elder than Pelops according to their
Genealogies reported by Diodorus Siculus, who writes, That Paris was the Son o^
Priam, he of Laomedon, whose Father was Ilus, to whom Ganymede was Brother; and
in another place, That Menelaus was the Son of Atreus, whose Father was Pelops,
where it may be observed that Paris and Menelaus being of the same Age, and
there being but two Generations from Menelaus to Pelops, and three from Paris
to Ganymed, it follows that this should be Elder than the other, and
consequently that Neptune his taking up of Pelops must be a long time after
that of Jupiter his Rape of Ganymede for his Beauty.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Olymp. 10* By Aid of favoring Venus raised above
The Stroke of Death, and made the Joy of Jove.
Pausanias (in Achaicis) takes notice of another Parachronism of Pindar, where
he says, It seems to me that Pindar was not altogether so knowing of what
concerned the Temple of the Ephesian Diana, whilst he Writes, It was built by
the Amazons when they made War against Theseus Prince of Athens; for that
Temple was famous long time before the Ionians passed into Asia. True it is,
the Amazons marching in that War from Thermodoon, offered their Sacrifices to
that Goddess there, as they did likewise in their Flight from Hercules, and
before that when defeated, and pursued by Bacchus, they fled to that Temple as
Suppliants; but they never were, or can be said to have been Builders thereof.

If we had those Poems of Pindar, which they call Threni, we should see whether
it be true what Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says, That Simonides was more happy
than Pindar, in describing sad and Lugubrious Subjects, in as much as he
mourned not in such Magnifick and Swelling Expressions as he, but in much more
pathetical. But as those Works are lost, we must acquiesce, and leave it to the
judgment and sufficiency of that Author.

I find there are some Learned Persons who discommend the beginning of the
first Ode, (...), The best of Things is Water; and like not, that being to make
a highly-elevated Comparison, he should use that of Water, which is too vile
and low to produce any Idea of Grandeur in our Thoughts. That of Gold which
follows after, has (say they) some excuse for the Passion this Poet had for
Riches; but they find not any proportion between Water and the Sun to join them
together, which has a seeming resemblance of Truth according to our Principles
and manner of reasoning at this Day.

This Objection nevertheless, will not appear very considerable, if we make but
this Reflection, That Pindar sent that Ode into Sicily to a Tyrant of Syracusa,
where they followed the Doctrine of Empedocles, who about that time had
immortalized himself by his Works, by his Life and his voluntary fall into the
flaming Gulf of Aetna: For one of the Principles of that Philosopher's
Doctrine, was this, That Water was the Origin and Source of all the Works of
Nature.

So that Pindar could not make use of a Comparison more happy or more
efficacious than that of Water, to comprehend what was great and elevated to
the Sicilians, who regarded that Element as the Principle, which had given them
their Being.

And these, my Lord, are the Defects which some have charged Pindar with, which
are no other than little Moles in a Beautiful Body, as Horace says, -- Velut si
Egregio inspersos, deprendas corpore naevos.
Which in my Sense, make in his admirable Works, what Shadows do in Painting,
which heighten and set off with greater Luster the Beauties and Colors of the
Piece: Or, as (...),. 25. ex Edit. Langbain. Or 26. ex Edit. Tan. Fabri.
Longinus says, As Dissonances in Music are suffered, to give the greater
relish and more agreeable sweetness to the perfect Accords. They are, to speak
truly the inevitable Effects of that Sublimity of Thought and Diction, which
according to the Sentiment of that Author, can never be entirely pure; and
where as in a great and rich store, there will be a necessity of loosing or
neglecting something.

I call these Faults Negligences, for such are those of Pindar, which will
never hinder him from always meriting to be Crowned with Phoebean Laurel, and
bearing away the Prize from all the Lyrick Poets, tho the Style of some of them
be more even, and less defective: For that, evenness of Style can never enter
into Comparison with that Majestic Force, (tho something uneven) in the Style
of Pindar.

And this (...), L. seu. 29. according to the Langbain Edition.
Longinus makes clearly appear, when having examined the Faults of Homer, and
declared that Apollonius, in his Argonauticks, is without Defects, he cries out,
and asks, Whether there be any one would rather be Apollonius than Homer?
Bacchylides than Pindar? Ion of Chios, than Sophocles? And after adds, These
first are without Defects, and never trip, or stumble in their Writings,
whereas the others sometimes fall, by reason of the Violence that Transports
them beyond their power to regulate, or remedy.

And I further observe, that Longinus judiciously joins together these three
Heroes of Greek Poesy, Homer, Pindar and Sophocles as the three Coryphaei in
every kind of Poesy, the Epick, Lyrick and Tragic; and who according to the
Judgment of Aristotle, chose Subjects the most Sublime, and handled them the
most nobly.

Come we now to the Works of Horace; he has left us four Books of Odes, one of
Epods, two of Satyrs, two of Epistles, and one of the Art of Poetry, dedicated
to the Piso's. He calls those of his Odes Lib^os Carminum, because the Word
Carmen in Latin answers to the (...) of the Greeks, who call the Lyrick Poets
(...), and (...).

Some Grammarians believed that the Word (...) (which they term See the reason
of the Word in Scaliger de Poetica, l. 1. c. 44. Quia post cantiones ad Aras
Deorum expletas, accedebat aliquis, sacra certis versiculis clausurus.
Clausular's) had taken its Name from the inequality of the Verse, in which
they are written, in regard the Greeks called Epods, or Clausular's the short
Verses which follow just under the longer. Others seeing the best Ode in the
Book of Epods, which is against Canidia, to speak nothing but of Enchantments,
which they call (...) in Greek, conceive the Name to have passed from that Ode
to the whole Book: And others lastly have concluded the Book of Epods to be as
it were (...), as if composed after, or as I may say, over and above those of
the Odes. There are those who take the Carmen Saeculare out of the Body of his
other Books, and make it a separate Work of it self.

The two of Satyrs have that Title given them for that as Horace seems to
confess, Sunt quibus in Satira videar minis acer.
There are who think in Satyr I Am too sharp.
They are called likewise Libri Sermonum, Discourses, because speaking of them
in another place, he says, they are, -- Sermoni propiora --
Nearer to common Talk, or familiar Entertainment.


There is something wanting in the Epistles; and tho there are some Specimens
which are without any Breach, by reason the beginning of one Epistle is joined
to the end of another; yet the common Sense shows clearly, that many times they
are both defective. That to the Piso's de Art Poetica, which Horace for the
most part has taken from Parianus Neoptolemus, is an accomplished Piece; it
has been anatomized by Fabricius, who has reduced to a certain Order the
Precepts here and there scattered in that Treatise.

You see, my Lord! By this Discourse, we have a larger Subject given us to
treat of these Pieces of Horace, than those of Pindar, for the reason we have
already delivered, that the greatest part of the latter's Works are lost. And
that by what we have left of him, he seems to have been constrained to spend
his Wit upon the praises of particular Persons; whereas Horace had the Liberty
to choose his Subjects the most proper to his own Genius and Humor.

I know full well there has been an infinite number of things advantageously
said of him and his Works; and that the greatest Persons, both Ancient and
Modern, have rendered of him Illustrious Testimonies. But I should be too
tedious, should I go about to report them all in this place; I shall therefore
content my self to tell you only what Quinctilian, who in my Opinion is a
sufficient Judge, has delivered of him.

And in the first place, as to its Satyrs, he immediately gives him the
advantage over Lucilius, Multo est tertior Lucilio, ac purius magis Horatius,
and ad notandos mores praecipuus. Horace (says he) is much more Polite and Neat
than Lucilius; and for describing of Manners most admirable.

For his Epods. Iambus (says he) non sane a Romany celebratus est ut proprium
opus, a quibusdam interpositus, cujus Acerbitas in Catullo, Bibaculo, Horatio:
Quamvis illi Epodos intervenire reperiatur, i. e. The Iambick never passed with
the Romans for a particular sort of Poetry. Some have inserted it among other
Verses. Of which, the force and Acerbity may be seen in Catullus, Bibaculus and
Horace: Tho it appears they were sometimes intermixed in Epods. Where we see he
calls Epods what others term Clausulars; that is to say, those short Verses
interposed after the longer, which they call Iambicks.

But as for his Odes, or Lyricks, he prefers him before all that ever wrote in
that kind. At Lyricorum idem Horatius fere solus legi dignus, nam and insurgit
aliquando and plenus est jucunditatis, and gratiae, and variis figuris and
verbis faeliciter audax, i. e. Of all the Lyricks, there is none but Horace
only who merits to be read, for he sometimes rises full of pleasing Graces, and
is most happily bold in the variety of his Expressions and Figures.

It will be very difficult to add any thing to that Judgment; which not only
places Horace above all the Lyricks, but enters into the Particularities of his
Perfections. It seems to me as if he would say, Horace has spoken upon all the
Matters that can enter into Lyrick Poesy, and that he has Divinely treated of
them: That he raised himself in the greatest Subjects almost as high as Pindar,
but maintained them more uniformly, without falling, as may be seen in these
Excellent Odes. Descend Coelo and dic age Tibia.
L. 3. Od. 4. Coelo tonantem credidimus Iovem.
L. 3. Od. 5. And, Odi profanum Vulgus and arceo.
L. 3. Od. 1. That in the middle sort of Style he has inimitable Charms, as in
that Ode which Sealiger is so much taken with. Quem tu Melpomene semel.
L. 4. Od. 3. And that other, Non visitata aut tenui ferar.
L. 2. Ode 20. There are other Odes of a Compsotion more severe, as these,
Intactas Opulentior.
L. 3. Od. 24. Tyrrhena Regum Progenies.
L. 3. Od. 29. Delicta Majorum immertus lues.
L. 3. Od. 6. We have him in others, where he seems to be full of a Spirit of
Fury, which Longinus would call, (...).
Phoebean Raptures.
Quo me, Bacche, rapis?
L. 3. Od. 25. Quo quo scelesti ruitis?
Epod. 7. Others that seem to have been dictated to him by the Graces: As, Vlla
si juris tibi pejerati.
L. 2. Od. 8. Nox erat, and coelo fulgebat Luna sereno.
Epod. 15. I have already spoken of his Amorous, and his Satirical Pieces; but
I can never be weary of praising the Sweetness of those where there is
something of sad, and mournful, as, in that to Maecenas. Cur me querelis
exanimas tuis.
L. 2. Od. 17. And that other to Virgil, upon the Death of Quinctilius Varus,
Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus?
L. 4. Od. 24. And to speak the Truth, I find all that is graceful, and
pleasant, in Horace; and I never take him up to read him in any part, but I
meet with something that seems to me to be new; and that I discover not some
fresh Beauties and Graces which I never perceived before.

And it is that part of his Works where one may admire the Fecundity and
Sublimity of his Invention, the Riches and the Hardiness of his Expressions,
the Purity of his Diction, which is infinitely more modest and correct than
that of Pindar. Horace likewise lived in an Age where his insolent Figures were
not permitted, and he could not say as Martial afterward did. Nobis non licet
esse tam disertis
Qui Musas colimus Severiores.
His Sentences are so frequent, and so strong and vigorous, and expressed in
terms so majestic, that it is impossible they should not touch to the quick;
and one may see by all that we have already said, that he had enriched his Mind
by all the fairest Lights he could get by the Lecture of good Books, or the
Conversation of Honorable Company which was the thing Pindar wanted.

His Satyrs and his Epistles are not of a Style so elevated as his Odes, but
on the contrary, he seems to have affected the abating and diminishing of its
force expressly. Extenuantis cas consulto. As if he purposely designed the
extenuating it, and thereby make his Verses appear sine nervis, less strong and
nervous.

In which the justness of his Judgment appears above all those who have
attempted to write Satyrs. For, in my Opinion, it is not they who speak great
Words, or make the most noise, that touch the nearest. I love an Author that
reasons and toys familiarly with us, and who, as Persius says of Horace, --
Admissus, circum praecordia ludit.
With sportive Art,
He tickles you about the Heart.
Upon which I cannot but wonder at the Judgment of Scaliger, who prefers
Iuvenal before him; Versus long meliores quam Horatiani, Sententiae acriores,
Phrasis apertior.
Whose Verses (says he) are much better than Horace 's, his Sentences more
sharp, and his Phrase more open.

Which I must needs refer to his chagrin Humor, who could not laugh at any
thing, and had been long accustomed to cry aloud, and speak injuriously. But
need I wonder that Scaliger should attack Horace? Scaliger, I say, who dared to
blame Euclid, and Archimedes, in whom he was confident he had found
Paralogisms, but with the Success, or rather Shame and Grief that all the World
knows. What he says elsewhere, Juvenalis ardet, Persius jugulat, Horatius
irridet, i. e. Iuvenal is fiery, Persius plays the Cutthroat, Horace mocks and
Laughs, is something of a better Sense; however an old Commentator upon Horace
has said, That the Satyr of Horace is a Mean between that of Lucilius, and
Iuvenal, Nam and asperitatem habet qualem Lucilius, and suavitatem qualem
Juvenalis, as having the Asperity of Lucilius, and the sweetness of Iuvenal.

I cannot but be troubled to find that the Authority of Scaliger has drawn
after him that of Lipsius. Who, after having declared that diverse Persons were
offended that Scaliger should prefer Iuvenal before Horace, says this, At ille,
me judice, inter multa certi and elegantis judicii, nihil verius protulit, i.
e. Among the many things he has delivered of a solid and exquisite Judgment,
there is nothing, in my Mind, he ever pronounced of greater Truth. And I am not
satisfied with the honorable Amends he elsewhere makes Horace, by saying, That
he is, Placidus, lenis, quietus, monet saepius quam castigat, sed ita praeclare
hoc ipsum, ut in ea part and art, nihil possit supra eum, i. e. Pleasant,
Gentle and agreeable, Admonishes oftener than Corrects; and this he does with so
much Art, and so Nobly, that nothing can be said to go beyond him.

For in my Opinion it is to judge after the Flemish or the Holland Fashion, of
the Delicateness, and Politeness of Manners, to say as he in another place
does, Hoc ipsum maxim Satyrae proprium videtur, tangit vitia, objurgat,
inclamat, raro jocos, saepius acerbos sales miscet, i. e. It seems the most
proper Character of a Satyr to strike at Vices, to chide and upbraid, to cry
out, seldom to joke, and oftener to intermix sharp and bitter Railleries.

It Is in these Satyrs Horace displays the best of that Learning he had
acquired by the Study of Philosophy: He is not pleased as Iuvenal, to put
himself into Passion incessantly, but contrarily Discovers Truths by Laughing.
-- Ridendo dicere verum
Quid Vetat? --
And takes off the Mask from Craft, Covetousness, Couzenage and Hypocrisy, by
his Reasonings which are always just, and issuing from a Spirit perfectly sound
and purified.

His Narrations there, are mavelous, his Descriptions fine and delicate. I
take a singular Pleasure in reading over and over the Treatment of Horace, and
that troublesome Fellow, in the 9th Satyr of his first Book. I can never be
tired with that Description of the Amorous Person, who consulted whether he
should return to his Mistress, who called him back, after she had thrust him
out of Doors? Which Horace has taken almost Word for Word from Terence his
Eunuchus, That of the Soldier of Lucullus, of Vulteius Mena, of the Sorceries
of Canidia in the Eighth Satyr of his first Book, are admirable. I speak not
of those little Stories so delicate and delightful, which he has taken from
Aesop's Fables, as that of the Stag and Horse, that of the Frogs, that of the
City and the Country Mouse, and a hundred other pr^tty Descriptions, which he
touches with an Air so gallant, and a turn so easy, that it is impossible to
look upon them without being extremely pleased. I should be forced to
Transcribe all his Works, should I undertake to report all the Places and
Passages that merit to b^ praised and commended.

It Is not yet but that the Critics find some thin^ to except against; and for
my self, I could say (if ^ might speak my Mind freely) that Horace has fallen
into that Excess which Longinus call (...) Fury out of Season, in those Verses
in his Art of Poetry where he says, Debemur morti nos, nostraque; sive receptus
Terra, Neptunus classes aquilonibus arcet,
Regis opus: Sterilisve diu palus aptaque remis,
Vicinas Vrbes alit est grave sentit aratrum.
Se cursum mutavit iniquum frugibus amnis,
Doctus iter melius. Mortalia facta peribunt.
Our selves and all our Works, are Death's Debt,
Whether the Sea into the Shore we let.
And for our Navy against the Northern Wind*
A Secure Port, a Kingly Work! We build,
Or drain a Sterrile Fenn, where Men late Rowed,
And make it cultivated, Food to yield
The Neighboring Towns; teach Tiber that o'reflow'd
The Tillers Toils, a better Course to find:
All Mortal Deeds shall perish and have end.


See the best Verses in the World, which speak of the greatest things that
humane Art or Power can undertake, viz. To make new Ports, to drain Marshes,
and turn the Course of great Rivers, which Horace calls Regis Opus, a Kingly
Work; and which the vast Expense, the great Care and Travail of Men intended to
have made Immortal; nevertheless all these by the common Fate of Things find an
end.

Will you not say that to answer the Comparison worthily of these Emphatical
Expressions, Horace should tell you of something extraordinary and surprising;
and yet this great Preparation ends at last in a Consolation only for the
Decease of some wretched Dictions, or Words departed out of the World of common
usage.

-- Cadentque
Quae nune sunt in honor vocabula --
Words that once graceful were, shall fall despised.
I cannot but further take notice of the passionate Transport some Learned
Critics of this latter Age, have against Horace upon the Subject of his
Judgment on the Verses and Railleries of Plautus, where he Writes,

At nostri proavi plautinos and numeros and
Laudavere sales: Nimium patienter utrumque
Ne dicam stulte mirati. Si modo ego and vos
Scimus inurbanum lepido seponere dicto
Ligitimumque sonum digitis callemus and aure.
De Art Poetica. Plautus his Numbers and his Jests, of old
Our Grandsires praised, and both admired (I Am Bold
To say it) too patiently, and fondly. Now,
Since you and I know to distinguish how
Scurrility, and Wit, differ; and can
A well turned Verse by the Ear, and Finger
Scann.
Hereupon Scaliger with his ordinary Emphasis cries out, Quis adeo est aversus a
Musis, ut lepore, and salibus Plauti and Laberii non tangatur? Horatii judicium
sine judicio est, i. e. Who can be so averse from the Muses, as not to be
touched with the Facetiousness and Jests of Plautus and Laberius? Horace his
Judgment is without Judgment.

Lipsius says no less, Neque praeter rem amare se dicit elegantes and Vrbanos
Plauti sales; nec Venusini illius aliter censentis versus unquam sine
indignatiuncula legere, i. e. Not without reason (says he) I love the Elegant
and Witty Urbanities of Plautus, nor can I ever read the Verses of that
Venusine, who judges otherwise, without some kind of Indignation.

Besides these, hear how mischievously pleasant Turnebus is upon the same
Subject, In hujus Plauti salibus aestimandis accedo potius sententiae veterum
ingenuorum Remanorum, quam Flacci Venusini Hominis, and Libertino Patre Nati,
i. e. As to the Estimation of Plautus his Jests, and witty Railleries, I rather
adhere to the Opinion of the Ancient Ingenuous Romans, than to the Censure of
that Venusine Flaccus, the Son of a Freedman. As much as to say, That Horace
did not well enough understand the Latin Tongue, because he was not Born at
Rome, but the Son of a Libertine.

But the Learned Heinsius is of another Judgment, who speaking of Horace says,
Ejus vernae melius de Plauto judicabant, quam qui nunc familiam in literis
tuer^ hac aetate creduntur: Et qui nec saeculi quo vixit, and quo, cum Poesis
tum Latina Lingua ad supremum culmen ac fastigium evecta fuit, ignorare potuit
judicium, vir tantus, and quod rei caput arbitror Principibus qui inter se
quotidie de iis judicabant, intime familiaris and amicus, i. e. His Slaves were
able to judge better of Plautus, than they who at this Day are accounted the
Patrons of Learning. So knowing a Person could not be ignorant of the Judgment
of the Age he had lived in, wherein both the Latin Poesy and Language were at
the height, and (which I take to be an Argument above all) familiarly
conversant with Princes, who were daily discussing that point with him as their
Friend.

There is another who says, Horace spoke not of Plautus but out of Envy; it is
Ianus Parrhasius, ingenio Plautus fuit perurbano, and maxim festivo, quod non
absque suspicione livoris elevatus ab Horatio.

What is it then that could compel Horace to speak so disadvantageously of
Plautus? Plautus (say I) who has been so commended by the Ancients; and in whom
we find so many handsome, and agreeable things. Proficiscine id potuit (says
Petrus Victorius) a judicio depravato? Quod amissus magna ex part tunc foret
lepos la^ini Sermonis, a^ puritas illa venustasque inquinala, i. e. Could this
proceed from a depraved Judgment? Or that the Delicacy of the Latin Tongue,
its Purity and Gracefulness was contaminated?

I am unwilling to say so; for that were to do an injury to the Reputation of
an Age, which was every way the most Gallant, the most Polite, and the most
Illuminated of all that preceded, or since succeed it.

Nor shall I attribute the Cause to the different Humors of these two Poets,
as Famianus Strada has done, Cum alter garrulus and facetus, alter iracundus
foret and taciturnus, as if one were Jovial and Facetious, the other Chagreen
and Silent, since we have reason rather to call Horace the Father of all
pleasant Gallantry, for the in^inite number of agreeable Gentilesses, which are
to be met with in his Poems, whence Augustus was used to call him his Pleasant
little Man.

There is more reason therefore to attribute that Judgment of Horace to the
Gusto of that Age, which was an Enemy to all unhandsome Buffoonery. For as the
same Strada says, Decorum Horatiani saeculi, a liberiori ac populari genere
joculandi abhorrebat.

And really there is no appearance that Horace had an intent directly to blame
Plautus an Author so celebrated, if all the Ingenious Men of those Days were of
a different Opinion. He had a Wit too fine and discerning, to advance a
Proposition so hardy, had he not known it would have been received with
Approbation.

And it is no wonder if Wits accustomed to those delicate Lyrick Cadences, of
Sappho, Alcman, Alcaeus, Stesichorus, and other Greek Poets, whom Horace has
so happily imitated in his own Tongue, should not find in the ill-concerted
measures of Plautus his Verses, that Gusto and that sweetness which their
Ancestors were taken with; for that in their Times, they had not met with any
more just. It is not strange, I say, that under an Emperor, (and he a Learned
one) Men should take no more Pleasure in hearing the impertinent Turns, the
labored Points, and insipid Railleries, which charmed the ordinary Vulgar in a
Democratical State, which nevertheless in Plautus his Days had some show of
Novelty.

It was not perhaps necessary I should have made so long a Digression in
defense of Horace his Reputation, that was too well established in his own
Times, when even the Ignorant could better judge of his Works, than the most
learned Critics of these Days.

In fine Horace had this Advantage in his Life time, as to enjoy the Fame of
the present, and not fear the Judgment of future Times, and was not (as
Famianus Strada said of Alexander Farnese) one of those Illustrious
Unfortunate, who needed to die to avow their Merit, which Envy had debased
during their Lives.

And this high Reputation which has lasted till now through so many Ages past,
will yet continue, not only as he says, -- Dum Capitolium
Scandet cum tacita Virgin Pontifex.
But as long as there are People who shall understand the Latin Tongue; or
shall have a Gusto or Relish of what is excellent.

This is, my Lord! What I had to say touching Pindar and Horace. Pindar has
some things more surprising than Horace, and comes nearer, as we may say, to
what is Divine. His Works have a Natural Liberty. It seems the only force of
his Genius has produced them without the aid of any Foreign Succor; as he
himself Glories while he says, (...).
He Is Wise, whom Nature has much knowing made.
And he speaks but undervaluingly of those who are forced to be taught by
others. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
They who are taught to learn a Babbling Trade
Like Crows, with their ha^sh Croaks, vainly invade
Jove's Divine Bird.
Which makes his Character appear extremely glittering and highly elevated. For
as (...), S. 2.
Longinus Writes, (...)
(...).
The Sublime ought to be born with us, and is not to be learnt.


But for Horace, he has a larger extent of Knowledge than Pindar, more
Equalness, more Sweetness, and Jovialness, and much fewer Defects. His Thoughts
likewise are very noble, and his Diction much more correct and pure.

He is like Pindar Bold, and adventurous in his Expressions, and many times
much more happy. This Quality is one of the most resplendent in Horace, whom
for that reason Quinctilian calls foelicissime Audac^m, Most happily daring:
And is that which by Petronius is styled Horatii curiosa Foelicitas, Horace his
curious Felicity.

In fine, my Lord! Besides all the Qualities necessary to Poets and Orators,
there is a certain happy hardiness of Expression, without which (as one may
say) Discourse has neither Life nor Soul. It Is that which Enchants the Reader,
and there is nothing but Nature can give it.

But who, my Lord! can better know this than your self? Who have it as a
constant Companion, even in your familiar Entertainments, and are notless happy
in your Expressions, than just in your Thoughts.

But this is not a place to undertake your Elogies; and it is too long that I
have abused your Honorable Patience by thus entertaining you. Without further
wearying you by a recital of your own Praises, it is enough for me to let you
see by my Obedience to your Commands, what I have been able to do in making
this Parallel of Pindar and Horace, and to show with how much Zeal, dutiful
Respect, and Submission, I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant. B.

FINIS.
OMISSA. The following Notes are inserted, for the better explaining of some,
either not fully, or doubtfully Expressed in the foregoing Treatise.
PAGE 1. Pindar Lived more than 450 Years before Horace.
TO make this out, it will be requisite to hear what other Authors say touching
this Matter. Suidas reports, That he flourished in the 65th. Olympiad. Others,
as Lilius Gyraldus in his 9th. Dialogue de Poetis, and Gerardus Vossius de
Poetis Graecis, c. 4. conceive him rather to have flourished in the 75th.
Olympiad, at which time Xerxes made his memorable Descent into Greece, Pindar
being then (as Suidas testifies) about 40 Years of Age. So that Gyraldus and
Vossius, with fair probability conjecture what Suidas delivers of his
flourishing in the 65th. Olympiad, ought rather to be taken for the Time of his
Birth, which reconciles the two different Computations. And this is approved by
Petavius in his Doctrina Temporum, Part the 2d. Page 562. where, against the
65th. Olympiad he notes Pindarus nascitur, and is followed by Helvicus. The
great Emendator of Times, Joseph Scaliger, in his Eusebian Animadversions,
concludes from the Supposition of his being 40 Years of Age in the 75th
Olympiad, that he was born in the 1st. Year of the 67th. Olympiad, that is in
the Year of Iphitus (the Restaurator of the Olympic Games after Hercules) 257.
and in that of the World 3465. and this is all the certainty we can meet with
as to his Birth. But Julius Firmicus might have cleared this Matter, had he set
down the Day and Year, as well as the Configurations of the Signs and Planets,
in that Scheme of his Nativity he has left us, wherein is represented Saturn
in the 9th. House, in the Sign Gemini. Mercury, Venus and Mars in Partile
Congress in his Horoscope, under the Sign Libra, Jupiter diametrically
respecting the same in the Sign Aries, and the Sun in the 2d. House under the
Sign Scorpio. Which Geniture, to use Firmicus his Words, Divinum Poetam Lyrici
Carminis reddit, qui Choreas Libero and Rythmos, sed and rara Religiosi
Carminis modulatione componat, i. e. Renders a Divine Lyrick Poet, who makes
Dances and Rhimes to Bacchus, but with a rare Modulation of Religious Verse.
Gyraldus yet refers this, In ejus potius Studium and Naturae Corporis Habitum,
quam in Astrorum Coitiones Motusque Ibid. ut supra.

PAGE 3. Pindar was of Thebes.
THOUGH he be here said to be of Thebes, the place of his Birth is yet
controverted; for Stephanus de Vrbibus, affirms he was Born in a small Village
called, Cynocephalus, within the Theban Territories, which his Scholiasts
likewise confirm. Nevertheless, he may well be said to be of Thebes, as being
born within its Dominions. As Virgil though born at Andes, a small Town not far
from Mantua, is called the Mantuan Poet; and with as much Justice may Pindar be
called the Theban Poet, having in Thebes fixed his Habitation and Family.

PAGE 3. Horace was Native of Venusium:
THIS shows where Horace was born, but not when, which the Reader may expect to
be as well satisfied in. He was Born the 6th. of the Ides of December, L.
Aurelius Cotta, and L. Manlius Torquatus being Consuls, as Suetonius in his
Life testifies, and is asserted by Eusebius in the last Book of his Chronicon
ad Numerum MCCCCLII. which was in the Year from the Building of Rome 698. in
that of the World, 3919. and in the 178th, Olympiad, by which it may easily
appear how much Pindar was his Devancier.

PAGE 6. He d'welt at Thebes near the Temple of the Mother of the Gods.
THE Ruins of this House, and the adjoining Temple, were remaining to be seen
in Pausanias his Time, who wrote his Description of the Grecian Antiquities, in
the Days of Hadrian the Roman Emperor. Vide illum in Boeolicis.

PAGE 6. He built a Chapel, and dedicated a Statue to Jupiter Hammon.
PAusanias adds, that besides the Chapel and Statue he dedicated to Jupiter
Hammon in Thebes, he wrote a Hymn in Honor of that God, which Hymn he further
says, was extant in his Time, being ingrav'd in a Triangular Pile affixed to
the Altar, which Ptolemaeus the Son of Lagus had dedicated to that God. He
wrote likewise and sent other Hymns in praise of the said Jupiter Hammon into
Libya, to be there consecrated in the Temple of the Ammonians, in Boeoticis, p.
565.

PAGE 35. Pindar Died in the Arms of his Beloved Theoxenus.
THE Manner of his Death is thus expressed by Valerius Maximus in his 9th.
Book, c. 12. Pindar (says he) going one Day to the Theater or Gymnasium to see
some Sports or Exercises; ^inding himself heavy as with Sleep, leaned his Head
in the Bosom of his Dear Theoxenus, and so Died, but not known to be Dead, till
the Keeper of the Gymnasium coming to lock up the Place, could not rouse him.
Adding, That so sweet a Death, and so pleasant an End of Life he believed was
granted by the Benignity of the Gods to so Excellent and Elegant a Poet. The
Time of his Death is much controverted; for Suidas, says, he Died in the 55th.
Year of his Age, in the 3d. Year of the 78th. Olympiad. Others report he Died
not till the 80th. Year of his Age, which sell to be in the 85th. Olympiad. But
Scaliger in his Eusebian Animadversions takes notice that in the 7th. Ode of
his Isthmioniques, he makes mention of Strepsiades, who was in the
Peloponnesian War, which begun (says he) in the 88th. Olympiad. So that
reckoning either way, he can neither be said to have Died in the 55th, or the
80th. Year of his Age. Notwithstanding this uncertainty of the Time of his
Death among the Ancients, Omnino Necesse est (says Scaliger) in magna Senectute
Diem Supremum obivisse. It is altogether necessary to believe he departed this
Life in a very Old Age. However and whenever he Died, he was honorably
Buried in the City of Thebes, a Monument being erected for him in the
Hippodrome there, which was standing in Pausanias his Time.

PAGE 41. The Athenians paid publicly a Fine or Mulct set upon Pindar.
THEY not only paid that Fine set upon him by his Countrymen, but as Pausanias
in Atticis witnesses, had so great an Esteem for him, that they made him
several rich Presents, and ordered a Statue to be erected for him in their
City. Upon which, the Learned Muretus in his 4th. Book of Various Lections, c.
1. adds, from a certain Epistle of the Orator Aeschines, that they sent him
double the Sum of the Fine set upon him, and caused a Brazen Statue to be cast
to perpetuate his Memory, which Statue was seen in Aeschines his Time placed
before the Regal Portico in Athens, Pindar sitting in a Chair in his Pallium, a
Diadem on his Head, holding a Lyra in his Hands, and a Book lying open upon his
Knees.

PAGE 52. Seu per Audaces nova Dithyrambos Verba devolvit, etc.
THIS Citation taken out of the Ode whose beginning is, Pindarum siquis studet
aemulari, was here meant, and doubtlesly intentionally first writ by Horace in
Applause of Pindar. I find yet a Learned, but Sour Critic, Erasmus Schmidius
in the Preface to his Edition of Pindar (by which Work he has very highly
merited) to be of another Opinion, for speaking of his own Pains in
dilucidating and making easy the seeming Difficulties appearing in the
Pindarick Odes; he says, a Reader, by them may not only be taught to
understand, but (with the Assistance of a very indifferent Muse) imitate him.
Quod ^nvidus Horatius (they are his own words) ut Lectores ab elegantiss^mo
Poeta deterreret, ne furta sua forte deprehenderent, hyperbolice negat. i. e.
Which Envious Horace, that he might deterr his Readers from the Lecture of so
Elegant a Poet, lest happily they should discover his Thefts, hyperbolically
denies. But let impartial Critics determine of the Equity of the Censure.

PAGE 35.
AS the Time of Horace his Birth has by the Author of this Piece been omitted,
so likewise has he past by that of his Death. This the Reader may understand,
according to the Testimony of Suetonius in his Life, happened upon the 5th. of
the Calends of December, Caius Marcius Censorinus, and Caius Asinius Gallus
being Consuls, in the 59th. Year of his Age, and from the Foundation of Rome
746 Years; and of the World the 3976th Year, Ten Years before the Birth of our
Savior, having declared Augustus Caesar his Heir, and was Buried in the
Esquilian Gardens, in a Monument close adjoining to the Sepulcher of Maecenas
his sometime Illustrious Patron.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Folio's.
THucydides, Greek and Latin, Collated with five entire MSS. Copies, and all
the Editions extant; also illustrated with Maps, large Annotations, and
Indexes, by the Editor I. Hudson, M. A. and Fellow of University College in
Oxford. To which is added an exact Chronology of the said History by the
Learned Henry Dodwel. Printed at the Theater in Oxford.

Athenae Oxonienses: Or an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford, from about 1480 to the
end of 1690, giving an Account of the Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death of
all those Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives, with the
fate and character of their Writings. The Work is so complete, that no Writer
of Note of this Nation, for ^00 Years is omitted; in two Volumes.

A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam; by Monsieur de la Loubere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam; in 1687. and
1688, wherein a full and curious account is given of their Natural History, as
also of their Music, Arithmetic, and other Mathematick Learning; in two
Tomes, illustrated with Sculptures. Done out of French by A. P. Fellow of the
Royal Society.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, the 8th Edition. To which is added the Cutter
of Coleman-street, never before Printed in any Edition of his Works.

Sir Robert Howard's five Plays, viz. The Indian Queen, the Commit, the Duke
of Lerma, the Surprizal, and the Vestal Virgin.

Mr. T. Killigrew's Comedies and Tragedies.

Dr. Pocock's Commentaries on Hosea, Micah, Malachy, and Joel.

M^lebranch's Treatise concerning the Search after Truth; the whole Work
complete: To which is added his Treatise of Nature and Grace, being a
consequence of the Author's Principles contained in the Search; together with
F. Male-branch's Defenses against Mr. de la Ville, and several other
Adversaries. All Englished by T. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen-College in Oxford,
and Printed there.

Quarto's.
A Critical History of the Texts and Versions of the New Testament, in two
parts, by F. Simon of the Oratory.

The Works of the Learned: Or* an Historical Account, and impartial Judgment of
Books newly printed, both foreign and domestic, together with the state of
Learning in the World, by I. de la Crose, Author of the Universal Bibliotheque.
One Volume is finished with complete Indexes.

A Sermon before the King and Queen by the Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Bishop of Chester's Charge to his Clergy, at his Primary Visitation, May
5. 1691.

-- His Sermon before the King and Queen.

Two Sermons; one on a Thanksgiving before the House of Commons, in November.
1691; the other before the Queen, in November. 1692, by Dr. Jane, Dean of
Gloucester.

Two Sermons; one on a Thanksgiving, the other before the King and Queen, by
Dr. Talbot, Dean of Worcester.

Three Sermons before the Queen, by Dr. Resbury.

Four Sermons on several occasions, by Mr. Fr. Atterbury, Chaplain to his
Majesty.

A Discourse sent to the late King James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion, by Sam. Parker, late Bishop of Oxon; to which are prefixed
two Letters; the first from Sir Lionel Ienkins, on the same subject; the second
from the said Bishop; all printed from the Original MSS.

A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England, by Mr. Luke Milburn.

The first Book of Virgil's Aeneis made English, by Mr. Luke Milburn.

Four Dialogues against Mr. Dryden, etc. written by Mr. Thomas Brown.

An Account of the Proceedings of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Exeter
in his Visitation of Exeter College in Oxon, the second Edition, to which is
added the Censure of the Naked Gospel.

A Defense of the said Proceedings, with an Answer to the Case of Exeter
College, and The Account Examined.

A Vindication of Mr. James Colman, M. B. Fellow of Exeter-College, from the
Calumnies of several late Pamphlets; to which are annexed the Authentic Copies
of the Affidavits relating to that Assize. These three last written by James
Harrington, Esquire

Popish Treachery: Or, a short and new Account of the horrid Cruelties
exercised on the Protestants in France; being a true prospect of what is to be
expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes.

Certain Considerations for the better Establishment of the Church of England,
by the Lord Bacon; with a new Preface, by James Harrington, Esquire

A Letter to a Lord, in Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled, An Enquiry into
the Causes of the present fears and dangers of the Government; in a Discourse
between a Lord Lieutenant and one of his Deputies.

A Sermon at the Funeral of John Melford, Esquire by Mr. Easton.

A practical Discourse concerning Divine Providence in relation to national
Judgments.

A Defense of the Church of England from the Charge of Sin and Heresy, as laid
against it by the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops.

The Indecency and Unlawfulness of Baptizing Children in private without
necessity, and with the public form, by Martin Strong, M.A. and Vicar of
Yeovil in Somerset.

Mr. Adams's Sermon before the Lords Justices, at White Hall, upon the
Thanksgiving for taking of Namur.

Mr. Blackburn's Sermon of Anger, before the Queen.

The foolish abuse, and wise use of Riches. A Sermon Preached May 1. 1695. by
W. Talbot, D.D. Dean of Worcester.

Octavo's and Twelves.
TWenty four Sermons upon several occasions, in two Volumes, by Dr. R. South.
Sermons and Discourses on several occasions, by Dr. Stradling, Dean of
Chichester, together with an Account of the Author, by James Harrington, Esquire

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, translated
out of Greek into English, by Dr. Causabon, with Notes. To this Edition is
added the Life of the said Emperor, with an account of Stoic Philosophy; as
also Remarks on the Meditations. All newly written by the famous Monsieur and
Madam Dacier.

Sermons and Discourses on several occasions, by Dr. Meggot, Dean of Winchester.

Walier's Poems complete.

The Faithful Shepherd, with an addition of diverse other Poems; the second
Edition by the Right Honorable Sir Richard Fanshaw.

The History of Henry IV. surnamed the Great, written in French by the Bishop
o^ Rhodes.

Memoirs of the Court of Spain, written by the ingenious French Lady, englished
by Mr. Tho. Brown.

Memoirs of the Court of France, by the same Author.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God, pathetically discoursed o^ in
a Letter to a Friend, by the honorable R. Boil; the seventh Edition.

Dr. Bu^by's Greek Grammar.

Academy of Sciences, being a short and ^asie introduction to the knowledge of
the Liberal Arts and Sciences, with the Names of such Authors of Not^, as have
written on every particular Science, by D. Abercromby, M.D.

The Life of that most illustrious Prince Chapter V. late Duke of Lorrain and Bar,
Generalissimo of the Imperial Armies, written in French originally, and made
English.

The Morals of Confusius, a Chinese Philosopher, who flourished above 500 Years
before the coming of Christ.

The Art of practical measuring, easily performed by a two Foot Rule, which
slides to a Foot, and is the best measure of round Timber the common way; as
also the true measure of round, square, or other Timber, of Stone, Boards,
Glass, Paving, Painting, etc. Gauging of Casks, and Gauging and Inching of
Tuns; containing brief instructions in Decimal Arithmetic, the best way of
using the Logarithms according to Mr. Townley; the use of the Diagonal Scale of
100 parts in a quarter of an Inch, applied to Gunter's Chain: And lastly, some
useful Directions in Dyalling, not hitherto published, by Hen. Coggeshal of
Suffolk, Gent.

A Voyage to the World of Des Carts, written originally in French, transl^ted
by T. Tailor, M. A. of Magdalen-College, Oxon.

A Letter to a Divine of the Church of England, concerning the composing and
delivery of Sermons.

Monsieur Rapin's Re^lections upon Aristotle's Poetry, containing the
necessary, rational, and universal Rules for Epick, Dramatick, and the other
sorts of Poetry; with Reflections on the Works of the Ancient and Modern Poets,
and their Faults noted, transla^ed by Mr. Rymer; by whom is added some
Reflections on the Poets of the English Nation.

The Inspiration of the New Testament asserted and explained, in answer to some
Modern Writers, by C. G. Lamothe.

Bona's Guide to Eternity, Englished by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Life of the Emperor Theodosius, written in French for the use of the Dauphin,
Englished by Mr. Manning.

Love Letters between a Nobleman and his Sister, three parts.

New Memoirs and Characters of the 2 great Brothers, the Duke of Bouillon, and
Marshall Turenne; written in French, by James de Longlade, Baron of Saumiers;
made English.

Arist. Hist. LXXII. Interpr. Accessere Veterum Testimonia de conversione. E
Theatro Sheldoniano.

Homeri Iliados liber primus, in qua singularum vocum significationes,
compositiones ac derivationes annotantur; dialecti clare and distinct
exponuntur, etc. Opera and Studio Georg. Sylvani Pan, Med. Editio secunda.

Newly Printed.
MOnsieur Bossu's Treatise of the Epick Poem, containing many curious
Re^lections, very useful and necessary for the right understanding and judging
of the Excellency of Homer and Virgil, done into English from the French,
together with Reflections upon Prince Arthur, by W. I. To which are added an
Essa^ upon Satyr, by Monsieur d' Acier; and a Treatise upon Pastoral Poetry, by
Monsieur Fontarel.

The Art of Speaking, written in French by the Messieurs de Port Royal, made
English.

Remarks on some late Writings of the English Socinians, in four Letters, done
at the Request of a Socinian Gentleman.

Tritheism charged upon Dr. Sherlock's new Notion of the Trinity, and the
Charge made good, in an answer to the Defense of the said Notion, against The
Animad versions upon Dr. Sherlock 's Book, entitled, A Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, etc. by a Divine of the Church
of England, Author of the Animadversions, 4to.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces, to which is added the Life of his
present Majesty King William III. from his Birth to his Landing in England, by
Mr. Tho. Brown; together with all the Princes Heads taken from Original
Draughts, by Mr. Rob. White.

De Fermento Volatili Nutritio conjectura Rationalis. Qua ostenditur Spiritum
Volatilem Oleosum, e Sanguine suffusum, esse verum ac genuinum Concoctionis ac
Nutritionis Instrumentum, cum medicamentorum plurimorum Stomachicorum, a Viris
celeberrimis praescriptorum, Examinatione and Vsu. Authore Guil. Coward, M. D.
and Col. Mert. Oxon. Socio.

Animadversions upon a pretended account of Denmark.

Plays, by Mr. Dryden.
COnquest of Granada. Tyrannick Love. State of Innocence. All for Love.
Assignation. Indian Emperor. Wild Gallant. Rival Ladies. Aurenge Zebe.
By Others.
SHE would if she could. Hamlet Prince of Denmark. Mackbeth. Epsom-Wells.
Emperor of the Moon. Rape, or the Innocent Impostors. Sir Foplin Flutter.
Villain. Tempest, or the Enchanted Island. Herod the Great, written by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Orrery.
FINIS.

