Janua Scientiarum: OR, A COMPENDIOUS INTRODUCTION TO Geography, Chronology,
Government, History, Philosophy,
And all Genteel sorts of LITERATURE

By CHARLES BLOUNT Gent.

-- Brevis esse Laboro. Printed by Nath. Thompson at the Entrance into the
Old-Spring-Garden near Charing Cross, MDCLXXXIV.

To His GRACE, Charles Lenox, DUKE of RICHMOND, EARL of MARCH, BARON of
SHEDRINGTON, Master of the Horse TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty, And Knight of the
most Noble Order of the GARTER.

This Piece is most humbly Dedicated by the Author, CHARLES BLOUNT.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 5. read Corcica, p. 2. l. 9. r. Stephanus, p. 31. l. 16. after
Luxury put the, p. 32. l. 3. r. Astyages, p. 40. l. 16. r. Antoninus, p. 42. l.
16. r. Constantinus, p. 43. l. 5. r. Heruli, p. 45. l. 16. r. Lygdanus, p. 61.
l. 21. r. Antoninus Pius, p. 61. l. 22. r. Aurelius Antoninus, p. 62. l. 19. r.
Scythia, p. 63. l. 4. after whom r. he, p. 64. l. 6. r. Antoninus, p. 66. l.
11. after rather r. a, p. 70. l. 17. r. Arnuphis, p. 75. l. 8. for Vices r.
Virtues, p. 77. l. 9. r. passages, p. 79. l. 20 for it r. them. p. 80. l. 6.
for Porsona r. Porsenna, p. 80. l. 22. r. agreeably, p. 95. l. 15. after
attribute r. to, p. 103. l. 6. r. Senecaes, p. 104. l. 6. r. of the Cimbri, p.
105. l. 2. r. Pieces, p. 108. l. 2. r. Antoninus, p. 108. l. 14. for one of r.
one and, p. 112. l. 7. r. Eclipses, p. 117. l. 18. r. Wat Tylor, p. 126. l. 13.
r. Petronius, p. 135. l. 19. r. quasi; in the great sheet Saesar for Caesar.
For these and what other faults occur; the Author entreats the Generous
Reader to impute them to his remote Abode from the Press.

BOOKS Printed and Sold by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the
Old-Spring-Garden near Charing Cross.
A Narrative of the Phanatical Plot, setting forth the Treasonable and Wicked
Designs which they have been carrying on against King and Government ever since
the last Westminster Parliament. With an Account of the Treacherous
Contrivances against several Worthy Persons, and the Measures which they used
to take off the Kings-Evidence by Subornation. To which is added, A Relation of
the Evil Practices of John Rowse (who was lately Executed at Tyburn,) William
Lewis, (who stands Convicted,) and others. By John Zeal Gent. Price 1 s.

A Vindication of the Lord Russel's Speech and Innocence; In a Dialogue betwixt
Whig and Tory: Being the same that was Promised to the Observator in a
Penny-Post-Letter. Price 4 d.

Stafford's Memoirs: Or, a Brief and Impartial Account of the Birth and
Quality, Imprisonment, Trial and Principles, Declaration, Comportment,
Devotion; Last Speech and Final End of WILLIAM late Lord Viscount STAFFORD,
Beheaded on Tower Hill Wednesday the 29th. of December 1680. Whereunto is
annexed a short Appendix concerning some Passages in Stephen Colleges Trial at
Oxford. Price Bound 1 s. 6. d.

The Lawyer Out-lawed; Or a Brief Answer to Mr. Hunt's Defense of the Charter.
With some Useful Remarks on the Commons Proceedings in the last Parliament at
Westminster, In a Letter to Friend. Price 6 d.

Oates's Manifesto; or the Complaint of TITUS OATS against the Doctor of
Salamanca: And the same DOCTOR against TITUS OATS; Comprised in a Dialogue
between the said Parties, on occasion of some Inconsistent Evidence given about
the Horrid and Damnable POPISH PLOT. Price 6 d.

A LETTER to Mr. Elkana Settle, occasioned upon his Famous Recanting and
Plot-Ridiculing Narrative. Price 4 d.

Some Brief Remarks on the Debates of the House of Commons in the last
Parliament at Oxford, etc. Price 6 d.

The Badger in the Fox-Trap, or a Satyr upon Satyr; An Excellent new Satyr.
price 6 d.

The Arraignment of Co-Ordinate-Power; wherein all Arbitrary-proceedings are
laid open to all Honest Abhorrers and Addressers: with a Touch at the London
Petition and Charter, etc. very useful for all Lawyers and Gentlemen. Price 1 s.

An Answer to a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, A Character of a Popish
Successor, and what England may expect from such a One. Price 6 d.

The GENEALOGIES of the Highborn Prince and Princess, GEORGE and ANNE, of
Denmark, etc. Showing the Lineal Descent of these two Noble and Illustrious
Families: with Their Matches, Issue, Times of Death, Place of Sepulcher,
Impresses, Devices, etc. From the Year of Grace M. to this present Year 1683.
Extracted from the most Authentic Testimonies of the best Historians and
Antiquaries of Their times. Price bound 1 s.

Anima Mundi: Or, An Historical Narration of the Opinions of the Ancients
concerning Man's Soul after this Life; according to Un-enlightned Nature.

Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Or, the Original of Idolatry; Together with
the Politic Institution of the Gentiles Sacrifices. Both Bound together, price
1 s. 6 d. Both written by C. Blount Gent.

Kings of The first ASSYRIAN or BABYLONISH MONARCHY. (which began Ano. M. 1788
and lasted 1646 years) were NIMROD. Belus Ninus or Ashur Semiramis Ninias
Arius and others we known till Sardanapalus After whom ye Empire was divided by
Rebellion Ano. M. 3148 between MEDIA
Arbaces Mandanes Sosarmus Articas Cardicias Deioces Phraortes Cyaxares Asty
ages by Succession
BABYLON
Belesus Tiglah-Pelesar Salmanasar Senacherib Assarhaddon Merodach-Baladan
Nebuchadnezzar Evil Merodack Belshazar. by Conquest


Kings of the second or PERSIAN MONARCHY, (which began Ano. M. 3434 and lasted,
228 years) were CYRUS Cambyses Darius Hystaspes Xerxes Artaxerxes Longimanus
Darius Nothus Artaxerxes Mnemon Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames Darius Codomannus
Overcome by

The first King of the third GRECIAN or MACEDONIAN MONARCHY, ( which. began Ano.
M. 3642 and lasted 300 years) were ALEXANDER THE GREAT. Who dying without sons
after him the Empire was divided into these four parts.
MACEDON
^ridaeus Brother of Alex: M. Cassander Phillippus Antipater Demetrius
Poliorcetes Pyrrhus King of Epirus Lysimachus Ptolomaeus Ceraunus Meleager
Anti-pater the 2 d. Sosthenes Antigonus Gonatus Demetrius the 2 d. Antigonus
Doson Phillipus the 2 d. Perseus who being Overcome By Paulys Emylius ye Roman
Consul, Macedon was herby reduced into a Province Under the ROMANS: Who Ano: M:
3924 began
ASIA MINOR
1 Antigonus Phil: of Macadons. Bastard 2 Demetrius Poliorcetes Who being
expelled by his Son in Law Seleucus Nicanor. Asia was thereupon A next to
Syria, and by consequence fell, Jointly with Syria under ye Dominion of The
ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began
SYRIA
1 Seleucus Nicanor 2 Antiochus Soter 3 Antiochus Theos 4 Seleuchus Callinachus
5 Seleuchus Ceraunus 6 Antiochus Magnus 7 Seleucus Philopater 8 Antiochus
Epiphanes 9 Antiochus Eupater 10 Demetrius Soter 11 Alexander Bala 12 Demetrius
Nicanor 13 Antiochus Entheus 14 Tryphon 15 Antiochus Sidetes 16 Demetrius
Nicanor, redux 17 Alexander Zebenna 18 Antiochus Grypus 19 Tygranes who being
subdued by Pompey, Syria after that became a Province. Under the ROMANS: Who
Ano: M: 3924 began
EGYPT
1 Ptolomeus lagus Phil: Bastard of Mace^ 2 Ptolom: Philadelphus 3 Ptolom:
Evargetes 4 Ptol: Philopater 5 Ptol: Epiphanes 6 Ptolo: Philometor 7 Ptolo:
Physcon 8 Ptolom: Lamyrus 9 Ptolom: Alexander 10 Ptol: Lamyrus redux 11 Ptol:
Auletes 12 Ptolom Dijonisius 13 Cleopatra ( Daughter of Ptolom: Auletes) who
was not only ye Beloved Mistress of Julius Saesar, but also of Mark Anthony,
whose Over throw at Actium made her in despair throw away her Life by ye Biting
of an Asp and by her Death Egypt was also reduced into a Province Under the
ROMANS: Who Ano: M: 3924 began


first Period of ye fourth MONARCHY, or ROMAN EMPIRE (which. reached to
Constantine ye Great, and lasted 355 years) under 1. JULIUS CAESAR 2 Augustus
3 Tiberius 4 Caligula 5 Claudius 6 Nero 7 Galba 8 Otho 9 Vitellius 10 Flavius
Vespasian 11 Tytus Vespasian 12 Domitian 13 Nerva 14 Trajanus 15 Adrianus 16
Antoninus Pius 17 Antoninus Phylosophus 18 Commodus 19 Pertinax 20 Didius
Julianus 21 Septimius Severus 22 Carracalla 23 Macrinus 24 Heliogabalus 25
Alexand: Severus 26 Maximinus Thrax 27 Balbinus, and Puppienus 28 Gordianus 29
Phillippus Arabs 30 Decius 31 Tribonianus Gallus 32 Valerian 33 Galienus 34
Claudius Secundus 35 Aurelianus 36 Tacitus 37 Probus 38 Carus 39 Dyoclesian and
40 Constantius Chlorus, The Father of Constantine the Great, Who Removing ye
Seat of ye Empire from Rome to Byzantium in Greece, did there after his one
Name Erect Constantinople, where (as Historians reckon) began (A. Chapter 306) ye
Empire of the East.


LIB. I. OF GEOGRAPHY.
Qu. WHat is Geography?

Ans. It is the description of the Globe of the Earth; and differs from
Topography, (which is the description of particular places) as the whole
differs from a part.

Qu. Into how many parts is the Earth divided?

Ans. Into four; Europe, Asia, Africa, and America both North and South.


Qu. Which are the chief Countries of Europe?

Ans. Europe may be divided into these three parts:

I. on the Continent, Scandinavia, which comprehends Sweden, Denmark, and
Norway; Muscovy, or Russia, France, Germany, Poland, Spain, Italy, and part of
Turkey.


II. The British-Isles; as, England, Scotland, and Ireland.

III. Isles on the Mediterranean; as, Sardinia, Candia, Sicily, Corcia,
Majorca, and Minorca.


Qu. Which are the chief Countries of Asia?

Ans. Asia may be divided also into three parts; as,

I. On the Continent, part of Turkey, Georgia, Arabia, Persia, India, or Moguls
Country, China, and Tartaria.


II. Isles on the Ocean; as, Maldivies, Ceylan, Sunda, Molucques, Philippines,
and Japan.


III. Isles on the Mediterranean; as, Cyprus, Rhodes, Scio, and Metelin.


Qu. Which are the chief Countries of Africa?

Ans. Africa in like manner may be divided into three parts; as,

I. On the Continent, Barbary, Egypt, Biledulgerid, Zaara, Country of
Negroes, Guiney, Nubia, Abissinea, or Aethiopia, Zanguebar, Congo, Monomotapa,
Caffares.


II. Isles on the Ocean; as, Madera, Canaries, Cape Verde, St. Thomas, St.
Helena, Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, and Zocotora.


III. an Isle on the Mediterranean-Sea, called Malta.

Qu. Which are the chief Countries of America?

Ans. Which America do you mean? for it is usually divided into North and South.

Qu. Which then are the chief parts of the Northern America?

Ans. The Northern America may likewise be divided into three parts; as, I. On
the Continent, the Arctickland, New north Wales New south Wales New Britain,
Canada, New France, New Scotland, New England, New York, New Jersey, or
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Florida, Mexico, or New Spain, New
Mexico, Land of Jesso, and Anian.


II. Isles on the North Sea; as, New Foundland, and the Antilles, which
comprehend Jamaica, together with all the Lucaif and Caribbe-Isles.

III. an Island in the South Sea, named California.

Qu. Which are the chief parts of the Southern America?

Ans. The Southern America (excepting one Island, called Magellanick) is all a
Continent, having in it these several Countries, viz. the firm Land, Magellan,
Peru, Amazones, Chili, Brasil, and Paraquay.


Qu. What is a Continent?

Ans. A Continent is one great parcel of Land, wherein are many Countries
joined together, without being separated by the Sea.

Qu. What is an Island?

Ans. An Island is any part of Earth encompassed round with Water; as, Great
Britain and Ireland.

Qu. Of what extent or circumference is the Earth judged to be?

Ans. Geographers divide the Globe into 360 parts or degrees; So that reckoning
each Degree to be 73 Italian miles, or 69 English, (which is the same) its
Circumference will appear to be 26286 miles, and its Diameter 8365 miles.

Qu. Of what situation and extent is Europe?

Ans. Europe is for the most part situate in the Northern Temperate Zone, and
contains within its bounds the principal part of the Roman and Grecian
Monarchies: whose length, from Cape-finis-terre on the west of Spain, to the
River Ianais in Muscovy, is 2400 miles; and breadth, from Cape-Metapan in
Morea, to the most Northern Promontory of Norway, about 2100 miles.

Qu. How is Europe bounded?

Ans. Europe is bounded on the North with the Northern Ocean, or frozen Sea; on
the West with the Western or Atlantic Ocean; on the South, with the
Mediterranean Sea, parting Europe from Africa; and lastly, on the East, it is
divided from Asia by the Rivers Duina and Tanais.

Qu. Of what situation and extent is Asia?

Ans. Asia (from whence sprang the first Monarchies and Religions of the World,
and now possessed by four the greatest Princes of the Earth, (viz.) the Grand
Seignior, Sultan of Persia, Great Mogul, and Cham of China and Tartary:) is
seated mostly in the Temperate Zone: and extends in length, from Smyrna in the
West, to the farthest part of Tartary near Jesso in the East, about 4800 miles;
and in breadth, from the lowest part of Malacca in the South, to the Streights
of Weigats in the North, near 4200 miles.

Qu. How is Asia bounded?

Ans. Asia, on the west, is separated from Africa by the Red Sea, and by the
Istmhus of Sues; from Europe, by the Rivers Tanais and Duina; and toward the
other part of the World, is environed by the Tartarian, Chinean, Indian,
Persian, and Arabian Seas.

Qu. Of what situation and extent is Africa?

Ans. Africa is situated under the Torrid Zone: being in length, from
Cape-Verde to Gaardafuy, 4300 miles; and in breadth, from Cape-Bon to the Cape
of good-hope, 4200 miles.

Qu. How is Africa bounded?

Ans. Africa is formed like a Triangle, and separated from all parts of the
World but Asia by four Seas: being limited, on the North, by the Mediterranean;
on the East, by the Red Sea, or Arabian-Gulph; on the South, by the Ethiopian;
and on the West, by the Atlantick-Ocean.

Qu. How is America bounded?

Ans. America (the fourth and last known part of the World, which Columbus
first discovered 190 years ago) is bounded on the East, by the Atlantic and
Vergivian Seas, which part it from Europe and Africa; on the West, by Mare
Pacificum, which divides it from Asia; on the South, by Terra incognita,
separated by the Streights of Magellan; and on the North, by parts as yet
undiscovered: so as no extent thereof can certainly be given.

Qu. Now, forasmuch as it concerns all Europeans to have a more particular
knowledge of Europe, as well as of the chief Towns in other parts of the World,
wherewith we trade: pray tell me first, how many Cities and Parishes there are
in England, together with its extent, circumference and limits?

Ans. In England there are twenty-five Cities, whereof London, York, Bristol,
and Norwich, are the four chief. Also it is divided into fifty-two Shires or
Counties, and those again into 9725 Parishes: being in length, from Barwick in
the North, to the Isle of Wight in the South, 386 miles; and from Dover in the
East, to the Lands-end in Cornwall in the West, about 279 miles; and 1300 miles
in compass round about. Lastly, it is bounded on the South with Normandy and
France, on the East with Germany and Denmark, on the West with Ireland, and on
the North with Scotland.

Qu. Which are the chief Cities or Towns in France; and how is it divided?

Ans. France may be divided into three parts; 1. the Inland, containing these
Provinces, (viz.) the Isle of France, Champagne, Orleanois, Burgundy, Lyonnois,
and Dauphine. 2. on the Ocean, as are Picardy, Normandy, Bretagne, Guienne, and
Gascoigne. 3. and lastly, on the Mediterranean, Languedock and Provence. As for
the chief Cities or Towns of France, they are these; Paris, Roven, Lions,
Bourdeaux, Toulouse, Rochel, Aix, Grenoble, Diion, Metz, Amiens, Orleans,
Marseilles and Nants.

Qu. How is Italy divided; and which are its principal Cities and Towns?

Ans. Italy is likewise usually divided into three parts; 1. the Midland, which
comprehends the State of the Church, and State of Tuscany. 2. Lombardy, which
consists of Venice, Milan, Genuoa, Parma, Modena, Mantua, Trente, Lucca, and
Piedmont. 3. and lastly, the Extremes of Italy; as, Naples, etc. which several
parts are beautified with these most eminent Cities and Towns, Rome, Venice,
Milan, Naples, Turin, Genoa, and Florence.

Qu. How is Spain divided; and which are its most eminent Cities or Towns?

Ans. Spain is divided into five parts, 1. the Inland, consisting of Castile
and Leon. 2. the North-part, which contains Galicia, Asturies, Biscay and
Navarre. 3. the East, comprehending Arragon, Catalognia, and Valencia. 4. in
the South are, Murcia, Granada, and Andalousia. 5. and lastly, in the West are,
Alguares and Portugal. The most eminent of the Spanish Cities are, Madrid,
Toledo, Burgos, Lisbon, Sevil, Granada, Valencia, Barcelona, Salamanca,
Caragoza, Leon, and Cadiz.

Qu. How is Germany divided; and which are its chief Towns?

Ans. Germany may be divided into three parts; the first belonging to the House
of Austria, which contains Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, Tirol,
Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia, Lusatia, French-County, and the Catholic Provinces
called Flanders. 2. that part divided among the Princes of the Empire; as, the
Palatinate on the Rhine, the Ecclesiastic Electorates, Franconia, Hesse,
Westphalia, Bavaria, Sovabe, upper-Saxony, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and
lower-Saxony. 3. and lastly, the United Provinces; as, Holland, Zealand,
Vtretch, Guelderland, Zutphen, Overyssel, Friesland, and Groningen. As for the
chief Cities and Towns belonging to these several parts of Germany, they are
these, Vienna, Prague, Cologne, Francfort, Hamburg, Nurembourg, Antwerp,
Brussels, Ghent, Amsterdam, and the Hague.

Qu. How is Poland usually divided; and which are its most eminent Towns?

Ans. It is divided into several Provinces, whereof the chief are, the great
and lesser Polands, together with Mozavia, Prussia, etc. As for its Towns, the
most eminent are, Cracovia, Warsaw, and Dantzick.

Qu. How is Turkey in Europe divided; and which are its chief Cities?

Ans. Turkey in Europe may be divided into three parts; as 1. the North
Provinces, which are, Romania, Servia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, Hungaria, Croatia, and
Dalmatia. 2. South Provinces; as, Macedonia, Epirus, Thessalia, Achaia, and
Morea, or Peleponesus. 3. and lastly, Transilvanian Provinces; as,
Transylvania, Valachia, Moldavia, and petit Tartars. As for the chief Cities in
the Europaean Turkey, they are these seven, Constantinople, Adrianople, Sophia,
Buda, Belgrade, Salonichi, and Misistra.

Qu. How is Muscovy divided; and which is its chief City and Town?

Ans. Muscovy, or Russia, (which is all one) may be divided into two parts,
North and South, comprehending several Principalities and Dukedoms, together
with one Republic, called North-Lapland. The chief City of Muscovy is Moscow,
but its chief Harbor and place of trade Arch-Angelo.

Qu. How may Sweden be divided; and which are its chief Towns?

Ans. Sweden is divided into many considerable Provinces; as, Vpland, Gothland,
West-Lapland, Finland, Livonia, and others: whereof the capital Cities are,
Stockholm and Vpsal in Vpland, and Calmar in Gothland.

Qu. How may Denmark and Norway be divided; and which are their chief Towns?

Ans. Denmark and Norway are now two Kingdoms united under one Monarch: to
which we may add Greenland and the Isles of Ferro and Iseland. The chief Towns
are, Copenhagen in Denmark, and Berghen in Norway.

Qu. Which are the chief Towns in Scotland?

Ans. Edinburgh, St. Andrews, Glascow, Sterling, Dunbritton, Falkland, Perth,
and Aberdeen.

Qu. How is Ireland divided?

Ans. Into four Provinces, (viz.) Leinster, Vlster, Munster, and Connaugh; In
which Provinces are 32 Counties.

Qu. Which are the chief Cities in Ireland?

Ans. Dublin, Waterford, Galloway, Limrick, Kingsale, Cork, Londonderry and
Armagh.

Qu. What is a Peninsula?

Ans. Peninsula, quasi pene insula, almost an Island, is a part of Land, which
being almost encompassed round with Water, is yet joined to the firm land by
some little Istmhus, or neck of Earth; as Africa is joined to Asia; Peleponesus
or Morea to Greece; Molucca to India; Jutland to Holsatia; and Corea to Tartary.

Qu. What is an Istmhus?

Ans. An Istmhus is any narrow neck of Land betwixt two Seas, joining the
Peninsula to the Continent; as that betwixt Egypt and Arabia, which parts Asia
from Africa; and those of Panama and Dariene in America.

Qu. What is a Promontory?

Ans. A Promontory is an high Hill or Mountain, that shoots it self out as an
Elbow of Land into the Sea, the utmost extent whereof is called a Fore-land, or
Cape; as, the Cape of good-hope in the furthest part of Africa, by which those
pass that sail into India: Also Cape-Verde in Africa, the Cape of Victory at
the mouth of the Magellanie Seas, and the Cape of S. Vincent in Portugal, with
many other.

Qu. Which are the most eminent Hills or Mountains upon Earth?

Ans. Those of most note are, the Pyrenaean Hills betwixt France and Spain,
Mount Cenis and the Alps betwixt France and Italy, Mount Atlas in Mauritania,
Mount Athos in Macedon, Mount Caucasus in India, Mount Olympus in Thessaly,
Mount Taurus in Asia, Mount Apennine in Italy, and lastly, el Pico in Tenariff
near the Canary Isles, thought to be the highest in the World, being 15 miles
high, and visible 100 miles off at Sea. Now, besides all these, there are many
other Mountains, no less famous for their vomiting up of Fire, than for their
height; as, Aetna in Sicily, Vesuvius near Naples in Italy, Hecla in Iseland,
and many others of the like nature in the Molucca and Japanese Islands, as well
as in Peru, Brasil, Congo and the Azores.

Qu. Which are the chief Deserts?

Ans. Those of Lybia in Africa, that encompass Egypt; as also those in Arabia,
Tartarie, Nova Zembla, Norway, Lapland, Finmarch, Sweden, Germany and America.

Qu. Where are the best Gold and Silver Mines?

Ans. In Peru, Arabia, Guinea, Monomotapa, Japan, Persia, China, Chili, and
Potosi, from whence the Spaniards have yearly exhausted 12 millions.

Qu. Having given this general account of the terra firma, and particular
(because most necessary) relation of Europe: let us in the next place launch
into the Ocean, and examine the watery World; for which end, inform us, how the
several sorts of Waters may be distinguished?

Ans. Into Seas, Streights, Lakes, or Rivers.

Qu. Which are the chief Seas?

Ans. The Levant, or East Sea; the West, North and South Seas; the Baltic Sea;
the Red Sea; the Ethiopian Sea; the Mediterranean Sea; the Archipelago; St.
George's Sea; the Euxine Sea; and the Dead, or Caspian Sea, on our Continent;
together with the Magellanick and Mare-pacificum on the Continent of America.

Qu. What is a Straight?

Ans. A Straight or Gulf is any narrow part or arm of the Ocean, lying between
two shoars, and opening a way into the Sea, as, the Streights of Jesso, lying
between the two Continents; the Streights of Magellan, between North and South
America; the Streights of Gibralter on the Coast of Spain, betwixt Europe and
Africa; the Streights of Babelmandel, between Asia and Africa; the Gulf of
Venice and the Bay of Biscay in Europe.

Qu. What is a Lake?

Ans. A Lake is any place that continually retains standing-water in it, as
Laggo Major in Italy, the Lake of Lucerna, and Geneva in Switzerland, etc.

Qu. What is a River?

Ans. A River is any small branch of the Sea flowing up into a Land; as, the
Thames, Severn, Trent and Humber in England; the Seine, Loyre and Rhosne in
France; the Rhine and Elbe in Germany; the Po and Tyber in Italy; the River
Volga of Muscovy, the greatest in Europe; the Danube of Turkey in Europe;
Euphrates, Tigris and Jordan of Turkey in Asia; the Indus and Ganges of India;
and the Nile of Egypt.

Qu. Which are the best Authors for Geography?

Ans. Ptolomy, Strabo, Stephanuus, Ortelius, Mercator, Scaliger, Ferrarius,
Varenius and Munster; with Bleau's, Johnson's and Sanson's Maps.

LIB. II. OF CHRONOLOGY.
Qu. WHat is Chronology?

Ans. Chronology is the knowledge of Times past.

Qu. What is an Age, or Century?

Ans. The space of an hundred years.

Qu. In what Age of the World was our Savior born?

Ans. About the middle of the one and fortieth Age.

Qu. What is a Year?

Ans. It consists of twelve months, and is the space of time wherein the Sun
passes through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

Qu. What is the Zodiac?

Ans. An imaginary great Circle in the Heavens, which (as Astrologers pretend)
contains the twelve Signs.

Qu. Name the twelve Signs.

Ans. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces.

Qu. What is that which the Greeks call Galaxia, the Latins, Via Lactea, and
we, the Milky-way?

Ans. It Is nothing but a number of little Stars, which give but a confused
light, and are not perceptible to the eye without a Prospective-glass.

Qu. How many days are there in a year?

Ans. Three hundred three score and five days and six hours, according to
Caesar's Reformation of the Calendar.

Qu. What becomes of these odd six hours that remain every year?

Ans. Why, in the space of four years they make up a day; so that every fourth
year has one day more then ordinary, and is therefore called Bissextile, or
Leap-year.

Qu. What is a Month?

Ans. Of months there are two sorts; First, a Lunary month, consisting of four
weeks, which is the space of time wherein the Moon passes through the twelve
Signs of the Zodiac; and secondly, a Solary month, consisting of thirty days,
ten hours and an half, the space of time wherein the Sun passes through the
twelfth part, or one Sign of the Zodiac.

Qu. How many days are there in each Solary month?

Ans. Thirty days has September, April, June, and November; February has
twenty eight alone, And the rest have thirty one.

Qu. How did the Ancients divide their months?

Ans. Into Calends, Nones and Ides; calling the first day of every month the
Calends.

Qu. How did the Ancients divide their weeks?

Ans. Into seven days, which they called by the name of the seven Planets; the
Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn.

Qu. What makes the Day and Night?

Ans. When the Sun is above the Horizon, it makes day; and when it is under the
Horizon, it makes night.

Qu. What are the Aequinoxes and Solstices?

Ans. There are yearly two Aequinoxes and two Solstices; a Vernal and Autumnal
Aequinox, and a Summer and Winter Solstice, which begin the four several
seasons of the year. The Aequinoxes are so called from the Latine-word
Aequinoctium, because the days and nights are then of equal length, the Sun
rising and setting at six, which is upon the 10th. of March and 12th. of
September. Also the Solstices are named from the Latine-word Solstitium, which
signifies a stop of the Sun; because, as it comes no nearer us than the Tropic
of Cancer in the Summer, so goes it not further from us than the Tropic of
Capricorn in the Winter; which Summer- Solstice, as it makes the longest day on
the 11th. of June, so does the Winter- Solstice make the shortest day on the
11th. of December.

Qu. What makes the several Changes of the Moon?

Ans. The Moon shines more or less according to the proportion of light it
receives from the Sun. As for example: We call it New Moon when it is in
conjunction with the Sun; and then it gives us no light, because the dark part
of it is toward us: But four days after it makes its first appearance in the
shape of two bright Horns, (the rest of her Body being dark) and then is the
first quarter. Being a week old, half of it appears bright, and the other half
dark; at which time it is called a Crescent, or Half Moon. Thus it increases a
week more, till it comes to be Full; and then being diametrically opposite to
the Sun, this strikes its Beams upon that more fully, till four days after full
Moon it begins to decrease, and lose its light, which is called the Wain; three
days after which, it appears in the form of a Crescent; and so loses its light
gradually till New Moon again.

Qu. What makes an Eclipse of the Sun?

Ans. The interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and the Earth, which
happens when the Moon is the same Sign and Degree with the Sun; for then the
Sun, Moon and Earth are diametrically opposite.

Qu. What makes an Eclipse of the Moon?

Ans. The interposition of the Earth betwixt the Sun and the Moon, which
happens generally upon the full of the Moon; at which time this Planet is
diametrically opposite to the Sun.

Qu. What is an Epoch?

Ans. It is some remarkable point of time, from the which Chronologers begin to
reckon, in reference to the changes of their own Nation: Thus, the Jews
reckoned, from their departure out of Egypt; the Grecians, from their
Olympiads instituted by Iphitus; The Romans, from the building of their City;
the Christians, from the Birth of Christ; and the Turks, from their Hegira, or
flight of Mahomet.

Qu. What is a Luster, and an Olympiad?

Ans. A Luster among the Romans and Olympiad among the Grecians, signified the
space of five years: because the Games so called were celebrated every fifth
year.

Qu. How do Sacred Chronilogers begin to reckon?

Ans. First, from the Creation to Noah's Flood, 1657 years.

2dly. From the Flood to the calling of Abraham, 367 years.

3dly. From the calling of Abraham, to the departure of the Israelites out of
Egypt, 430 years.

4ly. From the Egyptians Exodus, to Solomon's building of the first Temple,
480 years.

5ly. From the building of the first Temple, to the erection of the second by
Zorobabel, 497 years.

6ly. From the building the second by Zorobabel, to the Birth of our Savior
Christ, 529 years.

7ly. and lastly, From the Birth of our Savior, to these present times, 1683
years.

Qu. How do Profane Chronologers begin to reckon?

Ans. First, From Nimrod to Cyrus the Great, 1646 years.

2dly. From Cyrus to Alexander the Great, 228 years.

3dly. From Alexander to Julius Caesar, 300 years.

4ly. From Caesar to Constantine the Great, 355 years.

5ly. From Constantine to Charles the Great, 455 years.

6ly. From Charles the Great to Radulphus of Auspurgh, 472 years.

7ly. and lastly, From Radulphus to these present times, 400 years.

Qu. Which are the best Authors for Chronology?

Ans. Helvicus, Calvisius, Bucholcer, Funccius, Petavius, Usher and Alstedius.

LIB. III. OF HISTORY.
Of the Assyrian MONARCHY.
Qu. WHat is History?

Ans. A Record of past actions, either Sacred or Civil.

Qu. Which are the four chief and most ancient Monarchies of the World?

Ans. The Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian and the Roman.

Qu. Under what Kings did the Assyrian Monarchy begin, flourish and expire?

Ans. It began under Nimrod, and flourished till Sardanapalus, by whose Lust it
was divided, and almost destroyed.

Qu. At what time was the Assyrian Monarchy founded, and how long did it last?

Ans. It was founded about seventeen hundred years after the Creation, and
lasted sixteen hundred forty six years longer.

Qu. Tell me the Names of the Assyrian Kings in order.

Ans. Nimrod, Belus, Ninus, or Ashur, Semiramis, Ninias, Arius, and others
unknown, till we come to Sardanapalus, by whose Luxury Monarchy became divided
between two Rebels, Arbaces and Belesus, and so continued to them and their
Heirs till Cyrus's time, who began the second Monarchy, called the Persian.

Qu. How came Cyrus to begin the second Monarchy?

Ans. One part of the Empire falling to him by succession from his Grandfather
Astygas, (one of Arbaces's Successors) he soon conquered Belshazzer, (who was
Belesus's Successor) and so joining both parts of the Empire together, began a
new Monarchy in Persia, his Native-Countrey.

Qu. Wat Authors treat of this Assyrian Monarchy?

Ans. The holy Scriptures, Josephus, Diodorus, Siculus, Justin, Eusebius,
Matthaeus, Usher, Raleigh, Hoel and Viginier; besides the ancient Ctesias,
Berosus and Megastenes, whereof only some few fragments remain.

Of the Second, OR PERSIAN MONARCHY.
Qu. WHy was this second Monarchy called the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians?

Ans. Because the Empire did chiefly consist of those two Kingdoms.

Qu. Under what Kings did this Persian Monarchy begin, flourish and expire?

Ans. It began under Cyrus, whose Race ended in his Son Cambyses; after whom,
Darius Hystaspes, having defeated the Magi, and won the Empire from his
Competitors by the neighing of his Horse, it still flourished till Darius
Codomanus, in whom it ended.

Qu. How long did this second, or Persian Monarchy last?

Ans. It lasted 228 years, and was enjoyed only by two Families, that of Cyrus,
and that of Darius Hystaspes.

Qu. Tell me the Names of the Persian Kings in order.

Answ. Cyrus the Great, Cambyses, Darius Hystaspes, Xerxes, Artaxerxes
Longimanus, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon, Artaxerxes Ochus Arsames; and
lastly, Dar. Codomanus,


Qu. What Authors write chiefly of this second Monarchy?

Ans. Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Plutarch, Diodorus, Justin and Orosius.

Of the Third, OR GRECIAN MONARCHY.
Qu. WHy was this Third Monarchy called the Grecian or Macedonian Monarchy?

Ans. It was so called from its first Founder, Alexander, the Son of King
Philip of Macedon, a Grecian born.

Qu. When was it that Alexander began to reign?

Ans. 329 years before the Birth of Christ, and in 12 years space conquered
most part of the Universe; and is therefore called, the Great.

Qu. How long did the Grecian Monarchy flourish?

Ans. It flourished no longer than Alexander's Life; for he dying without Sons,
bequeathed the Empire to the Worthiest; which caused great division amongst the
Nobility, till at length they divided it into four parts: And so it lasted till
they were all conquered by the Romans, who began the Fourth and last Monarchy,
under the Conduct of Julius Caesar.

Qu. Which were the Four parts of this Grecian Monarchy, after its division?

Ans. The Kingdoms of Macedon, Asia minor, Syria and Egypt; all which were in
the space of 300 years reduced to the Roman Yoke.

Qu. What Kings succeeded in Macedon after Alexander?

Ans. The first was Alexander's Brother Arideus; after whom succeeded fifteen
Kings more, whereof the last was Perseus, who was overcome by Paulus Aemylius,
the Roman Consul.

Qu. What Kings succeeded in Asia minor after Alexander?

Ans. But Two; whereof the first was Antigonus, King Philip of Macedon's
Bastard, and the second was Demetrius Poliorcetes, who being put to flight by
his Son-in-law Seleucus Nicanor; after that, Asia minor was joined to the
Kingdom of Syria.

Qu. What Kings succeeded in Syria after Alexander?

Ans. The first was Seleucus Nicanor, after whom succeeded 19 King, whereof the
last was Tigranes, who being subdued by Pompey, Syria became a Province to the
Romans.

Qu. Now lastly, What Kings succeeded Alexander in Egypt?

Ans. The first was Ptolomaeus Lagus, (another of King Philip's Bastards) after
whom succeeded 12 Princes more, till by the death of the famous Cleopatra,
Egypt was reduced into a Roman Province; And thus Rome, having swallowed up
the four divisions of the Grecian Monarchy, began another, which was called the
Fourth, or Roman.

Qu. Which are the best ancient Authors that treat of this Grecian Monarchy?

Ans. First, Arrianus and Quintus Curtius, that write of Alexander himself; and
secondly, Plutarch, Justin, Polybius and Diodorus, that treat concerning his
Successors.

Of the Fourth, OR, ROMAN MONARCHY.
Qu. WHen was Rome first founded, and by whom?

Ans. Rome was first built 753 years before Christ, by the two Brothers,
Romulus and Rhemus.

Qu. How has Rome been anciently governed?

Ans. Rome was first governed successively by Kings; then by annual Consuls,
limited with Senators and Tribunes; and in time of War or distress, by
Dictators, who becoming perpetual, were at last called Emperors.

Qu. How many were the first Kings of Rome? name them in order.

Ans. Seven; to wit, Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilius, Ancus Martius,
Tarquinius Priscius, Servius Tullius, and Tarquinius Superbus, who by reason of
his Tyranny was the last King of the Romans; after whom they governed by
Consuls till the Emperors times.

Qu. Who was the first Roman Emperor?

Ans. Julius Caesar, who making himself perpetual Dictator, and having defeated
Pompey, took upon him the sole government of the Empire, and so began the
fourth Monarchy, called the Roman, which was afterward established by Augustus.

Qu. How many years was it from the building of the City of Rome, to the death
of Julius Caesar?

Ans. 710 years; which was about 42 years before the Birth of Christ, who was
14 years old when Augustus died.

Qu. The first period of this Roman Empire, reaching from Julius Caesar to
Constantine the Great, tell me in order the Names of the several Emperors.

Ans. Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Flavius Vespasian, Titus Vespasian, Domitian, Nerva, Trajanus,
Adrianus, Antonius Pius, Anton. Phylosoph. Commodus, Pertinax, Didius Julianus,
Septimius Severus, Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander Severus
Maximinus Thrax Balbinus and Puppienus, Gordianus, Philippus Arabs, Decius,
Tribonianus Gallus Valerian, Galienus, Claudius secund' Aurelianus, Tacitus,
Probus, Carus, Dioclesian, and Constantius Chloras, Father of Constantine the
Great.


Qu. How many years was it from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great?

Ans. About 355 years.

Qu. Why is the first period of the Roman Empire reckoned but to Constantine
the Great, when he had so many considerable Emperors that succeeded him, as
Constantius, Julian the Apostate, and others?

Ans. First, because Constantine the Great was the first Christian Emperor;
and secondly, because he removed the Imperial Seat from Rome in Italy, to
Byzantium in Greece: where building a great City he called it after his own
Name, Constantinople, which soon after produced a division of the Empire into
East and West, betwixt Arcadius and Honorius; and so it continued for several
years under two several Emperors.

Qu. What became of the Empire of the East, after its division?

Ans. The Empire of the East, together with its chief City, Constantinople, was
taken by the Turks (who now possess it) about 230 years ago, from the last
Greek Emperor, Constantius Palaeologus; whereupon it is observed, that as the
City of Constantinople was built by a Constantine the first, whose Mothers Name
was St. Helena, so likewise was it lost under a Constantine the eleventh, whose
Mothers Name also was Helena.

Qu. What became of the Empire of the West, which was held at Rome, after
Honorius?

Ans. About 100 years after Honorius, the Empire of the West was destroyed,
together with its Emperor Augustulus, by Odoacer King of the Herulii; which
Empire has been since succeeded by two Successions of Western Franks: the
first beginning with Charles the Great, and the second with Radulphus
Auspurgensis of the House of Austria, who possesses the German Empire at this
present time. But here it is observable, how that as the Roman Empire was
founded by an Augustus, so was it lost by an Augustulus.

Qu. How was the Roman Empire destroyed?

Ans. By the Invasion of Barbarians, such as were the Hunns, Goths and Vandals.

Qu. Which are the best Writers of this Fourth, or Roman Monarchy?

Ans. Caesar's Commentaries, Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Valerius Maximus, Livy,
Plutarch, Suetonius, Tacitus, both the Plinies, Velleius Paterculus, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Appian, Lucius Florus, Herodian, Polybius, Dion Cassius, Salust,
Zozimus, Procopius, Jornandes, Cassiodorus, Agathias, Historiae Augustae
Scriptores, and all the Byzantine Writers, besides many learned modern Authors
of the same Subject.

LIB. IV. OF THE GREEK and ROMAN HISTORIANS.
Qu WHich are the most eminent of the Greek Historians?

Ans. Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, Josephus, Plutarch, Philostratus, Arrianus, Laertius, Appian,
Dion Cassius, Herodian, Eunapius, Zozimus, Eusebius, and the Byzantine
Historians, as Procopius, Agathias, etc.

Qu. What account have you of Herodotus?

Ans. Herodotus, born at Halicarnassus, a City in Greece, is the most ancient
of Historians we have extant next to Moses, and therefore called by Cicero, the
Father of History. He lived about 450 years before Christ; when, being a man of
Quality and Power in his Country, and opposing Lydamus, his Cities Tyrant, he
was forced to fly to Thurium, where he wrote those Nine Books of History, which
Posterity called by the names of the Nine Muses, and which contained the most
remarkable Transactions of the World during 240 years, beginning from the time
of Cyrus the first King of Persia, and so on to Xerxes's time, wherein
Herodotus himself lived. As for the Life of Homer, (though very ancient, and
ascribed to him) it is thought to have been wrote by some other hand. Herodotus
his Style (like Homer's) is sweet and easy; his Dialect Ionick: Some (as
Plutarch and Chrysostom) esteem him fabulous: but Camerarius, Stephens,
especially our late Voyages and Discoveries, have sufficiently vindicated him.
He dyed, and was buried at Thurium.

Qu. What account have you of Thucydides?

Ans. Thucydides was twelve years younger than Herodotus, and lived 438 years
before Christ. Being but a Boy, he wept at the hearing of Herodotus repeat his
History, whereby Herodotus presaged his future parts. He was the Son of Orolus,
of a Royal Extraction, and married a rich Wife, the King of Thrace his
Daughter, by which means he expended much money both to the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, for good intelligence of their proceedings; whereof being well
informed, he wrote his History, and called it, A possession for everlasting,
which gives an account of the Peleponesian Wars with the Athenians for one and
twenty years together, in 8 Books, whereof the last seems uncorrect and
unfinished to the former seven, which makes some think it wrote by his
Daughter, others by Theopompus, but Vossius by Thucydides himself whilst he was
sick. His method is preferred above all others; His Style pithy, and full of
matter; His Dialect most pure Attick. However, Dyonisius accuses him of using
obsolete words. His Orations filled with good Argument, but tedious. Lastly, he
was an enemy to Fables, and his Relations most faithful; writing only of such
things as were acted in his own time and knowledge, which advantage Herodotus
wanted.

Qu. What account have you of Xenophon?

Ans. Xenophon, by Birth an Athenian, and Son of one Grillus, lived 400 years
before Christ. He was a second Tresmegistus, being a great Captain, Philosopher
and Historiographer. His Attick Dialect was so pure, that he was called Apes
Attica, and was therefore envied and hated of Plato. He was so generous, that
he exposed the Writings of Thucydides, which he might have delivered for his
own. Xenophon's History treats of 46 years Transactions of the Greeks, and
begins where Thucydides ended; showing Alcibiades's return to his Country,
whom Thucydides left meditating on that retreat. Also Xenophon gives us the
Enterprise of Cyrus the younger (under whom he was a General) against his
Brother Artaxerxes, with the Grecians retreat out of Persia, which was
afterward an occasion of his Banishment. His Institution of the Elder Cyrus is
a moral Romance, and shows rather what a Prince should do, than what Cyrus
really did: there being little true History in it, save the taking of Babylon,
and captivating of Craesus, as appears by the Relation given of Cyrus in Justin
and other Historians. As for the Book de Aequivocis, attributed to Xenophon, it
is an Imposture of Annius. His works (says Chrysostom) may teach Politics to
all Princes, Statesmen and Generals; which made Scipio and Lucullus, who never
went without them, succeed accordingly, as Cicero observes. A late foolish
Italian Author, without any ground for it, accuses Xenophon of an immodest Love
for Agesilaus, only because he writes so much in his praise; but he had learnt
too much Morality from his Tutor Socrates, to commit such an Act.

Qu. What account have you of Polybius?

Ans. Polybius, born at Megalopolis a City of Arcadia, was the Son of Lycortas
General of the Achaians, by whom both Father and Son were sent Ambassadors to
Ptolomaeus Epiphaneus; and afterward Polybius associated with the Roman
Consul, as joynt-Commissioner, in the War against Perseus King of Thessaly. He
wrote his History in 40 Books, whereof only the five first remain entire, with
an Epitome of the 12 next following, to the beginning of the 18th. Book, which
were thought to be epitomized by Marcus Brutus. This History begins with the
second Punick War, and contains not only the Events that passed betwixt the
Romans and Macedonian Kings, to the end of that Monarchy, but all other the
most considerable actions of the World for 53 years; for which reason he gives
it the Name of Universal. And for the more completing hereof, he traveled
himself over most part of Europe, Asia and Africa, being furnished with Ships
by Scipio Aemilianus, who, together with Lelius, were his two Bosom-friends;
whereupon Cicero says that he wrote a distinct Treatise of the War of
Numantia, waged by his Friend Scipio, (to whom he was a Councellor, though not
a Schoolmaster, as some would have it. He died in the 82d. year of his age,
which was 230 years before Christ. He believed nothing of Gods, Heaven or Hell,
as appears by his sixth Book. Dyonisius accuses his unpolite Style: Patricius,
without reason, blames his method; and Livy (notwithstanding he transcribes
whole Books of Polybius verbatim in his Decades) dis-ingeniously terms him only
a Writer not to be despised. However, (besides the modern Casaubon) Cicero and
Plutarch of old did much esteem him; and Brutus, who disliked Cicero, did much
admire Polybius. Finally, as Vossius observes, though inferior to one or other
of the Greeks for Eloquence, yet to none for Civil Prudence and Military
Science.

Qu. What account have you of Diodorus Siculus?

Ans. Diodorus Siculus, born at Agyrium a Town in Sicily, lived to a great age
under Julius and Augustus Caesar, about the middle of whose Reign he dyed. He
spent 30 years in writing his Historical Library, which in 40 Books (whereof we
have but 15 extant) comprised the most remarkable passages of the World for the
space of 1138 years, (not reckoning what was comprehended in his first six
Books, of those fabulous Times before the War of Troy;) which is certainly the
best account of the ancient Heathen Mythology, we have any where extant. For
the perfecting hereof, he traveled most part of Europe and Asia, as well as
into Egypt. Henry Stephens was informed that the Remainders of this Authors
Works were all found in Sicily, but how true, I know not. His style is
condemned (as being a Sicilian, and living in the declining of the Greek
Tongue) by Bodin; His Chronology censured by Pighius and Sigonius; and
Ludovicus Vives inveighs against his whole Book, for describing the Antiquity
of the World according to the ancient Caldaean and Egyptian Records.
Nevertheless, Authors of no less Credit, as Photius, (who praises his Style)
together with Pliny, Eusebius, Justin Martyr, and Stephens, do at least
equalize, if not prefer him to the best of the Greek Historians.

Qu. What account have you of Dionysius Halicarnasseus?

Ans. Dionysius of Halicarnassus in Greece, lived under Augustus at Rome,
whither he came soon after the end of the Civil-Wars; where, after 22 years
abode, (having well informed himself both from the most judicious Books and
Men) he wrote his History of the Roman Antiquities, in 20 Books, (whereof 11
only are extant.) The whole Work began from the Siege of Troy, and reached to
the first Punick War, and ended there where Polybius began. But the 11 now
extant conclude with the Government of the Decemviri, when the Consuls resumed
their Authority, which was 312 Foundation of Rome. He was a severe Critic, and
censures Plato, Demosthenes, and most of the Ancients; also a most accurate
Orator, as appears by his Composition of Rhetoric now in being, but too exact
and rigorous in his Laws of Eloquence; He too much affected digressions in his
History; also he was too credulous and superstitious in his Ethnic Religion,
as when he makes a Statue speak, etc. Nevertheless, Photius praises his Style
as most Elegant, and some prefer him before Livy; but Scaliger esteems him
before any of the Latins for his account of Roman Antiquities, both in respect
of his Chronology and Matter, wherein he is very particular.

Qu. What account have you of Josephus?

Ans. Josephus the Jew was born under Caligula, (which was 39 years after
Christ's Incarnation) of Royal Extraction, being descended from the Highpriests
of Jerusalem by the Father, and from the Royal Blood of the Machabees by the
Mother: He lived also under nine Emperors. In the 26th. year of his age he
went to Rome, and by the assistance of Poppaea (Augustus's Wife) procured the
release of those Priests whom Faelix had imprisoned. Afterward, being chosen
Captain of the Galilaeans, he headed them in their revolt against the Romans
under their General Vespasian: and being worsted, obscured himself in a Well,
where he endured great misery, till being taken, and brought to Vespasian, he
there prophesied of Vespasian's coming to the Empire; which soon happening
accordingly, as also interpreting the Prophecy of a Messiah to signify
Vespasian and his Son Titus, he was released, and made as a Friend to accompany
Titus at the taking of Jerusalem. After which, he composed seven Books of that
Judaick War, which he presented to Titus, who valued them above all others in
his Library. To this he adds his own Life, written by himself; And when he was
returned to Rome with Vespasian, he wrote his twenty Books of the Jewish
Antiquities, beginning from the Creation, and so on to the 12th. year of
Neroe's Reign. As for his two Books against Apion, they were to vindicate the
Antiquity and Honor of the Jews, from a Work which Apion had published to the
disadvantage of Philo and his Contrymen. Josephus (though Hebrew was his
Mother Tongue) wrote his Books in Greek, (wherein he was most perfect) to have
them more generally understood by the Greeks and Romans. The credit of his
History is blamed by many; as, Maldonat, Melchior, Canus, Pererius, Baronius,
and others, as Gregory, who says, (in his Posthuma) that Josephus destroys
several Miracles in Holy-Writ, only to make them seem credible. Nevertheless,
Justin Martyr, Eusebius, St. Jerome, Suidas, Calvisius, and Scaliger, prefer him
to the best of Writers next those of the Holy-Writ, as does the Letters of King
Agrippa approve him for the truest of Authors. As for his Testimony of Christ
in the 22d. Book of his Antiquities, it is by the most judicious Critics
thought to have been inserted by another hand, though very ancient. Josephus
published his Writings also as well in Hebrew, as Greek. Finally, Josephus has
not only writ many things contrary to Moses, but also omitted many Evangelical
Truths; as, the coming of the Wisemen to Judaea, also Herod's Massacre of the
Infants; and therefore ought to be read with caution. Some (as Munster)
confound with this Author, that Counterfeit Josippus Gorionides his Wars of the
Jews.

Qu. What account have you of Plutarch?

Ans. Plutarch (who lived under Domitian and Nerva, but flourished chiefly
under Trajan, about 100 years after Christ) was born at Cheronaea in Baeotia;
He was a Priest of Apollo, and both a great Historian and Philosopher. First,
as for History, he wrote the Lives of 24 Famous Grecians, educated at Sparta
and Athens; and of 25 Romans, bred up under the several Governments at Rome:
His Greek Lives begin with Theseus King of Athens, in the year of the World
2750. and end with Philopaemenes, General of the Achaians, in the year of the
World 3821. which was 121 years before Christ. His Roman Lives begin with
Romulus the Founder of Rome, and end with Galba and Otho, about 70 years after
Christ, and 820 from the building the City of Rome. Now secondly, for his
Philosophy, contained in the Book of his Morals, he learnt it partly from his
Father Lampras his Oratory, partly from his Grandfather Nicarchus his
Philosophy, and partly by the Converse of his Brother Timon, but mostly from
his Egyptian Tutor Ammonius, and Travels into Egypt. He is esteemed by all as
a most wise grave Author, both in Philosophy and History.

Qu. What account have you of Philostratus?

Ans. Philostratus flourished from Severus to Phillippus: and at the request of
Julia Augusta, Severuses Wife, (whose Secretary he was) wrote the Life of
Apollonius Tyanaeus, a Pythagorian Magician, in eight Books: wherein he
followed the Relations of Damis the Assyrian, and Apollonius his Associate in
his Travels; as also the Records of Maximus the Aegaean, and two others,
besides Apollonius his own Testament of himself, and written with his own hand.
From hence Hierocles (who is for that cause Answered by Eusebius) attempts to
prefer Apollonius before Christ; which has raised an unjust outcry of the
PRIESTS against our Author Philostratus:
whose Style is Elegant Greek, as well as his Geographical Descriptions,
especially of India, useful, and such as are not to be found in others. But to
say the worst of him, Philostratus is (as Merric Causabon observes) (though
fabulous, where he would make a God of a Magician) yet for some strange
Relations once supposed false, and now approved true, well deserving to be Read.

Qu. What account have you of Arrianus?

Ans. Arrianus, of Nicomedia a City in Bithynia, was a Priest of Ceres and
Proserpine; and flourished under the Emperors Adrians, Antonius, Pius, and
Marcus Aurelius Antonius. He was as well a Philosopher as Historian, being
Educated under Epictetus the Stoic: whose Philosophy he collected from his
Discourses, and afterward published in Writing as an Enchiridion. Besides
which, he published of his own Composure, seven Books of the Expeditions of
Alexander the Great, and an eighth Book of so much of the East Indies as was
known in his time. He wrote also ten Books of Alexander's Successors, whereof
at this day there remains only Photius's Abridgement. He wrote likewise four
other Tracts, none of which are at this time extant: one of Timoleon of
Corinths Acts in Sicily: Another of the Art which Dion of Syracuse used to free
those Countries from the Tyranny of Dionysius the Second: A third of the
Parthians descent from Sythia and Wars with the Romans under Trajan: And the
fourth, called the Alanick History; which makes some believe him to be the same
Arrian that Dion says was Governor of Cappadocia under Adrian, that made War
upon the Alanians. His Greek is so Attick and Sweet, that it gave him the name
of the new or young Xenophon, whom attempted to imitate. Not only Lucian and
Photius of old, but also Scaliger, Vossius and Bodin of the modern Critics
prefer him to the best of the Greek Historians, provided you will pardon his
Arrogance in the middle of his first Book, where he boasts himself to exceed
all other Authors, as much as Alexander excelled all other Conquerors. Finally
of his eight Books, the only that are extant of him, he professes in the first
seven concerning Alexander to follow the Relations given him by Aristobulus and
Ptolomaeus, Lagus, their Writings, who were Captains under Alexander; and in
his other eighth and last Book of the East Indies, to follow the Geography of
Marinus Tyrius, who in this point far exceeds Ptolomy:

Qu. What account have you of Diogenes Laertius?

Ans. Diogenes Laertius, so called from Laerte a Town in Cilicia where he was
born, lived under Antonius Pius, or soon after. He wrote the Lives and
Apothegms of the Philosophers in ten Books, beginning with Thales, and ending
with Epicurus; whom (being himself an Epicurean) he favors even to a fault,
making him place his chief Happiness in the pleasures of the mind, and not of
the body, which is contrary to the Character given both by Cicero and other
Ancient Authors of Epicurus. Nevertheless from hence Gassendus (too much
inclined to this Epicurian Sect) takes occasion to write so favorably of its
Founder. However, as Lactantius treats only of the Moral Philosophers, so we
owe our best account of Natural Philosophers to Laertius; notwithstanding
Keckerman (who is more studious of Modern, than Ancient Writers,) condemns him.
Finally, Ludovicus Vives tells us, that this Piece was written by Laertius, to
a woman.

Qu. What account have you of Appian?

Ans. Appian of Alexandria, removed thence to Rome, where he lived (under
Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Pius,) at first the quality of Advocate, but
afterward for his parts preferred to be one of the Emperors Proctors. He wrote
in 24 Books an History Royal, beginning with the taking of Troy, and success of
Aeneas, and extending to the reign of Augustus; nay with some reflections even
to the times of Trajan. But of all these, we have none at this time extant,
save his Punick, Syriack, Parthian, Mithridattick, Spanish, Hannibalick,
Illyrian, and Civil Wars of the Romans: For as for his Celtick, or War with
the Gauls, we have none but a fragment thereof left us. His Style is plain and
easy; and his Orations moving; his Descriptions of his Battails Natural, and
full of Military knowledge; for all which, he is much extolled by Photius. And
lastly, for his method, he endeavored to imitate Thucydides and Salust; but
fell far short: In so much that it is rather Rapsody of things most important,
than a continued History, as Livyes: He flatters the Romans right or wrong: and
as Bodin observes in many Relations appears too Credulous: Also Sigonius
accuses him of great Levity, and many Omissions: But what is worst of all, he
inserts as his own, whole Paragraphs out of Polybius, Plutarch and other
Antique Authors, without ever acknowledging his Theft; which was (I conceive)
one great reason that exasperated Scaliger so far, as (in his Notes upon
Eusebius) to call Appian a mere Child in History.

Qu. What account have you of Dion Cassius?

Ans. Dion Cassius, whose Surname was Coccius, or Cocceianus, was born at Nicea
a City of Bithynia, whither he like wise retired in his old Age to avoid the
Praetorian Militia, being advised thereto by his Familiar Spirit, or Demon,
which directed him in all things, as Socrates's did him; and diverted him from
his former Phylosophical Learning, and Interpretation of Divine Dreams,
(whereof he composed a Book) to the writing of History. He lived under the
Tyrannies of Commodus, Caracalla, Macrinus and Heliogabulus; in whose Reigns by
the prudent conduct of himself, he escaped the loss either of Life, Goods or
Reputation; and arrived safely to the peaceable happy Reign of Alexander
Severus, under whom he published his Roman History, being directed thereto by
his Genius, as well as commanded by Septimius Severus. His Father Apronianus
was a Consular man, as well as Governor of Dalmatia, and Proconsul of Cilicia.
Also he himself having Consular Dignity twice bestowed upon him, and commanding
Pergamus, Smyrna, Africa, Austria, and Hungary, was afterward made
Joynt-Consul with the Emperor Alexander.

His History comprehends 981. years, viz. from the Building of Rome, to the
Reign of Alexander Severus in 80 Books, divided into eight Decades, whereof the
first 34 Books are lost: Also, of the twenty, we have only the Epitomy of
Xiphiline a Constantiniopolitan Monk; for all that we have entire of Dion
Cassius (besides this Compendium,) are only the Events of 300 years, beginning
with Lucullus about 71 years before Christ, and ending with the Death of the
Emperor Claudius. But all this Authors VVritings that are lost, what are most
to be lamented, are the 40 last years, whereof he was an Eyewitness. He
employed ten years in providing Materials for his History, and twelve more
Composing it.

He imitates Thucydides in his Narratives and Orations, but not in his
Obscurity; his Language (says Photius) is Elevated, Copious, and Artificial,
but without Labor; he has discovered the Arcana Imperii, Election of their
Magistrates, Roman Rites and Ceremones, the Apothesis and Consecration of their
departed Emperors, together with the Ceremony of August's Funeral, Livia's
Mourning, and the letting fly the Eagle from the Funeral Pile, better than any
other Historian, either before, or since.

Nevertheless he is condemned for his tedious superfluity of Orations; for too
much adhering to Caesar against Pompey in compliance with the Times; for
impartially siding with Antonius, and bespattering Cicero; for too much
Superstition and Credulity given to Vespasian's Cure, and Appollonius Tyanaeus
his Prediction; as well as for his Calumnies against Seneca, unless his
abbreviator Tigellinus misquotes him. But I shall not accuse him (as Barronius
does,) for attributing the Victories of Marcus Aurelius rather to the Magic of
the Egyptian Sorcerer Arnaphis, than the Prayers of the Christians, because he
himself was an Heathen. Lastly, besides his History, Suidas and Volaterranus
(how true I know not) make him the Author of Arrianus the Philosophers Life,
the Actions of Trajan, certain Itineraries, three Books de Principe, and some
small Tracts of Morality.

Qu. What account have you of Herodian?

Ans. Herodian, the Son of Apollonius Difficilis, was originally a Grammarian
of Alexandria, and lived in the third Century under Commodus the Emperor. He
wrote Eight Books of History of his own time, beginning with the Death of
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher, and ending with the Murder of the
two Emperors, Balbinus and Puppienus. His History comprehends the space of 70
years, and is praised, not only by Photius for his Elegant Style, but also by
Julius Capitolinus, Tribonius Pollio, Ammianus Marcellinus, and Stephanus, for
the Fidelity of his Roman Accounts, wherein (according to his Latin Interpreter
Angelus Politianus) he only swerves in his Relation of Alexander and Maximus.

He imitates Dion Cassius in his Relation of the Ceremonies used at the
Apotheosis of the Roman Emperors, particularly of Severus his Funeral Rites, in
the beginning of his fourth Book. As for the Censurers upon Herodian, he is
thought by some to be too full of Orations; as also, to be too severe upon the
Empress Mammea, out of ill will to her Son Alexander Severus, to whom he was a
declared Enemy. Suidas says that Herodian wrote many other Pieces, the which
(if he did) are now lost.

Qu. What account have you of Eunapius?

Ans. Eunapius Sardianus lived in the times of Valentinian, Valens and Gratian:
He is called Sardianus from Sardis a City in Lydia, the place of his Birth,
from whence he traveled to Athens, and there became eminent, as well for
Sophistry and Physic, as History; being the Disciple of the Great Proaetesius,
and nearly related to the Noble Sophist Chrysanthius, who married Eunapius his
Sisters Daughter. At the persuasion of this Chrysanthius, he wrote an elegant
piece of the Lives of the Sophists, and afterward that other Historical Tract
of the Roman Emperors, beginning where Herodian left off, and so continuing it
to his own times.

Photius praises his Style, but condemns his History, for traducing Constantine
the Great, and extolling Julian, as also (in his Lives of the Sophists) for
being too severe upon the Christians. Lastly, besides these two pieces here
mentioned, we have likewise a fragment of another Treatise of Eunapius,
Entitled, de Legationibus, which was first published by Andrea Shottus, and is
now annexed to the Byzantine Historians.

Qu. What account have you of Zosimus?

Ans. Zosimus lived in the time of Theodosius the younger, and wrote six Books
of History; whereof the first does briefly describe all the Emperors from
Augustus to Probus, and so on to Dioclesian: But the other five Books (which
extends to the Siege of Rome by Alaricus) are more copious and large,
especially when he treats of the grounds of the Division betwixt Arcadius and
Honorius, whereof he himself was an Eyewitness.

This History of Zosimus is said to be a mere Abridgement of Eunapius; except
in those passages where he praises Stilico, whom Ennapius condemns. Evagrius,
Photius and others say, that he barks like a Dog at the Christians, and
unworthily traduces Constantine the Great: As also, that he not only
irreligiously bespatters Christianity, but Superstitiously adhers to Paganism,
being over-credulous in sundry of the Heathen Miracles. However, Leunclavius,
who first Translated Zosimus into Latin, makes great Apologies, as well for his
inveighing against the Christians, since Zosimus himself was an Heathen, as for
his Traducing Constantine, since he discovers as well his Vices. Lastly,
Photius applauds the Purity of his Style, the Brevity of his Sentences, and
Conciseness of his Phrase, being exempt from Figures or long Orations.

Qu. What account have you of Eusebius?

Ans. Eusebius Pamphili (so called from the Intimacy betwixt him and the Martyr
Pamphilius,) was Bishop of Caesarea, the chief Metropolitan of all the Churches
in Palestine, and most Ancient of all the Ecclesiastical Writers in the fourth
Century. For (as St. Jerome in his Life tells us) Eusebius flourished under
Constantine the Great, and his Son Constantius: So that (perhaps) fear might
oblige him to render a more favorable account of Constantine, than Zosimus
did. As for his Writings, they are various, both Profane and Sacred: The
Profane, is his Chronicle from the beginning of the World to Constantines
twentieth year, which was, 326 years after Christ; Joseph Scaliger esteems this
Piece to be only a Transcript out of Julius Africanus. As for the Sacred
Writings of Eusebius, they were these: Of Evangelical Preparation, fifteen
Books; Of Evangelical Demonstration, twenty Books, whereof but ten are now
extant; Of Divine Apparitions, five Books; Of Ecclesiastical History, ten
Books; Of the Disagreement of the Evangelists; upon the Prophet Esaias, ten
Books; Against Porphyrie, thirty Books, whereof twenty were only known to St.
Jerome; Of Topics, one Book; A Defense of Origin, in six Books; The Life of
Pamphilius, in three Books, and several other Books of Martyrs; Learned
Commentaries on the whole Book of Psalms; The Life of Constantine, in, four
Books, Against Hierooles, Eight Books; Against Fatal Destiny, one Book; and
three Books against Marcellus, mentioned by Socrates, lib. 2. Ecclest. Hist.
All which several Pieces have been Translated by several hands. In his
Evangelical Demonstration, he seems to favor Arrianism, notwithstanding his
Subscription to the Nicene-Council, and therefore is to be read with Caution.

Qu. What account have you of Procopius?

Ans. Procopius was born at Caesaria in Palestine, from whence he went to
Constantinople in the time of the Emperor Anastatius, by whom he was highly
esteemed, as also by Justin the first; and afterward by Justinian, so as to be
preferred to the Senate with the Quality of Illustrious, and created Prefect
of New Rome: Besides which, he was chief Secretary to the General Belisarius in
all the Wars of Persia, Africa and Italy; which makes him every where give so
Honorable a Character of him. Procopius was both an Orator, Sophister,
Rhetorician and Historian. His History consists of eight Books, whereof, the
first two comprehend the Persian War, Abbreviated by Photius: The two next the
Vandal Wars: and the four last, the War with the Goths: Of all which, there is
a Compendium in the Preface of Agathias, who began his History where Procopius
ended. His ninth Book called Anecdota, or the Secret History of Justinian,
which is a Scurrilous Invective against that Emperor and his Wife Theodora,
though mentioned in Suidas, was thought by Vossius to have been lost, but has
since been made public by Heschaelius and others. Now besides the
forementioned Pieces, there is another Treatise de Aedificiis in six Books,
which Procopius wrote for the Honor of Justinians Buildings in which Discourse
there are some passes that make many esteem our Author a Christian, but if his
whole works are examined, he will be found no better than a Superstitious
Ethnic Writer. Procopius is extremely condemned, not only for his too severe
reproach of the French; but likewise, for his Anecdota or Libellous Invective
against the Emperor and Empress, Justinian and Theodora: Which not only varies
from it in Style, but also in Matter contradicts all his other Works, wherein
he ever mentions the Emperor and Empress with great Honor and Applause;
Insomuch that for this very reason many have doubted whether that Piece is not
Spurious, and written by some other hand. Lastly, by his Oblique Orations he
attempts to imitate the Ancients, but comes far short of them. His Translator
Porsona, did rather pervert, than convert him

Qu. What account have you of Agathias?

Ans. Agathias (the Son of Memnonius) was born at Murina a City of Asia, in the
Reign of Justinian; he professed the Law, and pleaded as an Advocate at Smyrna,
for which reason he was Sir-named Scholasticus. His first study was Poetry,
which made him publish many small Poems in Heroic Verse under the Title of
Daphnicks, together with diverse Epigrams; whereby being prepared with a Style
most agreeable florid, he (by the advice of Eutychianus prime Secretary of
State) undertook to write an History concerning the Empire and Deeds of
Justinian in five Books, beginning where Procopius left off; which Piece he
finished in the Reign of Justin the second, as he himself declares in his
Preface. Now albeit Agathias highly extols Procopius, yet he differs from him
in many things, particularly in his commending the French, whom Procopius
decryes. He likewise (though an Heathen, as appears by his Discourse of Stephen
the Proto-martyr,) seems to speak more favorably of the Christians in the
beginning of his History, where he praises the French for being so. Finally,
his account of the Oriental Monarchys, in the end of his second Book, as well
as his Succession of the Persian Kings after Artaxerxes, in his fourth Book,
are rendered very considerable by the assistance of his Interpreter Sergius, who
was furnished herein, by the Notaries and Library-keepers of all the Kings and
public Archives in Persia,

LIB. V. OF THE ANCIENT LATIN HISTORIANS.
Qu. WHich are the most eminent of the Ancient Latin Historians?

Ans. Julius Caesar, Salust, Livy, Paterculus, Valerius Maximus, Quintus
Curtius, Tacitus, Florus, Suetonius, Justin, and Marcelinus.

Qu. What account have you of Julius Caesar?

Ans. Cajus Julius Caesar (descended from the Noble Julian Family) was the
first Founder of the Roman Empire; yet no less eminent for his Commentaries,
than his Conquests: Using his Pen with the same Vigor, as he used his Sword;
in so much, that, as Quintilian observes, he was the only Roman, who for
Eloquence might have been opposed to Cicero: And who, as Gyraldus says) did
alone overcome all others both in Writing and Fighting. In his tender years he
addicted himself to Poetry, and Composed the Tragedy of Oedipus, the Praise of
Hercules, and several other Poems under the Title of Julii, which Augustus
afterward prohibited to be published. Neither was he less famous for his Skill
in Oratory, witness his Funeral Orations on his Wife Cornelia, and Aunt Julia,
his Accusation of Dolabella, his Invectives against Cato, and his Orations for
the Bythinian Law Plautia, for Decius the Samnite, for Sextilius and others,
Likewise his two Books of Analogy gave him great repute among the Grammarians.
Besides which, he wrote several other Tracts of Augurie, and witty Apothegms;
as well as of the motion of the Stares, which he had Learnt in Egypt, and
wherein he Prognosticated his own Death, on the Ides of March, as the Elder
Pliny relates; nor is he less eminent for his Reformation of the Calendar. But
what surpassed all his other Writings, were his seven Books of Commentaries,
describing nothing but his own Actions, and things that he himself had seen.
Asinius Pollio, (that carping Critic) accuses him (as Suetonius says) for
suerving from the Truth in many Relations about himself, and that he differs
extremely from the account which Dion, Plutarch and other Authors give of the
same Actions; as also, that he reports many things unjustly to the Defamation
of the Ancient Gauls: But these Censures are only conjectural. As for the
excellency of his Style, it is so Easy, Natural and Eloquent, that his Latin
has ever been compared to Xenophon's Greek, as well as his other Characters.
The eight Book of his Commentaries was written by Hirtius. Caesar's Writings,
though adorned with some Orations, are destitute of many Rhetorical Ornaments,
wherewith he could have beautified them; in so much, that Cicero esteems his
Commentaries to be nothing but short Notes prepared by Caesar in order to a
more complete History, had not his untimely Murder prevented him.

Qu. What account have you of Salust?

Ans. Crispus Salustius, or, as others call him, Sallustius, was born at
Amiternum in the Sabines Territory, the third year of the 173d. Olympiad, which
was the same year that Sylla's Soldiers took and Sacked Athens; for he was
Elder than Caesar, though he outlived him seven years, Salust was first
Educated in Rome, spending his youth in Ingenious Studies, so as to be
preferred to many considerable Offices in the Government: as, Senator, Tribune,
Treasurer, and Praetour in Africa by the favor of Julius Caesar, in which last
Office, by his Extortions, he grew so vastly Rich, as to purchase the Village
Tiburte, and his Country House at Tivoli, as well as the chief Houses on Mount
Quirinal in Rome, together with those spacious Gardens, called (at this day)
The Gardens of Salust. He was descended from the Noble Salustian Family; and
Educated under his Tutor Attejus Praetextatus Philologus. Of his Works,
Catalin's Conspiracy, and the Jugurthine War, are the two chief, that are
extant; Besides which, he wrote the History of Rome from its foundation, with a
particular Narration of Marius and Sylla, as also the Atchievments of Pompey in
the Mithridatick War, of all which, we have only some few Fragments remain; but
for the true delivery of his Punick History, he was so Zealous, that he
Travailed into Africa on purpose, to be the better informed. His Style, in
imitation of Thucydides, whom Quintilian compares him to,) is Concise, Short,
and Pithy. Of the Ancients, as well as Tacitus, and Seneca, as St. Austin did
highly esteem Salust; and of the modern Critics, Lipsius, Turnebus and
Scaliger prefer him to Caesar or Livy. Nevertheless, Asinius Pollio, Livy and
others accuse him for inventing new words, as well as for the using obsolete
ones; and for too much obscure brevity in his expressions, wherein Tacitus
imitates him. He is likewise censured for stealing out of Thucycides and Cato
many Select Sentences, and for the too often repetition of the same words; as
well as for inserting many inessential things into his History, more especially
his two Prefaces before Catalin's Conspiracy, and the Jugurthine War, which
relate not at all to the following subjects: But the first a general Harangue
against Idleness; and the second an Invective against those whom Debauchery
diverted from their Employs. Yet that, for the which he was the most condemned,
is his own extravagant Life, so much contrary to his Writings: When, not being
satisfied with his own Wife Terentia, whom he married after her Divorce from
Cicero, he was taken in Adultery with Fausta, Lucius Sylla's Daughter; for the
which he was not only expelled the Senate, but condemned also to be Whipped by
Milo, and fain to buy off that punishment with Money. Finally, his Orations
discover both his amity to Caesar, and enmity to Cicero. Notwithstanding some
question, whether these two addressed to Caesar, were Salusts or no. But most
certain it is, that that one Oration which Cicero ascribes to Salust is
counterfeit, and none of his, it being in no wise Historical. The most
considerable of his Friends were, Julius Caesar, Cornelius Nepos, Messala, and
Nigidius Figulus.

Qu. What account have you of Livy?

Ans. Titus Livius Patavinus, was born at Padua, and flourished chiefly under
Augustus and Tiberius. He began to write after Augustus's Triumph for the War
at Actium, and finished his History in the beginning of Tiberius's reign. He
wrote (as Seneca tells us, many Philosophical Dialogues before he came to Rome,
the which he dedicated to Augustus Caesar, whereby he procured his Favor. And
Quintinian informs us, that in a Letter to his Son, he delivered many excellent
Precepts of Rhetoric; but his chief Piece is his History, which contained 142
Books, or (as some say) but 140. beginning with the Foundation of Rome by
Romulus, and extending for the space of 746 years, to the German War, managed
by Drusus. who lost his Life in that Expedition. This History was not divided
into Decades (as now we find it,) by Livy himself, but by others since his
time. And of the 140, or 142 Books which he wrote, there remain at present not
above 35. neither are those altogether entire: For that the whole second Decade
is wanting; also we have but the first, third and fourth, with half of the
fifth, which was found at Worms, by one Simon Gryneus. Likewise the beginning
of the forty third Book has been lately recovered by a Manuscript in the
Chapter of Bamberg. But for the remaining fourteen Decades, we must rest
contented with the Epitomy of Florus, who, as some vainly fancy, was the
occasion of the loss of the whole. His Style, notwithstanding Asinius Pollio
blames it for its Patavinity, or Paduan Dialect, (where he writes sibe for
sibi, and quase for quasi, as we now pronounce it;) is yet extolled by
Quintilian, as most Eloquent, and his History equaled to Herodotus. Also,
however the Emperor Caligula accuses him of Verbosity, yet the same Prince was
no less an enemy to Homer, Virgil, Seneca, and all Ingenious men. It is true,
that Augustus blamed Livy for too much favoring Pompey's party against Caesar,
but yet he withdrew not his favor from him, as perceiving it his Countries
cause, who were all of the Pompejan Faction. Again, Trogus Pompejus (as Justin
informs us) accuses Livy's Orations, as too direct and long, which censure
might happily, arise out of Jealousy betwixt two Historians of the same Age and
Subject. And for what Mascardi blames him, of beginning his History with part
of an Hexameter Verse, it is frivolous, since there is no Prose without
something of the like nature occuring. Seneca more justly accuses him of envy
to Salust, in preferring Thucydides so much above him; but yet Seneca terms him
the most Eloquent. Finally, the Aspersion which can with most difficulty be
wiped off from Livy, is that, for the which Gregory the Great prohibited him to
be kept in any Christian Library, and which Causabon mentions in his Preface to
Polybius, viz. his notorious Credulity in the Pagan Superstition, where he
fills his History with Prodigies; as, of an Oxes Speaking; a Mules Engendring,
the Metamorphosis of Men, Women and other Creatures; showers of Flint-stones,
Milk, Blood, Flesh and Chalk; the Statues of Gods Weeping, Speaking, and
shedding Tears of Blood, Armies engaging in the Air, and Ghosts appearing;
together with Lakes and Rivers of Blood: All which nevertheless he represents
only as the fond opinions of others, and not to be credited.

Last of all, Gruterus entitles him the Prince of Latin History, Barthius, the
Patavinian Siren, and Lipsius, the most Plentiful of Historians, wherein (as he
observes) we meet with things too good for us. He died in the fourth year of
Tiberius. He was chosen by the Senate to be Tutor to the Emperor Claudius in
his youth. And (as Pliny the younger tells us) One traveled to Rome from the
remotest parts of Spain, only to have a sight of Livy.

Qu. What account have you of Vellejus Paterculus?

Ans. Vellejus Paterculus (descended from the Ancient Warlike Princes of
Campaigne) was at first a Military Tribune in France, then Prefect of Horses
in Germany, afterward Quaestor, and last of all Tiberius's Legate in the
Pannonian War; as he himself informs us. About the 16th. year of Tiberius he
composed his Epitomy of Roman History in two Books, whereof the beginning of
the first is lost. He pretends to begin only with the Foundation of Rome,
nevertheless, as appears by the remains of his first Book, He treats of things
far more Ancient, and so comes down to his own time, the 16th. year of
Tiberius, which was the 32d. year after the Birth of Christ. Vossius, Lipsius
and others extol the Elegancy of his Style, and allow him to have given us a
Judicious account of some things which are not elsewhere to be met with.
Nevertheless, he is condemned for too much flattering the House of Augustus, as
well as for parasitically applauding even the Extravagancies of Tiberius and
his Evil Councellor Sejanus, whom he magnifies for the most Virtuous of men.
But, to conclude, his greatest Excellency is his Eloquence, which appears
chiefly in his Invectives and Encomiums, as where he traduces Mark Anthony, and
extols Cicero. Some attribute this Author another Fragment of the defeat of the
Roman Legion by the Grisons, the which Vossius, Velserus, and other Learned
Critics have demonstrated to be a counterfeit.

Qu. What account have you of Valerius Maximus?

Ans. Valerius Maximus, a Roman Citizen of a Noble Patrician Family, derived
his Pedigree from the Valerian Family by his Fathers side, and from the Fabians
by his Mother. In his youth he was initiated in Learning, but coming to be of
Age, he served for some time in the Wars, and Sailed with Sextus Pompejus into
Asia: From whence, being returned to Rome, he published in nine Books his
various History, or rather Miscellanious collection of memorable Deeds and
Sayings that had occurred among the Romans; the which he wrote at the latter
end of Tiberius his reign, and after the disgrace of Sejanus, which makes him
so boldly traduce that Favorite, whom Paterculus was obliged to flatter, as
writing in the time of his Prosperity. Finally, he is condemned for the
obscurity and unpoliteness of Style.

Qu. What account have you of Quintus Curtius?

Ans. Quintus Curtius Rufus, though born (as most think) in the Reign of
Tiberius, yet, living to a great Age, flourished chiefly under Vespasian: And
was the same Curtius whom Suetonius makes in his younger days to teach
Rhetoric under Tiberius; as also the same, to whom (as the younger Pliny
reports,) a Phantasme appeared in Africa. He wrote the Life and Expliots of
Alexander the Great in ten Books; whereof, the two first, and end of the fifth
are lost, as also the beginning of the sixth; and in some parts of his tenth or
last Book, there appears a defect: Nevertheless, Christopher Bruno has supplied
the two first Books out of Arrianus, Justin and Diodorus. As for the Censures
that pass upon him, Glarian, Mascardi and others condemn him for an ill
Geographer, in making the River Ganges run from the South, and confounding
Mount Taurus with Caucasus, as also mistaking the Jaxartes of Pliny for the
River Tanais: Likewise for too much abounding in Sentences, and making persons
speak improper to the Characters they bear, as in the Oration of the Scythians
to Alexander, in his seventh Book. But all these accusations are frivolous and
groundless, in comparison of that which is urged against him, for vindicating
the Brutish and Unnatural Lust of Alexander to the Eunuch Bagoas, which Curtius
justifies as Lawful. Nevertheless, he is as much esteemed of among the
Critics, as any of the Latin Historians, both for sincerity and Judgment,
and Eloquence. Lipsius prefers him before all others for the perusal of
Princes. Vossius says, He is more Elegant, than Perspicuous; yet allows his
Words to be Choice, his Sentences Accute, his Orations Eloquent, and his Phrase
worthy of Augustus's Age. As for his Orations, whether direct or oblique, they
are all Excellent. Neither is he impertinent in Digressions, unless you will
accuse his Description of India for one, which was really essential to his
Design. Lastly, Alphonsus King of Arragon was recovered from a dangerous fit of
Sickness by the diversion he took in the reading of this Author, which made him
cry out, That he owed his Recovery neither to Hippocrates nor Avicenne, but
only to Quintus Curtius.

Qu. What account have you of Tacitus.

Ans. Cornelius Tacitus, Prefect of the Belgic Gauls under the Emperor
Adrian, besides his Annals, (which reach from the Scene of Augustus, to the end
of Nero's Reign, excepting his last twelve years,) wrote also an History, that
extends from the Death of Nero, to the Government of Nerva and Trajan; of which
History, there are now extant but Five Books: And Lipsius, with reason,
conjectures, that there are at least Ten more lost, in as much as they were all
said to reach from Galba to Trajan, which was the space of one and twenty
years; whereof the five we have now left us, treat but of one whole year. His
History is quoted in the eleventh of his Annals, whence we may conclude That to
have been first written. Now, besides his Annals and History, he wrote also a
Treatise of Germany and its Inhabitants, with another Book of the Life of his
Father in Law Agricola: Both which pieces are now extant. But for the other
Tract of the corruption of Roman Eloquence, which some attribute to Tacitus,
and others to Quintilian, it is thought by Lipsius and other Learned men to have
been written by neither. Now among these many Judicious persons who extol this
Author, Vossius (though he prefers the Eloquence of his History before that of
his Annals,) yet allows him to be every where Grave and Elegant: Also Lipsius
calls him, a sharp and prudent Writer, and Imitator of Salust: Sidonius would
have him never mentioned without Praise: But the Emperor Tacitus had so great
a veneration for his Ancestor and Namesake, that he made his Books be
transcribed no less then ten times in one year, and caused his Statue to be
erected in all public Libraries. Notwithstanding, he has not been totally
exempt from Censure: For Alciatus, rather out of Affection, than Reason,
preferred his Friend Paulus Jovius before him; and Ferret, as well out of
Ignorance, as Vanity, accuses Tacitus of writing ill Latin; However Pliny the
younger, magnifies his Eloquence therein. Also Vopiscus (only to justify his
Assertion, that all Narrations are mixed with untruths,) accuses Tacitus of
delivering falsities, but gives no instance where. Likewise, Chrysostom and
Tertullian bribed rather with Religion, than Judgment, accuse Tacitus as an
Imposture, for that he derides the Christians, abuses the Miracles of Moses,
and upbraids the Jews for their adoring the Effigies of an Ass, in the fifth
Book of his History: Which, as coming from an Heathen, is not altogether so
criminal; but rather to be condemned for a digression, than for an Impiety.
Finally, he equals as well Thucydides, as Salust, in the number of his choice
Sentences; out of which, the wisest Politicians have selected their most
prudent Maxims of State.

Qu. What account have you of Lucius Florus?

Ans. Lucius Annaeus Florus (descended from the Noble Annaean Family, and
thereby allayed to the Senececaes) lived under the Emperor Adrian; and
composed an Epitomy of Roman History in four Books. Some question whether he
was the same Author that annexed the Arguments to Livy's History; but it is a
great error to imagine, that he ever designed the Epitomy of all Livy's works,
much less, that he should occasion the loss of any part of them. His style is
Poetical, using (like Virgil) Hemesticks in his Periods, and writes more like a
Declamer than a Historian, which makes Sigonius brand him for impertinent. His
account of the Suns being seen to fall into the Ocean, and there heard with
Horror to extinguish its Beams in the Waves; (as mentioned in his Description
of Brutus his Sea Voyage,) also his Report of two Spirits in the shape of young
men appearing in Rome near the Temple of Castor and Pollux; (when he speaks of
the defeat of Cimbri by Marius;) are things altogether incredible, and not fit
to be inserted in History; as Scaliger, in his Comment on Eusebius, well
observes. Yet notwithstanding, Vossius allows him to be a Writer, that is both
Elegant and Eloquent, and (except in some few places) truly Florid.

Qu. What account have you of Suetonius?

Ans. Caius Suetonius Tranquillus (whose Fathers name was Suetonius Lenis, as
he himself testifies in the Life of Otho,) was Secretary of State to the
Emperor Adrian, till being suspected of too great Familiarity with the Empress
Sabina, he was removed from that Employ. After which, he applied himself to
writing, and composed these several Pices: To wit, The Lives of the Twelve
first Roman Emperors, beginning with Julius Caesar, and ending with the death
of Domitian, in the 98th. year of Christ, which piece is now extant: Together
with other Tracts of the Illustrious Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Poets,
whereof at this day, only some Fragments remain; Besides, a Discourse of the
Roman Games, a piece called, the Republic of Cicero, and of the most
Illustrious Families of Rome, all which are perished in the ruins of time.
Ausonius likewise tells us of another Book of Kings divided into three parts,
Which (he says) was written by Suetonius, and afterward contracted into a
Poem by Pontius Paulinus. But for that Treatise of the Life of the Elder Pliny,
which goes under the Name of Suetonius, it was certainly none of his; for the
great Intimacy betwixt our Author and the younger Pliny, would have produced a
more Honorable Character of his Friends Uncle, the Elder Pliny, than is there
to be found, had Suetonius been the Writer of it. Some are of opinion that the
beginning of his first Book of the twelve Caesar's is wanting, because there is
no mention of the Birth and first years of Julius Caesar, as there is of the
Original and Education of all the other Emperors, in the rest of their Lives
As for the Censures that are passed upon Suetonius, they are chiefly two; the
first, For his exclaiming against the turbulent Superstition of the Christians;
And the second, for his Description of Vice in the Lives of Tiberius, Nero, and
Caligula; whereof, if you will pardon him the first as an Heathen, I see not
how he could avoid the other, as a Faithful and True Historian. Nevertheless,
Pliny calls him, A most Learned and Honest Author: Suidas, the famous Roman
Grammarian: Vopiscus, a fair, Candid and Compendious writer: But Ludovicus
Vives says, That of all the Greek and Latin Historians, He is the most pure
and diligent, speaking Truth boldly. Nay, many prefer him before Livy, Salust
or Tacitus: which Character, though Vossius will not assent to, yet does he
approve of those other Encomiums given him by Vopiscus and Vives. This Author
was at first rendered into English by that Voluminous Translator Dr. Philemon
Holland, which gave occasion for one merrily disposed to break this quibling
Jest upon him: Philemon with Translations does so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.


Qu. What account have you of Justin?

Ans. Justin flourished under Antonius Pius, and abbreviated those forty four
Books of the Universal History of two thousand years from Ninus to Augustus,
which Trogus Pompejus had before composed under the reign of Tiberius, and
whereof nothing but this Epitomy remains; which, nevertheless, we find not to
occasion the loss of the Original, as some imagine. Martin the Polander, as
well as Munster, confound this Author with Justin the Martyr, making them one
of the same, because they were Contemporaries; but without any color of
Reason, as appears by the Scurrilous Invective made by this Historian against
the Jews, in his 36th. Book, which the Martyr would never have been guilty of.
Now of this Author, as well his Method (wherein he follows his Original, even
in the very number of Books) as his Style, are both highly commended. The seven
first Books comprehend the Infancy of the World, or first Inhabitants thereof,
beginning with the description of Kings, Places and Countries of the first
Assyrian or Babylonish Monarchies; and from the seventh to the one and fortyeth
Book, is a continued Series of the Empire of Macedon, beginning with Philip,
the Father of Alexander the Great. He used no direct Orations, for that had
rendered him guilty of the same error, which Trogus himself condemned in Livy
and Salust. Yet nevertheless, Justin is accused of some Digressions, as in the
beginning of his second Book, where the Scythians and Egyptians have a long
tedious debate in preference of each others Antiquity: And likewise in the
twentieth Book, concerning the Birth, Travels, Virtue and Death of Pythagoras.
Again, Pererius in his Comment upon Daniel, has convinced Justin of many
errors concerning the Jews: And Vopiscus accuses him of Falsity. But that
wherein he seems most of all inexcusable, is his false Chronology, which is
wholly attributed to the Abbreviator.

Qu. What account have you of Ammianus Marcellinus?

Ans. Ammianus Marcellinus, a Grecian and Citizen of Antioch, flourished
chiefly under the Emperors Gratian and Valentinian, holding in his youth
diverse considerable Offices of the Militia, particularly, one of the Guard du
Corpse, besides many other eminent Employs, in all which, he acquitted himself
with much Honor. He wrote an History which extends from the beginning of
Nerva, to the death of Valens, in one and thirty Books: whereof, the first
thirteen being lost, the other eighteen only remain; and those (too) full of
Imperfection. As well his Military Profession, as Greek Birth, do both
contribute to the Roughness of his Style; and for the same Reasons ought to be
pardoned. No other Historian so well informs us of the Antiquities and
Originals of the Gauls, Germans and Burgundians, as he does; neither has any
Heathen Author written less reflectingly on the Christians, notwithstanding the
excessive Praises he attributes to Julian, which were but his due in respect of
Moral Virtues: For which reason, as well as for his sincerity, and presenting
us with things no where else to be met with, he is duly esteemed of by all
Learned men. Yet, nevertheless, some just exceptions may be taken against him;
when, instead of an Historian, he plays the Philosopher, and runs away from his
Subject: As in the seventh Book, where he quits Julian at Paris, to Speculate
the nature of Earthquakes: Also, in the beginning of his twentieth Book, where
leaving Constantius to prepare against the Persians, he falls enquiring into
the nature of Eclipse; and presents his Reader with a Lecture of Astronomy
instead of History: And again, in his thirtieth Book, where he leaves
Valentinian at Tryers, whilst he presents you with an Invective against
Lawyers. Also Marcellinus is by Causine accused of his too many Poetical
Descriptions throughout the whole Body of his Writings. But notwithstanding all
these Censures, he is allowed of by Vossius, To be a Grave and Serious Writer,
worthy to be beloved by all men.

LIB. VI. OF GOVERNMENT AND SUCCESSION.
Qu. WHich are the three principal forms of Government?

Ans. First, Monarchy, which is the Government of one single man alone, as is
used in England, France and Spain: Or secondly, an Aristocracy, where the
people are governed by a select number of Noblemen or Grandees, as heretofore
the States of Venice and Genoa: Or thirdly, Democracy, which is a Republic or
Commonwealth, wherein the People are governed only by such Magistrates, as they
choose among themselves, as it is at this time in Holland.

Qu. What are the Extremes or Abuses of these three sorts of Government?

Ans. When a Monarchy runs into Tyranny, Aristocracy into Oligarchy, or
Democracy into Anarchy and Confusion.

Qu. How many sorts of Monarchy are there?

Ans. Two, the one Hereditary, as in England or France, and the other Elective,
as in Poland.

Qu. How has England been Anciently governed?

Ans. England was first under the Britains: secondly, Tributary to the Romans:
thirdly, under the Saxons; fourthly, under the Danes: and fifthly under the
Normans; whose Conquest of this Island by William Duke Normandy, is the chief
Period of time from whence our Chronologers reckon.

Qu. Name me the Succession of our English Monarchs from the Conquest, together
with their several Races?

Ans. First, of the Norman Race, were William the Conqueror, William Rufus,
Henry the first, and King Stephen.


Secondly, of the Race of Plantagenets, were Henry the second, Richard the
first, King John, Henry the third, Edward the first, Edward the second, Edward
the third, and Richard the second.


Thirdly, Plantagenets of the House of Lancaster, were Henry the fourth, Henry
the fifth, and Henry the sixth.


Fourthly, Plantagenets of the House of York, were Edward the fourth, Edward
the fifth, and Richard the third.


Fifthly, of the Race of Tudors, were Henry the seventh, Henry the eighth,
Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.


Sixthly and lastly, of the Race of Stuarts, were King James, King Charles the
Martyr, and Charles the Second, our present King, whom God preserve.


Qu. How many years is it since William Duke of Normandy Conquered England; or
when began he to Reign?

Ans. William the Conqueror having defeated Harold in that famous Battle at
Hastings in Sussex, began his Reign Anno Domini one thousand sixty six. which
is about six hundred and seventeen years ago.

Qu. When did the Division betwixt the two Houses of York and Lancaster first
begin?

Ans. It began upon the death of Richard the second: In which Kings reign was
that Insurrection of Watt Tailor and Jack Straw, whom the Mayor of London so
Loyally defeated.

Qu. How ended the Quarrel betwixt these two Houses?

Ans. By the Marriage of Henry the seventh, to Elizabeth the Eldest Daughter of
Edward the Fourth; which Match united the Kings Red-Rose of Lancaster, with the
Queens White-Rose of York, and so established the Peace of both Houses.

Qu. From whence sprang the Title of King James, and the Stuarts, to the Crown
of England?

Ans. By the Marriage of the Lady Margaret, King Henry the seventh's Eldest
Daughter, to James the Fourth King of Scotland, whose Son, James the fifth, had
Issue one only Daughter, which was Mary Queen of Scots, the Mother of our
English Monarch King James, the sixth of that Name in Scotland, and the first
in England. For Henry the sevenths Issue Male being expired by the Death of
Queen Elizabeth, (the only Relict of Henry the eighth) the next Succession fell
upon his Issue Female, the aforesaid Lady Margaret.

Qu. Which are the chief Writers of our English Chronicles?

Ans. Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, Jeffry of Monmouth, Martin, Polydor
Virgil, Holinshead, Speed, Stow, and Baker; besides the Writers of particular
Lives: such as, Daniel, Heywood, Bacon's Henry the seventh, Herbert's Henry the
eighth, and Cambden's Queen Elizabeth, the best in their kind.

Qu. What Races have succeeded to the Crown of France?

Ans. There have been three Races of Kings in France: The first of Pharamond,
A. Chapter 419. the second of Pepin, A. C. 751. And the third of Hugh Capet, A. C.
988.

Qu. What Races of Kings have succeeded to the Crown of Spain?

Ans. Since the Expulsion of the Romans, the Spaniards have had four Races of
Kings: the first from the Goths, the second, after the Invasion of the Moors,
from Don Pelago; the third from Don Sancho Mayor, King of Navarre; and the
fourth from the House of Austria, by the Marriage of the Daughter and Heir of
Ferdinand the Catholic; which Race now governs in Spain.

Qu. What Races of Kings have succeeded to the Crown of Scotland?

Ans. The Ancient Kingdom of the Scots reckon by two Periods; the first from
Fergusius, who was King of Scotland in the time of Alexander the Great; and the
second from Robert Stuart, the Son of Walter Stuart, who married Margery, King
Bruces Daughter, in the year of our Lord 1350. or thereabouts.

Qu. How came Ireland into the hands of the English?

Ans. By the Conquest of Henry the second, in the year of Christ 1172.

Qu. Of what Family is the Emperor of Germany?

Ans. Descended from Radulphus Auspergensis, who A. D. 1273. made Austria the
Imperial Seat, constituting his Son Albert first Duke thereof.

Qu. Of what Family is the Emperor of Turkey?

Ans. Of the Ottoman Family, so called from the Warlike Emperor Othoman (Son
of Orthogules) who A. D. 1300. did much enlarge the Mohammedan Empire by his
Arms.

Qu. Of what Family are the Kings of Portugal?

Ans. Portugal, which did formerly belong to Spain, is now a distinct Kingdom
of it self, and enjoys the blessing of Kings of its own, out of that Honorable
Family of the Duke of Braganza, descended from Henry of Lorrain, to whom
Alphonsus King of Castile gave his Daughter Teresia in Marriage, for the good
Services he had performed against the Sarazens in Portugal, A.C. 1110.

Qu. How is Holland and the Low-Countrys Governed?

Ans. Holland did formerly belong to the King of Spain, 'till by the Severity
of the Spanish Inquisition, and Cruel Government of the Duke of Alva under
Philip the second, they Revolted, and by the Assistance of Queen Elizabeth
threw off the Spanish yoke, and set up a Commonwealth among themselves; under
which kind of Government they now continue at this very day.

Qu. What Interest has the Prince of Orange in the Government af Holland?

Ans. He is allowed a double Vote in their Senate, with many other Privileges
above the rest, as a Reward for the good Services done them by the Old Prince
of Orange, in their Revolt against the Duke of Alva and the Spaniards.

Qu. How is the present Government of Italy?

Ans. It is divided into little Commonwealths, Principalities or Dukedoms;
which in Spiritual matters are mostly subject to the Pope; who, as the Ghost of
the Deceased Roman Empire, sits Crowned upon the Grave thereof, as the
Malmsbury Philosopher well observes.

LIB. VII. OF PHILOSOPHY.
Qu. WHich are the chief Successions of Ancient Philosophy?

Ans. These three; the Ionick, Italick, and Eleatick, as Clemens Alexandrinus
reckons them; But Diogenes Laertius mentions only two the Ionick and Italick,
which last he makes to fall in with the Eleatick.

Qu. Who was the first of the Ionick Sect?

Ans. Thales.

Qu. Who was the first of the Italick Sect?

Ans. Pythagoras; whose Masters Name was Pherecydes?

Qu. What Philosophers succeeded Thales in his Sect of Ionick Philosophy?

Ans. Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, and Socrates, who being
the first Founder of Moral Philosophy, after his time several new Sects arose.

Qu. Who were the chief Philosophers of the Italick Sect after Pythagoras?

Ans. Telauges and Xenophanes, (whom Clemens makes the first of the Eleaticks,)
also Parmenedes, Zeno Eleates, Leucippus, Empedocles, Democritus, Protagoras,
Metrodorus, Diomenes, Pyrrho, Heraclitus, Anaxarchus, Nausiphanes, Naucydes,
and Epicurus, whose Philosophy is given us by the Latin Poet Lucretius.

Qu. What are the chief Sects, which you say arose after Socrates, amongst his
Followers?

Ans. They were the Cynicks, Stoics, Academicks, Peripateticks, Scepticks,
Epicureans, and Eclecticks.

Qu. Who were the chief Cynicks?

Ans. Antisthenes, Diogenes, and Crates, from whom sprang the Stoics.

Qu. Who were the chief Stoics?

Ans. Crates, Zeno, Citiensis, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Cato, Varro, Tullie,
Seneca, Antonius, and Possidonius.

Qu. Who were the chief Academicks?

Ans. Plato, Pseusippus, Xenocrates, and Polemon, of the old Academy: Crantor
and Arcesilaus, of the middle Academy: and Lacydes, Hegesilans, Carneades, and
Clitomachus, of the new Academy.

Qu. Who were the chief Peripateticks?

Ans. Aristotle, Theophrastus, Straton, Lycon, Critolaus, and Diodorus.

Qu. Who were the chief Scepticks?

Ans. Pyrrho, Timon, Aenesidemus, Neumenius and Sextus Empericus.

Qu. Who were the chief Epicureans?

Ans. Epicurus, his servant Mus, Hermannus, Lucian, Celsus, Lucretius, Cassius
who murdered Caesar, Maro, and Patronius Arbiter.

Qu. Who were the chief Electticks?

Ans. Potamon of Alexandria, Sotion, Ammonius, and Plotinus.

Qu. Why were the Cynicks so called?

Ans. In derision of their Morose Dogged Manners and ill Nature; Fawning on
Virtue, and Barking at Vice; as Ammonius well expresses it.

Qu. Why were the Stoics so called?

Ans. From the place they disputed in, called a Stoa, or Porch.

Qu. Why were the Academicks so called?

Ans. From the place where they studied in, called an Academy.

Qu. Why were the Peripateticks so called?

Ans. From their manner of Disputing as they walked in a place called the
Lycaeum.

Qu. Why were the Scepticks so called?

Ans. Because they denied any certainty of knowledge in any thing; which others
affirming, were called Dogmaticks.

Qu. Why were the Epicureans so called?

Ans. From their Master Epicurus; who nevertheless received all his Principles
of Atomical Philosophy from Democritus, who held the same long before.

Qu. Why were the Electicks so called?

Ans. Because they pretended to search all other Phylosophies, and choose the
best out of each.

Qu. Why were all these men called Philosophers?

Ans. From their Study of Wisdom and Knowledge.

Qu. To what kind of knowledge did the Academicks pretend?

Ans. To know nothing certainly, but to dispute all things; yet not absolutely
denying that there may be some probability of conclusion, only that it was
difficult to attain unto.

Qu. In what did the Stoics differ from the Peripateticks, and the Epicureans
from both?

Ans. Somewhat they differed in their Physics, but most in their Opinions of
the chief good and Happiness of man.

Qu. Wherein did the Stoics place Happiness?

Ans. In the rigid exercise of Virtue, and contempt of those things, which
others esteem Pain or Pleasure.

Qu. In what did the Peripateticks place Happiness?

Ans. In the exercise of Virtue, together with the enjoyment of the gifts of
Nature and Fortune; the want of which, they acknowledged to be Unhappiness.

Qu. In what did the Epicureans place their Happiness?

Ans. In the enjoyment of Pleasure, and living without the fear of Powers
Invisible.

Qu. What are the chief parts or contents of Philosophy?

Ans. Physics, or Natural Philosophy; Ethics, or Moral Philosophy; and
Dialecticks, or Logic.

Qu. What does Physics, or Natural Philosophy, comprehend?

Ans To know the Nature of the Heavens, and all things in the World.

Qu. What does Ethics, or Moral Philosophy, comprehend?

Ans. The instruction of Good Manners, Virtue and Vice, together with the chief
good of men, and how to attain it.

Qu. What does Dialecticks, or Logic, teach?

Ans. The Art of Discourse, or true Reasoning, which serves as the Instrument
of both the other.

Qu. Which are the best Authors to instruct us in the Lives and Doctrines of
the Philosophers?

Ans. Diogenes Laertius, Stobaeus Plutarch, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Steuchius
Eugebinus; but above all, Cicero's Works, wherein we shall find what the Lord
Bacon says to be Infallibly true: That as a little Philosophy enclineth men to
Atheism, so depth in Philosophy brings back to Religion.

LIB. VIII. Of LEARNING AND SCIENCES In General.
Qu. WHich are the seven Liberal Sciences?

Ans. Philology, History, Mathematics, Philosophy, Physic, Law, and Divinity.


Qu. What does Philology comprehend?

Ans. Philology comprehends the study of Grammar, (or the Art of Writing and
Speaking Correctly;) Rhetoric, (or the Art of Speaking Eloquently;) Poetry,
(or the Art of Writing in Measure or Verse;) Logic, (or the Art of Reasoning;)
Anagnostick, (or the method of Reading Authors Profitably;) Critics, (or
Censures upon Authors;) and Diadacticks, (or the method of Teaching others.)


Qu. How may History be divided?

Ans. Into seven parts: As for Example, Ecclesiastical, (or the History of the
Fathers and Councils;) Political, (or the Government of States and Kingdoms;)
Natural, (as Pliny of the Heavens, Fowls, Beasts and Plants;) Successions, as
of Countries and Families;) Professions, (as the Lives of Famous men in any
Faculty;) Various, (as Aelian, Plutarchs Morals, and Valerius Maximus;) and
Fabulous, (such as are called Romances;)


Qu. What do the Mathematics comprehend?

Ans. Arithmetic, (or the Art of Numbers;) Geometry, (or the Art of
Measuring;) Perspectives, (or the Art of Sight;) Astronomy, (or the knowledge
of the Stars and their Motions;) Geography, (or the Description of the Earth;)
Architecture, (or the Art of Building;) and Music, (or the Art of Harmony.)


Qu. What does Philosophy comhend?

Ans. Metaphysics (that treat of Supernatural things, as Spirits, etc)
Physics, (or Natural Philosophy;) Ethics, (or Moral Philosophy;)
Oeconomiques, (of Order and Discipline; Politics, (of Government;)
Thanmaturgicks, (or the working Strange Conclusions;) and Pneumatology, (or the
Doctrine of Spirits.)


Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Physic?

Ans. To be well read in all Natural and Physical Writings, of the Latins,
Greeks, Arabians, Paracelsians, Galeno-Chymists, Prophylacticks, and Empericks.


Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Law?

Ans. To read such as have written concerning Lawgivers, and Laws in general,
Of the Law of Nature, Of the Law of Nations, Of the Laws of the Hebrews, Of the
Civil-Law, Of the Canon Law, and Of our Municipal Laws.


Qu. What is comprehended in the Study of Divinity?

Ans. To read such as have written Divinity Natural, Catechetical, Exegetical,
on Commentators, Polemical, in Controversies, Synidetical, for Cases of
Conscience. Prophetical, of Preaching, and Gubernetical, of Church Government.


Instrue praeceptis Animum; nec discere Cesses:
Nam sine Doctrina, vita est qansi Mortis Imago.
FINIS.

