Mr. DREYDEN VINDICATED, IN A REPLY TO THE Friendly Vindication of Mr. Dreyden.
WITH REFLECTIONS On the ROTA.

Demitte Auricul as, ut Iniquae mentis Asellus
Quum gravius dorso subiit onus.
Hor. lib. 1. Sermon. Sat. 9. LONDON: Printed for T. D. and are to be sold in
Fleetstreet, the Exchange, and Westminster Hall. 1673.

Mr. DREYDEN Vindicated.
SIR,
CAsting my eyes upon the Title of your Pamphlet, I promised my self a
Diversion I have much coveted, that is, a Vindication of Mr. Dreyden, whose Pen
at present is one of the most Ingenious and Innocent Recreations England
enjoys; when proceeding to satisfy my Curiosity in the Discourse as before in
the Title, I perceived 'twas my Destiny to share with Mr. Dreyden in his
Abuse; only with this difference: His Reputation, and my lost time were the
Preys. As for my Injury, I had let it sleep, in respect that it was not only
mine, but* general Calamity: But when I found Mr. Dreyden so coursly handled,
fearing such Discourses might be of ill consequence, (as Presidents who make it
a Mode to decry all Ingenuity) the Zeal and Reverence I had for Learning, Wit,
and Innocent pleasure, urged me (in this ensuing Treatise) to vindicate him,
who is so great a Patron of all those three Virtues.

The world is now so overrun with Wits, that Poets have as hard a Task as
Women's Parsons or Tailors, not one in ten pleases. So numerous are the
Critics, so frequent is Wit, and so elevated are their Fancies, that as a
great Lady did, they forget Common Notions, and cry to their servants, Give me,
give me, give me, I think ye call it a Pin.

Nay, your stomachs are now grown so squeamish, that good solid Sense will not
take; no, it must have Wit: But if you hear a sentence which is a Jest with no
Sense in it, then away you run with that; it is Wit, it is Wit; no matter for
Sense. Now of this latter sort of Wit is the Rota filled with, from whence
sprung your Pamphlet as Branches from the Root of a tree: neither are you less
severe; but as the Greatest Treasons are generally Maqueraded, and acted
privately, so is yours, who meets him with a kiss, and then stabs him;
Reprieves him in your Title, and Condemns him in your Book.

As on Mr. Dreydens behalf I cannot but be exceeding sorrowful that the Rota so
surpised him, as to put him in a Swound, (with his Critical Engines levelled
against his sieges and Conquests) so on the Publicks behalf I greatly rejoice
that you have found out such an easy Expedient to recover one out of a Trance,
as you say Tweaking by the Nose is. Had you been Contemporary with Mahomet, and
of his Cabal, you must either have concealed that Expedient, or you had
confounded him for a Prophet. But howsoever, I hope you will be so good a
Commonwealths-man as to put it in Culpeper's Dispensatory at the Next
Impression.

I am altogether Ignorant whether your Expectation is of succeeding Mr. Dreyden
in his Laurel. If so, your War is Lawful. But the world is apt to censure it
may be with you as with some University-professors of Wit, who having learnt
one or two Sentences of Latin, or Divine Clinches, make Discourses on purpose
to extend them. Some Authors are as thrifty of their Jests, as ChanceryClerks
of their words, who allow but three a penny in their Writings. But you are as
free of your Wit and Jests, as Citizens of Macquerel when they are Twenty a
Groat; that you may wind the house (where they are) before you see it.

Those Objections you raise against Mr. Dreyden, are observed to be collected
not so much out of Mr. Dreyden as out of the Rota; which makes your Readers
conjecture you to be some Itinerant Pastor, that takes Breviates at
London-Scrmons, and then in the Country vents them for his own, and makes them
fit any Text, though the Foppery be the same. You were gay-humour'd, and you are
Now pensive;
Once calm, and now unquiet.


Here you have borrowed an Objection from the Rota, and for want of French
fallen into their Mistake: for Gay-humour'd is nothing else but Gayete du
Coeur, and an expression that may be applied without forfeiture of Respect to
any person how great soever. Besides, if this expression were not resin'd
enough for a Privy Counselor to salute his Sovereign with, yet it were for a
Chambermaid, she never being bred up at the University. Even as the fearful
Hare when cours'd on Plain,
and longer cannot her flight maintain;
By the fierce Dog, with flix turned up does lie,
Who though not killed, yet cannot fly.


Here I find the main scruple which troubles his Conscience is, why Mr.
Dreyden calls fearful, so timorous a creature as a Hare naturally is? To which
I Reply: Why do we say, Cruel Tyrant, or Wicked Rogue? since a Tyrant naturally
is so Cruel, and a Rogue so Wicked: for a Tyrant has as little mercy; and
Rogue goodness, as an Hare valor. Pavidumque Leporem, says Horace, Epist. 2.
Also this Simile was appl'd only to the Ship, and not to the Prince; wherefore
it injures not him: and I believe the Ship never asked for Justice against Mr.
Dreyden's Simile.

Methinks the Gentleman who was so Indulgent to Mr. Dreydens Reputation, should
have a little considered his own, and retained that Wit for himself which he so
freely bestows on Mr. Dreyden, when he turns This is my Will, etc. into
This is my Wit, and this my Wit shall be.


He might even as well have said, I love Wit, but Wit loves not me.

As Sir Roger says of Tobacco in the Play, when it makes him sick: I love it,
but it loves not me: this is my will, and this I will have done.

In the Descant upon these words, I find the Author of the Rota goes a little
beyond our Vindicator, and quarrels with the Chiming of the two words Will and
Will; whereas that Ingemination adds a further grace and force to the
Authority of the Resolution. Neither can it properly be called a Tautologie,
the inculcating of a Command; as if a man should say, You shall, you shall, I
say you shall do it; where is the Chime or the Absurdity of the same thing again?
But here we have reason to imagine that worthy Gentleman (who was so indulgent
to Mr. Dreyden's Repute) had more experience in Limning then Poetry, by his
discourse of Mr. Dreyden's pale and Vermilion cheeks; which terms of Art are to
hint you of his skill in Polygraphy. He does like a Country-Justice in a
Coffee-house, that brings in Henry the 8's Statutes, or Dalton, upon all
occasions, to show his Reading; or as some Apothecaries, that will run you over
all the Titles of their Gally-pots, to be thought Doctors. Again, the same
indulgent party complains of the conjunction of Saucy with Boldness, in the
Maiden-Queen. I must tell you it is a saucy
Boldness thus to press on my Retirements.


Nay, and to make these words seem more Ridiculous, he says that
Saucie-Boldness is a pretty Sawcebox-word. Truly a very ingenious Quibble: A
man would almost swear this Gentleman to be the Poetaster that in a Reply upon
Doctor Wild's Poems, Christened him the Wild Poet. But for his better
information, the Epithet of Saucy serves very well to distinguish an Impudent
or an Insolent Boldness, from a generous: as put the case, A man should take
the freedom to pass a Judgment upon the Boldness of the vindicator; there is a
Boldness in censuring the Style of a man that writes better than himself; and
that is an Arrogant Boldness: there is a Boldness of censuring a man that lives
better than himself; and that is a Scandalous Boldness: and then there is the
Boldness of Blind Bayard, that makes a man run his head against Stone-walls;
and that is a Bruital Boldness. I shall leave the Vindicator to take his Choice:
for my Business is only to prove that Boldness requires an Epithet to clear
it. Another of your Comerades condemns Mr. Dreyden's Fiction in Tyrannick Love,
page 4. -Midst this was heard the Shrill and Tender cry
Of well-pleased Ghosts which in the storm did fly,
Danced to and fro, and skim'd along the Ground,
Till to the Magic Circle they were bound --


Upon these Lines I perceive the Worthy Gentleman is offended that Mr. Dreyden
permits his Ghosts to Sing and Dance: which is no great matter to him, so long
as he is at no Charge either for Singing-master or Dancing Master. But his
chief Cavil is at the words Shrill and Tender as inconsistent; which most
ingeniously he illustrates by Harsh and Gentle. Now if Ghosts in general may be
admitted, I beseech you let us imagine withal, that there is something for them
to do; and it shall be all one to me whether they sing and dance, or play on
the Sackbut or the Jews-trump. But to justify the Congruity of the words
Shrill and Tender, the former relates properly to the exi^ity of the Sound, and
the other with the softness of the voice denotes also a gentleness of
Disposition or Affection. Who knows but that Ghosts may sing and dance as well
as when they were Men and Women? I am sure if Valeria's Ghost in Tyrannick Love
speaks truth, they do: for she says, -- That after death we Sprights have just
such Natures.
We had for all the world when Humane creatures.*


Your next Quarrel is at these Lines in Maximin: -- They Coursing it as He were
fenced within,
And saw this dreadful Scene of Fate begin. --


Your Asterism * upon They, and then your Marginal Comment upon it, viz. The
Rota Coursing his Muse, has left us more in the Dark then we were before: for I
hope you do not intend to make a pack of Curs of the Cabal, or that his Muse is
brought upon the Stage to be baited to death, as the Primitive Christians were
upon the Theater. But your main Criticism lies upon placing as he were in stead
of while we were: whence arise two difficulties, viz. upon as in stead of
while; and then he for we. The latter was manifestly the Printers mistake; the
former seems to me to be none at all: for as and while are very commonly and
warrantably used to the same purpose; for Instance, As I was in my Chamber,
etc. why not As as well as while? But some people love to play with words, as a
Cat with a Feather, or an Ape with a pair of Breeches; sometimes with his head
out at the Kneetyes, sometimes at the Codpiece, sometimes at the Wasteband;
when the Breeches are the same still, which way soever he turns them. Again, I
perceive you are much disgusted with those Lines of Maximin: -- Provoke my Rage
no further, lest I be
Revenged at once upon the Gods and thee. --


Where you accuse Mr. Dreyden for Profaneness. This Nicety perchance may
advance the sale of your Book among the pretended Zealots; yes, and your
Reputation too; although it were as absurd to make an Atheist speak piously, as
a pious man Atheistically: but the sound of Religion goes a great way with
those that place it rather in the Accent than in the Practice. And methinks
your Scruple at the Expression, might have done as well, if it had been
seasoned with a little Charity for the Author. But we'll Compound that Point,
if you please; and Mr. Dreyden's next Pagan shall enter the Stage with a Pater
Noester. A man might make Remarques pleasant enough upon the Remainder of your
sixth page, where you are pleased to sport your self with Mr. Dreyden's
Conscience, and the Equivogue of Assignation upon Love in a Nunnery: but it is
all Bubble, and breaks with the blowing upon. Here now you must permit me to
say, You are too severe to Railly upon this last new Play so suddenly, before
you can have the opportunity of Reading it: which makes some apprehend it with
you, as with Fruit-women, who are so eager of venting the Earliest fruit, that
they bring only Trash to the Market. And truly it is observed in your weak
Objections, that you are Cautious what Devils you raise, lest you should not be
able to lay them again. We'll now pass to somewhat more material, and that is,
your grand Exception to the White-day, in these Lines of his Maximin: -- Let us
use all, for if we loose one day,
That White one in the Crowd may slip away.


You urge, that it is not usual in the English Tongue to call a prosperous day
a White day. Where you must give me leave to mind you of a whole Nest of
Mistakes one within another. First, Mr. Dreyden does not intend a prosperous
day, but a day that might have been Prosperous, if the Opportunity then offered
had been improved; and advises the watching of all Opportunities that no
Occasions slip. Secondly, you argue, that it is not Current, because it is not
Common: which rate of Reasoning will destroy all things that are excellent. And
thirdly, that White day is not good in English. As if a Roman Emperor had been
to be treated in the English Tongue. But it is very Elegant Latin. See the two
first lines of the second Satyr of Perseus: Hunc Macrinae diem numera meliore
Lapillo
Q^ tibi La^entes apponit^ Candidus annos;


Alluding to the Custom of casting a White stone into a Box upon every
fortunate day, and a Black one on the contrary: neither (with your Critical
leave) is it amiss in the Tran^l^tion. Nor will it avail at all, your conceit
of the Drea^ of White money that put this White day in the Authors heart; when
it was in effect this White day which put a great deal of White money in the
Authors Pocket.

You have another fling at him for his Observations upon Men, their Words, and
Actions; and in short, for bringing Humane nature upon the Stage: Whereas you
should ^ather have commended him for it, as the main End, Business, and
Perfection of Comedy. Quicquid agunt Homines, Votum, Timor, Ira, Voluptas,
Gaudia, discursus nostri est farrago libelli.


This was Iuvenals Theme, and may without any disparagement be Mr. Dryden's.
But the poor man, it seems, is fallen under a miserable Dilemma; either he must
represent on the one side what was never said or done, (and so make himself
Ridiculous) or fall under the scandal of a Libeller for the contrary on the
other. But as to what you charge upon him for falling upon persons, it is
neither proved by you, nor justified by me.

Another Objection you collect from the Rota, upon the Contradiction in a
severe and sullen Joy. Seneca tells you Res est severa Gaudium. And then for
your Gloomy smile too, which gives so much offense; I think A Gloomy smile and
sullen joy appeared, is as proper a form of speech, as A Gloomy or Waterish
sunshine, when the Sun appears through a Cloud or Mist.

For Mr. Dreydens Prologue to his Maiden Queen, wherein you tax him with
confidence; this may be his excuse, that Confidence as well becomes those that
write well, as Silence those that write ill. Now (for all your severe Censures)
however Mr. Dreyden is highly obliged to you, in giving your self the trouble
to find out whether he was a Wit or no; which is a very great trouble, I can
assure you Sir: for all Philosophers are not Harefinders: the pains being
equal, as if you had gone to Mr. Lilly, or Cast his Ingenuity: for you proved
it by as infallible a Sign, as any Privy Counselor to the Planets could have
certifi'd you by his Calculation, that is, by Logic, as thus: -- -Either you
have a Gig, or you have lost a Gig. --

Which may be answered, -- You never had a Gig. --

Truly, a very Learned way of Conjuring and Arguing, much after the rate that
some Soph-wits prove the Moon to be made of Green-cheese; whose Arguments are
these: The Moon is made of Green-cheese, or something else.
Now Custard is something else; and it is not made of Custard.
Ergo, it is made of Green-cheese.


Another Accusation against Mr. Dreyden is, that his presumption extends to the
defaming of his Predecessors, as Ben Johnson, etc. by saying, -- Then Comedy
was faultless, but 'twas course. --

This is the Commendation of a fresh Country-girl, that she is sound, but
hard-favourd: and it was a true definition of our predecessors Plays, The Drama
and Poetical Methods were most accurately observed, as the Plot, etc. but view
the Lines, apprehend the Sense, and compare the Language with those of this
present Age, and then you will perceive the difference.

For Mr. Dreyden's Prologue to his Maiden-Queen, where you tax him with Again
for Boasting; he does but confess his Little Ph^s^ honestly; and therefore
justly merits a Pardon. -- A mingled Chime
Of Johnson's and Corneille's Rhyme. --


But if you condemn the Boldness of Poets, how comes Ben Johnson to escape you?
who when his Sejanus was hissed, comes himself on the Stage, and speaks thus to
the Audience:

Gentlemen, This in my Plays behalf I boldly say,
By God it is good; and if you like't, you may.


The next Impeachment you bring against Mr. Dreyden is for the obscenity of his
Comedies; where you term them all downright Bawdery, when the worst of them is
but Implicit. Now against such Reports, he may plead that every Poet must
strive to please the Humor of the Age wherein he writes; and so does Mr.
Dreyden, and so did his Predecessors. See The Heiress, Alchumist, and
Bartholmew-Fayr. Besides, as a supple Courtier ought not to write against
Flattery, so ought not you against Obscenity, Whose Railing Style is so obscene
and loud,
As if your very Muse it self went Proud.


It Is a received Opinion amongst all your Readers, that Mr. Dreyden did
Prophetically railly upon you in his Epilogue to Granado, 1 Part; where he
says,- -They who write Ill, and they who never durst write,
Turn Critics out of mere Revenge and Spite.


By your Writing, you do appear to be one of those Spiteful Critics, who, like
old crabbed-fac'd Maids, wish there were no such things as Beauty and Husbands,
because they have none; and do so malice those who have, that they will Paint
and Patch at Threescore years old to get them Beauty and Husbands; making
themselves Baboons on Earth, for fear of leading Apes in Hell. The only
Defense I can make for you, is the same Quibling Excuse your Generosity
conferred on Mr. Dreyden, which was -- That he writ as well as any man -- that
could write no better.

Now as for Mr. Dreyden, all these Errors wherewith he has been taxed, are so
few and inconsiderable, that nothing but a self-conceited Envy could have
spied: which implies, either that he never committed great Crimes, or that you
had not the Wit to find them; to whom Mr. Dreyden makes this Application, in
his Prologue to Maximin: They who of each Trip the advantage take,
Find but those Faults which they want wit to make.


THE ERRATA: VIZ. A COLLECTION of QUIBBLES Out of the Friendly Vindication.
See the Friendly Vindication, page and line as follows.

OF Critical Engines levelled against Mr. Dreyden 's Sieges and Conquests. Page
1. lin. 10. Saucy Boldness, a pretty Sawcebox-word. See p. 4. l. 4. He
converts the word Coursing in Maximin, to be meant the Rota Coursing his Muse,
p. 5. See the Margin. Cordials extracted from Mr. Dreyden's Muses Limbecks. See
the Receipt, p. 6. l.1. His Quibble upon the Assignation, or Love in a Nunnery.
p. 6. l.17. White day: he there interprets White for a Prophecy of White
Money. p. 7. l. 6. That the Drama did require too many drams of Wit. p. 7.
l.15. that we must pardon. A Sir Positive Truth. p. 8. l. 17. He was going to
add A Gloomy Smile. p. 10. l. 3. His Logical Quibble. See p. 11. l. 11, 13.
The Dildo of Mr. Dryden's Muse. p. 12. l. 28. A Bawdy Quibble. That Mr. Dryden
writ as well as any man -- that could write no better. p. 14. l. 29, 30. Being
under a Gloomy Sullen Censure of the Rota's. p.16. l. 11. His Muse to undergo a
Severe Penance for his Assignations of Love in a Nunnery. p. 16. l. 13. He
would not suffer with a Shrill Tender easiness of mind. p.16. l.14. No more
disturbed, then if a Horrid Stilness did invade my ear. p.16. l.23. If here be
not enough, stay for his next Reply. His Objections against Annus Mirabilis are
not worth Answering: besides, I leave them for a New Text for his Muse.
FINIS.

