A World of Errors DISCOVERED IN THE New World of Words, OR General English
DICTIONARY. AND IN NOMOTHETES, OR THE INTERPRETER OF LAW-WORDS and TERMS.

By Tho. Blount of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

PROVE. 27.5. Melior est manifesta correptio, quam amor absconditus.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T.N. for Abel Roper, John Martin, and Henry
Herringman, at the Sun in Fleetstreet, over against St. Dunstans Church, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the
New Exchange. 1673.

TO THE READER.
MVst this then be suffered? A Gentleman for his divertisement writes a Book,
and this Book happens to be acceptable to the World, and sell; a Bookseller,
not interessed in the Copy, instantly employs some Mercenary to jumble up
another like Book out of this, with some Alterations and Additions, and give it
a new Title; and the first Author's outdone, and his Publisher half undone.

Thus it fared with my Glossographia, the fruit of above Twenty years spare
hours, first published in 1656. Twelve Months had not passed, but there
appeared in Print this New World of Words, or General English Dictionary,
extracted almost wholly out of mine, and taking in its first Edition even a
great part of my Preface; only some words were added and others altered, to
make it pass as the Authors legitimate offspring. In these Additions and
Alterations he not seldom erred, yet had not those Errors been continued, with
new supplies to a Second and third Impression, so little was I concerned at the
particular injury, that these Notes (in great part collected from his first
Edition) had never reproached his Theft to the World.

First therefore, this gallant Piece faces it with a pompous Frontispiece,
wherein are sculped our two famous Universities, the Pictures of Sir Francis
Bacon, Sir Henry Spelman, Mr. Seldom, Camden, and others of our most Learned
Men of the last Age, with a Scholar of each University in his Formalities. And
the Title Page affirms the work to be very necessary for strangers, as well as
our own Countrymen: As if our Author intended the World should believe his
Book to be the Fac totum of all Great Britains learning, and himself the Parent
of so immense a Production.

Soon after we find a Catalogue prefixed of the names of diverse Learned Persons
of this Age, Eminent in or contributary to any of those Arts, Sciences, or
faculties contained in the following Work. Whereby the Author would at least
obscurely insinuate, that those Learned Persons had contributed to or assisted
him in it, thereby to advance its reputation; but I believe nothing less,
having heard some of the chief of them utterly disown both the Author and his
Work.

Thus does the Book pride it self in vanity and outward form; but when you come
to the substance, you will find Dr. In his Etymologicon Linguae Angl.
Skinners Judgment, both of it and the Author most true. In one place he says
-- Et pro more Authoris exponitur absurdissime. In another -- Ridicule ut solet
omnia. In a third -- Ubi notare est miserimam Authoris ignorantiam, etc. What
then will Strangers think of it; what our own Countrymen? They will say, Canis
festinans caecos parit catulos: That such a Dictionary cannot be hudled up in
Eight or ten Months, nor without much industry and care, though the Author be
never so learned. For we read of an Italian Dictionary that was Forty years in
compiling by the joynt-labor of several Learned Men; and that Sir Francis
Bacon, after he had written his Instauratio Magna, did, year by year for Twelve
years, revise and alter it, before he would commit it to the Press.

All Writers may modestly claim the benefit of Humanum est Errare; but
certainly our Author has transgressed the bounds of that Indulgence. For, I did
not read half his Book to pick up these, with many more Exceptions. What then
would a more knowing Reader discover, that should seriously peruse the whole?
Miserimam Authoris ignorantiam.

But that which chiefly incited me to this publication, was in some measure to
redeem the Terms of the Common Law of the Land from the scandal of a most
Barbarous and Senceless Interpretation, which too too often occurs through his
Book; though all other subjects have not escaped too without their share in his
mistakes.

As first for Words of Ecclesiastical use, How grossly has he abused the two
common words, Candlemass and Ember-week? Are we not like to have an accurate
account of obsolete, difficult, or foreign words from him who stumbles so
miserably at plain Ember-week? There being a particular Devotion ordered for
those weeks in the Liturgy of the Church of England. But he still fancies
himself under a Commonwealth, and a Church without Bishops, as appears in
Sequestration, Down, Court of Peculiars -- Perhaps he has been more versed in
Military Affairs; alas no, his interpretation of Blunderbuss and Dag shows how
little he is to be trusted with Weapons. He has also given a fair specimen of
his skill in Sea-Terms by interpreting Balass and Jetson; nay, he has shown an
extraordinary endeavor and dexterity in mistaking, else he could never have
erred in those things that are common in all Trading and Commerce, as Gallon,
Pipe, Cloue, Weigh, etc.

But, to the Particulars in order as they lie.

A World of Errors DISCOVERED In the New World of WORDS, OR General English
DICTIONARY.
AMesse, A Priests Hood* or Cap, which he wears in the Quire.

Both the word itself is mistaken, and the signification: The word is Amice
(from amictus) which is a Linen Cloth, with two long strings, which the Priest
puts about his Neck, and ties the strings about his middle.

Amoctise, To kill.

It has a more usual and proper signification, viz. To grant Alien, or give
Land in Mortmain.

Ancient Demeasn (a term in Common Law) signifying a public tribute by a
Tenure, whereby all Manors belonging to the Crown in the days of Edgar or
Saint Edward, did hold.

There is nothing of a Public Tribute, nor of Edgar in the Point. Ancient
Demain is a Tenure, whereby all the Crown-Mannors in the days of Edward the
Confessor, or William the Conqueror were held; and the number of them
particularly appears in Domesday, under the title Terra Regis.

Balasse, A Saxon word, signifying Gravel laid in the bottom of a Ship, to keep
it upright.

He mistakes the word for Ballast, which is a Dutch word, nor does it signify
only Gravel, but any other ponderous substance. Balasse has a different
signification.

Baronage, A Tax or Subsidy of Aid, to be levied for the King out of the
Precincts of Baronies.

The word had never any such signification till now, Rex and Baronagium suum is
taken for the King, and all His Subjects, or the whole Parliament representing
them; according to Seldom in his Titles of Honor.

Bastard, Signifies, in the Common Law, one begotten out of Wedlock --

One may be begotten out of Wedlock, yet be no Bastard, by our Authors leave.

Beacon and Beads, He derives from the Dutch, which are Saxon words, as Dr.
Skinner will inform him in his Etymologicon linguae Anglicanae.

Bigamy, The marriage of two Wives at the same time, which according to Common
Law hinders a man from taking holy orders.

Here our Author speaks some truth, at peradventure: For he that marries two
Wives at the same time commits Felony, and the punishment of Felony is Death;
which (suppose it be by hanging) may very well hinder him from taking holy
Orders -- I find he does not understand the word.

Blunderbusse, A long Gun that will carry --

Here long stands for short, by a new figure.

Bordlanders, The Demeans that the Lords keep in their hands for the
maintenance of their Board or Table.

He should have said Bordlands; for Bordlanders are the Tenants that held such
Lands, called in Domesday Bordarii.

Bowsing in Faulconry, is when, etc.

This etc. is a new way of explicating words.

Brigandine (French) An ancient kind of Amor -- Also a kind of Ship or Pinnace.

This last is a Brigantine.

Brudunsium, A Town in Italy.

Sure he aimed at Brundusium, a City of Calabria, by the Adriatic Sea.

Buckwheat, A Herb growing in Woods --

This is otherwise called French Wheat, and is a sort of Grain, much sown in
Wales and some parts of England, and used for feeding Swine and Poultry.

Calcedon, A word used by Lapidaries, being a certain Forbe-vein in a Ruby or
Sapphire --

This was an Errata of the Printer in the first Edition of Glossographia,
whence our Author misunderstandingly borrowed it; it should be Fowle-vein, for
there is no such word as Forbe.

Camuledunum or Camoledunum, The chief Town of Essex in England, Vulgarly
called Colchester, or rather Maldon.

This is most usually written Camalodunum, a name never given to Colchester,
but to Maldon, which is not the chief Town of Essex.

Candlemass, The second day of February, so called (as some think) because
about that time they left of burning Candles at Mass, which was between Four
and five of the Clock --

This is so ridiculously absurd, that ( as some think) none but our Author ever
Printed the like; if between Four and five of the Clock relate to the morning
(2 Febr.) then they must say Mass in the dark, if to the afternoon, then it
suits with Colonel Barksteads wisdom, who in the Rump time committed a Papist
for being at an Evening Mass (as he called it) at an Ambassadors House in Long
acre.

Chase (French) A Warren --

He might as well have said a Bull is an Ox; for Chase and Warren (so they are
written) differ as much.

Cloue, A Law Term, the two and thirtieth part of a weight.

Weight for Weigh makes it unintelligible, yet so it has passed in all three
Impressions of his Book.

Conventual Church, A Parish Church.

It is no Parish Church; as most men, except our Author, know.

A Cord of Wood, A parcel of Firewood, set out as the Coal-fire, containing in
measure --

How shall we understand this without an Oedipus?

Corporation (Lat.) In the Civil Law signifies a Body Politic etc.

It is not a Civil-Law term: The Civilians call it Vniversitatem or Collegium.

Corsary (French) A Courrier.

This comes from the Italian, Corsaro, and signifies a Pirat or Pirats-ship;
which the Author might have learnt from our weekly Gazets.

The Decimal Chain, A certain Mathematical Instrument for the measuring of
Land, which is to be divided into ten equal parts, each of which contains
about nineteen in length.

Here we are put to a subaudi, or else it is nonsense.

Descalsas (Spanish) A sort of Friars in Spain that go barelegged.

Barefoot, he should have said, for so the word imports; and those Friars are
elsewhere, as well as in Spain.

Dislodge, A term in hunting, applied to a Buck, when you first raise him.

I see our Author is no good Huntsman, for it is rowze a Buck, and dislodge a
Stag.

Doublet, A precious Stone, consisting of two pieces joined together.

Nor good Lapidary; for a Doublet is no precious Stone, but a counterfeit,
consisting usually of two pieces of Glass artificially put together, with a
foyl in the midst, answerable in color to that Stone you would have it
resemble. But it is ordinary with him to take counterfeit for right.

Down, The name of a Town in Ireland, formerly a Bishops See.

I doubt our Author still fancies we are under a levelling Commonwealth; for
Down is now, as formerly, a Bishops See.

Droit, Signifies in Common Law, a double right, the right of possession, and
the right of the Lord.

Sometimes our Author, when he borrows out of another Book, swallows an Erratum
of the Printer, and puts it down sense or not sense. Here he fancied an
Erratum, when there was none; for this word in our Law-Expositors is,
Droit-droit or Dreit-dreit, signifying a double right, that is, Jus
possessionis and jus dominii; which he thought to correct, by making a single
Droit to signify a double right; and by translating Jus Dominii, the right of
the Lord.

Ember Week, In Latin, Cineralia, the week before Lent, wherein by the ancient
Institution of the Church, people were to fast, and the Bishop used to sprinkle
Ashes on their Heads, saying, Remember O Man, that thou art ashes, and to ashes
thou shall return: Imber signifying in the Saxon tongue Ashes, whence our word
Embers comes --

We will for once enumerate the Errors in the Exposition of this one word. 1.
He concludes there is but one Ember-week, of four well known. 2. Cineralia is
Latin for Ash Wednesday. 3. The Ember-week he aimed at, is not before Lent,
but in the first whole week of Lent. 4. By no Institution, were people to fast
the week before Lent. 5. The Bishop did not sprinkle Ashes on their Heads, but
made a Cross on their Foreheads with Ashes -- 6. The words were Memento homo,
quia pulvis es -- Dust, not Ashes. 7. Imber in the Saxon Tongue, does not
signify Ashes, nor in truth is there any such word. And (8) by consequence our
word Embers cannot come from thence. Our Author ought to do some penance to
expiate these faults.

Emergent, An Emergent occasion is taken for a business of great consequence.

Well guessed! An Emergent occasion, is that which rises unexpectedly out of
some other, and was not foreseen.

Enquest In Common Law, is the trial of causes both Civil and Criminal by the
Jury.

It is not the trial it self, but that Inquisition which the Jury makes in all
Causes, Civil, or Criminal, touching the Matter in Fact, in order to their
Verdict and the Trial.

Errant, A Justice which rides the Circuit, from the Latin word Errare.

This is an errant mistake; for it does not alone signify such a Justice; the
Latin in the Statute of Marlebridge is Justiciarii Itinerantes, which Sir
Edward Coke sometimes Englishes Justices in Eire, sometimes Justices Itinerant;
and the Mirror, cap. 6. says in French, Que sont ore apels Justices Errants. If
our Author had said, that Errant is sometimes used for a Knight Errant, it had
been more allowable.

Exigent (Lat.) A Writ that lies -- It is directed to the Sheriff to call five
County days under pain of Outlary.

It should be to call the party five County days -- otherwise it is nonsense.

Ex part Latis, A Writ that lies --

This is an Errata in Cowels Interpreter, whence our Author took it, right or
wrong, it matters not: It should be Ex part talis.

Extrajudicial, That which is done out of Court.

That which is done in Court may be Extrajudicial.

Faloque (French) A Boat or Barge, by some called a Brigantine.

Faloque is a little Boat with four Oars, and a Brigantine (as our Author
himself says elsewhere) is a small Ship or Pinnace.

Feversham, A flourishing Town in Kent -- Where King Steven founded an Abbey
for the Monks of Clugny, etc.

This Towns name is Faversham, and the Abbey (however at first intended) was
stocked with the Monks of S. Bennets Order; as we read in Monastichon
Favershamiense, a late ingenuous Book.

Franchise Royal, Is where the King Grants to a person and his heirs to be
quit, or the like.

To be quit, of, God knows what.

Francis, A proper name of Man or Woman.

Francis is the Man's name, Frances the Woman's.

Franck-chace, A liberty belonging to a Forester, by which all men having Land
within such a compass, are prohibited to cut down Weeds without his view.

Though we should allow Weeds for Wood, to be the Printers fault; yet the rest
is erroneous.

Frithsoken, A surety or defense; from the Saxon words Frid, i. e. Peace, and
Socen, i. e. To seek.

Neither is the Explication true, nor the Derivation. The Saxon words are
Frith, Peace; and Soc, a Liberty or Power. So that Frithsocne signifies a Power
or Jurisdiction of keeping the Peace.

Gainage, In Common Law, is Land held of the Baser kind of Sokemen or Villains.

Sufficiently mistaken. We never till now read of Land held of Villains, who
had no property but Ad voluntatem Domini.

Gallon (Spanish) A measure containing two quarts.

Our Author had better omitted this word, since every Alewife can contradict
him.

Garnishment (French) Signifies in Common Law, the issuing forth a Writ of
Scire facias against the Plaintiff, for an Action of Detinue of Charters
brought against the Defendant.

Perfect nonsense! Garnishment, in Law, signifies a Warning: If you will know
particularly how the word is used, you had need find out a better Expositor,
then our Author.

Grand Sergeanty, A certain kind of service, whereby the Lords of Scrivelby in
Cheshire held their Land, which was to come well armed, etc.

If the Author had well explicated the word, his mistaking Cheshire for
Lincolnshire had been the more pardonable.

Goman (Saxon) A married man* and Gron, a Saxon word, signifying a Fenny place.

Neither of them (for ought I know) are at all of kin to that Language. For
thus the Learned Dr. Skinner on the word Goman, Author (meaning ours) dicit
esse vocem Angl. -- Sax. sed solens hallucinatur.

To Grown, The Foresters say, A Buck growneth.

But what it means you must learn elsewhere; for this is all he says of the word.

Hankwit or Hangwit (Saxon) A Theif escaped out of Custody.

It is a Mulct or Fine, for hanging a Theif unjustly.

Hocktide, A certain Festival time, celebrated about Candlemass, for the death
of Hardiknute, the last King of the Danes; it is also called Blazetide, in
Latin Fugalia.

Hocktide was celebrated the second week after Easter, for expulsion of the
Danes, after the death of Hardicanute. And Fugalia signifies a Feast solemnised
in remembrance of driving the Kings out of Rome.

Iansenism, The opinion of Cornelius Jansenus, Bishop of Tire --

For, Cornelius Jansenius, Bishop of Ypre in Flanders --

Ichidian, A Motto or Devise, heretofore belonging to the Arms of the Princes
of Wales --

He might have learned to have written this better from some Sign in London,
viz. Ic-dien; the old Saxon was Ic-pegn, i.e. I serve.

Ietson, The same as Flotson.

They are no more of kin, then the Land is to the Sea; for Jetson is that,
which being cast out of a Ship, in danger of Wreck, is found upon the shore;
and the other is that which is found floating upon the Sea:

Innocents-day, 28 Dec. Wherein Mass used to be said for the Souls of the
Innocent Children slain by Herod.

Certainly Mass was never said for the Souls of Saints and Martyrs, who are in
glory. But in the Mass or Church Service of the day there is a particular
commemoration of those Martyred Children.

Inquisition, -- The name of a Grand Council, instituted by Ferdinand, the
Catholic King of Spain -- And in the word Dominicans, Saint Dominick is said
to be the Author of this Inquisition --

So apt our Author is to forget himself, Frigida es, and nigra es, es, and non
es Chione.

Ioynder, In Common Law is the coupling of two in a soite one against another.

We allow soite to be the Printers fault, yet the rest is nonsense. It is the
joining of two in a suit against a third person.

Iopoena, For Jopaean, and Justices a Writ for Justicies -- Such we meet with
almost in every Page.

Knight Baronet, Is a new distinct order erected by King James -- Whereas
before that time there were Baronets that were not Knights --

A Baronet ( quatenus such) being created by Letters Patent, is no Knight; nor
was there ever any Baronets before King James Institution of them. Howbeit
anciently the word Baronet was sometimes used for Baneret, and sometimes for
Baro minor.

Lease -- If it be in writing, it is called a Lease by Indenture, if by word of
mouth* a Lease Parcel.

A Lease Parol, he should have said.

Leet (Sax.) A Law- day, whence Court Leet is a Court or Jurisdiction,
containing the third part of a Shire, and comprehending three or four
Wapentakes or Hundreds --

This is an imperfect fragment taken out of Cowels Interpreter, who says
indeed, that Court Leets, had anciently such large Jurisdictions, but have not
so now.

Lemstir, A Town of Herefordshire -- Is now a days very famous for Wool, which
is called Lemster-Ore.

A gross mistake, Lemster-Ore (from the Latin Ora) is a Territory or Compass
of Ground of about two miles round the Town, so called; and the Wool had never
any such denomination.

Libertatibus allocandis, A Writ that lies for a Citizen or Burgess of a City,
who refusing or deferring to allow his privilege, is impleaded before the
Kings Justices.

Capiat, qui capere potest; Make sense of this that can.

Lungis (French) A tall slim Man, that has no length to his height.

Quasi, A low gross Man that has no thickness to his bulk.

Lutheranism, The Doctrine of Martin Luther, who being first a Monk of the
Order of S. Augustine --

There were, nor are any Monks of S. Austins Order, but Friars.

Mac, An Irish word, signifying as much as Son in English, or Fitz in Welsh.

I see our Author is no Britain, nor Frenchman, else he would have understood
that Fitz is borrowed from the French, not Welsh.

Mallevertes, The name of an ancient Family in Yorkshire.

Mistaken for Mallivery, according to Camden.

Missale (Lat.) A Breviary or Mass Book.

This Error he borrowed out of Cotgraves Dictionary. The Books are of very
different kinds.

Mission (Lat.) A sending; it is also taken peculiarly, or if a power given by
the Church of Rome, to go --

Nonsense; if the Printer do not acquit him.

Nativo habendo, A Writ for the apprehending and restoring to his Lord his
Villain, claimed as his inheritance, who in Common Law is called Neif.

However blundringly the words are put together, the Author intends Neif shall
relate to Villain, and Villain to be a Man; but Neif* is the Bondwoman or she
Villain.

Nonability (A Term in Law) Being an exception taken against the Plaintiff or
Defendant, why he cannot commence any suit in Law.

We must convert Defendant into Demandant, to make it tolerable sense.

None of a day, The third quarter of a day, from Noon till Sunset.

Where then shall we find the other three quarters? -- He should have said from
Noon till the Sun be halfway down.

An Obit (Lat.) A Rental, an Obsequy or Funeral.

It signifies an Office or certain Prayers for the dead.

Oratorians, An Order of Friars, so called --

They are not Friars, but a kind of Regular-Secular Priests.

Ordeal, a Saxon word, Signifying Judgment, a kind of purgation -- Of which
there are several kinds, as Campfight, Free Ordeal, and Water Ordeal.

Campfight was none of the kinds of Ordaele, and Free Ordaele, should be Fire
Ordaele. For Ordalium fuit judicium aquae, ignis, and ferri.

Ostiary, (Lat.) One that keeps the Hoasts in a Church: a Door Keeper, a Keeper.

If he had only said a Door Keeper, he had preserved the word from an
erroneous explication. For Ostiary has no relation to the keeping the Hoasts in
a Church.

Pathopep (Greek) An expression of a Passion, in Rhetoric it is a figure by
which the mind.

We are left to guess at the rest; for so he leaves it. And Pathopep is an
unknown word of his New World.

The Court of Peculiars, A certain Court in the Bishops time, which dealt in
certain Parishes --

This is a certain kind of Independent-Commonwealth expression; insinuating a
certain Nonentity of Bishops at present.

Peter Pence, A tribute given by Inas, King of the West Saxons. -- It was also
called the Sea of Rome.

It was also called Romefeoh and Romepenny, and was a Pension or an Alms given
by King Inas, not a Tribute.

Pipe, A Measure of Wine or Oil, containing Twenty six Gallons, or half a Tun.

By this account, a Tun should be but Fifty two Gallons, which contains Two
hundred fifty two.

The Prerogative Court, A certain Court belonging to the Civil Law, in which
the Commissary sits upon Inheritances, fallen either by the intestate or by Will
and Testament.

This is an Ecclesiastical Court, wherein all Testaments are proved and
Administrations granted, where the party dying within the Province of
Canterbury has Bona notabilia in some other Diocese. V. Cokes 4 Inst. fol. 335.

Pownd, In Common Law, signify an Enclosure to keep Beasts in, but more
especially a place of strength, where Cattle distreined for any trespass are
put, until they be replevied or distreined.

-- Where Cattle distreined are put, till they be distreined; is suitable to
the rest.

Primier Seisin, A word used in Common Law, a Branch of the Kings Prerogative,
whereby he has the first possession of all Lands and Tenements through the
Realm.

This is sufficiently erroneous: The King (before the Statute of 12 Car. 2. ca.
24.) had the Primier Seisin, or first possession only of all Lands and
Tenements holden of him in chief, whereof his Tenant died seized in Fee; which
is taken away by the said Statute.

Quaver, A measure of time in Music being the half of a Crotchet, as a
Crotchet the half of a Quaver, a Semiquaver, etc.

What fustian is here? Just so, two is the half of four, and four the half of
two; and Semiquaver is explicated by a dumb, etc.

Reasonable Aid, In Common Law is a duty, that the Lord of the Fee claims,
holding by Knights Service or in Soccage, to marry his Daughter, or make his
son Knight.

I doubt our Author bears some malice to the Common Law; else he could not have
maimed so many of its Terms, which are in several Books expounded to his hand:
It should be ( claims of his Tenants) to make it sense.

Returns, Certain set times in each of the four Terms -- Each Term consisting
of 4, 5, or 8 Returns --

The longest Term has but ^ Returns, as every Almanac will show.

Rosemary (Lat. Rosmarinus) A well and most wholesome Plant --

He omits the singular use of it, in adorning a piece of Roast Beef.

Scapular (Lat.) Belonging to the Sholders; whence a Scapulary, a Monks Hood or
Cowl, reaching down to the Sholders.

This Scapulary is mis-interpreted, it being a narrow piece of Cloth or Stuff,
worn by Monks and Friars over the rest of their habit, and reaching from the
Sholders to the Ground; and is neither like a Hood nor Cowl.

Sequestration (Lat.) A separating a thing in controversy -- But it is now
commonly taken for a seizing upon the Rents of Delinquents Estates, for the use
of the Commonwealth.

Our Author having Revised and Printed his Book (as appears by the Title Page)
in the year 1671* is very bold, to call this Kingdom a Commonwealth; as he also
does in the word Coroner, where he speaks of the State, and Commonwealth of
England.

Seragesm Sunday, The Sunday before Shrove-Tuesday.

Sexagesima Sunday, is the Sunday sennight before Shrove-Tuesday.

Shafment, A kind of measure containing an hand breadth.

It is from the top of the Thumb set upright to the utmost part of the Palm,
which is, by a tall man's hand, half a foot.

Socinians, A certain Sect that deny the Divinity of Christ, first spread by
Faustus Socinianus of Siena.

It was first broached by Laelius Socinus, and advanced by Faustus Socinus of
Sienna.

Tierce (French) A certain liquid measure, containing the third part of a Pipe,
which is two Tuns.

And before he said a Pipe is Twenty six Gallons, or half a Tun. Strange
contradictions and mistakes even in common notions.

Trestle, A Trevet or Stool with three Feet.

Trevet is a Three-footed instrument of Iron, to set Cauldrons on -- Threstle,
that of Wood, for other uses.

Tuilleries (French) So called because that Titles were made there.

Tiles and Titles are all one with our Author.

Verdera (Lat. Viridarius) A judicial Officer of the Kings Forest --

This our Author will say was the Printers fault, for Verderer. And

Uncore purist (French) -- For Uncore prist.

Warrant or Warranty, In Common Law, is a Covenant made in a Deed by one man to
another, to warrant and secure himself and his heirs, against all men
whatsoever, for the injoyning of any thing agreed on between them.

Surely, no man will buy any Land of this Author, if his Warranty or Covenant
shall only extend to secure himself and his heirs.

Warren (Lat. Varrenna or Vivarium) A Prescription or Grant to a Man from the
King, of having Phesants, Patridges, Conies, and Hares, within certain of his
Lands.

Nor does this mend the matter; for though a man may have a Warren by
Prescription, yet Warren does not signify a Prescription or Grant.

Wolfetchsod (Sax.) The condition of an Vtlary.

The Saxon word is Wulvesheved or Wulfesheofod, Anglice Wolfeshead, and Vtlary
for Vtlaw.

Saint Wilfrids Needle, A certain narrow hole in the Church of Wakeman in
Yorkshire, wherein women's honesties were in times past tried.

There is no such Church as Wakeman in Yorkshire: But Camden in his Britannia
relates the same story of Rippon Church; and the Chief Magistrate of that Town
being called the Wakeman, our Author by a new Trope* converts the Magistrates
name into a Church.

Xerxes, A King of Persia -- Who with an Army of Seventeen hundred thousand Men
--

Thou Boy! I never read his Army consisted of above Ten hundred thousand, and
so Thomasius and Goldman deliver it. Other Authors say, even there is a cipher
too much, and that his Army was made up of only One hundred thousand men.


IN perusing this Dictionary, you may find some words twice explicated, and
those too, with different Interpretations, where one must necessarily be false.
Such are Dancet and Dansette; Dodkin and Dotkin; Jotacism and Herbert twice;
Ockham and Okum; Rere-County and Rier-County; Varry and Verrey, with diverse
others. It seems our Authors memory also failed him, or he did not understand
them to be the same.

He calls his Book The New World of Words, and in his Title Page tells us it
contains the proper significations and Etymologies of all words derived from
the Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack -- enumerating in all Eleven Languages; yet
descends to the needless Explication of many trivial words of the Old World, as
Beesom, Barm, Parsley, Rosemary, Bulhead, Buzzard, Capable, Gloomy,
Indifference, Industry, Inferior, Satisfaction, Discern, Expense, Ruinous, etc.
For example.

BEesom, A thing to sweep with, made sometimes of Broom, and ordinarily so
called, though made of Birch, Heath, etc.

We are obliged to him for this Learned Exposition; though he does not tell us,
whether it be derived from the Hebrew, Arabic, or Syriack, etc. To have made
it at all fit to take up a room in his Book, he might have said the Saxons
called it a Besm, and that in some parts of England it is otherwise called a
Broom.

Barm, Yest, the flowing or overdecking of Beer.

If he had told us, that this in the North of England is called Godsgood, he
had said something.

We will observe lastly, what the Learned Dr. Skinner in his Etymologicon
Linguae Anglicanae, says of this Authors English Dictionary, which he often
cites and seldom without reproof.

COllock, An old Saxon word, signifying a Pail without a handle Engl. Dict.

Collock, Authori Dict. Angl. apud quem solum occurrit, exp. qui antiquam Angl.
Sax. vocem esse dicit, sed apud Somnerum non occurrit. Credo igitur Authorem
hic, ut fere semper, somniasse. Dr. Skinner.

Calsounds, A kind of Linen Drawers usually worn among the Turks. Engl. Dict.

Colsounds, vox quae mihi in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, and, pro more Authoris,
exponitur absurdissime, ut ipsius verbis utar, A kind of Linen Drawers usually
worn among the Turks, revera a Fran. Gal. Calcons, Subligaculum. Femoralia
interiora. Dr. Skinner.

Chestoul, Poppy. Engl. Dict.

Chestoul, in Dict. Angl. mendose pro Chesbowles vel Cheesebowles. Dr. Skinner.

Corsary (French) A Courrier. Engl. Dict.

-- Credo autem, si Author hanc vocem unquam legit; vel fando audivit, quod
valde dubito, ipsum in ejus expositione errare. Dr. Skinner.

Cosh or Cotterel (old word) A Cottage. Engl. Dict.

Cosh, Authori Dict. Angl. apud quem solum vox occurrit, dicit esse idem cum
Cotterel, ridicule ut solet omnia. Dr. Skinner.

A Dag, A Pistol, so called from the Dacians, who first used them. Engl. Dict.

Dag, Vox quae hoc sensu in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, ubi notare est
miserrimam Authoris ignorantiam, qui tormentum bellicum manuarium minus, a
Pistol exponit, and dictum putat A Dacis, qui primi hoc armorum genere usi
sunt; imo ultimi omnium Europae populorum, Dr. Skinner.

Fosset, A little long Coffer or Chest; from the Latin word Fossa a Ditch.
Engl. Dict.

Fosset, Vox quae mihi in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit. Exponitur autem Cista,
Capsa: Author deducit a Lat. Fossa, imperite ut solet omnia; Credo potius ortum
ab Ital. Forciere, idem signante. Higginio autem Adr* Junii interpreti, Cista
dicitur Forset, a quo proculdubio haec vox orta est. Dr. Skinner.

Goule (Old Word) Usury; from the Latin word Gula, i. e. The Throat. Engl. Dict.

Goule, Vox quae mihi in solo Dict. Angl. occurrie. Author exponit usuram, and
deflectit a Lat. Gula -- Ego nihil nec de voce ipsa, quod unquam revera
extiterit, nec de Etymo credo. Dr. Skinner.

A Marrow (French) A Companion or Fellow; also a Beggarly Rascal. Engl. Dict.

Author male, ut solet omnia, exponit Socium, item mendicum vilem, A Beggarly
Rascal. Priori enim sensu nusquam gentium occurrit, etc. Dr. Skinner.

Rigols, A certain Musical Instrument, called a Clericord; comes from the
French Regalliadir, i. e. to rejoice (for Regaillardir.) Engl. Dict.

Rigols, Vox quae mihi in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, exponitur instrumentum
musicum, quod alio nomine Clavichordium, A Clavicord dicitur. Author somniando,
ut solet, suaviter deducit a Fr. Gal. Regalliadir, exhilarari. Sane si talis
vox sit, quod nullus credo, mallem deducere a Fr. Gal. Se Rigoler, deridere,
lascivire -- Vel, quod magis placet, a Lat. Lyricola. Dr. Skinner.


Once more to the READER.
I Had no sooner traveled over the New World of Words, but I stumbled upon a
late Book, entitled Nomothetes, or an Interpreter of obscure Law Words and
Terms, which obliged me to the trouble of another perambulation.

My Nomolexicon or Law Dictionary (being the product of many years pains) was
published in Trinity Term 1670. and within the space of Five Terms after, this.
Interpreter was wholly both Written and Printed.

This Author it seems made choice of the Title Nomothetes, that it might gingle
with Nomolexicon; but the more Learned in the Greek Tongue than my self, affirm
the word improper for an Interpreter, and to signify only a Legislator or
Lawgiver; and how fit he is to assume that title, will soon appear.

He dedicates his Book with much confidence, to a learned and very honorable
Person, to whom certainly he ought to have written at least in true Grammar.

In his Preface he says, -- I have also gleaned after the Book, entitled, The
Law Dictionary, wherein are many good things, which I have hinted, as every
ingenious Reader will discern, but withal have added some Centuries of Words,
therein totally omitted.

Though I did not expect or desire any commendations from this Gentleman, yet
he was in some sort obliged to it, for the credit of his own Work; since it is
obvious to every common Reader that he has hinted, that is, in the softest
phrase, borrowed almost every Stone from the Law Dictionary to build up his
Interpreter; yet with very disingenuous arts and subtle disguises.

His Additional Centuries of words he might, without so much as ever scratching
his head, have multiplied into Millenaries; since he has (by virtue of his
Nomothetical power) adopted many into the family of Law words, which are
absolute strangers to it. As House, Moer, Palmer, Paragraph, Paranimph,
Parathalassia, Patriarch, Tillage, Wife, Zenodochium, Zealot -- and such like.

But, it may be objected, The Law Dictionary too has diverse words that are not
precisely Terms of the Law. I grant it, but say, they are some way or other
allied to the Law, and not to be found in our common Dictionaries, and whereto
I add the Statute, Record, or Charter, wherein I found them, as my Warrant for
their insertion; one principal part of my design having been, from the ruins
of antiquity, to retrieve, as far as I was able, ancient Law-Latine, Saxon, and
Record-words, almost utterly lost, as Bescata, Juncaria, Tassum, Putura,
Rasarium, Sichetum, -- a work of labor, and may be of use; but our Author found
an easier way to the Wood.

It is enacted in the Fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, That no person
shall Print any Book or Copy, or part of any, which another, by due entry of it
in the Stationers I all, or otherwise, has the right or privilege solely to
Print, without the consent of the owner of such Book or Copy, upon a Penalty
therein mentioned; however this evasion has been industriously found out,
That, if some little alteration be made in every Page, be it but addition or
substraction, or the misusing or change of some words, it will pass with a non
obstante; though such as practice it, are dignified with the name of
Land-Pirates: To which title our Author has undoubted right, not for this Work
only, but for other of like nature. Thus then he shows his skill.

Where I put the Citation before the Exposition, he puts it after, Et e contra,
as in Scavage, Waxshot -- Where I say, As in the Case of the Burgesses of Derby
-- He -- As in the matter concerning the Burgesses of Derby. See Thrave of
Corn. Where I say small, he says little, as in Grills; and where I say called,
he writes nominated, as in Candlemass. Where I (having cited an old Deed or
Charter) say at last Penes such a one, he says in the custody of -- As in
Assart. Where I say, The word is mentioned in such a Statute, he says spoken of
-- As in Pyker. Where I say -- Most notoriously, he more notedly. Vide Term.
Then for variety, he sometimes puts my Citation into English; and it is odds he
makes nonsense of it, by so doing, as in Pax Ecclesiae, Seneucia -- Again, he
sometimes abridges, as in Eskippeson; and sometimes wholly omits the Citation,
as in Leccator, Orgallous -- Not reflecting that I had not at all inserted
those words, but for the authority of the Citations. To some Words he adds,
others he alters -- As where I say, Balenger seems to have been a kind of Barge
or Water-Vessel; he alters it thus subtilely, A Boat or Barge to sail on the
Water. So in Blomary, I only cite the Statute of 27 Eliz. 19. He, of this you
may read at large, 27 Eliz. 19. In which Statute the word is barely mentioned,
without any thing of it at large.

Lastly, He has an excellent way of mustering words up to a Century, and
filling up Paper, by dividing one word into two, as in Couratier, and repeating
the Exposition of Synonima's, as Annats, First Fruits, and Primitiae; Romefeoh,
Romepenny, and Romescot; Heinfare, Henfare, and Hinefare.

His principal Additions are certain Saxon words in Domesday Book, said to be
expounded by Mr. Agar, and Printed in a Book called The Law of Conveyances: The
most part of which I rejected, as full of Errors, some of the Words being
mistaken, and more of the Expositions. So that I concluded, it either was not
really Mr. Agars, or else much abused by the ignorance of the Transcriber or
Printer, however our Author kindly entertained them, to pass muster.

I was not willing to trouble my self or the Reader, with any more of these
absurdities, though I can produce at least Two hundred, besides misalphabets
and false English in great abundance, and none of them excused by any Errata.

I have only to add, That, besides his own mistakes, he brings most of the
Authors he deals with, even the Sages of the Law, as Bracton, Dyer, Coke, etc.
to be accessory to his Errors, by quoting them falsely: But I am willing to say
somewhat in his excuse, he was set on work by some Booksellers, and enjoined to
make great expedition, some of his hasty work, having been Printed before the
rest was written, and much written before half digested: If they had allowed
their Compiler more time, perhaps he could have done better.

ERRORS Discovered in the miscalled NOMOTHETES OR THE INTERPRETER OF OBSCURE
LAW-WORDS and TERMS.
ACcessory -- Because Manslaughter is sudden and not presented. Coke, lib. 4.
fol. 44. And, under the same Title-word, he says, If a Man counsel a Woman to
murder the child in her Womb, and afterward the child is born, and there
murdered by the Woman, in the absence of him that so gave the counsel; yet he
is accessory by his counselling before the Birth of the Infant, and
countermanding it. Dyer, fol. 186. pl. 2.

Here are no less than three gross mistakes in these few lines, and Dyer
vouched for Warranty.

Acre -- He concludes this word thus, -- As was adjudged in the Exchequer, in
the Case between Sir Edw. Aston and Sir Jo. B. in the Statute made concerning
sowing Flax.

Wondering how this Statute came to be hauld in without any Coherence, I found
at last, our Author (who was in have) has omitted two or three lines of the
subsequent matter, which should make it sense.

Aid -- In the close of this word, the Author has this piece of nonsense. The
Civil in Suits between two, allow a third to come in pro interesse --

Allay -- The reason of which Allay is with a better metal, to augment the
weight of the Silver or Gold.

I never heard of a better metal, than Gold; but hope he intended to have said
baser.

Ancestor, Antecessor. The signification is well known, but we make this
difference; that Ancestor is applied to a natural person, as J.S. and his
Ancestors; the other to a Body Politic or Corporate, as a Bishop and his
Predecessors. Coke on Littl. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 103.

To what ( the other) relates, does not appear, however my Lord Coke is
injuriously represented, as the Author of this blundering, lame expression.

Arabant, Are they that held by tenure of Ploughing or Tilling Ground.

These Arabants were certainly a sort of excellent Plough-men

Sic vos, non vobis, fertis aratra Boves.

Arsura Things relating to Coynage.

Arsura, is the singular number, and is often found in Domesday, where (as a
Learned Expositor says) Videtur esse examinatio per ignum. The trial of money
after it was coined.

Assault -- Assultus est in personam aut locum -- Vel equo aut manchinis aut
quacunque alia re --

Our Author had done well to have interpreted this uncouth word manchinis.

Assise of Mortdancestor -- This the Civilians call Judicium Possessiorum
adipiscendi.

The Civilians disclaim the word Possessiorum, and so does Priscian too.

Attainted -- One Attaint, was, in former times upon his confession,
constrained to abjure the Realm, and therefore was sometimes called Abjuration.

And for this is cited, Stam. Pl. Cor. fol. 182. but abusively.

Autum Reginae, The Queens Silver.

Then let Argentum Reginae be the Queens Gold. -- But it is a good stumble that
never Horses.

Bachelor -- Baccalaurei a bacillo nominati sunt, qui^ primi studit
authoritatem, quae per exhibitionem baculi concedebatur, jam consecuti
fuissent, etc.

This studit is a quarrelsome word, and will certainly break Priscians Head.

Balenger -- Seems to be a kind of Barge or Boat to sail upon the Water.

This may very well be true; for I never heard of any such to sail upon the
Land. And note, those words ( to sail upon the Water) are added to what the Law
Dictionary says.

Bane -- He which is the cause of another man's, is said then to be Labane, a
Malefactor.

If our Author write no better sense; it will be the Bane of his Interpreter;
and I think the Banes may very lawfully be forbidden.

Baron -- Barons by Letters Patent or Creation (say our Antiquaries) were first
about the time of Henry the Sixth.

It may well be suspected our Author consulted none of our Antiquaries herein;
for the first Baron by Creation* was in the second of Richard the Second.

Berwick -- Spelman thinks it may be Manerium majus ad minus pertinens.

This is a great injury to that learned Author, who says the direct contrary,
as you may read in his Glossarium, verbo, Berenuica.

Besca -- Hence perhaps Vna bescata fodient terrae inclusa, Mon. Angl. page 2.
fol. 642.

Here is a like false citation imposed upon another worthy Author; though the
words lay fair in the Law Dictionary.

Botting, Is a term of art used in Greys Inn, whereby they intend private
arguing of Cases.

I have heard of Botting of Barley in the Country -- But what our Author aimed
at, is Bolting, and some Bolts are soon shot.

Breve -- Quia breviter and paucis verbis intentionem proferens exponit.
Bracton lib. 5.

Nor must learned Bracton escape, without having false Latin imposed upon him,

Bullenger, The common Petition, that some Commissioners issued to Cities, for
the preparing Boats and Bullengers, may be repealed.

Our Author had a fair Copy, from whence he transcribed this. viz. The Law
Dictionary, but his have has shuffled it into nonsense.

Burse or Colibti, A word used in Domesday --

Colibti is not to be found there, unless with a dash on the b for Coliberti;
and how Burse and Colibti come to be Synonima, is beyond a common skill to
imagine.

Buzecatle, Bursecaples, or Botsecals, the same with Boatswain or Mariner.

It is much, our Author should not write one of these three words true; but
coin such as were never before heard of: Buzzard had been a more allowable
mistake. The true word is Buscarl or Buzecarl.

Carucata, A Plough Land -- Skene, de verbo signif. deriveth it from the French
Charon, a Plough --

There is no such French word as Charon, nor is it so in Skene, de verborum
signif. but charrow, which is nearer the true French word charrne, a Plough,
then Charon.

Cepi corpus, Is a Return made by the Sheriff, that upon a Capias, Exigend or
other Process, when he has taken the body of the party. F.N.B. fol. 26.

Here the redundant word ( when) does much perplex the sense, and make it
unintelligible.

Clerk -- Subdiaconi, Cantoni, Acolythi --

This Cantoni is a pretty word, and deserves a particular interpretation.

Clerk of the Ax -- This word, and the explication our Author took in have out
of the Law Dictionary, never looking upon the Errata of that Book, where he
might have found it an acknowledged mistake for Clerk of the Acts, and
explicated accordingly.

Clerk of the Pleas -- Is an Officer in the Exchequer, in whose Official, the
Officers of the Court ought to sue --

If any Action did lie for writing nonsense; our Author would find no Plea for
himself.

Collation of a Benefice -- Toward the later end of this Interpretation, you
shall find as little sense, as in the former.

Commendam -- When a Parson is made a Bishop, there is a Cession of his
Benefice by the Commotion.

Our Author is very unhappy in his variations; for Commotion marrs the matter.

Common Fine -- And for this Common Fine the Lord must prescribe, and cannot
prescribe for it without prescription, as appears in Godfreys Case, in 11 Rep.

Thus my Lord Coke is again brought in to patronize nonsense.

Commotes, Signifies in Wales a part of a shire, as a Cantred or Hundred, 28
Hen. 8. cap. 3. It is written Commoiths 4 Hen. 4. cap. 17. And is used for a
gathering made upon the people.

This last is Com^rth, a word of different signification from Commote, and
ought not to be confounded with it.

Count -- But Countors, by Horns Mirror of Just. lib. 2. cap. des. Loyers, are
such Sergeants, skilful in the Law, which serve the common people to defend
their Actions in Judicature, for their Fee; whose duty, if it be, as is there
described, and were observed, Men might have much more comfort of the Law, than
they have.

This our Author transcribed from Cowels Interpreter; and is one of those
irreverent reflections upon the Common Law and Lawyers of this Land, which
(among other mistakes, in points derogatory to the supreme Power of the Crown
of England, and Fundamental Constitutions of Parliaments) caused that Book to
be prohibited by the Kings Proclamation bearing date the 25th day of March, 8
Jac. Anno 1610. Yet our Author in his Preface, takes the boldness to say, That
the Groundwork, upon which he builds, is Cowels Interpreter, an excellent
Book, both as to its matter and composure, and did not deserve that severe
arraignment that it has of late suffered.

Courratier, A French word, signifying a Horse.

Courser, 2 Inst. fol. 719.

Courratier, Is a Hors-courser; but our Author has found a new way of dividing
one word into two, to make up his Centuries.

Cuth, otherwise Uncuth, Privatus vel extraneus --

Cuth signifies known, and Uncuth unknown, yet here they are both coupled in
one yoke, as Synonima.

Custos Brevium -- There is also a Custos Brevium and retulorum in the Kings
Bench, who Fileth there, and Warrants of Attorney --

This is of the same complexion with the rest.

Demurrer -- West calls that likewise a Demurrer in Chancery, when there is
question made, Whether a Parties Answer to a Bill of Complaint, etc. be
defective or not, and thereof Reference made to any of the Bench, for the
examination thereof, and report to be made to the Court. West Symbol. part. 2.
tit. Chancery, sect. 29.

There is no such words to be found in the Author, and place cited; nor is it
probable so learned a Writer, as West, could be guilty of so erroneous an
Interpretation of this common word, Demurrer in Chancery.

Donative, Is a business merely given and collated by the Patron, to a Man --

So, if it be given to a Man to be a Plagiary, that is a Donative from his
Ingenuity.

Dum non fuit compos mentis, Is a Writ that lies for him, that not being of
sound memory, did Alien any Lands or Tenements in Fee-simple, Fee tail, for
term of life, or for years, against the Aliens. F.N.B. fol. 202.

Can it be imagined, that the learned Fitz-Herbert would be guilty of such an
absurd Explication?

Enquest -- The Jury finds the fact thus, then is the Law thus; and so we
judge for the Enquest in Criminal Causes. See Jury --

The learned will see he writes thus, then is the Law thus, That they will
judge him a blind Interpreter.

Farding or Farthing of Gold, Seems to be a Coin used in ancient times,
containing in value the fourth part of a Noble, viz. Twenty pence in Silver,
and in weight the sixth part of an ounce of Gold, that is, of Five shillings in
Silver, which is Three pence and somewhat more. --

Our Author is very unfortunate in his Additionals, for these contradictory
words ( which is Three pence and somewhat more) are superadded to what the Law
Dictionary says.

Ferture, The Shooing of Horses. See Bouch of Court.

In Bouche of Court there is nothing at all of Ferrure; for our Author
curtailed my Citation, not regarding this Reference.

Filicetum, A bracky ground, Ubi salices crescunt. See Domesday.

Filicetum or Filictum, Is a Ferny ground, so says my Lord Coke, 1 Inst. fol.
4. b. I suspect it not to be found in Domesday.

Foreigne, Forinsecus, may be derived of the French word Exterus, and in Law is
used --

The French word ( Forain) may as well be a Latin word, as Exterus French.

Fortlet, Comes near the French Fortlet --

Yes, as near as Four pence to a Groat; but the French word is Fortelet.

Frank-pledge, Franciplegium, Is a Compound irregular of two Languages --

It is irregularly said; for the words are both French.

Frustrum Terrae -- Domesday, tit. Haritisc. Rex Abedestone --

I dare affirm there is no such title, as Haritisc. in Domesday.

Gaynage -- In the Explication of this word, He tells us of Spokeman and
Spokemen; for it seems he did not like the word Sokeman.

Gardeine del Esglish, In English Church Wardens, and they may have an Action
for the Goods of the Grounds; and aivers other things they may do --

I would have our Author or do any thing hereafter, rather then interpret hard
words.

Gleabland -- The quhilke should be free fra payment of any Feinds. Skene.

This should be Teinds, a Scottish word signifying Taxes. Instead of which, our
Author brings in Feinds (God bless us) or Evil Spirits.

Hankwite -- Of the Saxon words Haginan, Pendere, and Wite, mulcta -- * By some
it has been interpreted Mulcta pro homine injusti suspenso --

There is no such Saxon word as Haginan, nor true Latin in the rest.

Haratiun: -- As in the Law Dictionary.

If our Author had been a Master in this kind of Learning, he might in this
word have showed his skill, and my mistake. For Haratium (from the French
Haras) signifies a race or breed of Horses, which is the only material error
(besides those of the Printer) which I have hitherto discovered in my Book.

Hereslita -- From the Saxon here Exercitus and sliten, to depart --

Though this be taken by our Author out of my Lord Cokes 4 Inst. yet it is
certainly a mistake* happily of the Printer, there being no such Saxon word as
sliten, to depart, but slitan, dissolvere*

Herpsac. See Frodmortel.

Where there is not a word of Herpsac, for he omitted my citation there, and so
Herpsac stands as an insignificant nullo, without interpretation.

Hinefare -- Si quis occidit hominem and Reges and facit heinfaram, dat Regi
xx* Domesday.

The Law Dictionary has it plainly and truly thus, Si quis occidit hominem
Regis and facit Heinfaram dat Regi xxs.

Hominatio, It may be called Dominatio, Domesday.

He may as well call it Somniatio; for the word in Domesday signifies a
mustering of men, what then has Dominatio to do with it?

Hondpeny, Sint quieti de Chevagio, Hond-peny, etc. But there is a Declaration
made, what is intended by it, Ideo quaere.

Here he was in the humor of adding somewhat to the word, more then he found in
the Law Dictionary; But still with ill success. He omitted the Author of the
Latin, and added the nonsensical English.

Hue and Cry -- In this word he has many errors, the French Huier, for Huer --
Flagiture for Flugitare -- Oyer for Oyes* -- Men slain secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni, is a pretty position.

Ignoramus -- It has a resemblance of that ancient Roman, where the Judges,
where they abso^ved a person accused, did write A. i. e. Absolvimus.

Supine negligence! Not to have the care or patience to transcribe truly what
lay fair in Print before him* viz. It has a resemblance of that ancient custom
of the Romans, where the Judges, when they absolved a person accused, did write
A --

Justices in Air -- Were sent but every seven years -- But there is a Book
entitled Orig. Juridiciales, but of what authority I know not, which says they
went oftener --

Sure our Author did not consult his own Duty and Reason, when he took the
boldness thus to question the Authority of that excellent Book, now a second
time Printed; did he not see in its Front those awful names, Orlando Bridgeman
and Matthew Hale subscribed to an Imprimatur? Names of greatest authority in
this kind. Has he not heard that Mr. Dugdales Works are of such account, That
they have often been allowed by the Judges, as good evidence in cases of great
moment?

Karle, A Saxon word properly denoting a man, but with any addition, a servant
or clown. Hence they are called a Seaman, a Buscarle.

Here again our Author thought himself obliged to alter my words, though with
the loss of Sense and Syntax.

Knights of the Shire -- But now Custom allows Esquires to be chosen to this
Office, 27 Hen. 6.6. So that they be resident in the County for the choice of
these Knights.

The first part is true, the later nonsencical.

Kylyw -- Perhaps it might signify any liquid thing, as Scoteale, and such
like --

Scotale is not a liquid thing, but a meeting at an Alehouse, where every man
paid his Scot, for the Ale he drank. He might have said Ale is a liquid thing.

Legacy -- See a Bequest, we call it a Devise.

And there is no Bequest to be seen.

Lenna, Lenga, Lennides -- Domesday.

For Leuva, Leuga, and Leunides.

Lupulicetum, A place where Hops grow, mentioned in Domesday.

It is not mentioned there; for we had no Hops in England of some Hundreds of
years after Domesday Book was made. Viz. till 15 Hen. 8. according to our
Chronicles. But the word is mentioned in 1 Inst. fol. 5. b.

Maihim or Mayhem -- But the cutting off an Ear or Nose, or such like is no
Mayhem --

This is otherwise since the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. which was in Print
before our Authors Book, though since the Law Dictionary was published.

Maiden Rents, Is a Noble paid by every Tenant in the Manor of Builth in
Radnorshire, at the marriage of a Daughter, and was anciently given to them,
for his quitting the Custom of Marcheta.

If any one would pretend to make sense of this; to whom shall them and his
relate? Our Author is very unhappy in his alterations.

Marle, Marla is a kind of Earth or Mineral, like Chalk, which men cast on
their Land --

These two words ( like Chalk) he adds to my Interpretation: when as Marle is
as like Chalk, as Chalk is like Cheese.

Marlerium, A Marlepit Mr. Dugdale has an old Deed by him, wherein is
mentioned this word --

This is a pretty kind of impudence, to make the World believe he is intimately
acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, and knows what old Deeds and Charters he has by
him; when as Mr. Dugdale lately told me (discoursing of our Author) that he
knew him not, nor ever heard of him till then. And in the word Sacrafield Rents
he pretends the like familiar acquaintance with a person of quality, utterly
unknown to him.

Mediterranean, Is any that passes through the midst of the Earth.

Whether he means any thing as Bull, Bear or Horse, I know not.

Mile, Miliare, is a quantity of a thousand Acres --

This I confess is a Mile of a large size; perhaps according to the measure in
the Isle of Pines.

Minstrel, Minstrellus, from the French Menstrel --

There is no such French word; it is Menestrier.

In Misfeasans and Mistrial, Cokes Reports are cited for Crokes.

Multa or Multura Episcopi, is derived from the Latin word mulcta, for that it
was a Fine given to the Kings, that they might have power to make their last
Wills and Testaments -- 2 Inst, fol. 491.

Our Author by miswriting my words, has made nonsense; yet boldly cites Cokes
Institutes.

Nihil or Nichil, Is a word which the Sheriff answers, that is apposed
concerning Debts illeviable, and that are nothing worth, by reason of the
parties from whom due.

See the Law Dictionary on this word, if our Author have not, by his blundering
alteration, made it less intelligible at least.

Occasiones, Are Assarts, whereof Manhood speaks at large. See Spel. Glossary
verbo Essartum.

That learned Glossary says the word is in some Authors false written, for
Occationes, from Occo, to harrow or break Clods; but our Author had not time to
read him out.

Open Law -- Imperfection for Imputation. Such smalnesses are frequent with him.

Oyer and Terminer -- A Commission of Oyer and Terminer is the first and
largest.

Thus it ends abruptly, leaving out two or three lines, which should make it
sense. viz. Of the Five Commissions, by which our Judges of Assise do sit in
their several Circuits.

Pais, A Country or Region, which Spelman in his Glossary says, Non
intelligendum est de quovis populo.

Here the Learned Spelman is false quoted, for he speaks not these words of
Pais, but of Trial per Pais, which our Author omitted, as being obliged to make
alterations.

Pannage or Pawnage -- Is most properly taken for the Woods within the Forest
--

Which ought to be, For the Mast of the Woods --

Pax Ecclesiae, Is said, when all the Privileges and Immunities of the Church,
her Servants and Ministers. Vide Leg. Edw. Conf. cap. 8.

Here he pretends to translate my Citation, being the very words of King
Edwards Law, and makes this nonsense of it.

In Pedage and Peers, he cites Baldus in veribus Feudorum, and Bartilayus de
regno.

There is no such Book as the first, nor any such Author as the last.

Pervise non ad tyrocinia juris, quas motas volant, exercenda, says Spelman.

Another false quotation, for vocant.

Poleine, was a sort of shoe -- not utterly laid aside till the Reign of Hen.
8. in which time they were increased to that excessive length, that in Rich. 2.
time, they were tied up to the knees with Gold or Silver Chains. And forbidden
by Edw. 4. under great penalty.

Does our Author think, Rich. 2. succeeded Hen. 8. which his words seem clearly
to intimate.

Possession -- If the Lord purchase the tenancy held by Heriot-service, then
the Heriot is extinct by verity of possession. --

We Will suppose he intended to say unity.

Proporcitas, Skene de verbo signif. Latins it Proportio Assisae. --

Skene calls it Proportatio Assisa -- in his de verborum significatione, not
verbo signif. as our Author often mistakes it.

Pudhepec, -- But the Learned Spelman thinks it is miswritten, for the Sax.
puchepec, i. e. wudhepec.

This Saxon is Rudhewec, as here written, Spelman writes it better, I Will secure
you; but our Author has very ill luck in transcribing, even from fair printed
Books; and it seems understands not the Saxon Characters.


The Law Dictionary begins the Letter Q. with Quadragesima Sunday; but our
Author was not willing to begin so, lest it should look too much like
alter-idem, Therefore prepones Quadrans and Quadranta terrae; and so poor
Quadragesima has lost his due place in the Alphabes; but (Quack had he thought
on it) would have done his work better, and been as able a Law-word as Quadrans.

Quietantia Assisarum super Assisam -- Quod non ponantur in Assisis, jurat nec
magis Assisis --

For Juratis nec magnis Assisis.

Realty, -- Sometimes it is taken for Royalty.

Never; for they are two different words.

Recordare facias -- It seems to be called a Recordare, because the form that
it commands the Sheriff to whom it is directed to make a Record --

Of our Authors mistakes.

Renegeld -- infra hundred de Maulestria.

There is not such a Hundred in all England.

Rescyte -- As if Tenant for years brings, he in Reversion comes in and prays
to be received --

The Tenant it seems may bring what he will.

Rogus -- Constabulario Castri de Divis and Custodi Forestae de Cippeham --

I see our Author, by his writing it, does not understand this Divis which
should be Divisis or Divis. with a Period, for the Divizes in Wiltshire.

Scandalum magnatum, -- And has given name, to wit, granted to recover damage
thereupon.

Then it seems to give name is to grant.

Scyre-gemot -- In this word Seldens Titles of Honor is misquoted. --

Sea-rover, See Privateer. Anno 16. Car. 2. cap 6. Quere if not the same with
Pyrate.

You must know all this, except the Learned Quaere, is in the Law Dict. where
Privateer was misprinted for pirate; but our Author neither makes Errata's to
his own Works, nor reads others.

Selda, -- * In the conclusion he adds to what the Law-Dict. says, thus --
Selda also in Doomsday signifies a Wood of Sallows, Willows, and Withyes.

Which addition had been better omitted, the word being no where used in
Domesday for a wood of any kind, as I confidently believe, and our Author cites
no place.

Serjeanty, Serjeantia, signifies in Law a Service that cannot be due from any
Lord to his Tenant, but to the King only.

This is a new Service due from a Lord to his Tenant.

Severance, Is the singling or serving of two or more that are joined in one
Writ -- here Severance is Permittance.

Nor is this any better sense.

Soke, -- Clamat cognitionem Placitorum -- infra suum 40 s. --

Suum for Summam.

Solidata terre, -- Breve Regis Johannis vicecomitatus Angliae. --

This Vicecomitatus for Vicecomitibus, was an Errata in the Law-Dict. and noted
at the end of the Book; but out Author did not design to correct, but augment
Errors.

Sullings, In Domesday Book, according to Mr. Agars interpretation, are taken
for Alders.

I have so great a respect for Mr. Agar, that I am not satisfied this
Interpretation is his; no question but it is the same with Swolings, i. e.
Carucatae, Plough-Lands.

Team -- With their Childrens Goods and Chattels in his Court --

So it is in the Law Dictionary, but in the Errata, he might have seen it thus
corrected, With their Children, Goods, and Chattels.

Tenure -- What may make a Tenure, and what not. See Perkins Revelations 70.

Perkins, the Learned Lawyer, had no Revelations, that I ever heard of.

Theft -- Theft from the Prison, or in presence of the owner, is properly
called Robbery.

Prison for Person, makes a wide difference.

Thwertnick -- Absque alieno capiendo pro executione facienda --

For absque aliquo --

Tolsester -- Though this Word lay fair before him in the Law Dictionary, yet
he has committed three Errors in transcribing six lines.

Trial -- He concludes with Pat. 3 R. Joh. m. 3. In fidelitate Leulini.

Omitting what follows in the Law Dictionary, and is most to the purpose, viz.
In fidelitate Leulini statuitur de triatione differentiarum dicti Leulini, etc.

Tylwith -- Familia, tribus --

Doctor Davy's Welsh Dictionary, from whence he had this word, would have
furnished him many more, as able Law-words as this.

Vassal -- Skene verbo Lignantia says --

Skene has no such word in his Book, as Lignantia.

Verdetor, Vindarius -- Is a Judicial Officer of the Kings Forest --

Both the words mistaken, for Verderer, Viridarius.

Vi laica removenda -- Until the Bishop of the Plea, where such Church is, has
certified.

Any one may certify this to be nonsense.

Villain -- Our Villains Regardant to Manors were Glebae Abscriptitii, tied
to Turk --

What had our Villains to do with the Turk?

Walkers -- There are Foresters, assigned by the King, who are Walkers within a
certain space of Ground to their care.

Somewhat omitted to make it sense.

Warscot -- Immunis liberi and quieti --

For Immunes, liberi and quieti --

Westminster -- Epist. ejus ad diu Edwardum --

For divum. The word in mine is abbreviated thus ad Div. Edw. which our Author
it seems did not understand.


IF our Author have any further occasion to make use of the Law Dictionary he
may take notice of these Additional Errata's.

In Chron. Table of Hen. 8. for 1059. read 1509. In Gleab, read vel terra --
dele a. In Gildable, for aliqui read aliorum qui. In Grossome, for Titles read
Tiles. In Hatratium, read from the Fr. Haras, a Race of Horses and ^ares kept
for breed. In Honor, for Mardstone read Maidstone. In Kings Swanherd read
Cignorum. In Miskening, for Mistzeninge read Miskening. In Prepensed -- dele
yet. In Stoc, read Malefactor pro -- In Tassum, read duobus Tassis. In Tolt,
for Juris read Curiae -- In Wardwite, read Castro -- In Xenia, read omnia --
FINIS.

