BLOODY NEWS FROM Clarken-well.

BEING A true Relation of a horrid Murder Committed by John Mason upon Gregory
Reeves at Mr. Hues a Bakers right over against the Kings Arms, upon Monday
night last, being the ninth of July; With the manner how he wounded him on the
Head with a half hundred weight, cut of one of his Ears, and stabbed him in
several parts of the Body.

Also how he was apprehended, and his Examination and Confession before Justice
Powel on Tuesday last, by whom he was Committed a prisoner to NEWGATE.

Together with a true and exact Narrative of a Bloody murder committed by a
Soldiers wife on her husband, at Dog and Bitch-yard near the Covent Garden, on
Wednesday last, with her Examination and Confession.

This is an exact Relation as it was brought from Mr. Hues the Bakers in
Clarkenwell.

LONDON, Printed for J. JONES, 1661.

AN EXACT RELATION OF A Bloody Murder COMMITTED At Clarken-well on Monday
last, Being the 9th of July, by John Mason, upon Gregory Reeves, at a Bakers
house right against the KINGS ARMS.
LOve when grown beyond the wiser bounds of Reason, and that ever-waking Devil
Jealousy have in all ages produced very sad effects, witness the inhumane
story of Clytemnestra, who for the Love of the adulterer Aegysteus, did with a
merciless and un-relenting hand, even at a Banquet (which the very Laws of
Hospitality yea amongst the rudest Nations, might have forbid) make the Soul
(...) Husband Agamemnon, make an Ultimum vale of his wounded body.

And Deinira the unfortunate wife of the valiant and heroic Hercules,
harboring in her pining breast, the never-ceasing, venomous and dstructive
insinuations of a suppositious jealousy, did persuade her abused self, to send
her husband a shirt tinctured deeply with the blood of the Centaur Nessus,
whose poysonus vapors, did in a short time, force the spirit of that
all-conquering Conqueror, to leave its old acquaintance, by which means she
lost both her husband and her self.

Many might be instanced who have (through foolish jealousy) engaged with each
other in single duel to the loss of both their lives, which indeed is far
more-noble than this so late and horrid murder.

Now this following story has in it a double guilt both of jealousy and
murder, the exact relation whereof is as follows viz.

I shall first begin with the Author of this hanious murder, which was one John
Mason, who lay at Mr. Hues a Bakers over against the Kings Arms in
Clarken-well, and was bedfellow to Gregory Reeves a poor, simple harmless
fellow on whom this bloody design was Acted.

For the Reason of this cruelty so desperately executed, I only conclude, and
find by the report of all, that jealousy was the Original, which through the
instigation of the Devil was thus barbarously acted by John Mason, who bearing
an affection to the Carpenters maid living next door to the Bakers house was
jealous of all that looked on her.

But more especially was he jealous of the said Gregory an innocent
sillycreature,, who was not designed in the least, to frustrate the Suit of
his supposed friend.

But to come to this horrid act it self, on Monday night being the ninth
instant, they went to bed very f^iendly, the man's Son of the house lying with
them; yet by the Devils Suggestion, when poor Gregory was fast a sleep, and the
Boy that lay with him, up got this Cruel and baberous Murderer, and in the
first place, either with the half hundred weight, which he set again on the
Table, or the Hammer which was since found in the Room, he stund-him to hinder
his crying out, and wounded him in diverse places of the Head.

This not satisfying his most Cruel bloody mind, he cut off one of his ears,
and having so done stabbed him in several parts of the Body, of which he dyed.

The time of this sad Execution the boy lay fast asleep, and heard nothing of
this bloody and inhumane Tragedy till he avvaked the next morning.

Upon Tuesday morning being the tenth day of July, the Murderer was
discovered and rumorred abroad at which the whole Family was not a little
disturbed, the Carpenters Maid also at next door being very much troubled and
greatly grieved at this sad nevves of her Neighbors death, as well as the
desperate Condition of her Lover John Mason.

And the Neighbor flocking into the Bakers house apprehended the Murderer,
and immediately carried him before Justice Powel, who lived near adjacent to
the place, vvhe^e being examined he denied nothing; but the Justice ask^ng him
why he did it, he ansvvered thus, viz. I would my hands had been tied thus
last night, and it had been better for me.

This being ended, his Mittimus was made, and he was conducted by the
Officers to Nevvgate, till such time that Justice be inflicted upon him for
this bloody fact.

On Wednesday the 11th of July, the Crowner should have sat with his July on
the party murdered but he being absent they appointed to meet the next day,
till when the Corpse was ordered to be laid in the ground, which was accordingly
performed.

On Thursday the twelfth instant, the Crowners Jury as to the agreement the day
before met in the Nags-head Taat Clarken-wel, and being gathered together, the
body was ordered to be taken up again.

This being performed the Crowner and his Jury sat upon this sad and lamentable
act, and after viewing the Corpse, according to the Laws of this Kingdom, they
gave in their Verdict, that they could find it to be no other then willful
murder.

When they had thus ended the Corpse was again put into the place from whence it
was taken, and the murderer still remains in Newgate, and will doubtless (next
Sessions) receive the just sentence of Death for this cruel, bloody and
barbarous fact.

The Relation of this wicked and unimmitated enterprise is here published as a
warning-piece to all those that are young and ignorant of the nature of love,
(which in it self is peaceable, hides multitudes of faults, plots no evil, and
seeks not revenge, but if kindled with the divelish fire of Jealousy, is a
plotter of all manner of mischief, and acts with bloody hands in any cruel
murder whatever) that they fall not into such desperate designs, whereby they
may not only deprive of life those on whom they commit such horrid cruelties
and barbarous murders: but also bring themselves to unnatural and untimely
ends, to the great grief of their Parents and friends, and to the sorrow of all
good Christians, that have an eye to disceru the miserable and desperate
condition men fall in by Jealousy, which was the chief cause of this most sad
and lamentable cruelty committed on the said Gregory Reeves by the bloody hands
of John Mason, as he lay in a dead sleep not dreaming in the least of the
intended mischief designed by his bedfellow.

This may put us all in mind of our duty to him who is the Author of all good,
That in regard we enter into our beds, as into our graves, so we ought to use
our best endeavors to make such a preparation for every hour, that we may
embrace death as a Messenger inviting us to a Mansion of eternal glory.

FINIS.
A true account of the bloody murder commtted by a Soldiers Wife on her
Husband upon Wednesday last, at Dog and Bitch-yard near the Covent Garden.
IN this story I shall he brief, and only give you the true account, which was
thus, viz. Upon Tuesday the 10th instant, this Soldier coming home, he found
his wife craming her patch, he being hot opend his doublet, and desiring a Pipe
of Tobacco she told himhe should have none, but going to the box where he used
to lay it, she started up with a Knife in her hand, and stabbed him in the
Breast, he taking no great notice of what she did, in a jesting way flung his
hat at her, with which she in earnest most desperately stabbed him in the belly,
and yet was not satisfied till she had made a third assault and stabbed him
again.

Since which bloody murder, upon her examination she says He was not her
Husband, thinking thereby to escape the better, but the Law is more just then to
pardon such bloody offenders.

FINIS.

