(...) BLOODY MURDERER, OR, THE UNNATURAL SON HIS Just Condemnation.

At the Assizes Held at Monmouth, MARCH 8. 1671/2.

With the Suffering of his Sister and Servant, For the MURDER of his Mother,
Mrs. GRACE JONES.

FOR WHICH The said Son was pressed to Death, his Sister burnt, and his Boy
Hanged.

WITH A True Account of their TRIALS, Penitent Behavior, Prayers, Speeches,
and Circumstances thereunto Relating; With Letters of several Worthy DIVINES.

Filius ante Diem -- Quis ista legendo
Temperet a Lachrymis --
By Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lloyd for Jonathan Edwin at three Roses in
Ludgat-street. 1672.

A POEM upon the late Execrable Murder committed by Henry Jones (and his
Confederate Boy George Bridges) October. 11, 1671. upon his Mother Mrs. Grace
Jones of Monmouth Widow, and their deserved Executions, the one March 11. the
other March 16. 1671/2.
AND did a Pistol-shot distain the Ground
With crimson Gore, showered from the gushing wound
Of a fond Mother, which aloud did cry,
And with revengeful language pierce the sky;
And was this horrid Matchless Murder done,
To a kind Mother by an unkind son?
A son! how Admiration struck mine eyes,
And all my apprehensive faculties,
When I beheld the man! transformed with wonder,
Senseless I stood, as one struck down with Thunder.
This barbarous Act in never dying Rimes,
Shall be transmitted to succeeding times;
And (whilst the glittering Orbs in Order roll
Their burning rays about the fixed Pole,)
Be Annaliz'd in the black Rolls of Fame,
As a Memorial of the foulest shame.
Monster of men! what made thee to decoy
Thy Parent to destruction, and thy Boy?
Ah! was thy heart hew d from a Parian Rock,
Or to it did cursed Nature set a Lock.
To Shut out pity? was it walld with brass?
Or much more Steeled then Salvage Nero's was?
Could nothing but thy Mothers Blood supply
The ambitious thirst of thy insatiate eye?
Deluded wretch! experience lets thee know.
That thou art ruined by her overthrow:
And that thy big-womb'd wife, might be possessed
Of dear-bought lands, thou terribly art pressed,
(Dismal effects of love!) with massy stones:
O what sad ends attend Sanguineous ones!
And thou, vile Boy, who did rescind the throat
Of thy head wounded Mystriss, thou have got
A shameful death to thy foul practice due,
And now the Master of the damned crew
Pays thee thy wages, (if thou did not make
Thy peace with God) in the infernal Lake.
Thou did do well to clear the Maid from guilt,
But better, if her blood thou had not spilt.
The Wicked Life, Horrid Murder, and Penitent Death of HENRY JONES:
ALthough the unhappy Times we live in, (which may not unfitly be termed the
very Rust of the Iron-age) are too pregnant with sad instances of prodigious
Crimes, and unparalled Villainies, Men striving with a cursed Emulation to
outvie each other in wickedness; And that crying Scarlet-sin of Murder so
overflows (like a torrent) almost in every street; That it seems to many but a
piece of Gallantry to stab at the Majesty of God by killing and destroying Man,
his Image; yet shall we seldom meet with any Impiety, swelled to that height in
all Circumstances, as this which at present has engaged our Pen. An Action
that at once infringes all Bonds of Gratitude, and Obligations of Humanity; and
violates the Ties of Nature as well as the Dictates of Grace; so strange and
lamentable, so cruel and execrable, that it needs no flourish of words, or
Epithets, to render it odious, but is in it self so transcendently abominable,
as it is incapable of being aggravated by any Rhetoric; for who hears of a
Mother wilfully murdered by her own Son, but his senses startle, and his heart
is instantly brimful of horror and indignation. -- The perfect Narrative of
this deplorable Fact, with its concomitant circumstances, we undertake, not out
of prejudice to the deceased Malefactor, who having partly satisfied the Law,
by yielding up his body to death here on earth; has (as we hope, and have no
weak Grounds to believe, as shall appear in the sequel) obtained a Pardon also
of Almighty God for such his grievous sin, that his Soul may live for ever in
Heaven. Nor do we publish it to gratify their liquorish Fancies, who delight
in hearing strange stories, or to furnish the already too talkative World with
more vain Discourses; But to the end, that the Readers observing herein (as in
a Crystal Mirror) the variety and violence of the Devils temptations; And the
Allurements of sin, wherewith these poor Creatures (the Authors and Actors of
this horrid Butchery) suffered themselves to be seduced with the Miraculous
detection, and severe punishment of the same; Nay, by the terrors thereof be
for the future retained within the lists of Charity toward Men, filial respect
and duty toward their Parents and Superiors, and (which includes all)
religious obedience toward God and his Commandments: And I hope the World
(wicked and insensible as it is) has not yet so totally renounced and
abandoned all Virtue, Piety and Prudence, as not a little by these Examples to
reflect; and imitate the wise and skilful Pilot, who mourns to see the Rocks
whereon his fellow-Voyagers have suffered shipwreck; and yet again rejoices,
that by the sight thereof he may avoid his own; Lastly, that we may all admire
the Riches of Gods Grace, which denies not to receive the vilest and most
crimson sinners, whenever they with a sincere and hearty Repentance make their
Addresses to his Throne for mercy and forgiveness.

The principal Actor in this barbarous Tragedy was Henry Jones, the son of
Thomas Jones, late of Monmouth in Southwales, and Grace his Wife; Parents
miserably unhappy to bring into the World so ungrateful and unnatural a Wretch,
that justly came to suffer an ignominious death, for bereaving her of life,
from whom he thus derived his own: It were no less injury to truth, then
affront to the Country of his Nativity, should we deny him to be by descent a
Gentleman, his Father being a Person of a competent estate, and good repute in
those Parts: But alas! what a sorry and contemptible Glory is it, to bear only
the empty names and painted Coats of Generous Ancestors, whilst we by
neglecting the imitation of those virtues that first made them eminent,
disgrace their Memories, and commit Actions more vile then the basest of the
plebeian Rabble. His Provident Father considering, That no quality does more
adorn or embellish then Learning, took particular care to have his greener
years seasoned with the Rudiments of Literature, which one would have thought
should have served him for the more regular Conduct of his future life; and
rein'd him in from such matchless enormities; But Learning alone, without being
grafted on a stock of good natural Parts, and watered with the dew of Heavenly
Grace, is commonly not only barren of happy fruit, but very dangerous whilst it
puffs up its empty-headed Possessors, and makes them self-willed, conceited,
and temerarious in their undertakings: He was no sooner arrived to that Age,
which loyally (though not always truly) entitles us to discretion, but he was
freed from the Tyranny of the Rod and Ferula, and Articl'd with an Attorney; an
Employ not unlike to continue and thrive, since Pride, Fraud, Malice, Revenge
and Contention do daily increase amongst Neighbors. But -- -- Ludit in Humanis
divina Potentia rebus. --
We fondly to our selves great things propose,
But their Events it is Heaven alone that knows.


Whilst his careful and Indulgent Parents feed themselves with hopes of his
rising by the Law; It Is (alas!) his destiny most wretchedly to fall by it; He
wore out his five years Term with his Master, without any thing worthy of
(...) unless we shall say, that by keeping debauched Company, learning to
drink, and other Extravagancies too frequently practiced by some, (I had almost
said in this seducing Age, by most) young Cl^rks; he then laid a foundation for
the sad Superstructure of his succeeding life, and that his ruin may perhaps
not amiss be calculated from thence --. After the Expiration of his said Term,
he continued some time in London, making Addresses and Courtship to several
Women; but not succeeding herein, and his father being lately dead, leaving him
some estate, though it seems, not enough to satisfy his boundless desires: He
thereupon returns home to Monmouth, and married the Daughter of a
Gloucestershire Gentleman, with whom (as it is reported) he had a competent
Portion; and one that (had it stood with the Decrees of Providence) seemed to
deserve a better Match, since Fame gives her the commendable Character of
virtuous and discreet: But since Marriages are first ordained in Heaven before
they are consummated on Earth, it is equal vanity in any that have submitted
their Necks to that yoke, to murmur and complain: As it is for Bowlers, when
they have made their Cast, to cry, either Rub or Fly: Heaven to some gives
agreeable and happy Consorts to assist and support their weaknesses; to others
lewd and unequal Yoke-fellows, for the trial of their patience: The first have
Reason to applaud its mercy in Hymns of Thanksgiving; the last, to evidence
their own obedience, by a cheerful submission in the discharge of their Duties.

The old Gentleman his father, being very tenderly affectionate toward his
wife, and having other children fot her to maintain, left her at his death an
estate of about 100 l. per ann. for life, that was afterward to descend to the
said Henry her son, which brings us directly to the occasion that first excited
this inconsiderate wicked young Man to the horrid thoughts of murdering her.

He found this rate of living, above what his estate or Practice of Law, (which
he followed in the Country) could maintain, and would often be borrowing money
of his Mother, sometimes pretending one urgent occasion, and then another, which
she, like a kind Mother, for several times very readily supplied him with.

At last, finding by his often requests her small Exchequer would soon be
exhausted, and that he wasted it vainly and profusely, she grew more reserved,
and less free to part with her money, which put him into a rage: and the devil
takes hold of the opportunity to mind him of 100 l. per ann. to come to him
after her death, and suggested, that she lived too long: hereupon without fear
of God, or regard to his soul, he like an unnatural Villain, entertains
thoughts of sending her out of the world; hellish thoughts and infernal
resolutions! which will not only strangle those that embrace, but confound all
that hearken to them: he consults about this bloody business with his will, not
his conscience: with his wicked heart, but not with his precious soul: His
faith is so weak toward God, and so strong with the devil, that he will not
retire with grace, but advance with impiety: His wild youth has no regard to
her Reverend Age, nor has all the blood that streams in his veins power to
prompt him that it is derived from hers, which he goes about most inhumanely to
spill: he is hellishly resolved on the matter, and now proceeds to the manner
of her Tragedy: He proposes to himself several ways for to murder her, and the
Devil who is never absent on such hellish occasions, makes him as well
industrious as vindictive and implacable in the contriving and finishing it: At
last, having a servant, a Boy of about fifteen years of Age, named George
Bridges; the son, as is reported, of a Butcher, he resolves to make him his
Confederate and Confident in this black design, whereupon preparing him with
fair words, obliging him to secrecy, with horrid Oaths and Imprecations, and
tempting him with a Promise of five pounds in Money, and a new suit of Clothes
for his infernal service in the business; he discovers to him his intentions of
killing his Mother, and engaged him therein: But she seldom going forth they
knew not how to bring about their wicked purpose, though for a Month together
they waited for an opportunity. At last he inspires them with a stratagem,
which took effect to all their Ruins. Thi^ wicked Son and his young Villain
privately steal several Sheaves of Corn out of a Barn his Mother had in the
Fields, not above a quarter of a Mile distant from Monmouth Town, and carry
them down to a small Wood, about two Furlongs beyond the said Barn, on a
Riverside called Munnow, being a place designed for Executing their Inhumane
Villiany; having thus laid the Train, and spread his Nets for the Life of his
Innocent Mother, this graceless Son on Wednesday, the Eleventh of October last
past, (like a cursed Hypocrite) under the officious and specious pretenses of
care and diligence, invites his tender Mother to her own bloody Funeral, coming
and acquainting her, that she had certainly lost Corn out of her aforesaid
Barn, and that he had often told her so, but she would never believe it; but
now he could make it appear, if she would be pleased to go with him thither,
and that she would do very well to look after it: Hereupon through his much
importunity she condescended and went with him toward the Evening in her
Slippers to the Barn, where seeing Corn scattered toward the aforementioned
Wood, he told her it was gone that way to his knowledge; for (says he) if you
go but a little further, you shall find several Sheaves of your Wheat, which
she yielding to, came to the Wood-side, but was very unwilling to go in, till
by his Entreaties she was prevailed upon; and, according to his Stories, found
indeed several Sheaves, but meets also with a Death no less cruel then
unexpected; for as she was stooping to take up some of the ears of Corn, and
rubbing them in her hands to see whether they were thresh'd or no, this
graceless, inhumane, and unnatural Wretch, her Son, attended with his aforesaid
Confederate George Bridges, who had waited on them thither, discharges a Pistol
at her, from which she received a mortal shot, with a slug or loget, in the
right side of her head, about an inch above her ear, the slug remaining in her
head; the Wound was found, when prob'd by Chyrurgions to be about six inches in
length; she falling down, they for the present left her; but fearing, it seems,
they had not completely done their work; about two hours after they return,
and though one would have thought the direful Reflections on what they had
done, might have raised in them a Consternation, and the ghastly spectacle of a
Murdered Mother, touched and somewhat mollified the obdurate heart of this
wicked son: yet contrariwise, so little were they dismayed thereat, and such
small Impression could this woeful Object make on their savage spirits. That
these sons of darkness fell afresh to their bloody banquet, (it being then
about 9. of the Clock the same Evening) when the amazed and blushing Sun had
withdrawn it self far enough from beholding so foul and barbarous an Action;
And then the young Assassinate, George Bridges (young indeed in years, but old
in wickedness) steps on ^^e bloody stage to present the second Act of this most
lamentable Tragedy; for doubting she was not yet quite dead, and her soul fully
dispatched into the other world; this young son of Belial, George Bridges, with
a Knife cuts her throat, making a Transcision about five inches long, clear
through the great Artery and Jugular veins; and (as it is credibly related) this
Imp of Hell, a stranger to Grace, and Rebel to Nature, scoffingly told his
Master on that horrid occasion, That his Mothers throat cut as tough as an old
Ewes: and here it is observable how these two wretched creatures could be so
hardened in wickedness, and bold in villainy, as to have the impious courage to
return unto the place and person where they had so lately committed such an
abomination; for although their Guide and Conductor the black Prince of the
Air, assisted them with the obscurity of Night, yet every Bird and Bush might,
methinks, have stricken Terror in their conscious souls, and they might by time
have reflected on what they had done, and considered they had been hatching
Cockatrice-Eggs, and weaving the Spiders web. But God was not i^ all their
thoughts, and the Devil had lulled the ^eared cons^ences into a lethargick
Slumber not to be awakened but with Thunder, their thoughts were wholly
th^^ghts of Blood, wasting and destruction were in their paths, which in short
time fell on their own heads; this being done, the son then took from her what
money she had about her (reported to be about 5 li. enough to pay the Villain
his promised reward that assisted in her murder) and several Rings off her
fingers, which Providence after ordered partly to discover it; then they
endeavored to drag her dead body to the beforementioned river Munnow (hard by
the wood-side) but it proved too heavy for them, or on I know not what other
considerations, they at last left it near the place where they did the Fact;
the boy went to the farm-house of his slain Mystriss near the wood, and the son
home to her house in Monmouth, who coming to the door, gave a little rap with
his fingers, his Sister Mary who stayed up for him, presently let him in (as
'twas afterward proved against her at the Assizes) and that night washed his
bloody clothes: Next morning early, on Thursday October. 12. a poor woman of
Monmouth going into this Wood to gather some sticks, saw this dead body, and
approaching near, fo^nd it to be Mrs. Jones whom she well knew, and thereupon
returning back, acquainted the Magistrates, that in such a wood lay such a
person murdered, on which they went to the house of Mrs. Grace Jones, and
found her son Henry in bed, and told him they heard his Mother was murdered;
he made strange of it, and seemed to be much troubled at it: but going with the
townsmen to the place where his mother lay dead, by her was found several
footsteps, and measuring the feet of them that were present, they found those
footsteps ^o fit the feet of Henry Jones, and suspecting him (...) be
concerned, they charged him with the murder, and had him and his Man before
two or three Justices met for that purpose, who examined first the Boy, and
then the Master; the Boy confessed that his Master shot her in the head, and
the Master said the Boy cut her throat; and so the one impeached the other.
After this, the daughter M. Jones was taken into examination, suspecting her to
be guilty with her brother in this Murder, not only for beating of the little
children for crying, and making enquiry for their mother, but for washing her
Brothers bloody clothes, and endeavoring to conceal her mothers death; yet some
friends thinking her to be innocent became Bail for her, and shewent at
liberty; but within five or six weeks after she made her escape from Monmouth,
and was gone several miles toward London, which the Bail hearing of, she was
pursued, apprehended and carried back again, where she was committed prisoner
till the next Assizes, together with her brother and the said George Bridges.

After Mr. Jones's commitment, several able Ministers went to visit him, viz.
The Reverend and learned Dr. Goodwin Minister of the Town of Monmouth, Mr.
Pollington Minister of Newland, and Mr. Betham Minister of Whit-Church, who
used their most strenuous endeavors to make him sensible of the heinousness of
his sin, with which from the first moment of his being taken into custody, he
seemed to be extremely affected: besides these, one Mr. Jackman Minister of
Newent sent a Letter of Advice to him, which being full of excellent Matter, we
should not discharge our duty, if we did not publish it here verbatim, as
follows.

A Godly learned Ministers Letter, to Mr. Jones, soon after he was committed to
prison.
SIR,
IN giving you the trouble of these Lines, I have no other design than the
discharge of my Conscience, and the awakening of yours, by a faithful and
friendly admonition. My Office, as a Minister, binds me to lay out my self for
the salvation of men's Souls? and being deeply apprehensive of the danger of
yours, both in respect of that bloody fact which you have committed, and the
sins which made God leave you to commit that unnatural Murder: I could not but
give you my best advice, though at a distance. -- Now, since Conviction of Sin
is the first step to Repentance: I beseech you in the fear of God to consider
how hideous and ghastly the Sin is which you have committed, which had it been
only of a stranger that had no way obliged you, might have made you go mourning
to your Grave. How much more then to take away the Life of her who gave you
yours, that bare you in her Womb, dandled you on her Knees, and nursed you in
her bosom? Oh! of what a deep dye is a Mothers Blood? what a prodigious sin is
Matricide! In this how have you out sinned Cain? as much as a Mother is dearer
than a Brother, and has done more for you than a Brother or Sister can do. Can
a Mother forget her Child, says the Prophet, Isa. 49.15. But can a Child
forget a Mother? Could you forget what pains she underwent in bearing? what
trouble in nursing? what care in providing for you? But then if you consider
yet further. How suddenly you thrust her out of the world, whereby she was
deprived of time to put the affairs of her Soul in order, it may more humble
you; and consider, whether depriving her of space to call on the Lord for
mercy, you may not have hurt her Soul more than her Body, especially if she was
taken away in an unprepared estate. And further, all this was done not rashly,
in your drink or passion; but was a premeditate and deliberate act of your
Soul. Oh! how does my Soul bleed at the consideration of your horrid Sin; mine
Eyes are not dry whilst I write, I know not how yours are in reading it. As
it was an act of your hand, your body was guilty of the Sin; but as it was a
deliberate act, your Soul is partaker in the guilt, and both Soul and Body
defiled with your Mothers blood. But alas! my Brother, the act is not all,
though bloody; the corruption of Nature, and Fountain that sent forth those
bitter streams, is to be bewailed. The Cause is worse than the Effect; that
deep pollution of your Nature, and that corruption which put on this wicked
act, is to be bewailed. The sins of your life, which provoked God to give you
up to shed a Mothers blood, are to be lamented; It is like by committing many
other sins, and by neglecting to serve God, your heart came to be hardened by
degrees, and so from one wickedness to another, till at last you adventured on
this high crime. -- Think then I beseech you in how full a manner your Heart
was under the dominion of the Devil; and what quiet and peaceable possession he
had of your Soul; so that if this sin had not been committed, you might have
perished for your other transgressions. -- And now I beseech you to consider,
whether it does not concern you, to think in what a woeful estate your Soul is,
when a studied and deliberate slaughter of a Mother, fills up the measure of
your sins, what hope remains of escaping Eternal misery, without deep and
sound Repentance, when the Scripture says expressly, that Murderers are shut
out of Heaven, Rev. 22.15. --

I write not this to drive you to despair; but to draw you to Repentance. And
oh! that you would cast your self down in the dust, and bitterly bewail this
bloody and black sin, with the sins of your life, which prepared you for this;
Oh that you would be continually on your Knees, begging for Pardon and Peace;
Oh that your head were a Fountain of Tears, and that you could weep day and
night for the wrong you have done, not only to your own Soul, but also to him
that made you, and her that bare you; Great sins must have great Repentance;
it is not true except it he very deep; it is not true except it be for all as
well as some; it is not true except it be for sin as sin; it is not true except it
bewails original corruption, as David's Repentance of his Murder and Adultery,
left not his depravity unlamented, Psalm. 51.5.

Now that you may not miscarry this great work of such high concernment; but
that your Repentance may be Repentance unto Salvation, never to be repented of.
I beseech you for Gods and your own Souls sake, to observe and follow these
directions.

1. Beware of whatsoever may be an hindrance to the true humiliation of your
Soul.

Take heed of too much company, or bad company, privacy or retiredness may be
much for your advantage; vain company will have vain discourse; desire all such
to depart from you, whose discourse tends not to your Souls profit, let only
such be conversant with you, who will help you in your work, which is to fit
your self for an happy Eternity.

2. Take heed of worldly and vain discourse, loose not precious time in
unprofitable talk, spend not your Breath otherwise than in penitent sighs,
groans, and prayers, and in giving warning to such as come about you to avoid
the sins which brought you to this sad condition. --

3 Take heed of pleasing your appetite, in taking too much drink, or in a too
liberal use of meats, be much in fasting which is an help to Prayer, and let
the diet you take be moderate, and mean as becomes one that judges himself
unworthy of life or comfort; abstinence from the enjoyments of this life, is a
great help and furtherance of mortification and humiliation; Bishop Atherton
found that by shutting the Windows, making the room somewhat dark, was helpful
to humiliation

4. Take heed of thinking that if your life pay for your Mothers, you do
thereby make satisfaction to God; for though that be some satisfaction to the
Law of the Land, yet not to God, who is only satisfied by the death of his Son
Jesus Christ, which satisfaction you must lay hold on by Faith, and apply the
blood of Christ to wash away the foul sins of your Mothers blood. -- And such
faith cannot be separated from true repentance: therefore you must practice the
one, that you may be assured of the other.

2. Embrace all means that may further and promote you in the way and work of
Repentance.

1. Read much in the Scriptures, and such Soul-searching Books as may help to
awaken, direct, comfort, and further you in the way of Salvation; especially
look much into those books as treat of Conversion, Repentance, and the last
things, as Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: it would do well also to get such
Books as have been set forth of penitent Malefactors. as Bishop Atherton,
Nathaniel Butler, Thomas Savage, and others, who being cast into Prison for
great crimes, were through Divine mercy brought to Repentance, and left the
world not without hope of Salvation; read also the Penetential Psalms, and
labor to get your heart affected by reading, and be not contented except you
profit by it.

2. Meditate much on the guilt of your last great sin, and the former that led
you to it; wast no thoughts about the world or worldly things, think much how
God might possibly chastise your Parents for their worldliness in and by you,
for whom it may be they were more careful to provide, than for their immortal
Souls. -- And think also of your own ingratitude, who requited a dear Mother so
evil, as to take away her life, whose greatest fault it may be was, that she
was too eager to make you great and rich in this world. -- Think also of the
strict Justice and severe vengeance of God, whose wrath is a consuming fire,
and also who is a terrible avenger of Innocent blood, which cries for
vengeance. -- think also what is like to become of the Body and Soul of that
poor wretch, who was your Companion in guilt, and who was drawn by you to be a
partaker of Blood; that so his sin and misery (as well as your own, may incite
and draw on to Repentance. --

Pray without ceasing, for Mercy, Pardon and Peace; cry unto God for a broken
and contrite heart, and say often with a bleeding heart, as David, Psalm. 51.14.
Deliver me from blood guiltiness O God, let prayer be your continual exercise.
Above all things pray for a saving sight and sense of sin, and of your need of
Christ. And that you may be deeply humbled as well for your other sins as this
last, was not your breath in unprofitable discourse, which may be better spent
this way. You have a blessed Eternity to provide for, and all the time you have
to live on Earth, is little enough to bewail the sins of your life, and to fit
your self for an everlasting state. -- Therefore redeem your precious time, and
account every Minute of great value; be very thrifty of it: Oh let not
drinking, gaming or vain talk devour those precious hours which you may and
ought to improve for your Eternal Salvation. Redeem all you can from sleep,
company, vain discourse, etc. and spend it in self-examination, humuliation,
prayer, confession of sins, and supplication for Mercy; Remember God upon your
Bed, and meditate on him in the night watches; remember the greatness of your
sin, and the worth of your Soul, and let it be your great business to get the
one pardoned, and the other saved: If Soul-helping friends come to visit you,
hold them fast, and entreat their Prayers and Counsel, and let them not leave
you till you hove reaped some spiritual benefit from them; but if worldly and
carnal friends come to see you, such as have little favor of God and Grace,
dismiss them speedily with some good admonition, for the time they stay is like
to be lost, which you should esteem as an unvaluable Treasure.

Lastly, let me entreat you for your Souls sake, and by the Prayers that I have
made, and the Tears I have shed for it, that you would not slightly read these
lines which I have written, nor throw them away after once reading them; but
that you would ponder on them, and endeavor to practice the instructions given
you by him that desires your Repentance and Salvation. And oh! that God would
set your sin home to your Conscience, and save you from Eternal death and the
wrath to come. By what I have written, you see, that I look not upon you as
utterly past hope and help, your sin, though great, is not unpardonable if you
can truly believe and heartily repent; the blood which David and Manassah shed,
was upon their true Repentance forgiven. And the Arm of the Lord is not
shortened, nor the Fountain of Mercy exhausted; The Blood of Christ cleanses
from all sin, 1 John. 1.7. Though they be as Red as Scarlet, or as Crimson,
Isa. 1:18. You are not yet so far from Heaven; but you may by true Faith and
Repentance get it. Nor are you so near Hell, but you may yet by the means of
God escape it; but remember the Work you have to do is great, your time short,
and your strength small; therefore whatsoever you find in your heart to do for
your Salvation, do it with all your might, Eccles. 9.10. you have lost too much
time already, loose no more; but immediately about this great Work, to make up
the dreadful breach that is between God and your Soul, and to fit it for his
glorious presence, which that you may diligently and faithfully perform to your
everlasting Salvation, is, and shall be earnestly requested (whilst you are on
this side the Grave) by him who is

Your Souls Friend and Remembrancer, Tho. Jackman.
Directed thus. For Mr. Henry Jones, Prisoner in Monmouth.



BY the labors of the aforesaid Ministers, and the repeated perusal of this
Pathetical, Soul-searching, Heart-melting Letter, it pleased the great God in
infinite Mercy, to give this desperate Malefactor a sense of his most dangerous
state, the grievousness of his sins, and the necessity of a Christ to preserve
him from the Jaws of everlasting destruction, henceforward, he was very little
concerned for his body, or the pains of death it was to suffer; but extremely
sollicitous about the affairs of his Soul. He was often bewailing his sinful
heart, and the Errors of his life; how much time he had wretchedly wasted in
the Devils service, and how little he had now to spend for Gods Glory and his
Souls advantage, he was very diligent in reading the Holy Bible, and good
Books, and very frequent and fervent in Prayer, some forms of which (we
conceive) for the assistance of his Memory, were found after his death, in
writing, in the Prison, which take as follows.

O Almighty God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, Judge of Angels and Men, give leave
to a vile, wretched and dejected Soul to come into thy presence, who deserves
nothing but Plagues and Torment, Fire and Brimstone, permit a trembling
Malefactor to look toward thy Mercy Seat, and for Jesus sake attend unto my
cry, and hear the voice of my Tears. O Eternal goodness, if thou forsakest me,
the huge load of my sins will sink me into desperation, and fiery Prison, my
estate is most sad, and pittyable, and there is none to deliver me, let thy
tender Mercies speedily prevent me; for I am brought very low. I am astonished
at the sight of my Iniquities; for they are great and numberless, O Lord
support me with thy blessed Arms, or I shall fall into a Sea of misery, and
never rise again; fear and terrors do surround me, and the evil spirits watch
for my ruin: may I not, a grievous sinner, beg one drop of comfort, who am
ready to perish, may I not pray to thee in the time of my distress, when thy
fierce Waves are coming over my Soul, my pensive, fainting, and troubled Soul:
I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors I
am dictracted, will thou be angry with me for ever? will thou draw out thine
anger into all Generations? most Gracious God, give me leave to lie at thy
sacred feet, and sigh and mourn, and bewail my self a little, before I descend
into my Grave, where there is no repenting, give me leave to confess my
Iniquities, and beg this favor, that I may not go down into the Regions of
darkness, and dwell with Devils, Ezekiel. 18.31. thou willest not the death of
sinners, thou take no pleasure in their Torments. O then Wellspring of Life
and Salvation, who have promised pardon to the penitent, let the sighing of the
Prisoner come before thee, whose heart is melted in the midst of his Bowels. I
confess O Lord I have been proud, and profane, and despised thy truths, I have
been greedy of the world, and distrusted thy providence, I have made have to be
rich, and ruined my self, This O God was the bitter root from whence all my
sorrows do grow, my worldly-mindedness. This made me unhallow thy day, and
despise Religion, the promises of God, and Eternal felicities: it was my
filthy, base, and sordid covetousness, which drew me to disobedience and blood
guiltiness, which cuts me off in the midst of my days. O that I should be such
a Son of Belial, as to die my hands in the blood of my Parent, that bore me
upon her Knees, and laid me in her bosom, that I should be such a wretch as to
side with the Devil, and the unrighteous Mammon in taking away her life, who
groaned for me. O the fullness of this deed of darkness, which fills me with
grief, horror and astonishment; but is there no Balm in Gilead? no Physician
there, to heal a wounded spirit, to support a sinking sinner? O Father of
Mercy, though my goods and life is forfeited by this Hellish deed, let not my
hopes of Heaven be left, and my precious Soul. Thou O God of truth have said
it, John 1.9. If we confess our sins, thou art faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness And how unrighteous was I,
to send her out of the world, who rejoiced greatly when I came into it? I speak
it Lord in the bitterness of my heart, I am the vilest Son, the bloodyest
Villain that ever breathed in the Air. Never was Turk or Moor guilty of such
horrid wickedness; but thou see my prost^ation, and thou have heard my
groans, put my Tears into thy Bottle, are they not in the Books? O searcher of
Hearts, thou know it is not life, but unfaigned sorrow, and Mercy that I
implore. Burn this my flesh, wound and destroy it, so that my Soul lie in the
Arms of Jesus. O wash me clean in that purple River which flowed from his side,
and let all my lusts be drowned in my sorrows. Jer. 1.9. O that my head were
Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night! O
God of Patience and consolation, look not upon the blackness of my crime, but
upon the wounds of thy Son, who is mighty to save, Isa. 63.1. for his sake let
my Prayer come before thee; for my soul is full of troubles, and my life
draws near unto the Grave. Isa. 63.15. Look down from Heaven, and behold from
the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy Glory, where is thy zeal and thy
strength, the sounding of the bowels and of thy mercy toward me? are they
restrained?

O holy Jesus offer up my suit to thy Father, and plead for a Soul who begs
compunction of Spirit, and thy loving kindness, and the addition of a few days
to my life, that I may give testimony to my friends, and the world, that I am a
penitent Murderer, as David and Manasses, and many more, who now are in the
City of God. O most Gracious and Merciful Father, who art unwilling that any
should perish, speak Peace to my troubled and guilty Soul, and heal the gaping
wounds which I have made in my Conscience, and knock off my Chains of flesh,
and take me to thy self, though I become least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ever blessed Jesus, I humbly beseech thee to save the Soul of my servant, whom
I have drawn to the gates of death and misery, by engaging him to join with me
in spilling the blood of the Innocent, for the horridness of which I cannot
weep enough, if my Tears would make a River, and rise above its Banks, and
drown the Fields where I sinned. O thou Prince of Peace, look with a favorable
Eye upon thy Servants, who are bound in affliction, and Iron, may thy wounds
satisfy for those which we have given, and thy blood for that which we spilt,
and deliver us from the Eternal Prison, the crime, I confess, was heinous and
desperate; but it was I, O Lord it was I that did it, lay not my sin to my
Servants charge, but pity and pardon him for thy name sake, and deliver him
from the spirits of darkness, and eternal damnation. O my dear Savior, though
we suffer here an ignominious death, and become objects of scorn and derision,
spectacles to men and Angels, do thou hear and help, and forgive us, that we
may shortly dwell in the blessed Regions, where we shall never sin, nor sorrow
more. Do it for thy everlasting Mercy sake, most Merciful Savior Jesus, in
whose name and words we further pray.

Our Father, etc.

O Lord I know not what to pray for as I ought, let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer a Spiritual Sacrifice unto thee by Jesus
Christ.

O Most Gracious and Glorious Lord God the Savior of the world, who art
infinitely holy and happy, and it is from thee I must expect the possibility of
being either the vilest of thy Creatures, or the unworthiest among such as own
a God. I do humbly prostrate my self before thee, confessing from the bottom of
my heart, that I have transgressed my duty toward thee my Neighbor, and my
self, and that by neglecting to do those things, that thou have expressly
forbidden; and this not through ignorance and frailty, but knowingly and
willingly against the motions of thy Spirit, and the checks of my own
Conscience to the contrary: and to my shame I confess that I have lifted up
violent hands against her that bore me, being the Instrument to take away that
life whence I derived my own, such is the terror of my sin, the stain of my
polluted Conscience, that nothing but the blood of my Redeemer can wash it. I
am troubled for my sins, and my thoughts are disquieted within me. I pant for
mine heaviness, and all the day long I groan for my offenses. Psalm. 15.14.
Deliver me from guiltiness O God, and in mercy save my Soul. And since my life
has hitherto been a president for the height of pride and cruelty, my actions
to this remainder of my life did loudly say there is no God, since the Devil
h^^ tempted me to destroy my body; O give me Grace to beguile him of my Soul:
let me henceforth be the more diligent and careful, as I have been hitherto
remises and wilful, my misery is unspeakable: O let me not loose my Relations
and Soul too; but grant me I implore thy goodness, a sincere Contrition, a
hearty confession and Repentance, which thou have promised, Mercy and Pardon. I
have sinned with Peter and David: O! give me their heart-melting sorrow and
Salvation, make me a great Penitent, as I have made my self a great sinner, let
my Tears not only confess, but my heart change from a brutish to a Christian
temper, that I out of due sense of my horrid Impiety, and a serious
apprehension of my guilt, which lies before me, may with all earnestness of
Spirit, with all vigor and resolution, beg, and at last obtain Mercy for
Christ his sake, who dyed upon the Cross, to save sinners, of whom I am chief,
1 Timothy 1.15. O! heal my Soul by his wounds, let his Innocence attend for my
guilt, the purity of his hands propitiate for the filthiness of mine, let his
Blood spilt upon the Cross, expiate for that which I have spilt upon the
ground. O! my heart bleeds within me: I could endure a thousand torments, but a
wounded Conscience who can bear? so woeful, and so eternally miserable is my
condition, without the assistance of the Almighty, thou art my succor and my
terror; but I fly from thee, unto the; from the Tribunal of thy Justice, to the
bosom of thy Mercy; though the Wages of sin is death, yet I beseech thee for
thy Mercy sake, free me, though not from Temporal death, yet from that which is
Eternal, that my Execution here, may be my passing to Glory. O! thou who
willest not the death of a Sinner, save my Soul; though my sins be like
Manasses numberless, as the Sand, like David's, Red as the Scarlet, yet thou
can make me whiter than Snow, wash me with Hyssop, give me a sincere
compunction, and a perfect abhorrence of my wicked self, that I may lay fast
hold upon Christ, through lively faith and repentance, and then welcome
torments and death it self, then though I die, I shall live to this end and
purpose, to enlighten my mind and dark understanding with those graces that are
requisite for a dying man, let thy preventing Graces keep me from the Devil, my
former confederate, and now my adversary. O! give me Grace, not to yield any
more to his suggestions: Let him not betray my Soul; but that I may stand upon
my guard, and baffle all his assaults, that as he overcame me here, I may live
to conquer him, and at my death triumph over him, and all his Strategies. Lord
thou know the retirement of my Breast, the secrets of my bosom, pity my
woeful Condition, and lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me, in order to
the removal of this Clog upon my Conscience, that I rightly understanding what
I have committed, may not deceive my self, with the show of Repentance, and
finally through thy Grace and Mercy, inherit the Kingdom which my Savior
purchased for me, to whom be ascribed all Honor and Glory, etc.

Of Contrition.
O Holy Lord God, who art a Merciful imbracer of true Penitents, but yet a
consuming fire to obstinate and perverse sinners, shall I approach thee, who
have so many provoking sins to inflame thy wrath, and so little sincere
Repentance to incline thy Mercy. O be thou pleased to soften and melt this hard
and obdurate heart of mine, that I may water my Couch with Tears, that I may
heartily bewail the Iniquities of my life, and mourn for my Scarlet sins, and
blush for my heinous crime; strike this Rock O Lord, that the Waters may flow
out, even floods of Tears to wash my polluted Conscience, my drowsy Soul has
too long slept securely in sin, my life hitherto has been but a sinful dream.
Lord awake my Soul, though it be with Thunder, and let me rather feel thy
terrors, than not feel my sins, thou have sent thy son to heal the broken
hearted; but Lord what will that avail me, if my heart be whole: O break it,
that it may be capable of his healing virtue, and grant I beseech thee, that
having once tasted the bitterness of my sin, I may fly from it, as from the
face of a Serpent, and take my Sanctuary in the Arms of my Savior, that I, by
the showers of thy Grace, may bring forth the fruits of a sincere Repentance,
in the speedy amendment of my life, to the praise of thy Name, the Comfort of
my Friends, and the Eternal welfare of my Immortal Soul, for Jesus Christ his
sake.

Our Father, etc.

For Patience.
O Lord God of our Salvation, which art the God of Patience and Mercy, and
give Comfort and consolation to those that are in misery and distress, stay
the unbridled Nature of my dear Wife, who is now overwhelmed with misery,
sorrow and distress, give her Patience, and strengthen her feeble Nature in all
discontentedness of mind, doubts, fears, murmurings, rage and furious actions
in this life, let no profaneness enter into her heart, but grant her a stayed
mind, a grave, sober, and quiet disposition. O! thou that so patiently,
peaceably, mildly, meekly, truly and willingly, did suffer affliction,
persecution, and many heinous and heavy sorrows for us. I beseech thee, let thy
Patience discharge and rule her Impatience, and let thine infirmities
strengthen her weakness; inform her Ignorance, comfort her in sadness and
affliction, kindle her love, and discharge, and abandon her fear, moderate her
anger and passion. O Lord grant her true Patience to bear thy Holy Will in all
things. O Lord her Heart bleeds within her, she is brought very low, even to
the Gates of death, though she be reviled, reproached, bespitted, scoffed, and
abused, let her bear it patiently, and give her thy Grace, and patience to take
all in good part, whatsoever shall befall her, and let her heart acknowledge it
to be thy doings, and to come from thy Providence, and our base unruly minds,
quiet her Soul in the many disquieting changes and chances in this world, and
open her Eyes now in her discomfort, necessi- and need, that she may see hope
and comfort in thee, prosper her in all her endeavors, and Actions, and grant
I beseech thee that she may obtain her hearty desire. Make me O Lord a joyful
Mother, and speak comfortably to her Soul, and tell her, that the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the World, will have Mercy upon her. O Lord Jesus,
it is the Joy of her Heart, to hear that thou have taken and born all our
infirmity. I humbly mind thee for thy promises, for the performance of them
all, that we may be partakers. Prevent her from all evil, that may befall her,
and term all things to the best for her good in thee, and grant her Patience,
and thy will be done, for Jesus Christ his sake, who is the Son of thy Love,
and our only Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name I further call upon thee,
saying.

Our Father, etc.

Besides he had with his own hand noted the most comfortable Promises, and
places fit for his Condition in the Bible, writing down the words at large,
which since it may possibly be useful to some sin-sick Soul, we have here also
inserted them, in the words of his own Paper, as follows.

Psalm. 15.14. Deliver we from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my Salvation,
and my Tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. --

Let Tears run down like a River day and night, give thy self no rest, let not
the Apple of thine eye cease. --

Lam. 2:18, 19. Arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning of the Watches,
pour out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord. --

Hos. 13.9. Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.

Job 14.13, 14. O that thou would hide me in the Grave, that thou would
keep me secret, until thy wrath be past. If a man die shall he live again? All
the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my Change come,

Psalm. 88.2, 3, 9, 10, 12. Let my Prayer com^ before thee, incline thine ear
unto my cry; -- For my Soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto
the Grave. -- Mine Eye mournet^ by reason of affliction; Lord I have called
dail^ upon thee, I have stretched out mine hands unt^ thee. -- Will thou show
wonders to the dead? shall the Dead arise and praise thee, shall thy wonders be
known in the dark, and thy Righteousness in the Land of forgetfulness. --

Psalm. 6.1, 4, 5. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in
thy hot displeasure. -- Return O Lord, deliver my Soul, O save me for thy Mercy
sake; -- For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the Grave there is no
giving thanks unto thee. --

Psalm. 15.5. Behold I was born in sin, and in Iniquity did my Mother conceive
me.

Psalm. 25.11. Against thee O Lord have I sinned, against thee, even thee O
Lord, have I sinned and done wickedly, and Lord pardon mine Iniquity, for it is
exceeding great.

John 6.37. And he that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

2 Samuel 12.9, 13. David said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and
Nathan said to David, the Lord also has put away thy sin.

Isa. 45.18, 19. I said not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will abundantly pardon.

Ezekiel. 18.23, 30, 32. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die,
says the Lord, and not that he should turn from his ways and live. -- Repent
and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be
your ruin; for I have no pleasure in him that dies, wherefore turn your
selves and live.

Mica 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardonest Iniquity, and passes
by transgression, that retainest not thy anger for ever, and delightest in
Mercy.

Mat. 18.11. the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief.

Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his
Imaginations, and return to the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to
our God, for he is ready to forgive.

Isa. 57.10. I have seen his ways, and will hear him, I will lead him, and
restore comfort unto him, and to those that lament.

Psalm. 103.13. As a Father has compassion on his Children, so has the Lord
compassion on them that fear him.

Psalm. 144.3. Lord what is man that thou take Knowledge of him, or the Son of
man that thou make account of him.

Job 16.21, 22. O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleaded for
his Neighbor. -- When a few days are come, then I shall go the way whence I
shall not return.

In this manner this penitent Malefactor passed the time in a very sorrowful
and Religious frame of Spirit, for about half a year in Prison, until the last
assizes for Monmouth, the seventh of March, last past; at which time being
brought to his Trial, out of consideration (as it is believed) to save his
Estate for his Wife and Child, whereof she was there ready to be delivered, he
would not plead to the Indictment, but stood mute, and thereupon had Judgment
to be pressed to death, a Sentence that carries with it so much of terror,
that we think it not improper to set it down, with the Reason thereof, as one
published by that grand Pillar of your Law, the learned Lord Cook, in the
second Book of his Institutes, in his Comment on Prim. Westminster. Cvp. 12.

The Judgment or Sentence in case of standing mute, called, Pain, Fort, and
Dure.
THat the Prisoner shall be remanded to the Prison, and laid there in some low
and dark house, where he shall lie naked on the bare Earth, without any Litter,
Rush or other Clothing, and without any Garment about him, but something to
cover his Privities, and that he shall lie upon his back, his head uncovered,
and his feet, and one Arm shall be drawn to one quarter of the house, and the
other Arm to another quarter, and in the same manner shall be done with his
Legs; and there shall be laid upon his Body Iron and Stone, as much as he can
bear, and more, and the next day following, he shall have three Morsels of
Barley without any Drink, and the second day he shall drink thrice of the water
that is next to the house of the Prison (except running water) without any
Bread, and this shall be his diet until he be dead.

Thus we see they are to die three manner of ways, (viz.) Onere, Fame, and
Frigore, by weight, famine, and cold, and therefore (if executed according to
the severity of the Law) it is a punishment of all others the most grievous and
fearful; the reason of this terrible Judgment is there rendered, because he
refused to stand to the common Law of the Land, that is, Lawful and due Trial
according to Law, and thereupon his punishment for this contumacy, is more
severe, lasting and grievous, then it should have been for the crime it self,
if he had been Convicted of it, which he cannot be, without Answer.

THis Action of Mr. Jones, standing mute, administered occasion to some to
dispute its lawfulness, and theteupon a very Judicious Casuist drew up the
ensuing Case of Conscience.

CASE OF CONSCIENCE.
Whether a guilty Malefactor ought to Answer to the lawful Demands of his
Judge. Affirmatur,
Because, 1. He cannot deny a Truth whereof he is himself Convicted, without
Lying; nor can he deny, or any way detract from his Duty of Answering (being
demanded by a superior and lawful Power,) without being likewise guilty of
Contumacy and sad Inobedience.

2. A Malefactor, who is condemned already in foro Conscientiae, cannot,
without remorse deny, nor indeed wave or conceal his Confession (when he is
Juridice demanded) without giving offense to the glory of God, as it was in the
Case of Achan, Josh. 7.19.

3 The public Good which is intended by the lawful demands of the Judge, ought
not to be frustrated (Give me leave to speak conscienciously) by the private
evasions of the Criminal.

4. The Person guilty, not pleading, may be supposed to die for his Crime of
Contumacy, not the Fact which requires satisfaction in this life.

5. All humane Policy, when repugnant to the manifestation of Justice, legal
Procedure, and the Convictions of a tender, though doubtful Conscience, is
altogether unallowable.

But to proceed in our Narrative, The same way that was appointed for putting
the before-recited terrible Sentence in Execution March 11 last, he writ to his
Wife as follows.

Henry Jones his last Letter to his wife.
Dearest Dear
AFter my hearty prayers to the God of Heaven and Earth for thee and my poor
child or Childrens welfare when born; I do beseech the for Jesus sake to fear
God, and pray Continually to him, to endue thee and thy poor child or more with
grace, wisdom and understanding, and to give thee a contented mind, in what
estate Soever he is pleased to set thee; That thou may take all things with a
true, religious and satisfied eye, praising him in every thing, and doing no
wrong to any man, but what good thou can to all, never covering any man's
estate or plenty of Riches, but satisfied with any small competent maintenance,
wherewith to supply thee and my poor Child or Childrens bodies in this life,
and to make you more sensible of a better which is to come, I should have bin
very glad to have heard thou were safely delivered of thy burden before I die.
But since it pleases Almighty God, that it shall be otherwise, I desire thee
to be contented, and to bear all the Lords dispensations very patiently, who I
hope will turn all things to the best for thee in short time: As for my
suffering an ignominious and terrible death, I conjure thee not immoderately to
afflict thy self about it; Oh! consider how flight and trivial the momentary
pains I can here go through are, in comparison of those inconceiveable endless
torments, which I must confess my self justly to have deserved: bless the Lord
with me, that he has dealt so gently as to awaken me to a sense of my horrid
sins; That I now see the sinfulness of sin, of all sin, and the need of a
Jesus; Through whose pity, grace and mercy I steadfastly hope (though my body
suffer for a moment) yet my poor soul shall be pardoned, freed and absolved
from eternal damnation; And that he will make thee and all the Worid take
example by me, not to offend so good and gracious a God: And as for my Sister
Mary, who is to suffer with me or presently after, I do hereby assure thee and
all the World, as I have a soul and hope for salvation, she is as clear, free,
innocent and guiltless, from having any hand in contriving, plotting, or
knowing any thing of my Mothers death, before or after: as any of her
Prosecutors, or of the Officers, who took me upon suspicion, until they
themselves did suspect me: And therefore I think it is some just and deserved
affliction, which God is pleased to lay upon me for the sins of our Parents,
not but that we have deserved this and ten thousand times more for the sins we
have commitred our selves! However I desire thee hence to consider, how angry
the Lord is with us sometimes, when he is pleased to inflict such punishment
upon her for lewd living, and committing such sins: as are termed (with all
people) small, and little made of, amongst men in our times; Consider, I say,
my dear Heart, my dear Life, my dear Self, what odious and hateful a thing the
least sin is in the sight of Almighty God: since she, poor wretch, is now to be
burnt to death for lewd living, wantonness, lying, living merrily and idly;
Oh, my dear Wife, go sorrowing to thy Grave for the days of thy vanity, and
that idle merry life thou have formerly lived in: Do not buy such trifles, and
indeed a nothing but sorrow, at so dear a Price, as the love of so holy a God,
and a happy Eternity: O my dear heart, it cannot choose but make thee tremble
(to read it, as well as me to write it) what sins have I committed in killing
my Mother, and what Punishment have I deserved for such great sins: when my
poor dear Sister is punished for so small offenses, as people term them, (but
great with God.) How ought I to pray the Lord to pardon me so great faults, and
that for so small pains and little punishment: Oh praise the Lord all the days
of thy life for his goodness and mercy toward us, both in this life and that
which is to come: Keep the day that I am put to death as a solemn Fast from
diet, but especially from sin, with Prayers and Thanksgiving to the end of this
thy mortal life: Retire and confine thy self to a solitary and solid way of
living: have as little to do with any in worldly affairs as thou can: let thy
house be in some retired place, free from frequent Resorters, unless it be they
who fear God, and live soberly and godly in this present wicked world: let such
be thy Comforters and Companions, ^live like the Ostrich and Pelican: Comfort
thy self in nothing but in the Lord God, bring up mine and thy poor child or
children always in the fear of the Lord: And whatever thou do, be
continually in prayers for them, and thy poor self, My dear Mall: And when thou
art most under affliction and distress in this life, be then most frequent and
fervent in prayers before God, confessing all thy sins (even those thou may
count small) as well as great and presumptuous sins, desiring pardon and
forgiveness, and grace and abstinence for the future: be humble, m ek, and
lowly at all times, but especially when thou art before Almighty God: I would
have written more large unto thee, but I refer my self to the bearer, who will,
I hope, satisfy thee fully, and how and when I was put to death: I can say no
more, but my Dearest Dear, farewell: Farewell on Earth; Thy dying Husband hoping
to meet in Heaven,

Monmouth March 11. 1671. Henry Jones.


After this, being brought into the place where Execution was to be done, which
was in a Cellar belonging to George Sadler the Jailer. After several pious and
devout Ejaculations, he spoke to the Spectators to this effect,

'That he came very willing to suffer death, since the crimes he had committed
were so odious both in the sight of God and man: That he acknowledged he no
longer deserved to tread on the face of the earth, or to look up to Heaven;
That he had been a very wicked Liver from his youth up, and that the burden of
his sins would be much more grievous to his soul, then the weight that was to
press his body to death, had he not a firm belief, and assured hope, That his
blessed Savior would preserve him from sinking under them, whose Promise it
is, Come to me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give rest to your souls:
He expressed himself deeply affected with the sense of his guilt, in drawing in
his boy to be a sharer in the horrid Act; He expressed himself now in Charity,
and reconciled to all the world, but his wicked self: He confessed it was
covetousness and extravigancy, or rather covetousness to maintain extravigancy,
that first put him upon this wicked Act of murthring his dear and tender
Mother, he wished that all the World might take warning by him, not to get a
habit, and live in a custom of sinning, though only in things which we count
little things, and venial escapes, lest thereby they provoke the Justice of God
to give them to commit some great and monstrous wickedness as he had done, and
thereby brought himself to this untimely and infamous death; Finally, he
desired all that were present to be earnest with God in his behalf for mercy
and acceptance in Christ Jesus, Taat he might be patient in the pangs of his
sufferings, and receive everlasting tonsolation, whereupon a godly Divine there
present, made this ensuing Prayer.

The Prayer said at Henry Jones his Execution.
O Almighty God, Lord if Heaven and Earth, Judge of Angels and men, give leave
to a vile, wretched and dejected soul to come into thy Presence, who deserves
nothing but plagues and tormentts, fire and brimstone: Permit a trembling
Malefactor to look toward thy Mercie-Seat, and for the Holy Jesus sake attend
unto his Cry, and hear the voice of his tears. O eternal Goodness, if thou for
sakest him, the vast weight of his sins will sink him into desperation. His
state is most sad and deplorable, and there is none to deliver him: let thy
tender mercies speedity prevent him, for he is brought very low: He is
astonished at the sight of his iniquities, which are great and numberless. O L
rd support him with thy blessed Arms, or he will fall into a S^a of misery,
and never rise again. Fears and terrors surround him, and the evil spirits
watch for his ruin: may he not, a gr^e^ous sinner, beg one drop of comfort,
wh^ is ready to perish? may he not pray to th^^ in the time of his distress
and calamity, when thy fierce wa^es are coming over his fainting troubled soul?
He is afflicted and ready to die -- Oh, will thou ^e angr^e with him fo^^ver?
will thou draw out thine anger unto all generations? Most gracious God, give
him leave to lie at thy sacred feet and bewail himself a little, before he
desc^nd into his grave wh re there is no repenting; give him leave to confess
his iniquity and beg thy favor, that he may not go down into the Regions ^f
darkness, and dwell with devils, for thou willest no^ the death of sinners,
thou take no pleasure in their torments. O (...) W^ll-spring of life and
salvation, who have promised Pa^don to the Penitent, let the fighing of the
Prisoner come before thee, whose heart is melted in the midst of his bowels. He
confesses, O Lord, his pride and profaneness, and contempt of thy G^sp^l, that
he has been greedy of the world, and distrusted thy Pr^v^dence, that he has
made haste to be rich, and ruin^d himself, that it was his base and sordid
covetousness, which drew him into disobedience, and blood-guiltinesse, which
(...) him off in the midst of his days.

O that he should be such a son of Belial, as to die his hands in the blood of
his Parent, that bore him upon her Knees, and laid him in her Bosom! thdt he
should be such a Wretch, as to side with the devil, and the unrighteous Mammon,
in taking away her life who brought him into the World! O the foulness of this
deed of darkness, which fills him with grief, horror and astonishment! But is
there no Balm in Gilead? no Physician there to heal a wounded spirit, to
support a sinking sinner? O Father of mercies, though his life is forfeited by
this Hellish Act, let not his H^pes of Heaven be lost, and his precious soul.
Thou, O God of Truth, say, If we confess our sins, thou art faithful and just
to forgive them. And he acknowledges, O Lord, in the bitterness of his soul,
that he is the vilest, bloudiest Villain that ever breathed in thy Air; that no
Turk or Moor has been guilty of more horrid Wickedness: but thou see his
Prostration, thou have heard his g^^ans: O put his tears into thy bottle, are
they not in thy Book? O Searcher of all hearts, thou know, it is not life but
mercy which he implores: Do what thou please with his vile body: but let his
soul, we beseech thee, lie in the Arms of Jesus. O wash him clean in that
purple stream which flowed from his side, and let all the sins of this po^r M
l^factor be drowned in a flood of sorrow. O that h^s Head was waters, and his
Eyes a Fountain of tears! -- O God of patience and consolation, look not upon
the blackness of his crime, but upon the wounds of thy Son, who is mighty to
save: O that he may have a share in his death and intercession. For Jesus sake,
let his Prayer come before thee, for his soul is full of troubles, and his life
draws nigh unto the Grave. Look down from Heaven, and behold from the
Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory: O Holy Jesus, offer up our suit to
thy Father, and plead for a soul who begs Compunction of spirit, and thy
loving kindness, which is better then life, that he may declare he is a
Penitent Murderer, as David, Manasses, and many others, now in thy Kingdom. O
most gracious Lord, who art unwilling that ^^y should perish, speak Peace to
this troubled, guil y soul, and heal the gaping wounds which he has in his
heart: knock off his chains of flesh, and take him unto thee, though he be the
least in thy Kingdom: Ever-blessed Jesus, we humbly beseech thee also, save the
soul of his poor ignorant servant, whom he has drawn to the Gates of death, by
engaging him to join with him in spilling the blood of the innocent: for the h
rridness of which Fact they cannot weep enough, if their tears could make a
River, and rise above its banks, and drown the Field where they sinned. O thou
Prince of Peace, look with an eye of mercy upon these Wretches, who are bound
in affliction and iron: may thy wounds satisfy for those which they have
given, and thy blood for that which they have spilt, and save them from the
eternal Prison: Pity and pardon them, and deliver them from the spirits of
darkness, and everlasting damnation.

O our dearest Savior, though this poor, vile and dejected Sinner, suffers an
ignominious death, and becomes an object of scorn and derision to many, a
Spectacle to men and Angels; do thou bear, help, and save his immortal soul,
for thy everlasting mercies sake, most merciful Savior Jesus, in whose Name
and words we further pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

This Prayer ended, the Prisoner kneeled down, and prayed near a quarter of an
hour softly by himself, and then was put into the Press, which whether it were
not made convenienr for that purpose, or whether for the detestableness of his
Crime, it was intended he should suffer the rigor of the Law, I know not, but
certain it is, That he lay therein almost two days and nights before he was
dead; and yet endured it with that courage and patience, as became one that was
sensible his sins deserved infinitely more grievous torments, or rather one
that had the assurance of faith, that his sins were washed away in the blood of
Jesus; and that he was going to take possession of Ioys unspeakable and
endless, ravished with the apprehension thereof, he could not only go through,
but welcome the greatest pains that in this World could be inflicted.

George Bridges his unhappy servant stood his trial, was found guilty of the
Murder, and condemned to be hanged, which was accordingly ex^cuted on
Saturday, March 16. last past. He seemed very sorrowful and penitent, and
confessed he did cut his Mystriss's Throat after she was shot: The Prayer used
at his death was as follows.

A Prayer at the Execution of George Bridges.
O Eternal God, and Father of mercies, in much pity and compassion behold this
weak and rrembling Malefactor, who in all Humility begs the remission of his
sins and follies: who with shame and sorrow casts himself down at thy feet, and
confesses his manifold and insufferable wickednesses, his ignorance of thy Law,
and contempt of holy duties, his falsehoods and lies, dissimulations and
hypocrisies, cruelties and blood-guiltiness. He confesses, O God, that he has
deserved the heaviest of thy wrath, to beseparated from the comforts of thy
Presence, and the Glories of thy Kingdom.

But blessed be thy Name, that thou invitest sinners to thy ^elf, and offerest
them Pardon upon repentance; that thou have sent thy only Son into the World to
die for such, and ^ast promised salvation upon their true Confession and deep
Humiliat on. O holy God, who art full of long-suffering and patience, have
mercy upon this fearful miserable sinner, and pardon him his ignorance and
anger, and all the errors of his life, and hear his earnest groans now in the
time of his affliction and trouble, O what shall we say to thee thou Preserver
of men? thou take no pleasure in seeing the blood of thy children: thou
would not have any to die in his transgressions. O God of mercies pity and
pardon this timorous dying person, and cleanse his guilty soul in the blood of
the immaculate Lamb, which speaks better things then that of Ahel. Return, O
Lord, deliver his soul: O save him for thy mercies sake. For in death there is
no remembrance of thee: in the Grave who shall give thee thanks.

Blessed God, thou have said, thou will hear the prayer of two or three; Will
thou not attend unto the cries, an^ tears of a Multitude, who are at thy Throne
of grace in behalf of this poor wretch who by the Seductions of the devi^ and
his own hearts lusts was drawn to commit a black, an^ horrid wickedness, to
plot and contrive the death of hi^ Mistress, and to lie in wait for her fall.
For thy Name-sak^ O Lord, pardon his iniquity for it is great; The trouble of
his heart are enlarged: O bring thou him out of his d^stresses.

O most Gracious Father, let not this sad, and timerou^ Sinner sink under the
burden of his transgressions and cal^mities: To thee alone he makes his
complaint, and Prayer And he trembles at thy judgments: let not the evil
Spirit and his fears prevail in the time of his trouble, and sorrow, and
dissolution.

O God, we beseech thee, give thy afflicted servant a pe^fect and sound
repentance, and assurance of thy favor tell him that thou have sealed his
Pardon to him with t^^ blood of Jesus, that thou have accepted his Confession,
a^^ have heard his g^oans, and that he shall quickly be tak^^ from a miserable
and sinful world to a Celestial Mansion. (...) dearest Lord, take from thy poor
and sinful servant all ino^dinate fear of death, and give him earnest desires
after C^lestial pleasures: and when his soul shall take a farewel^ this world,
let thy holy Angels carry it into the Regions eternal joy, peace, and
felicities, for Christ Jesus sake, o^ dearest Lord. In whose Name and words we
further pra^ Our Father, etc.

As for Mary Jones, though she from first to last protested her innocence, yet
it being proved, Not only that she stayed up for her brother that fatal Night
the Murder was committed, but that very Night washed his bloody Clothes, beat
the Chil^ren for enquiring after their Mother, and since ^ndeavoring to fly
for it, all which was testified, with several other circumstances, by two
credible Witnesses, she also was hereupon found guilty as consenting to the
Fact; and condemned to be burnt.

Which Sentence was executed the same day that the Boy suffered, viz. Mar. 16.
she being drawn along with him on a Sledd, and burned at a Stake nigh the
Gallows: She to the last insisted on her Innocence, and gave Certificates
thereof to several Persons under her own hand, with most solemn Protestations;
and begged of the Lord on the day she was to die, That he would please to show
some sign or token to clear her to the world, which some will have to be
Answered by the stubborn Horses refusal to go on with the Sledd when she came
against the Church, going to the place of suffering; the falling down of part
of the Church-wall then, a strange Meteor and Storm, with I know not how many
other Prodigies: but wiser men judge all these to be but raised stories, or at
best, forced observations of some melancholy and credulous Heads: It Is certain,
her sex, youth, and vehement denial of being privy to the Fact, were very
powerful Advocates to plead for pity in the spectators breasts, whose tears at
her death seemed almost enough to quench the flames she was exposed to, she
said not much at the stake, but what ten^ed to declare her innocence in the
particular fa^ charged, though having bin a grand sinner, she a^knowledged she
had otherwise duly deserved t^ worst she could suffer. And concluding her
discour^^ with a Protestation, that she freely and heartily di^ forgive all the
world.

The Prayers following were put up for her as she sto^^ at the Place of
Execution, a numerous throng acco^panying each word with sighs and tears.

A Prayer at the Execution of Mary Jones.
O Eternal and most merciful God, who have made the way (...) troubles and
afflictions, the way to Jerusalem and everlasti^^ pleasures: Look in abundant
mercy upon a sorrowful sin (...) soul, upon a wretched and vile sinner, who
has none to he^^ and deliver her: O pardon and forgive her all her secret sin
lusts and passions, her averseness to religion and virtue, and h^^ want of love
to Prayer and holy Offices, to the Word of G^^ and pious Christians: her easy
yieldings to the assaults of S^tan, and violent resistings of the motions of
thy Spirit: H^^ slavish fears and distrust of thy Providence, her greediness of
t^^ world, and neglect of the things above, the omissions and lu^^ warmness of
her Prayers, and whatsoever has provoked the^ lay this great punishment upon
her; O God we beseech thee, (...) ^^e be guilty of the charged crime, of
taking away the lif^ (...) her Mother, let a River of tears run down her
cheeks, and w^^^ her clean in the blood of the Holy Jesus; If she was not
c^^scious to that fearful and horrid deed of darkness, clear her ^^nocencie to
this great multitude by her readiness and che^^fulness to die, to go through
this fiery trial, or by what to (...) ^eems best to thine infinite W^sdom, and
let thine holy Ang^^ minister to her in her sorrow, and wipe the tears from her
eyes, and sweat from her body, and carry her soul into thine everlast^ng
Kingdom, where, if she arrives, she shall never sin, nor sigh, nor be accused
or tempted, judgd or cond^mn'd, where she will have s^und and solid j y,
perfect Peace and felicity, and (...) Anthems for ever with Angels and all the
Martyrs of ^^sus.

O Almighty and most gracious Savior, who did suffer with meekness and
p^tience those severe stripes of thy Fathers wrath which we did deserve, but
thou did feel, and have estab ish'd with mankind a Covenant of Faith and
Patience, a Law of S^fferings, making the way of the Cross to be the way of
Heaven: Give t^ thy handmaid thy grace, that according ^o thy excellent
example, and holy Commandment, she may bear the burden of the Lord, with an
even and willing, an obedient and loving spirit. O let her never charge thee
foolishly, nor murmr secretly -- but with faith and ^^pe submit her body and
soul to thy merciful and just disp^nsation; that she may not discompose the
duties of her repentance by a new sin, nor provoke thee to anger by her
impatience -- nor neglect the doing of any thing that can be in her power, or
in her duty to her body or her soul. O God b^ merciful to thy handmaid, and
press her not with an unequal load, but remember that she is dust and vani^y,
and dies in thy displeasure. Give her [we pray thee] a quiet mind and peaceful
conscience; and deliver her not into the will of her spiritual enemies, but let
her be justified by thy mercy, sanctified by thy spirit, saved by thy infinite
and eternal goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord [and Saviour] In whose Name
and words we further pray, Our Father, etc.

Which words being ended, The Exe^utioner (with a a flaming Torch) sets fire to
the straw and Faggots, and in less then an hour after, her body is there
consumed to Ashes.

Thus have we traced our bloody Murderers into the other world, where we
Charitably leave them all to the mercies of a most Righteous God, who we may
observe in this Example does often punish one sin with another: A wild
dissolute course of Living Engages this unhapy young Gentleman in Covetousness
and unjust greedy desires after his Mothers rightful Estate, to supply his
Extravagancies; These unlawful desires Tempt him to Trample on and violate all
Laws of Nature and Grace on Earth and Heaven; And with barbarous hands to
Murder her whom in duty and Affection he was bound to obey, honor, and with
the hazard of his life preserve; Thus lessercrimes draw on and prepare us for
greater, for when we first forsake God, no wonder if he abandon us to our
selves and our sins, and the fruit thereof Calamity, Misery, Infamy, and
Perdition; Wherefore since we see humane (or rather such Inhumane) Cruelty is
ever met with and punished by divine ^^stice let us fly their Crimes that we
may avoid their punishments, Reassuming our reasons and recalling our wandering
thoughts from Hell to Earth, purposely to Elevate them from Earth, and fix them
on Heaven, and consecrate them and our Souls from sin to Righteousness, from
Satan to God, that so we may piously Live and peaceably die in this world and
Gloriously Reign in that which is to come.

FINIS.
Dr. Bromfield's Pills against the Scurvey, and all other diseases, are to be
Sold by Thomas Hancox Bookseller in Hereford.


