A TREATISE OF THE SIBYLS, So Highly Celebrated, As well by the Ancient
HEATHENS, as the Holy FATHERS of the CHURCH; GIVING An Account of the Names,
and Number of the SIBYLS, of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their
Verses; As also of the BOOKS now Extant under their Names, and the Errors
crept into Christian Religion, from the Impostures contained therein,
Particularly, concerning the State of the Just, and Unjust after Death.

Written Originally, by DAVID BLONDEL; Englished. by J. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for the Author, MDCLXI.

To the worthy of all Honor, Sir EDWARD MAUNSELL of Margam in the County of
Glamorgan, AND Sir EDWARD MAUNSELL of Mudlescomb, in the County of Carmarthen.
Baronets.
Most Honored,
THE Favors received from Men have this Alliance, with those descend from
Above; That, how secretly soever they may have been conferred, we may, without
the least hazard of Modesty, make the most Public Acknowledgments we can of
them. Nor is it unlikely, that Addresses of this Kind were the Issue of some
such Reflection; They, who make them, being desirous they should rather be
thought the Effects of a Duty, then the Satisfaction Men are apt to conceive,
from their acquainting the World, how highly they are obliged to Great Persons.
Hence those excessive Celebrations, frequent in Dedicatories; a Custom I am
the more unwilling to comply with, out of a Caution, lest what I should say,
might be thought Advanced to Commend my own Choice. And yet, what could I not
say of two Persons, the Glory of a most Noble, and Ancient House; One,
heightened with all the Advantages of a Princely Education, and Travel; The
Other, so Transcendent in the Constancy of a Noble Passion, as, known, would
reconcile our Faith to Romances, and make us confess it possible, that
Representation may be indebted to Reality.

As to the Present Treatise; What Importance it may be of, I rather leave to be
seen in the Perusal of it, then insist on here. It Is a Discovery of the Pious
Frauds, and Impostures, which, having crept into Christian Religion, even in
its Infancy, have ever since poisoned it, more or less, by their Continuance
therein: a Design may justly be termed Great, if out of no other Consideration,
yet this at least, that it imposed a Necessity on the Author, to unravel all
Antiquity to find them out, and bring them to the Tribunal of a Rational
Disquisition. For my own Endeavors herein, they are left to the success Time,
and Men's Censures shall afford them, with all my Wishes summed up in this, That
my addressing of them to so Noble a Name may be looked on, as an Eternal
Testimony of my humblest Respects thereto, and the greatest Expression I can,
at present, make of my being,

Most Honored, Your Most Obedient, and Most Obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

A TREATISE OF THE SIBYLS.
BOOK 1.
CHAP. I. That the most earnest Pursuers of Truth, are (as others) subject to
mistakes.
THough (according to the judgment of Tertullian) Adver. Valentin.
it be much better for a man to be less knowing, then to know that which is
worse, and to err, then deceive, it being the Characteristick of that Charity,
which is recommended by St. Paul, as the greatest of the 1 Cor. 13. 7. 13.
Virtues, to believe, and hope all things; so far as concurrence and compliance
with reason may permit; yet ought not the credulity, which accompanies Charity,
nor its hope (what latitude soever we may imagine to allow it) as it were out
of a design to be enslaved to impostures and circumventions, put out its eyes,
for fear lest it should be in a condition to discover and elude them. And if it
be requisite, it should be free from all servile stupidity, since it is the
principal effect of the holy Spirit, who calls and conducts us, by the liberty
of his Grace to that of Glory, it may with Romans 8. 20.
much more reason be expected it should be far from being subject to blindness,
because it presupposes the conduct of Faith, which is in some sort the eye of
the regenerate soul, in whom the simplicity of the Dove, Matthew. 10. 16.
which is, of it self, inclined heartily to interpret what there might be some
difficulty to exempt from the censures of persons not easily satisfied, is ever
attended by the prudence of the Serpent, whose vigilance is employed to foresee
and prevent surprises.

The same profession of piety, which encourages sincere souls to walk in an
innocent confidence, is also their perpetual remembrancer that Truth persuades
by teaching, whereas, on the contrary, Impostors, who Tertul. loco ci^to.
are loath to communicate themselves, even to their own Disciples, till such
time as they have gained them, artificially endeavor to persuade, before they
instruct: and, discovering, that they make it their main business to conceal
what they preach, if so it may be said of those who smother what they would
have the world acquainted with, that they preach it, make it appear, that they
are therein diametrically opposite to the Truth, which blushes at nothing so
much as the regret she conceives at her being undiscovered.

Hence comes it to pass, that the just and virtuous, having their breasts open,
and void of all dissimulation, are, according to the saying of the same
Tertullian, likened to the Dove, which is the Figure of the holy Spirit, Ibid.
Matthew. 3. 16. Luke 1. 78.
and loves the East, the Figure of Christ, and are willing to leave to
Impostors the shameful imitation of the Serpent, who arrogates to himself the
image of God, the beast which shuns the light, hides himself as much as may be,
that Tertul. loc. citat.
smothers all the prudence it has in obscure places, that lurks in blind
holes, that eludes those who would see it, by decietfull contractions of its
own length, and goes in folds and wrinckles, and is never at once wholly seen.
For (after the manner of Serpents) those who think it a glory to deceive, are
never reduced to any compliance with truth, but by force, and can hardly avoid
being at difference even with themselves, nor will express themselves to
others; the malice, which they are ever guilty of who are engaged in a design
to surprise others (to make the event of their attempts the more certain)
putting on all manner of masks, and leaving no ways unsought, to prepossess
the minds of the good, who thinking there cannot be a greater subtilty, then to
live without subtilty, imagine it somewhat unreasonable, to conceive, at the
first sight, any suspicion of those by whom they had not as yet been
overreached. And thence it comes to pass, that the best men have this
misfortune, upon no other ground then that they are the best, to be the more
credulous, and inclining rather to security, then diffidence, easily give
advantage to those, who, by their craft and insinuations, make it their design
to triumph over their simplicity.

CHAP. II. Instances of certain misapprehensions of Justin Martyr.
THough there be no Age which cannot furnish us with several examples what
effects Imposture has had on such as have been most ardently zealous for the
Truth, yet were it hard, in all the series of Time, to meet with any one more
remarkable, then that of the mistake of Saint Justin, a Person very
recommendable, if any may be admitted such: First, for his Antiquity, since he
died but very little after the midst of the second Age of the Church. Secondly,
for his knowledge, as being one, who (before his reduction to the Christain
Faith) had, by profession, been a Philosopher. Thirdly, for his piety, since he
became so constant a maintainer of the true Religion, as that he was, at last,
honored with the Crown of Martyrdom. All these advantages might have raised
him above the ordinary rate of men; yet have they not exempted him from being
abused by certain advancers of foolish Stories, who having persuaded him to
take the Idol of Semo Sangus, one of the false gods of Semo Sangus.
the Sabini, for the Statue of Simon Magus, engaged him (I know not Simon Magus.
how) to maintain his mistake in the presence even of some of the Heathens, and
that with so much confidence, as clearly discovered, he said nothing but what
he really believed. He it was also, who thought himself very much in the right,
when he boasted, that he had seen at Pharos near Alexandria, the remainders of
the LXXII. Cells, where the Interpreters of the Bible had been employed in that
Work; nay some others, as Saint Irenaeus, Saint Cyril, and Saint Augustine have
believed him; and yet Saint Lib. 3. c. 26. Catech. 4. De Civit Dei, l. 18. c.
42. In Ezech. l. 10. c. 33. Epist. 104. Lib. 5 advers. Cells.
Hierome (who; as well as the other, had been upon the place, and taken more
particular notice thereof) does not only laugh at it, but says, I know not who
by his glozing has built them. With the same security, disputing against the
Heathens, who (according to the observation of Origin) by way of derision,
called the Christians Sibyllists, he opposes thereto the Authority of
Hystaspes, a supposititious Author, of whose Works there is, at the present,
nothing extant; as also the Oracles of the Cumaean Sibyl, whom he pretends to
have been the Daughter of Berosus, Tatian says, that he dedicates his three
books of the Chaldaick History to Antiochus Soter, who began hisreign in the
year of Rome, 472. or the 472. after the death of Cyrus. Ph^cai. lib. 10.
who was later then Cyrus by 250 years, and dyed in the 225 year of the
foundation of Rome, and the fourth of the reign of Tarquin, to whom many hold,
that one called Amalthaea Sibylla, sold at an excessive rate, the books since
known by the name of the Sibylline, and preserved in Rome for the space of
above 440 years, till the civil wars of Sylla; not minding, it seems, that
(according to the general persuasion of the Romans) the Cumaean Sibyl had
entertained Aeneas, who dyed 639 years before Cyrus possessed himself of
Babylon; nor yet reflecting on what Pausanias, an Author much about his own
time, observes (from Hyperochus Cumanus, and other Ancients) 1. That the Sibyl
who conversed in that place, was called Demo; 2. That the Cumaeans had not any
Oracle to show of hers: 3. That she had not been preceded by any, but by Lamia,
the daughter Of the same opinion is Plutarch, De Pythiae Orac. i
of Neptune, surnamed by the Lybians, Sibylla; and Herophila, the daughter of
Jupiter and Lamia, who had her residence sometimes at Ida in Phrygia, sometimes
at Mapessos, sometimes at Samos, sometimes at Claros of Colophon, and sometimes
at Delos and Delphi. 4. That her Monument and her Epitaph, engraved upon a
pillar, was at Troas: 5. That the Erythraeans would not only have it that she
was born among them of Theodorus a Shepherd, and the Nymph Idaea, but also that
she gave Hecuba the interpretation of her dream: and, 6. That, after the
Cumaean Demo, the Hebrews who live above Palestine, set up Sabba, the daughter
of Berosus and Erimantha, who went under the name of the Babylonian or
Egyptian Sibyl: Nor lastly, regarding, that the very argument, whereof he
thought to make his greatest advantage, in order to the conviction of Pagan
Idolatry, expressly maintains, that she, who composed it, was wife to one of
Noe's Sons, and of near kin to him, who departed this life, 1697. years
before Antiochus Soter was established in Babylon, and that Berosus (whose
Daughter they would have her to be, merely because her VVriting intimates her
coming out of Babylon) could have been allowed the name of Father: For these
are her words. O the great joy I have had, since I have escaped the destruction
of the Deep, having Lib. 1. ad finem.
before undergone many misfortunes, tossed up and down by the waves with my
husband, my sisters-in-Law, my Father and Mother-in-Law, and those who were
married together. And elsewhere, When the World was overwhelmed Lib. 3. ad
finem.
with waters, and that a certain man, who had undergone the trial, was left
alone, exposed to the waters, in a house cut out of the Forest, with the
beasts, and birds of the air, to the end that there might be a Restoration of
the World; to that man was I daughter-in-law, engendered of his blood.

By which words she clearly destroys what she had writ some lines before;
saying, that the Greeks took her for the daughter of Circe, and Gnostus, or
rather Ulysses, whom she entitles known Father, because of the reputation of
his name, never considering that 800. years and more, were slipped away,
between the death of Noe, and the arrival of Ulysses, at Cir^aeum. She further
affirms, that she came from Babylon in Assyria, speaking so much the more
improperly, for that Babylon was neither built, nor named, till 153. years
after the Deluge, nor was it of Assyria properly so called, but of another
different Country, that is to say, of Sennaar, and that it took not the name of
Assyria, till above 165. years afterward. Nay, the impudence of the Imposture
is so much the more palpable, in that this pretended daughter-in-law of Noe,
describes her self as a notorious strumpet, saying, Ah wretch that I am! what
will become of me in that day, for all the things I set Lib. 2.
my mind upon in my folly, having no regard of either my Marriage, or my
reason? And again, What great evils have I heretofore committed, wittingly,
Lib. 7. ad finem.
and willingly, and how many other things have I imprudently run after, without
the least remorse thereat? I have taken my lustful pleasure with ten thousand,
and have not had the least consideration of my marriage, etc.

CHAP. III. The supposititiousnesse of the Writings pretended to be Sibylline,
exemplified in several particulars.
IF St. Justin Martyr had been but pleased, I will not say to look a little
better about him, but only to open his eyes, and fasten them with ever so
little recollection on what he read, he had met with a thousand instances of
imposture in those pleasant Oracles, which he objected against the Heathens,
employing against them three Verses out of the first book, as many out of the
third, and seven out of the fourth. For he would upon the first sight, have
perceived, that that ill-digested collection, written in wretched Greek, and
coming from the hands of a person who discovers his ignorance of the Hebrew,
could not be attributed either to Noah's daughter-in-law, who lived above 250.
years before the confusion of Tongues, and consequently before there was any
Greek; nor yet to the daughter of Berosus, born in the Metropolis of Chaldaea,
and later; by almost 1700 years. Nay, he would have thought, that the Impostor,
who had made it so much his business to gain reputation by a cheat of so great
antiquity, had sufficiently discovered himself an upstart:

1. In deriving Adam from (...), as if it were a word of Greek extraction. Lib.
1. p. 7.


2. In saying, ADA. (...). l. 2. p. 19. (...). Lib. 1. p. 8. The Hebrew
letters. (...) produce but 41. Lib. 1. p. 12.
that the same word signifies, East, West, South, and North, by its four
letters, though in the Hebrew and Chaldee it has but three.

3. In supposing that the letters of the Name of God make up the number of 1697
which cannot be true, but only writing it in Greek characters, and that
barbarously too, (...).

4. In drawing, from those of the Name of Jesus, which he makes to consist of
four vowels, and two consonants, the number of 888. which again cannot agree
With the Hebrew (...) which is only of five letters, all consonants, and
exceed not the number of 391. unless it be in the Greek (...).

5. In affirming that the duration of Rome shall be 948 years, because Lib. 2.
p. 58.
the number 948 arises from the Greek letters (...), and not from the Hebrew
(...) which make only 251.

6. In placing Ararat (where the Ark stayed) in Phrygia. Lib. 1. p. 10.


7. In affirming that Phrygia was the first Country discovered after Lib. 1. p
9. 11. 7. p. 53.
the Deluge, and that Noe, who continued in the Ark from the seventh day of the
second Month, to the twentieth day of the second Month, in the year following,
stayed there but one and forty days.

8. In imagining that the Fables of the Titans were true Histories. Lib. 1. p.
11.


9. In supposing (according to the heresy of the Chiliasts) that Jerusalem
shall not only be rebuilt again, but shall be the Imperial seat of Lib. 2. p.
14. 17. 18. 3. p. 34. 49.
the Son of God, where the faithful, having passed through the purgatory fire
of the worlds conflagration, shall enjoy all manner of delights, corporeal and
spiritual.

10. In feigning that the Eurotas, a River of Laconia in Peloponnesus, Lib. 3.
p. 22.
issues aut of Dodona in Epirus, and mingles with the Peneus, a river of
Thessaly; Again, that Gog and Magog are among the Aethiopians. Lib. 3. p. 26.


11. In foretelling that the Italians shall become subject to the Ibid.
Asiaticks.

12. In maintaining, that Nero is the great Antichrist, that he is retired Lib.
5. p. 41, 43, 44. 49.
into Persia, and that returning from Babylon with an army of Jews, he will
destroy Rome, and set it on fire.

13. In confounding Alexandria with Memphis.

14. In feigning that Eliah shall come down from Heaven in a Chariot; Lib. 8.
p. 57. Lib. 2. p. 15. Lib. 5. p. 41. Lib. 5. p. 46. Lib. 5. p. 41. Lib. 8. p.
57.
That Joshuah, raised again, shall restore the Jews; That Tyberius was to set
upon Persia and Babylon; That Trajan, a native of Italica, in the extremities
of Spain, was born among the Gauls; That Adrian strangled himself with a
string; That under Antoninus, surnamed the Lib. 8. p. 57.
Debonnaire, whom he impertinently calls (...), in stead of (...), or, (...),
and his two adoptive Sons, Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, one whereof must
necessarily survive the other, would be the end of the world; That Rome, being
destroyed in the 948. year after Lib. 8. p. 59.
its foundation, should come to its period in the year of our Lord, 195. which
was the third year of Severus: And lastly, after all this, in acknowledging
himself to be a Christian, by these words, which absolutely take off all the
precedent suppositions; And yet we descended from the Lib. 8. p. 66.
holy geniture of Christ, are called of the same blood.

For, from the consistency of all these remarks, this consequence must
necessarily ^e deduced; that the Impostor, who took upon him the name of Noes
daughter-in-law, and persuaded St. Justin, that he was the daughter of Berosus,
was, by Profession a Christian, but ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, and true
Theology, no less then of Geography and History, and that he compiled his
Rhapsody between the year 138. wherein Adrian was by death delivered of his
disease on the twelfth of July, and the year 142. or 151. in which Cardinal
Baronius, with diverse others, affirm, that justin presented his Apology to the
Emperor Antoninus, and the Caesar's his adoptive sons, and consequently, that
this counterfeit piece was just come out of the Mint, and was not quite cold
when he undertook the dispersing of it, and, by his example, recommended it to
Athenagora, Theophilus of Antioch, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, the Author
of the Work, called, The Apostolical Censtitutions; Lactantius, Constantine
the Great, Eusebius, Optatus, Hierom, Augustine, Prosper, Palladius, Sozomenus,
Junilius, etc who have all drunk out of the common shore, of the Sibylline
Imposture, and that with so little difficulty, and so strong a prejudice, that
nothing could ever offend their stomachs. If therefore so many great men, and
Justin himself, who first broke the Ice before them, could find any relish in
so unsavory a dish; and if they have (with a kind of emulation) served it up,
and commended it to others, with so much assurance, as begat an imagination,
that, to express any horror thereat, was to quarrel with God himself, who can
think it strange, that the example of their credulity should be able in as high
a measure to injure others?

CHAP. IV. The judgment of Antonius Possevinus, concerning the W^itings
pretended to be Sibylline, taken into examination.
IT is no miracle to me, if, after the antiquity of the first Ages had been
circumvented through the excess of their credulous sincerity, ours (though much
refined from the scurf of ignorance, and forced by the necessity of so many
difficult experiments, to be more cautious and diffident should not be wholly
free from the remainders of the same misfortune, in so much, that we now find
there are some very grave men, such, for instance, as Onuphrius, Sixtus of
Sienna, the Cardinals, Baronius and Bellarmine, and the Bishop of Norwich,
Montague, enslaved by the tyranny of the popular error, fortified by length of
time, and consent of such Christians as are admirers of inveterate opinions.
Yet can I not but express my dissatisfaction with the judgment of Antonius
Possevinus, a Divine of the Society of Jesus, who, having discovered the
Imposture of the Sibylline books, has chosen rather to think them corrupted,
then supposititious. I shall therefore in the first place, to make a full
discovery of this forgetfulness in him, lay down his censure, with some
observations thereupon, and afterward examine the ground of his Sentiment. It
is apparent (says he) both from the Fathers and other Ecelesiasticall Writers,
Appar. Sacr. verbo Sibyllarum.
that there was not any Sibyl before Moses, to the end the world might know,
that, if, in the Oracles published under the name of the Sibyls, and comprised
in eight Books, there be any thing relative to what was before the Age of
Moses, it is counterfeit and false, as having been since sown by Satan, out of
a design, that falsehood, being thrust in together with truth, might bring into
question the truth of other times. Of that kind is that which is attributed to
the Sibyl of Moses, hinting at, and foretelling the Deluge, Lib. 1. p. 9. as
also what is found written in the same Book, page 11. that the Sibyl her self,
with her husband, her Father-in-law, Mother-in-law, her brethren-in-law, and
others, was t^ss'd up and down by the waves in the time of the Deluge. But it
is evident rom page 30. that those very things which have come abroad under the
name of Oracles, were written fifteen hundred years after the Empire of the
Greeks: whereof, whether we take the beginning from the reign of the Argives,
or Sicyonians, or Athenians; or whether it be taken from Moses, from the reign
of Solomon, the Macedonian Empire, or the four Monarchies; those things which
are called Predictions, will be frivolous, and after the things done. They will
be found also to be wanting, as to truth, if the government of the Greeks began
since Moses; for from the departure of Moses and Israel out of Egypt, to the
destroying of the Administration or Commonwealth and Government of the Jews,
under Vespasian, are reckoned one thousand four score and two years. Further,
what can be said, as to what we find in the fifth Book, p. 49. where the Sibyl
affirms, that she had seen a second conflagration of the Temple of Vesta? And
that (according to the testimony of Eusebius) it happened under the Emperor
Commodus, in the year, 199. for in that year the Temple of Vesta, and the
Palace, and the greatest part of the City was burnt, whereas the first
conflagration happened in the 134. Olympiad. Whence it is to be conceived, that
the Prophetess (if it may be lawful to call her such) prophesied not before
the birth of Christ, but long after, and pretends not to any thing beyond
Commodus, since that in the eighth Book. p. 57. she says, that three Emperors
shall reign after Adrian, that is to say, Antoninus, the Debonnaire, Antoninus
the Philosopher, and Commodus. To this may be added, that it is apparent from
the first Book of Lactantius Firmianus, Chap. 6. that each of the Sibyls writ
her own Book, and yet that now they seem to be all the Work of one, because
they all go under the name of the Sibyl, and that we cannot distinguish them,
nor assign to any one her own, unless it be to the Erythraean, who put her name
into her Poem, and is called Erythraea, (now that was the Work of the
Erythraean, which takes up the third place among those Books.) The Author of
the first Book, feigned himself to be daughter-in-law to Noe: the second and
the seventh seems to personate a most impudent strumpet, page 56. though there
want not some credible Authors, who affirm, that the true Sibyls were chaste,
and inspired of God. The sister of Isis challenges the fifth Book; (...).
the rest were published under the names of uncertain Authors.

By way of Annotation upon this (granting what he says, as to the
supposititiousness of the pretended Sibyl, as also that Moses is more ancient
then any that have gone under that name;) I affirm,

In the first place, That the writing which goes commonly under that title,
does not introduce Moses, but Noah himself, foretelling the Deluge, which
speaks yet a little more confidence.

2. That from the departure out of Egypt, to the taking of Jerusalem, by
Titus, there are 1600. years complete, 518. more then was thought.

3. That the Author of the Sibylline Books, does not affirm, he saw the second
conflragration of the Temple of Vesta, but the last of Jerusalem; The house
sometime so much desired by thee (says he to Rome) when I saw that house pulled
down, and set on fire the second time, by an impure hand; a house ever
flourishing, and having God in it; which house he supposes that Christ himself,
descending from heaven, will come and re-establish, together with Jerusalem, to
reign there in his glory. Which manifestly argues, that (though threatening Rome
with final destruction) he writes, The Virgins shall not always find the
Divine fire; yet he neither saw nor foresaw the conflagration that happened in
the twelfth year of Commodus, which was but the 191. of our Savior, but
reflected on the Prediction of St. John, expressing, that Rome should be
utterly burnt with fire, and be found no more at all: so that he thought it
would be to no purpose to look Apoc. 18. 8 21
there for Vesta's fire, and other Monuments of her Paganism.

4. That if his intention had been to denote the conflagration happened under
Commodus, he could not truly have called it the second; for that besides the
first mentioned in Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and happening under the Consulate
of Gracchus and Falto, in the third year of the Lib. 2.
135. Olympiad, and the 516. of Rome, there had been a second, observed by
Tacitus, and other creditable Authors, under the Consulship of Bassus and
Crassus, in the fourth year of the 210. Olympiad, which Annal. 15.
was the 817. of Rome, the 64. of our Savior, and 11. of Nero.

5. That he does not only not pretend to any thing beyond Commodus, but makes
an apparent stop at Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, which latter he presumed
must needs (as being the younger by seven years) outlive the other. After him
(says he) whose name begins Marcus was born in the year 121. and Lucius in the
year 128. Lib. 5.
with a T. the note of the number three hundred, that is to say, Trajan,
another shall reign, a person with a silver head; that is, one that was already
arrived to gray hairs: or shall be, (as he speaks in the eighth Book) (...),
hoary, and his name [that is to say, Adrian] shall be derived from the Sea
[Adriatick] and he shall be good all manner of ways, and shall know all
things: and under thee (O man absolutely good, excellent all manner of ways,
and hoary headed) and under thy boughs [that is to say, thy adoptive sons] the
last days shall come to pass; three shall reign [that is to say, Antoninus,
Marcus, and Lucius] but the last [that is, Lucius] shall obtain the sovereignty
of all things. And in the eighth Book, After him [that is to say, Adrian] there
shall reign three, who shall see the last days, filling the Name of the
heavenly God, whose kingdom is now and to all ages; that is to say, they shall
be called Antonini, or (according to our manner of pronouncing) Andonini, from
the name Adonai, and Adonim; that is, Antoninus the Debonaire, Antoninus the
Philosopher, and Lucius Verus Antoninus, who (...)
he pretends ought (as being the youngest) to survive the other two, succeed
them, and continue til the 948. year of Rome, or the 195 of our Redemption, in
which he would have been 67. years of age; never imagining, that Lucius, by his
irregularities, would prejudice his health, so as to be cut off in the flower
of his age, in the midst of Winter, between the Ga'en. de praecogn. post. c. 9.
years 169. and 170.

6. That though Lactantius, carried away with the prejudice of his time,
conceived that the Books, called Sibylline, had no other Authors then the
ancient Sibyls, celebrated by Varro; and that they had been chaste and inspired
of God; yet has he not escaped a mistake, as we shall make appear more at
large hereafter.

7. That the Author of the third Book, neither was, nor would be thought the
Erythraean Sibyl, but wife to one of the sons of Noah, come from Babylon to
Greece; for those are her own words: These things I tell thee far from the
walls of Babylon, etc. The men of Greece will say, I am of another Country,
born in Erythraea, etc.

8. That the first Book is (as all the ensuing) of the same vein.

9. that the impudence and whoredom, so much bewailed in the second and seventh
books, were by the third acknowledged for the proper description of the
pretended wife to Noah's son, who cries, Men will say, I am of another
Country, and shameless. In a word, that all the eight books (...).
are the extravagant fictions of the same Impostor, who, under pretense of
advancing the truth, has perfidiously dishonored it.

CHAP. V. The recommendation of the Writing, pretended to be Sibylline,
attributed by Clemens Alexandrinus to St. Paul, examined.
TO qualify, with more ease, the reproach consequent to so unworthy an
attempt, and in some sort, to save his reputation that was guilty of it, there
are many, who (as it were out of a certain emulation) allege that St. Paul
himself recommended the reading of the Sibyls, and, to justify their
assertion, bring in Clemens Alexandrinus, speaking in these terms: Besides, the
preaching of St. Peter, the Apostle, St. Paul Strom. lib. 6. p. 136.
will declare the same, saying, take also the Greek books, acknoweledge the
Sibyl, how she discovers one only God, and the things that are to come; and
taking Hystaspes, read, and you will find the Son of God much more manifestly
and openly described. But I shall not stick to presume their pardon, though I
affirm they heap evil upon evil. For if it be blameworthy for a man (as St.
Justin did) to subscribe a piece of forgery which he was not able to discover,
how odious must needs be the malice of that false witness, who (to deceive
Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Christians) would needs maintain the
supposititiousness of the Sibylline writings, by a worse Imposture, and feign
that St. Paul himself had brought them into credit by his recommendation? If
souls perfectly virtuous cannot without difficulty endure that Encomiums of
chastity should be bestowed on common Prostitutes, who among such as are truly
Christian, will be able to suffer comparisons to be made between the Prophets
of God, and persons in the depth of an extravagant melancholy, between their
celestial Oracles and the disordered resueries of the other, and that the
Projector of so base a cheat should presume to give it the greater reputation,
produce the Apostle as a complice of his sacrilegious insolence? And yet there
are those who would, that, out of this vessel of election, should come the
words alleged by Clemens; and whereas there cannot any such thing be found in
his Epistles, they imagine them spoken by him in his popular Sermons, as if it
were possible, that he, who sacrificed his life Baron. Appar. 19. Sixth. Sen.
Bibl lib. 2. Possevin. Appar. and Bib. Sell. lib. 2. c. 71. Lib. 17. c 20.
in a glorious martyrdom, in the 65. year of our Lord, should give his
approbation to a piece full of errors, and forged since the year 137. as it
were out of a design, by that recommendation, to oppose the Authority, as well
of the old Testament, and the Son of God himself, as his own preaching and the
most excellent of his Epistles. For if, among the Heathens, the Sibyl and
Hystaspes, have not only declared one God, and manifested the things to come,
but also described the Son of God after a manner more clear and convincing,
with what credit could David have written, It is in Jury that God is known; God
shows his words unto Jacob, his Statutes Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with other nations; and
as for his judgments, they have not known them? Or, how comes it that the
Savior of the World has decided the case on the behalf of the Jews, saying,
Salvation is of the Jews? And upon what ground does St. Joh. 4. 22. Acts 14. 16.
Paul make this precise Declaration to the Lycaonians; God in times past,
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways: and speaking to the Athenians,
(the most refined people of all the Europaeans) call the times preceding the
publication of the Gospel, The times of ignorance; and maintain Acts 17. 30.
in his Epistle to the Romans the advantage of the Jew, to be much every way;
chiefly, because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God: Again, Romans
3. 1, 2.
that to the Israelites pertains the glory and the covenant, and the giving
of Romans 9 4.
the Law, and the service of God, and the promises; and put other nations, in
comparison of them, into a qualification of such as are no people, and a Romans
10. 19.
nation void of understanding? Certainly, if the Gentiles (according to the
pretended presupposition of St. Paul, in Clemens Alexandrinus) have been
depositaries of the Oracles of God more clear and manifest then the Prophets,
they neither have, nor ought to have granted, that God has not shown them his
Ordinances and Judgments, and that on the Jews behalf (over whom they were
notoriously advantaged) the advantage was much every way. For since, before the
Incarnation of the Messiah, they had, in their hands, the illuminating
predications of the Sibyls, which furnished them with historical descriptions
of what in the Prophetical Writings, is but aenigmatically proposed, their
time was not a time of ignorance, but of light and knowledge, more distinct
then that of the Jews, and it must have been false, that God was only known in
Jury; since that we do not esteem ignorant, at least comparatively to another,
him who in the same matter of fact, knows as much, if not more, then the most
knowing, and that these propositions are formally contradictory: the advantage
is of the Jews, and the advantage is not of the Jews. Again, the advantage of
the Jews over the Gentiles consists, having the Oracles of God committed to
them; and, the Oracles of God committed to the Gentiles by the means of the
Sibyls, are more clear and manifest then those of the Jews.

From all which I must needs infer, that, it being impossible, a person sound
in his intellectuals, should at the same time, hold both parts of the same
contradiction, and there being yet a greater impossibility, that such as are
inspired from God, should be guilty of such a miscarriage; St. Paul did not
only not say what is attributed to him in Clemens Alexandrinus, but could not
have said it. And thereupon I shall desire the prudent Reader, to take four
things into his consideration:

1. That he who has presumed to borrow his name, to gain the greater credit to
his fond imaginations, does, by the general description he has given us of
what is contained in the pretended Sibylline predictions, saying, they declare
one only God, discover things to come, and the Son of God, clearly show, that
he alludeth to those very books, which are now extant of them, and
consequently, that his work was hatched after that, entitled the Sibylline, and
must needs be later then the year of our Lord, 137.

2. That, with Justin and Clemens, he acknowledges but one Sibyl, who
manifested one only God, which shows, it were to little purpose to look for
different Authors for the eight books that are come to our times.

3. That the most clear and remarkable descriptions of the Son of God, palpably
relate to the designation as well of the four vowels and two consonants, which
make up the Greek name (...), as the number precisely arising thence; as also
the Acrostick of the eighth book, wherein we have consecutively the names of
Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior, and Cross, with the Paraphrase on the
greatest part of the history of the Gospel.

4. That the more express and historical these descriptions are, the more
apparent it is that they are supposititious, and written after the event, the
Spirit of God having never thought it convenient to propose things to come
otherwise then aenigmatically, and under the veil of several figures, and
there being no instance but only of one person, whose proper name it has
expressed in its Oracles, that is to say, Cyrus, twice named by Isaiah, 175.
years before he was possessed of the Monarchy Isai. 44. 28. and 45. 1.
of the Universe.

Clemens might soon have observed this, if, to compass his design, he had made
it as much his business to exercise his judgment, as exhaust his memory; but
having resolved to make use of Heathens and Heretics against themselves, so to
undeceive them all, without taking heed himself of being surpised, he, as well
as others, is fallen into the snare, and the cloud of witnesses, he had to
produce, suffered him not to see the bad marks which some of them carried in
their very faces. Accordingly do we find, That this vast Wit, whom nothing
escaped, and who thought to make his advantages of all, and take away (as
sometimes Israel did) all the treasures of Egypt, after he had with a
miraculous ostentation laid down the Depositions of 250. Heathen Authors, as
well Philosophers, as Historians and Poets, and given quarter to the most
execrable Heretics, such as Basilides, Carpacrates, Julius Cassianus,
Epiphanes, Heracleon, Hermogenes, Isidorus, Marcion, Prodicus, Tatian,
Valentin; etc. and opened his breast to Apocryphal pieces; that is to say, the
Prophesies of Enoch, Cham, Abacuc, Esdras, Parchor, and Sophony, the book of
the Assumption of Moses, the Gospels of the Egyptians and Hebrews, the Sermons
of St. Peter, and St. Paul, the Traditions of St. Matthias, the Epistle of St.
Barnabas, the Pastor of Hermas; Brother to Pope Pius the first, (a piece which
dazzled the eyes of St. Irenaeus, and many others) has also given credit to the
counterfeit Sibyll, whose discourse he thought so much the more authentic, the
more directly it contributed to his design.

CHAP. VI. An account of several instances of dis-circumspection in Clemens
Alexandrinus.
SInce therefore it could not well be otherwise, but that this great man
drawing out of so many several sources, must needs, out of diverse of them,
bring up dirt rather then water; we shall not fear being thought awanting as to
the respect we owe his memory, and the merit of his great abilities and
knowledge, if we presume to affirm, that, in what we have left of his Works, we
meet with many instances of dis-circumspection, weakness, and an excessive
credulity. To come to particulars, what is it else, when he says, after a very
uncouth manner of speaking, that the Word is the minister of the paternall
will, and the second Paedag l. 1 c. 2. p. 80. Strom l 7. 695. 702. 3. Lib. 3. c
2. Str^* l. 3 p. 450 and lib 4 p 550 Padag l. 3 c. 3. Ibid c 11 Strom. lib 1. p
280. 309. 18, 19 lib 6* 636, 63^ 48 Strom lib 1. p 304. 5 p. 548. Lib. 1. p.
307. P 310 P 311. Lib 5 p 615. Lib 6 p 662 Lib 1. p 324. P 325. p. 326. P. 327
P. 328.
cause, which comes nearest the Father: That the Angels fell through
fornication: That it is not lawful for a man to touch blood; nor to swear:
That Philosophy has been, to the Gentiles, a Paedagogue to bring them to
Christ, fo far, that it has justified them; that thereby they have glorified
God; and that it has been their Testament, and the foundation of all Christian
Philosophy. That Numa, who dyed in the second year of the 27. Olympiad, 134.
years before Pythagoras appeared, and 168. years before he came into Italy, was
a Pythagorean: That Semiramis was Queen of Egypt; That the Devil may repent:
That it is in our power to be delivered from ignorance and bad choice: That the
soul makes the difference in the election of God: That man is saved through his
own means: That in the time of Debora, Osius the son of Riezu was high priest:
That Solomon was Son-in-law to Hiram: That Rehoboam was father to Abiu, and
Abiu to Athaman, and this last to Jehosaphat; and that Joram was father to
Ozias: That Jonathan was son to Ozias; that Amos the Prophet was father to
Isaiah: That Achaz was father to Osea, and Osea to Hezechias: That from the
time of Samuel, to that of Josias, the Passover was never celebrated: That the
false Prophet, Ananias, was son to Josias: That Nechao fought Josias near the
river Euphrates: That Helchias the High Priest, was father to Jeremy, and that
he died immediately after he had read the book of the Law: That the ten Tribes
carried away (according to the express certificate of the Scripture) in the
sixth year of Hezechias, were brought into captivity in the fifteenth year of
Achas, his father: That the transportation of the Jews under Sedechias, who was
later then the birth of Moses, by about 1073. years, and the raising of David
to the Throne, by 517. years, was after the former 1085. years, six months, ten
days; and after the latter 492. years, six months, ten days precisely: That
Zachary, who began P. 332.
not to prophecy to the people, till the second year of Darius, which was the
first of the 65. Olympiad, is more ancient then Pythagoras, who began to come
into reputation in the fourth year of the 60. Olympiad. That Moses, before his
adoption, was called Joachim, and that P. ^43.
now he goes under the name of Melchi: That he killed the Egyptian by his
word: that he was cast into prison, and afterward got out by miracle: That the
King, having heard the name of God pronounced, fell dumb, and was afterward
miraculously restored: That it was to ^ib. (...) p. 428.
Philip o^ ^aviour said, Let the dead bury their dead: That the body is P 349.
lib 4 p 529 Lib. 4 p. 488. Lib. 5. p. 564. Lib. 6. p 637. 638, 639. P. 649.
the Sepulcher of the soul: That Saint Matthias is Zachaeus the Publican: That
the Sacerdotall Vestment was bordered with 360, bells: That the Son of God and
his Apostles, did, after their death, preach in hell; that many were there
converted; that there was so great a necessity of that predication, that
otherwise God had been unjust: That our Savior did not eat out of any need his
body stood in of sustenance, but out of a fear of raising any ill opinion of
himself in those who saw him: That P. 650. 51, 54.
he who is endu'd with knowledge, is free from all animal passion, and
cupidity; that he is not overcome by any thing of voluptuousness; that he has
no further need of patience, temperance, etc. That he is impe^^able: That Lib.
7. p. 706. 47. Lib. 6. p. 667. P. 669.
Saint Matthias was chosen, because he had shown himself worthy to be an
Apostle: That the Sun and the Stars were bestowed on the Gentiles, to be adored
by them: That by the worship of the Stars, they should have looked up to God:
That it is lawful to lie for the safety of another: That God Lib. 7. p. 730.
P. 748.
would have a faithful man to be so far his own guide, as not to need any
other assistance: That after Marcion (whom he acknowledges to have P. 676.
lived under the Empire of Adrian and Antoninus) Simon did (for a short time)
hear Peter preaching, etc. He discovers also, that he had not met with very
skillful Masters in the Hebrew, when he writ that Hosanna, Paedag. l. 1. c. 5.
interpreted in Greek, signifies light, glory, and praise, with supplication to
the Lord: Again, that Abraham is, by interpretation, elected father of Strom.
l. 5. 549.
the sound, and gave other such Etymologies of the Hebrew names.

CHAP. VII. Reflections on several supposititious pieces, whereby many of the
ancient Christians have been imposed upon and abused.
ARe we then to think it much, after so many strange remarks, that he, who with
an excessive easiness of belief, could take things from all hands; from
Heathens; from Heretics; from Judaicall Traditions; from the Apocriphall
Writings of Christians, and (upon the credit of the false Pastor of Hermas)
introduce our Savior and his Apostles preaching in hell, should be drawn in to
admit the predication fathered on St. Paul the Apostle, and swallow down the
pretended Oracles of the Sibyl, which derived their recommendation from it* And
why should we make any difficulty, to acknowledge what expe^^ence proclaims, as
it were, in the open streets? In the second Age, (the first year whereof had
been signalized by the decease of St. John the Evangelist) Satan, not satisfied
with the open war there was against the Church, by the persecution of the
Heathen, would needs fasten on her skirts a numerous crew of Heretics of all
sorts, execrable in their Opinions, and depraved in their Manners, and made it
his business to pull all into disorder within, by the uncontrolable
licentiousness of forgers and Impostors, who with a certain earnestness, and in
a manner, at the same time, have, either to gratify some particular Heresy,
or under the specious pretense of engaging against the Idolatry of the Heathen
with greater advantage, out of a pious fraud, filled the world with adulterate
and supposititious pieces. In so much, that it may be said, there was not any
season more fruitful in those pernicious excrescencies and Apocriphall
Writings, then that Age, nor happily at any time a greater disposition in men's
minds to give them credit and entertainment; the simplicity of some not
permitting a perfect anatomy of the evil; and the confidence of those who were
either satisfied therewith, or suspected it, inclining them to this opinion,
that they might make some benefit thereof, to the confusion of falsehood, and
advantage of truth. Nay, those, whom learning had a little more refined, and a
conversation with the Sciences made more capable of things, as such as being
well advanced in years had forsaken the banners of Paganism, were apt enough
to bring into the Church some tincture of the Opinions they had been imbued
with before; and thinking by the correspondence they still held with the
Philosophers, to make them more susceptible of piety, imagined themselves
concerned in point of honor, to reconcile their own Maxims to Christianity,
which, by that base allay, lost much of its natural luster and beauty. As
therefore men were either totally heretical, or incendiaries and troublesome,
accordingly did they impose upon the credulity of the simple; some broaching
and advancing false Prophesies and Histories; such as were those of Jaldabaoth,
of Seth, of the sons of Seth, of Enoch, of Cham, etc. The Prayer of Joseph, the
Assumption of Abraham, Moses, Eldad, and Modad; The Testament of Moses, Esdras,
Baruc, Abacuc, Ezekiel, Parchor, Zephany, the lesser Genesis, the Book
attributed to Zacharias, father to St. John; the Repentance of Adam, of James
and Mambres; the Book of the Giant Ogenes, Jacobs Ladder, the Testament of Job,
the greater and lesser Symphony; the Prophesies of Marsiades and Marsian, the
Ascension of Isaiah, etc.

Others, vented counterfeit Gospels, such as were those of Eve, Peter, Andrew,
James the less, Philip, Barnabas, Matthias, Thaddaeus, of the Apostles, of the
Egyptians, of the Hebrews, of Judas, according to Basilides and Apelles; that
which the Gnostics called the Gospel of Truth and Perfection; whereto, upon
the declination of the third Age, the Manichees, added that of Thomas, and some
others, later Impostors, that of Nicodemus.

Others, false Acts; as those of Peter, Andrew, Paul, and Tecla, John, Philip,
Thomas, forged in some part by Nexocharides, or Lucius Charinus, and Manes,
after whom, a new Impostor, 300. years after, puts upon the world the life of
St. John, under the name of Prochorus; and a Rhapsodist, who lived about 860.
years since, and took upon him the name of Abdias, the Babylonian, the lives of
all the Apostles.

Others scattered abroad false Relations; such were the Books, entitled, The
infancy of our Savior; of the Questions of Mary; of the extraction of Mary; of
the Assumption of Mary; of the Nativity of our Savior; of the Lots of the
Apostles; of the commendation of the Apostles, of the Ascension of Saint Paul;
of the Itinerary of Saint Peter; of the preaching of Saint Peter; of the
doctrine of the Apostles; of Apostolical Constitutions; of the Controversy
between St. Peter and Appion; of the Passion of St. Peter and St. Paul, by
Linus; the Pastor of Hermas; whereto, about the beginning of the fourth Age,
Maximian the Emperor, caused to be joined the Acts of Pilate.

Others disperc'd counterfeit Epistles; such as was that of Abgarus, Prince of
Edessa, to our Savior, with our Saviors pretended answer thereto; those that
go under the name of St. Barnabas; of the B. Virgin to St. Ignatius; of St.
Ignatius himself; of St. Paul to the Laodiceans; of the same, a third Epistle
to the Corinthians; as also a third to the Thessalonians, the second to the
Corinthians, wrongfully attributed to St. Clement.

Others started counterfeit Apocalypses; such as were those of Adam, Abraham,
Eliah, Paul, Thomas, Stephen, etc.

Others there were, who, looking with a jealous eye on what ever was
remarkable, among either Jews or Heathens, would needs make it contribute to
Christianity, and appropriate all the glory of it to the Church. Thus to rob
the Grecian Jews of their golden-mouthed Philo, it must be feigned he had had
some conversation with St. Mark; and to apply to Christian Monks (who began not
till the times of Paul and Anthony the Hermits, whereof one died the tenth of
January, in the year 343 and the other the seventeenth of January, 358.) what
he had expressly written of the Esseni, a Sect much given to contemplation,
seated near Alexandria, upon the Lake Maria, Eusebius himself (who had
acknowledged as much in his eighth Book of Evangelicall preparation, Chap. 11.)
does, in his Ecclesiastical History, retract what he had delivered before,
and, by his example, has so prepossessed those that came after him, that St.
Epiphanius was persuaded, that Philo spoke not of the Esseni, whom he Page 688.
(...), etc. (...), etc. Page 690 91.
names in express terms, but of the Tesseni, of whom he said not any thing
either good or evil, supposing them to be some of the first Christians, and to
have derived their denomination either from Jesse, the father of David, (whence
St. Paul takes occasion, after Isaiah, to call out Savior, the root of Jesse)
or from Jesus himself. But all without any ground, for the description of Philo
cannot any way be attributed to Christian Monks, since he says of his
contemplative Esseni:

1. That they went away, so as never to return again, forsaking brethren,
children, wives, kindred, etc. directly contrary to the command of Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 7. 12. etc.

2. That they spent the whole day, as well in reading the sacred books, and the
Commentaries of the Ancients, to Allegorize upon them; as in the composing of
certain Hymns: which shows their conversation to have been only with the Old
Testament, and their study therein wholly after the manner of the Jews.

3. That they met together every seventh day, that is to say, every Saturday.

4. That the most austere among them, did not break their fast, but Page 692.
only on the sixth day, consequently Friday, contrary to the custom of the
Christians.

5. That they celebrated the Pentecost as their principal Feast; and that in
honor of the number of seven, seven times reiterated, a conceit not derived
from the Gospel, but the Discipline of Pythagoras.

6. That in their common Festivities, the Males were seated on the P. 695.
right hand, and the Females on the left, a custom which never was of any
account in the Church.

7. That there was no flesh eaten among them; but only leavened bread, salt
and Hyssop.

8. That they drunk nothing but Water, Wine being accounted poison P. 696.
with them; an evident testimony that their entertaiment had nothing common,
either with the Eucharist, where there is such a necessity the Chalice should
be filled with Wine; that those who endeavored to reduce it to Water, have
been branded as Heretics, under the name of Aquarii, and Hydroparastati; nor
with the Love Feasts of the Primitive Christians, who used Wine freely, and in
abundance, and condemned the Tatianites and Encratites, who abstained from it,
as what might not lawfully be drunk, and called it, in imitation of the Esseni,
The poison of the Dragon.

9. That having ended their Feast, they spent the night in dancing and singing:
first in two Quires, afterward in one, in imitation of Moses P. 647.
and his sister Miriam, after the passage through the Red Sea; a ceremony,
which has not only never been observed in the Church, but has been expressly
condemned by her in the Council of Laodicea, forbidding dancing, even at the
marriages of Christians. Can. 53.


10. That seeing the day break, turning toward the East, they prayed; which
done, every one returned to his Cell; Which last ceremony, is all P. 698.
that might seem contrary to the common practice of the Jews, and to have some
relation to that of the Christians, who, in their Prayers turn to the East,
whereas the Jews looked toward Jerusalem, in what part soever of the world
they made their supplications. But as to what he observes that this Sect of
people were not served by slaves, as esteeming that P. 696.
the possession of servants was absolutely contrary to nature, it speaks
somewhat dissonant from the general belief and practice, as well of the
Ancient Jews, who permitted slavery, as the Primitive Christians, who
disallowed it not, as appears by the words, both of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 21.
Philemon 16, and St. Peter, 1 Epist. Chap. 3. 18. but it was indeed, common to
all the Esseni, of whom Philo said, There is not so much as a slave P. 678.
among them, but all are free, yet mutually serving one another; and they
condemn Masters, not only as unjust, defiling, holiness, but also as impious.

With the same design of making some advantage of Josephus, has some bold hand
or other inserted into his Antiquities, Lib. 18. cap. 4. certain words which
are so much the less likely to come from him; for that they contain an
honorable testimony, as well of the person of our Savior, as of the holiness
and truth of Christian Religion, from the profession whereof that Author ever
stood at a great distance; besides, it is notoriously remarkable, that they are
hedged in, so as not to have any coherence with the rest of his Discourse,
either going before, or coming after, and put into the place which they take
up, rather out of affection to some certain party, then any reason there was to
do it.

Of the same thread is also (if I am not deceived in my conjecture) that
Encomium of St. John, inserted in the sixth Chapter; for, besides that, he
describes him as a very good person, one whose advice it was to those Jews who
exercised virtue, and were observers of justice one toward another, and piety
toward God, to become, as it were, one by Baptism; and that this Discourse
can speak no less of him who made it, then that he was a Disciple of St.
John's, the contexture of the whole Story formerly concludes, and evidently
shows, that it was thrust in (it may be) out of some zeal, but certainly with
much want of sincerity. Tiberius (says Josephus) being extremely incensed, at
the attempt of Aretas, writes to T. Vitellius, that he should declare war
against him, and if he took him alive, to send him ^und in chains to him, if he
were killed; that he would send him his head. Tiberius sent Orders to the
General of his Army in Syria, that he should do these things; In this placeis
inserted a Discourse of 20. lines concerning St. John, his Baptism, death, and
the defeat of Herod.
and Vitellius, (as it were, for the war against Aretas) prepared two Legions,
etc. And it is to be noted, that the defeat of Herod by Aretas, happening seven
years after the suffering of St. John (seeing Vitellius being upon his way to
take his revenge of that affront, received four days before his arrival at
Jerusalem, the news of Tiberius's death) there is very little likelihood, that
the Jews (who had delivered our Savior to Pilate, though they had followed and
admired him, after the martyrdom of St. John, which had not wrought any
alteration in them) should have had, for so long time, so lively a remembrance,
both of the unworthiness of his death, and the sanctity of his life.

It was also conceived in the time of Origin, that Josephus, desirous to find
out the cause of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple, had said,
Advers. Cells. lib. 1. Eusebius. Hist. lib 2. c. 23. Hieron. Catal.
that those things were happened to the Jews, in revenge of James the Just, who
was the brother of Jesus, called Christ, since they had killed him, though a
just person: and no doubt, these words were to be read in his time, in the
History of the Jewish war; but at present, there is no such thing to be found,
and the falsification, as to that particular, has lost its credit.

With the same observance of civility and sincere dealing, which makes us
concern our selves many times, where we have least to do, was it, that Paulus
Orosius, a Spanish Priest, who had read in Josephus, that, in the time of
Claudius, about the year of our Lord, 46. Izates, King of Antiq lib. 20. cap. 2.
the Adiabenians, had (with his mother Helene) embraced the Jewish Religion;
that the said Princess, being come to Jerusalem to adore in the Temple, and to
offer sacrifices (acts of devotion, proper only to Judaisme) had contributed
very much to the relief of the City then hard put to it by the famine; must
needs infer thence, that, having been converted to the Law of Christ, she had
made very great contributions toward the Oros. lib. 7. c. 6.
relief of the necessitous Christians in Jerusalem. But there needs no more to
refute this mistake, then, First the magnificent Sepulcher of Helene, a
monument which the Jews, the implacable enemies of the Church, would never have
suffered to be erected to the memory of a Christian Princess so near Jerusalem:
Secondly, the Palaces which were known in Jerusalem, as well by her name, as
that of Monobazus her husband: Thirdly, the obstinate continuance of her
Grandchildren in that City, when besieged by Titus, after the general retreat
of the Christians to Pella, there having not any thing been heard of this
mistake, till the fifth Age, at the beginning whereof, Orosius writ; and so I
return again to these of the second.

As it has happened on the one side, that the excessive desire of advancing
the credit of the true Religion, engaged some in considerate Christians, to
feign of the Jews, such things as were not true: So wanted there not those on
the other, who thought themselves obliged to do the same offices to the Pagans,
and thence came the supposititious Letters, written under the name of Lentulus
to Tiberius concerning the stature and beauty of our Savior, and others from
Pilate concerning his death. And whereas St. Paul had, during his abode at
Rome, brought Phil. 1. 13. 3. 8. 4. 22.
the light of the Gospel even into the Pr^^torium and gained to Christ, some of
Nero's retinue; it gave many occasion to ^magine, that the paquet must needs
(rather then to any other) be directed to Seneca, a man learned, grave, and by
Profession a Stoic, that is, the Sect that came nearest, in appearance, to the
persuasion of the Christians. Thence started up the Opinion of his pretended
familiarity with St. Paul, and the Letters which it is reported he writ to him;
the passion to Christianize so great a man, having prevailed more on the
refined Wit of St. Hierome, to make him a place in the Catalogue of Saints, and
to authenticate his pretended Letters, though written in Latin bad enough,
then the roughness of their style, and the little gravity they discover, has
hitherto had power to have them (as it were but just) proclaimed counterfeit.
Let us not therefore expect a more convictive proof of the force of these
charming prejudices, then to find St. Hierome, one of the sharpest
understandings of all Antiquity, so overcome with the fume thereof, as to have
numbered, if not among the children, at least among the friends of the Church, a
person who confounded her with the rebellious Jews, saying (according to the
relation of St. Augustiue;) The custom of this De Civit. Dei lib. 6. c. 11.
most wicked race of people has prevailed so far, as that now it is received
all over the world, and the conquered have given Laws to their Conquerours; and
one, who, having (with a Pagan resolution) made use of Iron, poison, and the
heat of the Bathes, to put a period to his life, took leave of it with these
Idolatrous expressions; I pour out this liquour (his blood) to Tacit. Annal. 15.
Jupiter the Deliverer.

But, if, to convince the incredulity of the Jews, the Church, deriving her
proofs from their own Library, drew them by the collar to the acknowledged
revelations of their national Prophets; as to the true foundations of her
Faith; she could not deal with the Heathens upon terms so advantageous, there
being not between them and her any common principle, other then the light of
Reason, nor she finding any other Oracles in their hands, then what were
profane and deceitful, as such as were the suggestions of the spirit of
Error, who is a liar and murderer Jo. 8. 44.
from the beginning. And yet there have risen up amongst such as had given up
their names to Christianity, those, who had the confidence to feign in its
behalf, what it could not any way pretend to, and (producing to Infidels
adulterate allegations) to prepare for it the solemnities of an imaginary
triumph: nay, they urged them with so much the greater show of ostentation, the
more certain they were that they had to do with adversaries, whose abilities
went not much beyond a confused knowledge of names, whereof they were, in
effect, ignorant of the things signified thereby.

CHAP. VIII. The different opinions of the Ancients concerning the Sibyls.
EVery one had heard talk of the Sibyls, Rome made it her brag, that she had
books of them, wherein might be read her destiny; but there was not any one
fully satisfied as to the number, or times of those who had gone under that
name, nor assured of the ground of their predictions. Diadorus Siculus had had
no knowledge Lib. 4.
but only of one, to wit, Daphne, the daughter of Tiresias, taken at the
sacking of Thebes, by the Epigoni, and placed at Delphi, some Aeneid. 10.
Baeotic. lib. 4. Lib. 1. cap. 6. Lib. 1. 4. 6. and 10. Lib. 13. 17. Lib. 7. c.
33. 13. cap. 13. Antiq. l. 1. c. 5. Apol. and Legal. Exhort. ad Autolyc. lib.
2. Apud. Orig l. 7. In Peregrino and Pseudomanti. Lib. 34. c. 5.
27. years before the taking of Troy, and of her he affirmed, that Homer
borrowed. But Virgil, and Pausanias, and Suidas, call her ^anto, and Clemens
Alexandrinus, Art^is, and Apoliodorus, in Lactantius, attributes what Homer had
borrowed to the Erythraean Sibyl; Plautus, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Strabo,
Pliny, Josephus, Justine Martyr, Athenagoras, Theophilus of Antioch, Celsus,
Lucian, and Juvenal, speak of the Sibyl in the singular number, as
acknowledging but one; only Strabo, (who assigns her residence at Erythrae)
observes, that (some Ages after) she was seconded by another Prophetess of the
same place, named Athenais; and Pliny relates, that in his time, there were, at
Rome, three little Statues of the Sibyl, so ancient, as that they might have
been thought the first of any, and to have been made in the time of Tarquineus
Priscus, which relation of his, many have misunderstood, so conceiving him, as
if he affirmed, they were the Statues of the three Sibyls. Martianus Capella
gives us an account of two, that is, Erophila, the daughter of Marmessus, born
in the Territories of Troy, otherwise called the Phrygian or Cumaean Sibyls;
and Symmachia of Erythrae, the daughter of Hyperchus, or Hyperides. Solinus
reckons three, the Delphick, whom he affirms (from Boethius) to have preceded
the wars of Troy, and was Cap. 7.
a kind of Patroness to Homer; Eriphila of Erythrae, who followed the precedent
not many years after, and gave notice to the Lesbians, long before it happened,
that they should lose the sovereignty of the Sea; and the Camaean. Pausanias
(as has been already seen) numbers four; Lamia, otherwise called the Lybian
Sibyl; Herophila, otherwise called the Delphick, or Erythraean; Demo, the
Cumaean; and Sabba the Babylonian. Aelian raised the number to ten, that is,
the Erythraean, the Samian, De Var ^^ist. l. 12 c. 35.
the Egyptian, the Sardinian, the Cumaean, the Judaick, and four others.
Clemens Alexandrinus, though he cites not any thing of them, but what is in the
singular number, expresses himself in these terms, whence it may be inferred,
he admitted diverse; Manto, and a multitude of Sibyls, the Samian, Strom. 1.
the Colophonian, the Cumaean, the Erythraean, Phyto, Taraxandra, the
Macedonian, the Thessalian, the Threspotick. Lactantius (from Varro) affirms
their number to be ten, and observes, that the first was of the Persians, of
whom Nicanor, who writes of the Acts of Alexander the Macedonian, makes
mention. The second was the Lybian, mentioned by Euripides in the Prologue to
his Lamia. The third, the Delphick; of whom Chrysippus speaks in a book he
writ, Of Divination. The fourth, the Cumaean, or Lib. 2. 1. 6.
of Cumae in Italy, named by Naevius in his books of the Punick War, and by
Piso, in his Annals. The fifth, the Erythraean, whom Apolodorus the Erythraean
affirms to have been of the same City with him, etc. The sixth, the Samian, of
whom Eratosthenes has written, consonantly to what he had found written before
in the ancient Annals of the Samians. The seventh, the Cumaean, under the name
of Amalthaea, who by others is also called Demophila, or Herophila, etc. The
eighth, the Hellespontick, born in the country near Troy, at the Town of
Marpessus, near the City Gergithum, whom Heraclides of Pontus, writes to have
li'vd in the time of Solon and Cyrus. The ninth, the Phrygian, who Prophesied
at Ancyra. The tenth, the Tiburtine called Albunea, who is served as a Goddess
at Tibur, which stands not far from the Tivoli.
River Anio, in the bottom whereof, it is reported, that her Image was found
T^veron.
holding a book in her hand. Issidorus of Sevil follows Lactantius; save that,
speaking of the Delphick, he adds, that she was begotten in the Orig l. 8. c.
8.
Temple of Apollo at Delphi: That the fourth was the Cimmerian of Italy: That
the fifth, that is to say, the Erythraean called Erophila, was Originally a
Babylonian, and that she was called the Erythraean, because her Verses were
found in that Issand; and that the sixth, namely, the Samian, was called
Samonota, from the Isle of Samos, whence she took her surname. In a word,
Suidas, who has gleaned together all he could meet with in other Authors,
standing much upon the number of ten, in imitation of Lactantius, says, that
the Chaldaean or Persick, whose proper name was Sambetha, was descended from
the most blessed man, Noah; That she spoke before of the things that are
reported of Alexander the Macedonian; that Nicanor, who has writ the History
of the life of Alexander, makes mention of her; that she foretold ten thousand
things, concerning Christ our Lord, and his coming; that the rest agree with
her, and that moreover, there is of hers four and twenty books, treating of all
nations and places; Again, that her fathers name was Berosus, and her mothers
Erymantha; that the Delphick was born at Delphi; that the Samian was called
Phito, the Cumaean, Amalhaea, or Herophila. And whereas Lactantius and Isidorus
have written, that the Hellespontick had lived in the time of Solon and Cyrus,
he makes this referr to the Town of Marpessus, and the little City Gergithum,
which sometime were in Troas, in the time of Solon and Cyrus. And elsewhere,
speaking of the Sibyl in general, he makes this Discourse: The Sibyl was the
daughter of Apollo, and Lamia; according to some, of Aristocrates and Hydole;
and (as others would have it) of Crinagoras; or, (as Hermippus affirms) of
Theodorus. She is called Erythraea, because she was begotten at a place of
Erythrae, called Batti, and now that place increased into a City is called
Erythrae. Some have thought her a Sicilian, others a Sardian, others a
Gegithian, others a Rhodian, others a Lybian, others, a Lucanian, others a
Samian, etc. The Sibyl Helissa has written, in Verse, certain Prophesies, and
Oracles. The Colophonian Sibyl, whose name was Lampusa, the daughter of
Calchas, has also written in Verse, certain Oracles, and Divinations, and
other things. The Thessalian Sibyl, whose name was Manto, was the daughter of
Tiresias. The Sibyl by some, called Sarbis, by others Cassandra, by others
Tarraxandra, has also left Oracles. Nor have the Cumaean, and Threspotick
Sibyls left us without their Oracles.

Thus then (according to his account) the two Sibyls of Martianus Capella; four
of those of Aelian, that is, the Erythraean, the Samian, the Egyptian, the
Sardian; three of those cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, that is, the Samian, the
Erythraean and Phyto; five of those, mentioned by Lactantius, as also by
Isidorus, who has followed him, that is, the Libyck, the Erythraean, the
Samian, the Hellespontick, and the Phrygian, all Constantine the Great, in his
Oration to the Assembly of the Saints, follows Pausanias, in that he maintains,
that the Erythraean Sibyl was at Delphi; but he leaves him again, when with
Diodorus Siculus, he calls her Daph^^
reduced to one Sibyl. Pausanias, who distinguishes the Libyck from the
Erythraean, makes another kind of reduction, affirming, that the Phrygian, the
Samian, the Colophonian, the Delphick, and the Erythraean, were all but one and
the same person, residing in several places. Martianus Capella, gives us
another after his dressing, making the Cumaean and Erythraean one and the same
Sibyl. And Justin Martyr, shoots his arrow much to the same mark, when he takes
for one Sibyl, the Cumaean and the Babylonian, as Isidorus, after the Author of
the book, De mirabilibus auscultationibus in Aristotle, confounds the
Erythraean and Cumaean. And as the same Isidorus is extremely mistaken, when he
reckons Erythrae (which was in the Continent over against Chio) among the
Islands, and makes his Samonota fly with the wind: so Suidas, maintaining
(after Justine Martyr) that the Chaldaick Sibyl was the daughter of Berosus,
does in some sort agree with Pausanias, who places her among the last: but he
palpably contradicts: First, what he had said of her being daughter to Noah,
and more ancient then Alexander; and, Secondly, the sentiment of Varro, who
had, in Lactantius, adjudg'd to the Persick (who was no other then the
Chaldaick) the prerogative of Antiquity. Another contradiction of his, is,
where he writes that the Erythraean was 483. years after the war of Troy, in
which assertion, he Saint Cyril in his first book against Julian, places the
Erythraean Sibyl under the 9 Olympiad, and distinguishes her from Herophila,
whom he makes to flourish in the 17. Olympiad. Strom 1. p. 304. 323.
comes near the opinion of Eusebius, who has given her place in his
Chronology, under the reign of Romulus, who began it 431. years after the
taking of Troy; for in the next page, he acknowledges she was before the taking
of that place, which confirms the sentiment, as well of Dionysius
Halicarnssaeus who relates that she was consulted by Aeneas, as that of
Lactantius, who affirms (from Apollodorus) that she foretold the Grecians the
issue of the siege they were to make to that famous place; and that of Solinus,
who observes, that she was some few years after the Delphick, who had lived
before the expedition of the Greeks. Clemens Alexandrinus, lays it down for
certain, that the Delphick (whom he names Artemis, the daughter of Lamia, a
Sidonian) lived before the time of Orpheus, who made one of the Argonauts, 79
years before the Trojan war; and in the mean time, Diodorus Siculus, (who calls
her Dap^^e, the daughter of Tiresias) makes her taken, together with her
father, 52. years after, at Thebes, by the Epigoni. Diodorus affirms further,
that she was seated by them at Delphi; and Pausanias, that she came thither
from Asia; Plutarch, from Helicon, and that she was the daughter of Lamia. On
the otherside, Isidorus and Suidas pretend, that Delphi was the place of her
Nativity; nay, this later, who names her Manto, the daughter of Tiresias a
Thebane, seems to have forgotten his Geography, when he makes her a Thessalian,
as if Baeotia and Thessaly, neighboring Countries, had been in effect, the
same Canton. What he writes also of Lampusa the Colophonian, the daughter of
Calchas, contradicts not only what is affirmed by Pausanias, who bestows the
title of Colophonian Sibyl on Herophila, descended from Jupiter and Lamia, but
also that probability, which seems not easily to perm^t, that the daughter of
Calchus, an European, who had accompanied the Greeks, should, be born in Asia.
Virgil calls the Cumaean Deiphobe, the daughter of Claucus, and makes her
contemporary with Aeneas; but there is not any one of the other Authors that
speak of her, agrees with him about either her name, her extraction, or the
time she lived in, but make her to flourish a long time after. Pausanias^ gives
the Chaldaick the name of Sabba; Isidorus calls her Erophyla, and Suidas,
Sambetha; and here I think it not unfit to observe by the way, the inadvertency
of Possevinus, who making general what Suidas had particularized, sordidly
imagined that all the Sibyls went, among the Chaldaeans, under the name of
Sambethae. Pliny and Solinus hold that the Cumaean Sibyl having written three
Books, burnt two of them, and sold the third to Tarquinius Superbus; but this
latter pulls down with one hand what he had built with the other, relating this
sale to have been in the 50. Olympiad, which was about the 35. year of
Tarquinius Priscus, and the 47. before the reign of his Son; besides that
Varro, in Lactantius, and Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and Noct. Attick. lib 1 c
14.
Aulus Gellius (who in the mean time, attribute it to the later Tarquin) and
Servius in Aeneid lib 6. Suidas, verbo (...), tres libros a Sibylla Erythraea
Romam allatos, ait, sive sub Tarquinio, sive sub Consulibus, itaque sibi non
constat.
Servius, and Isidorus, and Suidas, affirm there were nine books, whereof six
were burnt, and three remaining, sold to Tarquinius Priscus. Eusebius not
agreeing with the sentiments of others, nor indeed, with himself, gives
entertainment to the Samian Sibyl, one while under Numa, and another under
Tullus Hostilius: and Suidas (to satisfy the world, that there is nothing so
fantastic, but there may be some brain which has garret-room to receive it)
contrary to the opinion of all Authors, who generally hold, that Sibyl is an
Aeolick word, would have it pass among us for a Roman, as if it had been of the
invention of the Latins, and received its original from them.

CHAP. IX. The Precautions of Rome, while yet in Paganism, to prevent the
reading of the Books which she believed really Sibylline.
INto whose hands soever of the Roman Kings the Sibylline Writings fell, and
whenever it happened, is not much material; it is evident from the unanimous
consent of all the Ancients; that they have been always kept under so strict a
guard, that (as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus Lib. 4.
observes) the Romans kept not any thing, how holy or sacred soever, as they
did those Oracles. Tarquin had, at the very beginning, committed them to the
custody of two persons of quality, who (under the title of Duumviri of the
sacred things) had the express charge to preserve them religiously; as also to
consult, read, and interpret them, when need should require; which was not put
in execution, but in some extraordinary Dionys. l. 4. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
emergency, and was observed with so much rigor, that Tarquin inflicted the
punishment of Parricides on M. Attilius, who had lent them, to be copied out,
to Petronius Sabinus. Some 213. years after, that is to say, in the year of
Rome 388. the number of the keepers being increased to ten; their College went
under the name of The Decemviri of sacred things; and under their charge and
inspection, the Writings of the Sibyl was kept entire 283. years, being
disposed under ground in a chest of stone, placed in the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus, till the conflagration of the Temple, which happened in the year
of Rome 671. and was the second of the 147. Olympiad, and the 83. before the
Incarnation of our Lord, under the Consulship of Scipio and Norbanus. Now these
execrable Monuments of Heathenish Idolatry, coming by that accident to be
consumed with the other Ornaments of the Temple, to repair the pretended damage
of this imaginary loss, there were, after a Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 6. ex
Fenestella.
solemn debate in the Senate concerning it, sent away three Ambassadors,
namely, P. Gabinius, M. Octacilius, and L. Valerius, who brought from Erythrae
about a thousand Verses, which had been transcribed by private persons. And
thence it comes, that Dionysius H^carnassaeus, speaking of that recovery, says,
that, those which are now extant, are pieces gleaned up from Lib. 4.
several places; some having been brought from the Cities of Italy, others
from Erythrae in Asia, according to the decree of the Senate, Ambassadors
having been purposely sent to take Copies thereof; others came from other
Cities, copied out by private persons, among which there are some imposed upon
the Sibyls, which are discovered by those things which are called Acrosticks.
Luctantius adds to what he had observed concerning the sale of the three Books
of the Cumaean Sibyl to Tarquin, that, the number has since been increased,
upon the repairing of the Capitol, as having been (under the name of some Sibyl
or other) got together, and brought to Rome from all the Italick and Grecian
Cities, especially from Erythrae. And whereas Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, had
concluded his Discourse, with this protestation, I follow in this, what
Terentius Varro has related, Lactantius puts a period to this, with this
conclusion, which is equivalent; We have already shown that Varro has
delivered the same thing; and yet prejudicially to this, and contrary to what
Dionys. Halicarnassaeus had gathered, as well from the Treatise of Varro, as
the practice of his time, which was, that all the Oracles brought out of Italy
and Asia to Rome, were so carefully kept in the same place; that none could
have the sight thereof but the Commissioners particularly entrusted with the
charge of them, he says, The Poems of all these Sibyls are published, and all
easily met with, except those of the Cumaean, whose books are kept secret by
the Romans, who permit them not to be seen by any but the Quindecimviri. For if
(as Pausanias assures us) the Cumaeans themselves had not any Oracle of the
Sibyl to produce, what production could be made thereof at Rome, if so any were
desirous to do it? If the books of all the Sibyls were equally sought for up
and down, were all committed to the oversight of the same Guardians, who kept
them locked up altogether in the same place, and all preached one only God,
especially those of the Erythraean esteemed the most famous and most noble
among them, what reason or likelihood is there, they should not be as highly
valued and priviledg'd as those of the Cumaean? And if he cite Verses out of
the Erythraean, with this particular remark thereupon, That she inserted her
own reali name into her Poem, and foretold that she was to be called Erythraea,
though she were originally of Babylon, showing, that he speaks of the pretended
Authoress of that Rhapsody, which we have at this day; how came it into his
imagination, that the Heathens extraordinarily jealous of the secret of their
Mysteries, would have been so careless of a piece, which they thought the
noblest of all, and that was, in effect, so opposite to them, as that should it
have fallen into the hands of the Christians, they must needs expect it would
have been published to their confusion?

But observe by the way, that he speaks of the Quindecimviri; for that between
the year of Rome, 671. wherein the Capitol was burnt, and the 675. in which
Sylla laid down the Dictatorship, fifteen men had been appointed to keep that
collection which the Senate and People of Rome, had made of the Oracles they
had met with up and down, through the diligence of their Ambassadors. For
though since that time (according to the observation of Servius) the number of
these Guardians was augmented to forty, there was^o alteration, either as to
their former Title, or their Function; nay (after the coming of Christian
Princes to the Empire) the fall of Paganism, the cessation of the privileges
of its Ministers, the prohibition of sacrifices and the desolation of Temples,
had not abolished either the Sibylline books, transferred by Augustus to the
Temple of Apollo Palatinus, nor yet the ancient regulation made for the custody
thereof among the In^idels, who (notwithstanding the loss of their credit)
abated nothing of their courage in maintaining their inveterate customs.
Ammianus Marcellinus relates, that in the Lib. 23.
year of our Lord, 363. The Sibylline books were consulted at Rome, by the
command of Julian, and that the twentieth of March, in the night time,
Apronianus being Prefect, the Temple of Apollo Palatinus was set on fire in
the eternal City, where (had it not been for the assistances of all sorts of
people) the greatness of the flames had consumed the Cumaean Poems. In like
manner, from the Itinerary of Rutilius, Claudius Numatianus, it appears that
they had been preserved even to the year of our Lord, 389. Lib. 2.
since that, that Author, who writ in the year of Rome, 1199, or the 416.
Quamvis sedecies denis and mill peractis, Annus praetere jam libi nonus eat.
of our Lord, objects to Stilico, killed by the command of Honorius, on the
three and twentieth of August, 408. that he had not only committed his rapines
against Rome, by the arms of the Goths, but that he had before burnt the
Destinies of the Sibylline assistance, as not presuming to fasten that
execution on Honorius, who had commanded it out of revenge, for that the
Idolaters had forged, I know not what Greek Verses, as if they had been August.
de Civit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 53.
communicated by the Divine Oracle, to some person that consulted it, wherein
they made Christ really innocent; as to the Religion they abhorred, as of a
sacrilege; but that Peter had by Magic founded the worship of the Name of
Christ for 365 years, and that at the expiration of that number of years, there
should be no more heard of it. But certain it is, that the Emperor justly
incensed at the impudence of a rascally sort of people, that durst presume to
bark at the Dignity of the Religion he professed, and terminate the continuance
thereof to 365. years, expiring under his fourth Consulship with Eutychianus,
in the year of our Lord, 398. issued out his commands the year following, that
the Sibylline books (whence the pretended Prophecy had been taken) should be
burnt, and the Temples demolished. The year following, (says St. Augustine)
Manlius Cap. 54. Idem Epist. 201, 2. 53, 54, 67.
Theodorus being Consul, the time being already come, wherein (according to
that Oracle of evil spirits, or humane fiction) there should have been no
longer any profession of Christian Religion, etc. in the most eminent and known
City of Africa, namely, Carthage, Gaudentius and Jovius, Governors under the
Emperor Honorius, did upon the ninteenth of March, cause to be pulled down the
Temples of the false gods, and their Images to be broken. Prosper Africanus
confirms the same thing, though he attributes that command to Theodosius, De
promis. l. 3. c. 38.
who died at Millain, the seventeenth of January, 395. and the Edicts of the
nine and twentieth of January directed to Macrobius, Prefect Cod. Theod. lib.
16. tit. 10. c. 15. 16, 17, 18.
of Spain, of the thirteenth of July to Eutychianus Prefect of the Praetorium
in the East, and of the twentieth, and twenty ninth of August, to Apollodorus,
Proconsul of Africa, do yet satisfy the world of it.

But however the case stands, it matters not; while the Sibylline books were in
the custody of the Heathens, and they possessors of the Empire, the provision
made on that behalf, was, that they should never be consulted without express
command from the Senate; the sight and reading thereof was absolutely forbidden
all, but the Quindecimviri; and all the places whence they had been gotten
depending on the Roman Monarchy, must necessarily have been obliged, to the
same Law. Whence it came, that, as nothing more sharpens the edge of curiosity,
then the rigor of prohibitions, and that the dis-satisfaction men conceive at
their being incapable to exercise it openly, makes them beyond all reason
daring; so were they not a few, who endeavored to sift the secret out of the
Quindecimviri, or made their brags that they had learned part thereof of
themselves. Nay, sometimes it came to that height, that the State became
engaged in the distractions occasioned by that superstitious passion. Of that
nature was what happened in the 710. year of Rome, when (to gratify Caesar,
and compel the Senate to honor him with the royal Diadem) those who were the
Guardians of the Oracles, scattered abroad of themselves this false report,
that (according to the Dion. lib. 46. Sueton. in Caesare Plutar. in Caesare.
Cicer. de Divin. lib. 2.
saying of the Sibyl) the Parthians could not be destroyed, nor the
Commonwealth be secure from their arms but by a King; which no doubt had been
put to the trial of experience, had it not been for the murder committed in
the person of Caesar the fifteenth of March the same year, which was the four
and and fourtieth before our Savior. Twenty years after, under the Consulship
of the two Lentulus's, Augustus gave command to the Priests, to copy out with
their own hands, those of the Sibylline Verses Dio. lib. 54.
which time had defaced, to the end that no other should read them. And to the
same effect, Suetonius relates, that after he had taken upon him the charge of
In Octavio. cap. 13.
the High Priesthood, of the Divinatory Writings, as well Greek as Latin, he
burnt above two thousand books brought together from all parts, and divulged,
either without Authors, or under the names of Authors not much to be credited,
and reserved only the Sibylline, and that after trial made thereof, he locked
them up in two golden Drawers, under the basis of Apollo Palatinus: To which
relates also that saying of Horace, Lib. 1. Epist. 3. -- Et tangere vitet
Scripta Palatinus quaetunque recepit Apollo.


So that it was then in vain to look for them any more in the Capitol, or for
any to pretend a more familiar acquaintance with them then before. Under the
Consulship of Silanus and Norbanus, in the year of Rome, 771. which was the
ninteenth after the Incarnation, according to our account now, and the fifth of
Tiberius, a certain Oracle, which agreed not with the time of the City, put the
people into no small disturbances: for it Dio. lib. 57.
said, that, three times three hundred years being come and gone, an intestine
sedition, and a kind of Sibaritick madness would prove the destruction of the
Romans. But Tiberius found much falt with that Verse, as guilty of imposture,
caused a review to be made of all the books which contained any prediction,
rejected some, as being of no worth or credit, and retained others. And in the
eighteenth year of his Empire, which was the 785. of Rome, and the two and
thirtieth of our Lord, under the Consulship of Domitius and Camillus, it was
propounded in the Senate by Quintilianus, Tribune of the people, concerning the
Sibyls book, which Caninius* Gallus, one of the Quindecimviri, Tatit. Annal. 6.
had requested might be received among other books of the same Prophetess, and
demanded it might be so established by Decree of the Senate. Which being
uanimously granted, Caesar sent Letters, somewhat reprehending the Tribune, as
ignorant of the old custom by reason of his youth, and upbraided Gallus, that
having grown old in knowledge, and the Ceremonies, he had nevertheless demanded
the opinion of the Senators, it being uncertain who was the Author thereof; and
before the College had yielded their judgment; neither, as the custom was,
the Verses having been read, and taken into consideration by the Masters. He
further represented what abundance of vain things were published under so
celebrious a name; that Augustus had, under a certain penalty, set down* a day,
within which such books should be brought to the Praetor of the City; and that
it was not lawful for any to have them in their private possession. That the
same thing had been decreed by their Ancestors; that after the burning of the
Capitol, during the time of the civil war, their Verses were sought at Samos,
Ilium, and Erythrae, through Africa also, Sicily, and the Colonies of Italy,
(whether there were one Sibyl or many) and a charge was given to the Priests to
distinguish the true Prophesies from the false, as near as might be by the
judgment of man; so the book was referred to the examination of the
Quindecimviri.

To be short, two and thirty years after, viz. in the year of Rome, 817. which
was the 64. of our Lord, and the tenth of Nero, under the Consulship of Bassus
and Crassus, the City having been set on fire on the Sam 2. Annal. 15 Dio. lib.
6. Suet. in No^on.
ninteenth of July, the fire could not be stopped, till it had devoured the
Palace, and Nero's house, and all about it. And though (as Tacitus observes)
recourse was then made to the books of the Sibyl, yet the whole Quarter, where
they had been disposed by Augustus, being destroyed by the fire, it is very
probable they were in no less hazard then they had been six and forty years
before, when the Capitol was burnt, as it was again afterward in the year of
Rome 822. in the month of December.

CHAP. X. The Motives which he might have gone upon, who was the first
Projector of the eight books, which at this day go under the name of the
Sibylline.
AFter so many irreconcilable differences, making it undeniably apparent, that
the ancient Heathens never had any thing which might be relied on as certain,
concerning their Sibyls; after the conflagration of the books sold by one of
them to Tarquin, and the several accidents, which since the time of Sylla,
happened to that confused collection which the superstition of the Romans had
gleaned together from all quarters of the world; after the Senate had in the
first place interposed their judgment on all that had been sent to them; and
that Augustus had 65. years after, smothered to the number of two thousand
books, such as were thought either supposititious, or of little consequence,
and exercised his censure on the rest; after that Tiberius had, two several
times, taken into a re-examination the sentence of Augustus, to cull out as
superfluous what he had any quarrel at; and the fire, if not devoured or
prejudiced, at least come very near what had, after so many disquisitions and
retrivals, been preserved; who, I say, all these things considered, can think
it strange, that Posterity should, from time to time, have been guilty of a
presumption of furnishing the Romans with some new piece of that kind, though
it were done merely by reason of their being the more inquisitive after
Writings of that nature, by how much they both were, and were obliged (by their
own provisions, and orders to that purpose) to be ignorant of what they
contained; and consequently, that they should deferr the publishing thereof,
till after the death of Adrian, at which time, supposititious pieces of that
kind had See in Lucian the supposititious Oracles advanced in favor of
Alexander Abonotichites, and Peregrinus, notorious cheats.
free toleration even among the Pagans, 74. years after the conflagration of
Mount Palatine under Nero, and 69. after the desolation of the Capitol under
Vitellius and Vespasian? And to give a check to the Authority of the Heathenish
Prophetesses, and confirm this common principle of both the Jews and the
Fathers, that, the most ancient monuments of Idolatry, were later then the
Writings of Moses; and to raise a greater reverence thereof in the Christians,
who were not acquainted with any thing at so great a distance from their own
times, they brought upon the stage Noah's daughter-in-law, who lived eight Ages
before; and much about the same time that the Gnostics (who called his wife
Noria) made it Epiph. haeres. 26. calls her Barthenos.
their brag, among the Christians, that they had some of her Writings, out of a
design, to corrupt the simplicity of the Church, by a supposititious piece,
pretending to so great Antiquity, the Millenaries, and some counterfeit
Christians, scattered up and down certain spurious Oracles and Predictions,
under the name of one of his sons wives, especially among the Gentiles,
imagining (not without some likelihood) that the curiosity of those blinded
wretches would open a gap for the cheat, and dazzle their understandings into
admiration, and that the Christians overjoyed to find therein the condemnation
of idolatry, the preaching of one only God, the prediction of the Incarnation
of the Word, the redemption of mankind by the blood of the Cross, the general
resurrection, and the Colos. 1. 20.
last judgment, would the more easily swallow down the venom of the imposture
craftily instilled among so many truths, and would be rather inclined to set up
this new Engine to pull down error, then to discover the mischievous intent of
him who had invented it. Nay, further, to gain it entertainment (such as had
sometime the Trojan Horse) with greater pomp, and to persuade people the more
effectually, that among all nations of all Ages, there rose up witnesses
equally authentic and creditable to maintain the same truth, there were spead
abroad (under the title of Hermes, or Mercurius Trismegistus, whom Diodorus
affirms to have been Secretary to Osiris, or Mitsraim, the son of Cham) certain
Philo Biblianus from Sanchomathon, a Reritian called de Saturno, Eusebius praep.
l. 1. c. 20. Bibl. De Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 23, 24, 26. De Promiss. l. 3 c. 38.
Greek books of Paemander, and Asclepius, whereof the latter has imposed upon
good St. Augustine, and Prosper Africanus, and suborned a counterfeit
Hystaspes, who, in the very heart of Persia, must be a maintainer of the truth
in the Greek Tongue; and in fine (to raise up things to the greatest height of
impudence) derived from the name and recommendation of the Apostle St Paul, a
certain reputation to such old wives tales, whereto, as to this particular,
Clemens Alexandrinus has (as we have already observed) given but too too much
credit. For he, giving absolute credit thereto, has (as well as some others of
the Fathers) made no difficulty at all to object them, (nay, with a certain
ostentation) to the Heathen, who knew not what they spoke to them of. Nay, so
far was the rigorous observance of the Ancient provision made on that behalf,
(which reserved the reading of those Prophetical Books only to the
Quindecimviri, and allowed it not to them, but in case of extraordinary
necessity) from raising (as it should have done) a jealousy in the Christians,
that those Writings, which came not to the knowledge of any but the Guardians
thereof, to whose custody they were committed, had no relation to, or any thing
common with the pieces put into their hands; or that imagination from
prevailing so far with them, as to weaken the resolution they had taken to make
their advantages thereof, that, on the contrary, it has extremely fortified
it, every one being apt to believe, that the very remorse of conscience, and
the shame it was to see Idolatry condemned by the Sibyls, had occasioned the
prohibition of reading those Oracles; and consequently, that there was some
ground to press the unbelievers with these earnest and stinging reproaches. You
indeed have them [the Writings of the Sibyls] in your possession, but conceal
them out of an aversion to the truth which they discover; You prohibit the
reading thereof, because they speak what is contrary to your opinions. What is
come to our hands of them, is only the extract of what there is among your
Archivi, where the Originals are still to be found, to your conviction; and yet
you perversely deny it: or if they are not there, they have been out of a
mischievous design suppressd. And as on the one side the retrenchments made at
several times by your chief Priests and Emperors, of such things as they were
not pleased with, are to be looked on as an effect of diabolical rage against
the worship of the true God; so may it be thought, on the other, that those
accidental fires, which have consumed your evidences, proceeded from the train
of an infernal malice, to the prejudice of the Religion we propose to you. But
since it has pleased the divine Providence, out of its excessive indulgence
toward you, to rescue out of so many horrid ruins brought about by the
implacable enemy of mankind, and opposer of your salvation, some small
remainders of your ancient treasures, be not so irreclaimable against the
cordial remonstrances of those who kindly invite you to join with them in a
consideration of their divine beauty, and such as you have so much the less
reason to be jealous of, in that they press you purely upon the credit of
Copies extracted our of your own Originals, of familiar arguments drawn out of
your breasts, and your own domestic witnesses, whose depositions and
testimonies (being much more valuable then the antiquity of all your devotions,
and all your gods) deserve you should, without any further contradiction,
afford them the submission due thereto in point of honor and sovereign
Authority.

CHAP. XI. A Discovery of the mistakes of Constantine the Emperor, concerning
the Sibyl and her Writings.
ALl these being imagined with abundance of ingenuity, and spoken with a more
then ordinary measure of confidence, was enough to show, that those, who gave
entertainment to such conceptions, and expressed them with so much freedom,
spoke consonantly to their persuasion, and without any indirect design. But if
the violent prejudice which pre-possess'd their minds, were, on the one side,
somewhat extraordinary, the insolence of the cheat which occasioned it was most
unworthy, and their simplicity so much the more to be bemoaned, by how much it
had been the more miserably over-reached and besotted with an imagination, that
the counterfeit money, which was put into their hands to disperse, had been
current amongst the ancient Heathens.

But above all, the first Christian Emperor, Constantine, was so far
pre-possess'd with this opinion, that that great Monarch, (now 1330. years
since) would needs undertake to maintain it in the face of the Church, and
grounded his proof thereof on certain considerations, which so much heightened
his piety, and the excellence of his great parts, that (if ever the Imperial
Diadem might have served for a mask to disguise Truth) we were all obliged to
entertain Her, put into that dress by so noble a hand: but since her dignity
never had any dependence on the authority of men, and that Constantine had no
other design then to make her more glorious, and not to gain any reputation to
himself, by misrepresenting Her, and enslaving Her to falsehood, it will be no
presumption in us (to the end she may appear in Her own true light) to take
notice of his inadvertencies who has misapprehended Her.

The first mistake we observe in him, is, where he says, That the Erythraean
Sibyl (whom with Pausanias he places at Delphi, and, with Orat. ad Sanct. coet.
c. 18.
Diodorus, calls Daphne) had written of her self, that she had lived in the
sixth race after the Deluge. For besides that the daughter of Tiresias (taken
by the Epigoni at Thebes, about 1212. years before our Savior's time, above
eleven hundred years after the Deluge, and consequently in the twelfth Age, or
thirty sixth race after it) could not have said with any truth, that she was of
the sixth, it is clear as any thing can be, that the Emperor had misunderstood
the words by him attributed to her; since that, having formally distinguished
that part of mankind which preceded the Deluge, into five races, and laid it
down, as acknowledged, That the last was that wherein the Giants flourished,
she Lib. 1. p. 8.
expressly began the sixth, which he calls, The first, and golden Age, upon the
disburthening of the Ark, wherein she, with a strange impudence, Ibid. p. ^1.
affirmed, that she had been kept in one and forty days, a thing which never
Ibid.
either came, or could come into the imagination of Daphne.

The second is, when, after he had said, That on a certain time, the Sibyl,
filled with a divine inspiration, uttered the 33. Verses, which make up the
Acrostick of these words: (...),
he adds, It is manifest that Cicero, having read this Poem, translated it into
the Language of the Romans, and inserted it into his Works, and that he was
killed while Anthony had the supreme power of the Empire in his hands, and that
Augustus (who reigned 56. years) came after Anthony, and that Tiberius
succeeded Augustus, in whose time was the coming of the Savior into the World,
and the mystery of the most holy Religion came into reputation. For not to
take much notice, that the Acrostick of the pretended Sibyl, such as we find it
in the eighth Book of her Writings, consists of four and thirty Verses, among
which Constantine has left out this: (...),
which is the ninth, and (according to the translation of the ancient
Interpreter in Saint Augustine, and Prosper) rendered thus: De civit. Dei. ^.
18. c. 23. De promis. l. 3. c. 6. 14.
Exuret terras ignis, pontumque polumque.
whence it follows, that the spurious Sibyl had written (...), and not (...), as
has been notoriously discovered by the Author, of the Traduction copied by
Saint Augustine, wherein the Latin Acrostick runs in this order of the
Letters, Jesues Qreistos, etc. Nay, further, to pass by (as what is generally
acknowledged, that Anthony was the contriver of Cicero's death; that Augustus
reigned 56. years afterward, or thereabouts, and that Tiberius succeeded him;
and not to urge, that though From the ^7. of Novem. in the year 711. to the 29.
of August, in the year of Rome, 767.
the most remarkable accidents of the reign of Tiberius were the Baptism and
Passion of our Savior, yet his coming into the World cannot be properly
attributed to that time, since he took flesh of the blessed Virgin, in the
forty second year of Augustus's government, and consequently, that he was
going out of the fifteenth year of his age, when the same Augustus departed
this life: Now, I say, to make any advantage of all this, I answer, that it is
not only not manifest, either from the reading, or the version, nor yet from
the record pretended to be made thereof by Cicero, that any such thing was, but
that (what is directly contrary) it is evident, from the very ground whence it
might be imagined, that Constantine derived his opinion, that is to say, from
the second Book of Divination (written by Cicero, between the fifteenth of
March, in the year of Rome, 710. wherein Julius Caesar was murdered in the
Senate, and the seventh of December, in the year 711. in which he was himself
put to death by the command of Anthony,) that he neither did, nor could have
done what is pretended.

The first reason is, for that he maintains in general terms, that there is no
Divination by inspiration, such as it is supposed, was that of the Sibyls. What
authority (says he) is there in that fury, which you call Divine, De Divin. l.
2. c. 110.
which is such, as that a person distracted, sees what a wise man sees not,
and that he who is at a loss of humane abilities, should have acquired divine?

Secondly, for that he particularly observes, that the Author of the Verses
which were kept at Rome, under the title of the Sibylline, was so far from
doing what he did, by virtue of any inspiration, that it was the effect of a
juggling and crafty invention, out of a design to cheat. We take notice, says
he, of these Verses of the Sibyl, which it is reported fell from her in a fury,
out of which it was thought not long since [that is to say, in the year 710]
that the Interpreter [Cotta] would tell the Senate things that were not true,
according to the common report of men, to wit, that if we would be safe, [from
the Parthians] we must call him King, who in effect was our King. If this he in
the Books, what man, what time does it particularly design? For, finally, he
who has composed these things, has so done his work, as that (whatsoever
should happen) it might seem to be foretold, the determinate observation of men
and times being taken away. He has also put on a vayl of obscurity, that the
same Verses might seem applyable, Cap. 111.
one while to one thing; another, to another. But that the Poem is not the work
of a person in fury, on the one side, the Poem it self declares it; for it is
rather the effect of Art and diligence, then of transportation and ecstasy; and
on the other, the Acrostick, as they call it, when there may some connection be
made of the first Letters of the Verse, as in some of Ennius's Poems; this
certainly is the work rather of an attentive mind then of a distracted.

Thirdly, in as much as he concludes that that the Poems, committed, in Rome,
to the custody of the Quindecimviri, tended rather to impiety, then the
establishment of Religion. Wherefore (says he) Let the Sibyl be still secret
and sequestered from us, that (as it has been ordered by our Cap. 112.
Ancestors) the books be not read without the permission of the Senate, as
contributing more to the putting off religious worships, then submission
thereto. Let us treat with the Priests, that they would draw any thing out of
them rather then a King, which neither gods nor men will ever hereafter suffer
in Rome.

This he spoke in relation to the design of Cotta and his Colleagues, to have
Caesar proclaimed King, the poor man not in the least imagining that he was
himself upon the threshold of his greatest misfortune, for having through an
almost fatal inconsiderateness, contributed to the translation of the Royal
power, which Caesar had been possessed of, into the hands as well of a remote
descendant [Augustus] of that Prince, as of Anthony his most inexorable enemy.
And thence it may be deduced:

1. That he had not (though Augur) read the Sibylline books, in as much as he
expresses himself in these terms, If that be in the books; and with greater
reason, that he had not been the Interpreter of them, nor inserted into his
Works any pieces thereof.

2. That though they had been absolutely at his disposal, yet would he not have
taken the trouble upon him, either to transcribe ought out of them, or give any
interpretation thereof, since he did not acknowledge there was any thing Divine
in them, but only artifice, mixed with imposture and impiety.

3. That it is not possible he should account the Sibyl (whatever she might be)
a Prophetess, in as much as he denied there either were, or could be any
Prophets; it being not imaginable in an understanding man, and a Philosopher,
that after he had laid down this universal negative Proposition, No person was
ever seized by Divine fury, he would betray so much forgetfulness, as to
maintain the contradictory affirmative, Some person (to wit, the Sibyl) has
been seized by a Divine fury.

3. That what he observes of the Acrostick and the Poem which was full of
ambiguity and artifice, signifies, that it was (in his judgment) an attempt of
subtle knavery, and not the effect of any Divine inspiration.

CHAP. XII. The sentiment of Cicero concerning the Acrostick attributed to the
Sibyl, further cleared up.
BUt I proceed further, and say, That though it were granted, that Cicero could
have been persuaded that the Pieces kept at Rome in the custody of the
Quindecimviri, were Divine, yet would he never have made that judgment, either
of the eight Books now extant among us, nor yet of the thirty three Verses
taken by Constantine out of the eighth. He would not have made it of the whole
body of the eight books; for all the Sibylline Oracles were (as being not much
unlike the Centuries of Nostradamus) little fragments of Poetry writ down one
after another, but distinguished as well in regard of the form as subject, and
disposed by way of Acrosticks. Whence it is, that Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,
writing under Augustus, and some few years after the death of Cicero, says,
that The Verses attributed to the Sibyl, are discovered by the Acrosticks; And
Cicero himself, who had spoken of an Acrostick in the singular number, shows
that the artifice of it was common to all the Poems that went under the name of
the Sibylline. In the Sibylline books (says he) of the first C. 12. Aiqui in
Sibyllinis ex primo versu cujusque sententiae primis literis illius sententiae
carmen omne praeiexitur.
verse of every sentence, is made the beginning of the contexture of all the
Poem, by the first Letters of that sentence; this is the work of a person that
writes, not of one in a fury; of a man that does things with circumspection,
not of one that is extravagant.

So that it might be said of these Pieces, that there was in them not a simple,
but a double artifice, as wherein the first verse was written, as it were, in
the frontispeece, and down along sideways, making the beginning of the Poem, and
containing, in order, the first letters of every of the following verses. Of
that kind was that forced Preface which Athelme, Bishop of Sarisbery writ,
about the year, 705. and put at the beginning of this Poem, Of the praise of
Virgins; the first verse, which was, Metrica tyrones nunc promant carmina
castos,
contains an Acrostick of all the rest of the work, so that as the first
Letter, that is, M, begins the whole body of the Preface; the second E, is the
first Letter of the second verse; the third, which is T, of the third; and so
of the rest. And hence it is apparent, that, though the Acrostick of thirty
three, or thirty four verses, copied by Constantine, as also by St. Augustine,
had been truly Sibylline, the rest of the eight books, according to the
presupposition of Cicero and Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, could not be the like;
since that there is not any Tract of an Acrostick The same thing may be said of
the verses, which Zosimus attributes to the Sibyls, and for the same reason.
elsewhere. But that those thirty three verses, whereof the Capital letters
make up the name of our Savior, neither have been, nor could be such as the
ancient Christians believed them, is further apparent from this, that the first
verse contains not the Acrostick of all that follows, and does not any way
express the artifice: of the Sibylline verses, observed by Cicero. Whence it
must necessarily follow;

First, that the person, who was the Author, as well of this part of the eighth
book, as of all the rest of both that and the other books, which many upon such
trivial grounds, would have us entertain for Divine Oracles, had only heard
so much of the Acrostick mentioned by Cicero, as that he never understood it.

Secondly, that it may with much more reason be believed, that he never had any
sight or knowledge of the Sibylline books celebrated by the ancient Heathens.

Thirdly, that Constantine the Great, and those Fathers who were later then
Justine Martyr, as Tertullian, and Optatus, dazzled with the false luster
Tertul. de Bapt. c. 1. Optat. l. 3. August. de civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 23.
of an imposture, which carried some appearance of piety, were deceived; not
only when they receive'd, with open arms, for Divine and Prophetical, what
was not such; but also when (critically endeavoring to find something of
mystery in it, and striving to go beyond the Acrostick, which they so much,
though without any just cause, admired) they shuffled together the capital
Letters of these five Greek words, (...), to raise out of them the word (...)
which signifies a Fish, and to gather thence, that our Savior is the only
Fish of Salvation, and that the Christians are Pisciculi, the little fishes,
whom he nourishes and enlivens in the Fish Pond of his Baptism. For though it
be most certain, that Baptism is the washing of regeneration, and that Tit. 3.
5.
our Lord and Savior (who was the Author and consecrator thereof) is the
Fountain of our spiritual life; yet was the ground whence they Psalm. 36. 9.
thought to derive this truth, most false. Nor do I make this remark out of any
design to cast a blemish on those holy persons, who made their advantage of it
(for who is not subject to be surpized?) but out of compassion, to see their
plain dealing, and want of caution, so unworthily played upon, and their piety
so insolently abused by a sort of persons, who (without any shame or
conscience) have presumed to lodge their own fantastical imaginations in the
most honorable places of Gods Sanctuary, one while as Prophetical Oracles,
pronounced immediately after the Deluge; another, as Apostolical Predications,
added some 2400. years after, to confirm and raise them into greater veneration.

CHAP. XIII. The sentiment of Virgil in his fourth Eclogue examined and cleared
up and, that it has no relation to the Writing pretendedly Sibylline, which
was composed a long time after, made apparent.
HAving made the best advange he could of this Certificate of Cicero's on the
behalf of the Sibyl, the Emperor Constantine produces that of Virgil, to the
same purpose, the gravity of which second Witness deserves a more particular
examination of what is alleged by him. I take no notice of the conceit which
the Prince, who produces his testistimony, had, when he thought that this
verse, (...),
whereby he would express the Latin, Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto,
is out of some other place of the Bucolicks then that which begins Sicelides
musae; for though it be indeed out of that very Eclogue, and clearly discovers
that Constantine either had not read it exactly, or had it only upon the
report of some other, I shall not, I say, make any advantage of this mistake of
little consequence, but entreat the Reader to remember, that whether he be
pleased to reflect on the occasion of the Poem, or on the whole contexture of
it, he shall not find any thing in it, which does not favor of Paganism, and
accordingly is so much the further from Divine, or may show, that the Author
had his thoughts fixed on any Oracle which might set his fancy on work.

In the year of Rome, 713. which was the third of the Triumvirate, and the one
and fourtieth before our Savior, under the Consulship of, L. Antonius, and P.
Servilius, Augustus, victorious over Cassius and Brutus whom he had defeated
the Summer before, to recompense his old Soldiers, bestowed on them the Lands
beyond the Servius upon the ninth Eclogue, says, that the Inhabitants of
Cremona having entertained the forces of Brutus, Cassius, and Anthony,
Augustus, overcoming Anthony, gave away their lands; but he is mistaken, since
that donacton had been made ten years before the war against Ant^ony.
Po, so that the Inhabitants of Cremona and Mantua were cruelly treated, and
Virgil, then in the twenty ninth year of his age, had been put to great
extremities (his estate being fallen to the share of Claudius, a Veterane, or
Arius a Centurion, who coming to take possession thereof had put him into some
danger of his life) had it not been for the support of Asinius Pollio, Alfenus
Varus, and Cornelius Gallus, who procured his indemnity. And as (to represent
the misery of the poor Mantuans) he had introduced Melibaeus crying out: Shall
ever I again my old abode, etc.
Shall th'impious Soldier have these new-plow'd Fields?


And Moeris, complaining that the new-comers said to the ancient Inhabitants,
Depart, and that Mantua had been too near to sad Cremona, and said elsewhere,
That unhappy Mantua had lost her fields; which Martial, Ecl 9.
in imitation of him, alluding to, writes, that Tityrus had lost his Lands
Georg. l. 2.
near wretched Cremona: So, to express his gratitude, he called Augustus the
god who had been the Author of his quiet; and speaking of himself, Ecl. 1.
says, that he had seen at Rome, -- That gallant For that Augustus, born in
Sept. 23. 691. was then in the 22 year of his age.
youth, for whom
Twice six days annually his altars fume.


And that he answering first his suit, said, Shepherds, feed your cattle as
before, and let your Oxen plow: and celebrated Pollio, by his third and fourth
Eclogues, Varus by the sixth and ninth; and Gallus by the tenth, besides,
Donatus in Virgils life, writes, that Cicero had seen his Bucolicks; but it is
more likely, he took (from the recovery of his estate) occasion to write them
two years after Cicero's death.
that he had filled the fourth of his Georgicks with the praises of the last;
But, (to comply with the humor of Augustus, who forced him fourteen years
after, to kill himself, as guilty of some attempt against his life) he
transformed all into the Fable of Aristeus.

In the year of Rome, 714. which was the fourth of the reign of Augustus, the
first of Herod's, and the fourtieth before our Saviors coming, Pollio being
raised to the Consulship, with Domitius Calvinus, and his wife brought to bed
of a son, Virgil thought himself obliged to take occasion, upon these two
honorable and pleasing accidents, to break forth into praises (I am loath to
say flatteries) and vows for Augustus, for Pollio, and for his child. Thence is
it that he says in his fourth Eclogue, that there was then coming on a new age,
and a golden race of mankind beginning with the Consulship of Pollio, and the
Nativity of Saloninus his son, that, in Pollio's happy reign, all nations
should be freed from fear of the Iron age, if any Track of it remain, Apollo,
that is, Augustus, already reigning who shall live the life of the gods, and be
mixed with them, that is, converse familiarly with them and the Heroes, and
shall rule the World by his mighty Father's power, Julius Caesar. That the
little Saloninus shall be surrounded with such happiness, that the earth shall
no longer bear any pernicious plant, nor Serpents, but produce Assyrian Roses,
and play-games for his Infancy. That during his youth, Harvests and Vintages
shall come without trouble, and honey from the Oak distill, though as yet there
must be setting out of Ships, fortifying of Cities, War and Tillage. But when
he shall have attained the age of a perfect man, there shall be no longer any
commerce by Sea or Land, no Agriculture, or Mechanics; forasmuch as all places
shall bring forth all things. And thereupon, desiring Augustus, burdened with
the weight of the Worlds government, to accept the honors due to him, he
wishes himself a long life to describe his achievements.

Now, what is there in all this, not suitable to a Heathen? Or, what is there
that makes the least discovery of any Divine revelation? Nay, indeed, what is
more remarkable all along, then that there is not any thing which speaks not
the person wholly Idolatrous, as one, whose imagination cannot raise it self to
ought more excellent then the fabulous state of the world under Saturn, but
withal, promising himself (according to the Platonic principle) the
restoration of it, in the revolution of the great Months of the long year,
which that Philosopher imagined to himself should come, and mingling the
frivolous hope of that feigned prosperity As when he says, in the 6. of the
Aeneid^ Longa ^tas, meaning a thousand years.
with the invocations of the false Deities, so far as to cry out;

O chaste Lucina, aid the blessed birth, etc.
The Fates conspiring with eternal doom,
Said to their Spindles, Let such ages come?
Accordingly, could not the good Emperor Constantine give any Christian
interpretation to his Verses, without making them speak otherwise then they do
in themselves; For, whereas Virgil had said,

Tu modo nascenti puero quo ferrea primum
Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo,
Casta fave Lucina: tuus jam regnat Apollo.
Teque adeo decus hoc aevi, te consule inibit
Pollio; and incipient magni procedere menses.
Te duce, siqua manent sceleris vestigia nostri
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
O chaste Lucina, aid the blessed birth, J. O.

Who shall from Ir'n extract a golden Age,
And to thy Phoebus all the world engage.
Thou child being Consul, Pollio shall that year
Be most renowned, then glorious days appear.
If any print of ancient crimes remain,
Thou shall efface them in thy happy reign;
And from perpetual fear all nations free.
He makes him say,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Who would ever imagine (without notice given him aforehand) that those four
Greek Verses were brought to express the seven Latin ones of Virgil; or that
any one should thence take occasion to discourse of the Adoration due to
Christ, and the reconciliation of the World to God through his blood? Since
they attribute that to the child newly born, which the Poet had expressly said
of the Consul Pollio; To keep close to Virgil, it should have been rendered,
(...).
they turn the prayer he made to Lucina, to be favorable to the little
Saloninus, into a command directed to the Moon, to adore the Savior of the
World; and referr to the spiritual tranquillity of men's Consciences, effected
by the remission of sins, what he had hinted at concerning the establishment of
temporal peace, by a restoration of the government of Saturn, succeeding,
under Augustus, Virgil had indeed said Our crime, out of a reflection, that he,
and all those who had preceeded the Consulship of Pollio, had been under the
Iron-Age, and participated of the crime thereof.
the crimes of the Iron-Age, which was (according to his supposition) to give
place to the Golden-Age, coming in under the Consulship of Apollo. Nor that
only, but they must also omit the clauses, which made mention both of that
Consulship, and the reign of Apollo, by which name the Poet had meant Augustus;
and the more probably, not only for that the Heathens (as Saturn lib. 1. cap.
17.
Macrobius observe) referred all the gods, whom they thought below the heaven,
to the Sun, or Apollo: but also by reason of the particular devotion which
Augustus had for Apollo, to whom (not many years after) he dedicated a
magnificent Temple in the Mount Palatine; and that in his secret Debauches (as
for instance, in his Banquet, sirnam'd Of the twelve gods) he had represented
Apo^ and that with the greater Analogy, in regard of his being the great King
among men, as the Sun amongst the Stars, and was then in the prime of his age,
being four and twenty years old; as the Sun, who never growing old, looks
always with the same countenance.

According therefore to his first mis-representation, Constantine imagined that
Virgil had, by the multitude of new men, meant the Christian Church. But it is
clear, that his imagination ran only upon that race, which he supposed was
(under the Consulship of Pollio) to begin the Golden-Age, after the expiration
of that of Iron. From thence the Emperor comes to make this Remark, What can
there be more manifest? for he adds, The Oracle of the Cumaean Prophecy is come
to its period, clearly signifying the Cumaean Sibyl. And I acknowledge, that
Virgil (speaking of the coming of the last Age of the Cumaean Prophecy)
reflected on that of the Cumaean Sibyl: but I affirm withal;

First, That to allege any such thing, is manifest to shoot wide from the
Mark, and not to say any thing pertinent to the Discourse, which had preceeded,
that is to say, that Cicero had copied out, and translated the Acrostick
attributed to the Erythraean Sibyl. Erythraea, and Cumae, are they the same
thing? And to persuade people, that those, who had spoken of the Inhabitress of
one of those two places, are at no difference with the Authors, who maintain
the other, was it not necessary to make it appear beforehand, that she made
her residence in both successively?

Secondly, I say, that (this supposition being allowed) it would not follow
from the words of Virgil, that he had, or could have read the Sibylline
Prophecy, since he was neither Patrician, nor Quindecem-vir (to whose College
that privilege was reserved) nay, indeed, not of a competent age to be
entertained into that Society, which consisted only of ancient men; and not of
young men, such as Virgil then was, as being about the thirtieth year of his
Age.

Thirdly, That, though he had been one of the Quindecem-viri, yet can it not be
granted, he could have any knowledge of those Cumaean Oracles, which had been
brought to Tarquin; for they were destroyed forty three years before, in the
time of Sylla: and those, which Rome was possessed of in the time of Cicero and
Augustus, were (according to the observation of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus)
certain Collections, gotten out of a thousand several places, and went under
the name of the Cumaean, improperly only, in as much as they were disposed
into the place of the real Cumaean ones.

Fourthly, That, though it were granted, that the true Cumaean Writings (which
had nothing common with those reputed such at this day) had been preserved
entire, and that Virgil had been of the number of those, to whom the reading
thereof was allowed: yet had he (according to what is supposed) discovered
therein any thing of Prediction concerning the Savior of the World, he would
not (as he has done). wholly have adapted the Sense of the Oracle to Pollio
and his Son, and principally to Augustus, not only in that place, but also
above sixteen years after, in the sixth Book of the Aeneids, where he
introduces Anchises, saying to his Son Aeneas, of the Prince Marcellus, whose
Death is bewayl'd by Anchises, in the sixth Book of the Aeneids, died in the
year of Rome 731. Ec. 4.
so highly qualified in the ^ucoliks; and called

-- Heavenly race, great progeny of Jove, etc.
There, there is the Prince often promised us before, Aen. 6.

Divine Augustus Caesar, who once more
Shall Golden days bring to the Ausonian Land,
In The Kingdoms where old Saturn did command.
All therefore, that can be with any reason gathered from the allegation, which
he has in a word made of the Cumaean Prophecy, is, that being carried away (as
well as others of his time) with the common persuasion, that the Oracles, which
were kept at Rome, in the place of the Cumaean, and, upon that occasion, went
under their name, contained the Fate as well of that City, which pretended to
Eternity, as of the Universe; and consequently were to regulate both, till the
return of the great Platonical year, which should reinstate the world in the
felicity of the Age of Saturn; and accordingly, to flatter the growing power of
Augustus, and to heighten with extravagant hopes the Ambition of Pollio, one of
his greatest Benefactours, and most intimate Friends: he seems to have held it,
as a thing most manifest, that that Age, crowned with peace and glory, would be
restored under the Monarchy of Augustus, and take its Commencement from the
Consulship of Pollio.

The Emperor, prosecuting his design, says, Virgil is not satisfied with
this, but pressing farther, there being a necessity of his Testimony, what has
he more to say? This sacred Order of Ages is raised for us, the Virgin comes,
the second time conducting the desirable King. Who then shall be the returning
Virgin; but she, who is full of, and has conceived by the Divine Spirit? And
who hinders, but that the Virgin, who has conceived, and is full of the Divine
Spirit, still is, and continues a Virgin? He will also come the second time,
and upon his coming will comfort the Universe. To this I answer;

First, That there is a great distance between the Greek and the Latin, which
(as it were particularly, to point at the great Revolution of the
Platonick-Year, and the Restoration of the Saturnian Age, and to discard all
other speculations) spoke thus much, -- Now Time's great order's born again,
The Maid returns, and the Saturnian reign;


So that (to render it exactly) it should have been written, (...), or (...).

Secondly, That, though the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Mother of our
Lord and Savior, and the Conception of that great Savior by the Holy Spirit,
and his happy return at the last Judgment, ought to be acknowledged by all the
World: yet does it not thence follow; that Virgil had any knowledge thereof, and
much less, that he spoke ought of it. Besides, that in rigor it cannot be said
of the Blessed Virgin Mother; that she returned into the World, when she
Conceived our Savior: so as that, having been before upon Earth, she had been
absent from it; to the end, she might return thither again in the fullness of
time; or happily, that, having been brought forth Gal. 4. 4.
once before, she was snatched out of it, and then returned again into the
World by a second Production: and consequently, That, which way soever it be
taken, this Imagination will still have a savor of Origenism, if not some
thing worse.

To conclude therefore: since it is impossible, without great Inconveniences,
to adapt to the sacred Virgin this Discourse of Virgil; who neither did, nor
could have thought of her: there will arise a ^ecessity to acknowledge, that the
Fantasy of this poor blinded Prophet amounted to no more, then that the
Kingdom of Saturn being to be restored, the celebrated Virgin of the Heathens
(that is, Urania, or Astraea) would return. Of whom Ovid, and Juvenal, had
written; That, at the Metam. l. 1. v. 2. Satyr. 2.
Commencement of the Iron-Age, the Virgin Astraea, the last of the Celestial
Deities, had relinquished the Earth, flowing with Blood. So that, in the
pretended Prophecy of Virgil, there is no other Virgin to be sought; but (...)
Astarte, or Hastoreth, and Astaroth, and Atargatis, that famous Goddess of the
Sidonians, which 1 King. 11. 5.
Solomon adored in his old age: which the Jer. 7. 18. 44. 17 25.
ancient Idolaters of Israel, and Lib 9.
Apuleius, and De Ling. Lat. lib. 4.
Varro, and the P Victor in descript. Regionis 12.
Romans in general called the Queen of Heaven: which Philo Biblianus, in (g)
Eusebius, affirms (taking it from Sanchoniathon of Berytus) to have been the
daughter of Uranus, Sister to Rhea and Dione, and one of the Wives of Cronus or
Saturn, her Brother by the Father's side. For to lier it is, that he
particularly gives the Title of Virgin. De praep. lib. 1. cap. 10. (...).
Apol c. 23.
Tertullian calls her the Celestial Virgin, who promises rain; De Civit. Dei.
l. 2. c. 4.
St. Augustine, the Celestial Virgin worshipped by the Carthaginians; Lib 9.
Apuleius (an African also, and a most superstitious Adorer of this imaginary
Deity) the Virgin, which sumptuous Carthage serves, who riding on a Lion
ascended to Heaven: upon which account it is, that in the ancient Medals of
Severus, and Caracalla, she is represented riding on a Lion. And De Dea Syria.
Lucian, who proposes her under the name of the Goddess Tyria, or Juno of
Hierapolis, says, (in two several places) that Lions carry her; which is
affirmed also by Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Macrobius.

CHAP. XIV. Remarks of some less Considerable Mistakes of the Emperor
Constantine, in the Explication of Virgil's fourth Eclogue.
THe Observations, which we have made of these Principal Mistakes of the
plain-dealing Emperor Constantine, were enough, to take off the Credit of what
other Conjectures he may have made upon the Poem of Virgil: yet, to make his
Misapprehensions the more apparent, I shall not think much to add these further
Remarks.

He says, in the first place, "That the Poet had written; That Altars were to
be erected, the Temples to be adorned, and Sacrifices to be offered to the
newborn child: but there is not a Syllable to this purpose in all the
Eclogue. Then he is deceived again; when he conceives it is of the same
newborn child, that the Poet said; He shall lead the life of the
incorruptible God: for, besides that the Latin has it, Ille Deum vitam
accipiet, The life of the Gods; it is most evident, that the words of these
Verses, and the two next ensuing, were by the Author applied to Augustus:
under whom had happened the Birth he so much celebrated. As to these
insinuating Expressions, The Flocks shall not be afraid of the great Lions; The
Serpent shall be crushed, and the noisome Plant destroyed; Assyrian Amomum
grews every where; upon occasion whereof the Emperor observes, that, The Faith
shall not be daunted at the greatness of Royal Courts; that, The Serpent, and
Death, are overcome by Jesus Christ; that, The Church shall spread it self from
Syria all the world over: I so acknowledge the undeniable Truths of those
Remarks; as, while I admit them, to affirm withal, that they have not been
rationally deduced. For Virgil, having no more in his fancy, then to promise
the Reign of Augustus the felicity of that of Saturn, makes a Description of
the Advantages thereof, suitable to the imagination, which the Heathens had of
the first Race of men, and their Lives: so, as they are represented by Metam. 1.
Ovid, when he says;

Sandys.
The yet-free Earth did, of her own accord,
(Untorn with Ploughs) all sorts of Fruit afford.
-- Warm Zephirus sweetly blew
On smiling Flowers; which without setting grew.
Forthwith the Earth Corn, unmanured, bears;
And every year renews her golden Ears.
With Milk and Nectar were the Rivers filled;
And Honey from green Holly-Oaks distilled.
Add to this; That, from the Analogy, and resemblance, there may be between
the Descriptions of Heathen Poets, and those we find in the Scripture, (where
we read, that, under the Reign of the Messiah, Psalm. 72. 16.
There shall be a handful of Corn sown upon the Top of the Mountains; the
Fruit whereof shall shake like Lebanon, and the People of the Cities shall
flourish like Grass of the Earth; and, Isa. 11. 6, 7 8, 9. and 65. 25.
The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb; and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid; and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together; and a
little child shall lead them: And the Cow, and the Bear shall feed; their
young ones shall lie down together: and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox:
And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child
shall put his hand on the Cockatrice's den; they shall not hurt, nor destroy:)
there is not any ground to conclude; That the Idolatrous Writers had any
sentiment of the future; and, That they themselves, or their Sibyls, were
Divinely-inspir'd: because there seems to be a consonancy, as to the Words and
Sense, between them and the Prophets. For, besides that the Bible was
Translated into Greek, two hundred and nine years before the Birth of Virgil,
the Writings of the Prophets had not been, even before, absolutely kept from
the knowledge of the Gentiles. Nay, it being supposed, that, having had some
acquaintance with the Prophetical Oracles, they might have adapted the words
thereof to the Description of their Mythological Golden Age under the Reign of
Saturn; and applied to things passed what the Spirit of God denounced as to
come: there were not any inconvenience at all; provided it be remembered, that
these People have not pronounced the Sentences of Celestial Predictions
otherwise, then as Parrats, without meaning, or aiming at, any thing thereby;
but to heighten their particular Fancies with something, that were strange and
borrowed. Thus it is more then probable, that Virgil, for example, (it being
granted, he had seen somewhat of the Prophecy of Esaias in the Greek) having no
other design, then in Hyperbolical Terms to express his wishes for the
Prosperity of Augustus's Reign, and the Felicity of his Friend Pollio, had no
more in his Fancy, then the restoration of the Saturnian Age; and accordingly
makes a Description of it, not only suitable to that of Ovid, in the first
Book of his Metamorphoses; where, to represent the Tranquillity of the first
Inhabitants of the Earth, not interrupted by any trouble, and that, (as yet)
there was no object of Fear, he says; that it was not, till the coming in of
the Iron- Age, that Poison began first to be mingled, War to be made, etc. and
that, after the Deluge, the Earth first brought forth Monsters, and among
others, Python; whose Serpentine Figure was unknown to the new Race of People:
but also in a manner the very same, with what he makes himself elsewhere; viz.
in the first of his Georgicks, speaking of Jupiter;

Before Jove's time, etc. J. O.

All common was, and, of her own accord,
The Earth full plenty freely did afford.
He to soul Serpents deadly Poison gave,
Commanded Wolves to prey, and Seas to rave,
Robbed leaves of Honey, Fire concealed, and Wine,
Which ran before in Rivers, did consine:
That various Arts by Study might be wrought
Up to their height: --
For, having the same Idaea in his mind, his desire was to make a Pastoral
Representation of it; speaking of the Security of the Flocks, and the cessation
of the Production of Serpents, and venomous Plants: never minding, whether any
such thing had been written by any other, upon some other account. All
therefore he would have said amounts but to this; that as (according to the
Opinion of his Time) there had been neither Serpents, nor Poisons, nor hurtful
Creatures, nor War, under Saturn: so there should not be any of all these under
Augustus: and, consequently, there is no more Mystery in what he writes in his
Fourth Eclogue; that, Every where Assyrian Roses grow,
-- And the unpruned Thorn
Shall dangling Grapes with purple Clusters fill:
then when he said, in the Third, Such Joys as thine, who loves thee, Pollio,
share;
For him flows Honey, Shrubs Amomum bear.
For no body needs be told, that the fertility of Briers and Thorns in bearing
Roses and Grapes is much alike, and that there were no less Miracle in one then
in the other.

As to what Constantine adds, That the Poet, having exclaimed against the War,
and Towers, or Fortresses, has described the Savior engaging in the War of
Troy, and that, in his Eclogue, Troy signifies the world; I cannot but so much
the more pity, the more apparent it is, that he considered not the whole
discourse, on which his speculation is grounded. For first, Virgil does not
exclaim only at War and Fortifications of places, but also at Navigation and
Agriculture, things most innocent, not to say necessary, if not to the being,
at least to the convenience of men's being in the world.

2 He speaks not of the War of Troy, otherwise then by way of example, as he
had proposed in matter of Navigation, the expedition of the Argonauts, and
alleged those two facts, as two illustrious Arguments of that great
Revolution, which he supposed must have followed that of the Platonical year,
and began under the Monarchy of Augustus.

3 If by War of Troy he had meant the conquest of the World by our Savior, he
would certainly have excepted it out of the number of those (wars) which, in
his judgment, deserved to be exclaimed at: and if he was unwilling (which he
could not have denied without crime) to celebrate it with its due praises, he
would not have presumed to accuse, and put it into the rank of things
condemnable. But having detested all Navigation and Wars absolutely, he (to
confine himself to some known fact) alleges the voyage of Tiphys and the
Argonauts to Colchos, and the going of Achilles to the Trojan wars: who yet was
not General in the Grecian Expedition, but went under the command of Agamemnon,
and did not conquer Troy, but died before the taking of it. Whence it is
manifest, he could not be any way taken for a Type of our Savior, who was not
under the charge of any other Chief, but has only been known by the Title of
Josh. 5. 14.
Captain of the host of the Lord; nor ever made use of any Army for the
Conquest of the world, but has effected it Heb. 1. 3. Luke 19. 12.
by himself; nor Jo. 3. 17. 12. 47.
came into the world to judge and destroy the world (as Achilles went to Troy
to lay it desolate, but to save it, and to 2 Cor. 5. 19. Ephesians. 2. 13. Colos.
1. 20.
reconcile it to God by his blood.

So Virgil says, that the equipping of Fleets for Sea, and the undertaking of
Wars would be discoveries of the ancient fraud; that another Tiphys should
undertake the Conduct of another Argo; and, that the great Achilles should be
once more sent to Troy; to show, that he was far from approving any thing of
War: and particularly, that he accounted not the Designs of Tiphys and Achilles
among the commendable; but among the criminal Enterprises of the Iron-Age of
old. So that those, who think, that (under the Coverture of these borrowed
Names) his Design was to speak of the spiritual War between the Savior of the
World and the Devil, imagining by that means to make him a Prophet of his
Victory, make him a Blasphemer of his Majesty; from which he must notoriously
derogate, by making a parallel between the glory of his admirable Combat, and
the remainders of the ancient Fraud.

He had represented the Felicity of Augustus's Reign so great; that all parts
of the Earth should bear all kinds of Fruits, and that there would be no
farther use of Cultivation. Upon which Constantine, (who should have remembered,
that this Fiction was only a Pastoral Hyperbole, grounded on the ancient
Mythologie of the Saturnian-Age, wresting those Words to his own advantage,
asked, Whether any one, in his Wits, could imagine this of the Race of men, and
of a child born of a man; What reason there was that the Earth should be
without sowing and laboring, and the Vine should not feel the Pruning-hook,
and be exempted from other husbandry; How it could be conceived, that that was
said of humane Race, that Nature, who is subservient to the Ordinance of God,
should be the Executress of the command of man: inferring from all this, that
the joy of the Elements, described by the Poet, signified the descent of a God,
not the conception of some man.

I answer, that Nature indeed does not properly ow Obedience to any word, but
that of its Author; that in effect the Earth, since the Fall of man, never
was, nor ever will be, without need of Cultivation; and that no body either
could, or can imagine, that it has, or ought to be in that condition, without
renouncing his Reason. But I think it withal as true, that it is no less an
Error to deny; that the Heathens were guilty of such an Imagination, as
believing, and peremptorily writing, that to the first Race of men, under the
Golden-Age, all things happened according to their Wishes, without any trouble,
and that the same Happiness would infallibly return: and it having been the
particular Supposition of Virgil; that it would happen, not only under
Augustus, but for his sake, it were a strange course, to cure the extravagance
of his Imagination, which was in effect absurd and groundless, to bring it into
question (contrary to the plain matter of Fact) whether he ever had any such,
and thereupon convert his Discourse into Allegories, which he never dreamed of.

Virgil, concluding his Poem, had said, speaking to Pollio's little Son,

Begin, sweet Babe, with Smiles thy Mother know, J. O.

Who ten long Months did with thy burden go:
Sweet Babe, begin; whose Smiles never Parents blessed;
No Goddess grants him Bed, no God a Feast.
Which words, as they had a formal relation to the Heathenish Opinion; that the
Sun, and Moon (together with Love, and Necessity) are the two principal
Deities, which preside at the Birth of men: so they showed, that Pollio's Wife,
who had been very much indisposed during her Pregnancy, should, after her
Delivery, make her self known to her child by her joy; that that Joy was, as
it were, the Earnest of the child's Blessing; as it were a signification of
Misfortune to him, if his Parents were not joyful at his Birth.

But the Emperor, transforming the Discourse of Virgil according to his own
way, makes him say, Begin, laughing, and lifting up thy sight, to know thy
Mother, who should be dear to thee: for she has carried thee in her womb many
years: thy Parents have not smiled on thee at all, thou have not been put in a
Couch, nor had splendid Banquet. Whereupon he adds, by way of Comment upon it,
How have not the Parents smiled on this child? Certainly, it was because he,
who begot him, is a certain Power, that has no Qualities; nor can be figured
by the delineation of other things; nor has a humane body. Now, who knows not,
that, being a holy Spirit, it can have no experience of Coitions? And what
inclination, and desire, can be imagined in the disposition of that good, with
a greediness whereof all things are inflamed? Or what compliance is there
between Wisdom and Pleasure? But let these things be said only by those, who
introduce, I know not what, humane generation of God, and endeavor not to
cleanse their minds of every bad Word, and Work.

What a small matter needs there to divert men from the Truth; since the pure
Imagination of a Mystery, where there is not any, is able to do it. Certain it
is, that, as God the Father has neither Qualities, nor Figure, nor Body, nor
Passions, nor Desires; so the eternal Generation of his Word has nothing
common with that of men. But nothing of all this coming to the knowledge of
Virgil, and his words neither expressing, nor capable of expressing it; (since
the Greek, properly speaking, is a corruption of the Latin,) which tended to
no other end, then to promise Happiness to Pollio's young Son: to what purpose
have some thought to Philosophize, as they have done? For there had been no
occasion given, had they not altered the Sense, by supposing (as many have
done) that Pollio's little child had laughed as soon as he was born; and that,
upon that extraordinary Laughter, the whole Prediction of his Happiness had
been grounded; and imagining, that Virgil had said of the child's Laughter what
he meant of the Mother's; as also that she had born him several years; and
that, he was not descended of Parents, subject to, either any inclination to
Laughter, or the natural necessity of Sleep and Rest. For should that Great man
have returned to Earth again, he might with reason have said to Constantine,
what St. Augustine said since to Julian the Pelagian; Restore me my Words, and
thy dreaming Imaginations will vanish.

CHAP. XV. That it cannot be said, That Virgil, in his Fourth Eclogue,
disguised his own Sentiment.
THe same thing may also be said of the same Emperor's supposing; that the
Poet spoke Figuratively, and disguised the Truth, out of a fear, that any of
the Potentates of the Royal City should charge him with writing against the
Laws of his Country, and dcrogating from what had sometime been the sentiment
of his Ancestors concerning the Gods; and, that he wished the prolongation of
his own life, to see the coming of our Savior. For, as it happened (about
three hundred years since) that the Poet Dante, moved by an Admiration of that
incomparable Wit, would needs deliver him out of his Hell; in like manner, the
good opinion Constantine had conceived of him, has made him read in his Poem,
what indeed is not in it, out of such an Imagination, as those have, who,
looking up to the Clouds, think they see such and such Figures therein. And
thence comes it, that he has spoken so much to his advantage; though without
any ground, either in Truth it self, or indeed, in the very outward Dress of
his Work, which was not done according to the certain Pattern of any ancient
Oracle of the Sibyls, nor yet to the eight Books now extant among us, and which
were writ above one hundred fourscore and six years after the Consulship of
Pollio; but was designed, only to express the desire, which Virgil had to
comply with Augustus, and Pollio, and to insinuate more and more into their
Favor. Whereupon I conclude; That the ancient Paganism (what Opinion soever
Constantine, and others, may have had to the contrary) has not given any
Testimony, either in favor of these pretended Sibylline Oracles, which openly
oppose Idolatry; or yet to confirm the persuasion, which the Fathers have had
thereof.

CHAP. XVI. That Apollodorus had no knowledge of the Eight Books, called the
Sibylline.
FOr to think (with the generality of modern Christians) that Apollodorus, the
Erythraean, had seen the Third Book; because (as Lib. 1. c. 7.
Lactantius observes from Varro) he had affirmed of the Erythraean Sibyl; That
she was of his City; and that, she had Prophesied to the Greeks, going to
Ilium, that Troy should be destroyed; and, that Homer should write Lies: is a
manifest abuse. The Words we read to this purpose, are these;

Lib. 3. page 28.
(...), etc.
Troy, I compassionate thy Miseries:
A Helene.
fair Erinnys shall from Sparta rise;
Which Europe, and the Asian Realms will vex,
But thee, 'bove all, with many Woes perplex;
Her self much crowned with Fame, that never dies.
An Homer.
Aged Man, Author of many Lies,
Shall flourish next, of unknown Country, blind
His Eyes; but of a clear, quick-sighted Mind.
He his conceptions into Verse shall frame,
And what he writes, style with Ilium and ulysses, in the Iliads and the
Odysseis.
a double Name;
Profess himself a Chian, and declare
The Affairs of Ilium, not as they were,
Yet clear, both in my Words and Verse; for he
The first, that looks into my Works, shall be.
This, I say, is a manifest Mistake. For

First, It is no hard matter to imagine, that the Impostour, who composed the
Eight Books of the Sibyls, and had impudently taken upon him the name of Wife
to Noah' s Son, two hundred years after the Death of Varro; who died, according
to Eusebius, in the seven hundred twenty and sixth year of Rome, Twenty seven
years before our Savior, and nine years before the Death of Virgil.
might at his ease, and long enough before, have read what he had alleged out
of Apollodorus, who was more ancient, whether in his Latin, or in the Greek
Text of Apollodorus; and that he could do no less, for his own Reputation, then
produce, as a probable Argument of his pretended Antiquity, what he had found
in him.

Secondly, For that Apollodorus, who attests of the Erythraean Sibyl; that she
was born in his City, and acknowledged a Native thereof, whether by common
Report, or upon the Credit of her Writings, could not have said any such thing
of our Counterfeit Sibyl; who says she came from Babylon, and was Noah's
Daughter-in-law, and formally denies, that she was by Country an Erythraean,
and charges the Greeks with Imposture, for presuming to derive her thence. A
manifest Argument; that Apollodorus could not ground his pretension on her
contradictory Testimony: but that the Counterfeit Sibyl, having seen (as being
later by many Ages) what he had written, took occasion to oppose it, as
incompatible with his Fiction.

Thirdly, For that she quarrels with the Greeks; for having said, of her,
things, which not any one in particular could be convinced to have affirmed: to
wit, That she was the Daughter of Circe, and, by Father, of Gnostus; for all
those among the Ancients, who have left any thing behind them, have made the
Erythraean Sibyl, the Daughter of Jupiter, or of Apollo and Lamia, or of
Aristocrates and Hydole, or of Crinagoras, or, in fine, of the Shepherd
Theodorus and the Nymph Idea; and not any one, of Circe: besides, that indeed
they could not have done it without Absurdity. For, how could it have come into
their minds, to make her born at Erythrae, a City of Asia; if they had thought
her the Daughter of Circe, by Nation an Italian, born, and dwelling near Rome,
upon the Mount called, to this day, by her name, Monte Circello?

I pass by (as of less Consequence) the Stupidity of that pretended Prophetess,
who (to put a slur on the reputation of Homer) betrayed her own Ignorance;
saying, That Homer should write not truly, but clearly, of Ilium; because he
should see her Works. For, who will say, they are things incompatible, To say
the Truth, and, To speak clearly? Are they, who speak Truth, necessarily
obliged to conceal themselves; and Liers, to discover themselves? Or, can it be
said, that the Consequence is good, He has my Verses; therefore, He shall not
speak the Truth: unless it be presupposed, that those Verses are full of
Untruths, and teach him, that has them, to Lie? But the Books, pretended to be
writ by the Sibyls (though they have for these fourteen hundred years, and
still do, dazzle the eyes of many) swarm with such Impertinences.

CHAP. XVII. That Pausanias has not written any thing, which may give credit
to the Books, mis-named the Sibylline.
NOr is there any more reason, we should take the Discourse of Corinthior. lib.
2. page 47.
Pausanias, who says, The Isle of the Rhodians has been much shaken; so that
the Oracle of the Sibyl, which had been given concerning Rhodes, is come to
pass, for any confirmation of what the pretended Sibyl had writ in two several
places, Lib. 4. page 38. and lib. 8. page 54.
The greatest unhappiness, that may be, shall happen to the Rhodians. For he
speaks of the Earthquake, which happened in that Isle, almost two Ages before,
under Augustus; soon after which Tiberius had in a manner raised it again,
through his Dio, lib. 55. Patere. lib. 2.
continual Residence therein, from the year of Rome 748. to the year 755. (upon
which account it is, that the Epigram of Antiphilus calls him its Restorer;)
and the pretended Sibyl See lib. 3. page 27. and lib. 4 page 38. and lib. 8.
page 59. And these fine allusions: (...).
threatens it with a Ruin, to come at the end of the World; when Rome, having
accomplished its Period, nine hundred forty and eight years, shall be so
destroyed by Nero, returned from Persia, that it shall become (...), that is to
say, a street, Delos shall be no more, and Samos be turned into an Heap of
Sand. Which may serve to justify the mistake of Tertullian; who, thrusting
into his Book De Pallio these last words, dis-joynted from the Precedent and
Consequent, applies them to that Desolation of those Isles, which reached to
his Time; saying, Of the Isles, Delos no longer is; Samos is become Sand; and
the Sibyl is no Lier: whereas he should necessarily have concluded; That she
had lied, in referring to the end of the World, and of Rome, what had happened
long before; as also, that all the eight Books, in three whereof the
Misfortune of that Isle was recapitulated in the same Terms, were (contrary to
the Opinion, since embraced by Lactantius) the Draught of one and the same hand.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Prohibition, made to read the Books, called the
Sibylline, and that of Hystaspes, adds no Authority thereto.
THere is yet less ground to rely on the Words of Apol. 2. page 82.
Justine Martyr, writing to the Emperors; Through the working of Evil Spirits,
is it come, that it is forbidden, upon pain of Death, to read the Books of
Hystaspes, ^he Sibyl, or the Prophets; that so those, who read them, might, by
fear, be diverted from taking cognizance of good things: for we not only read
them without any fear; but also (as you see) we recommend them to your
inspection, knowing they would be acceptable to you all. Yet, if we persuade
but a little, we gain much; for that, as good Laborers, we shall receive a
reward from the Master. For though we may (with some likelihood conjecture,
that the Ancient Prohibition, to read the Prophetical Books, was much more
strictly observed, after the discovery of the forged Pieces of Hystaspes, and
the Sibyl, among the Heathens; and that they had a particular aversion for
those, who gave credit thereto: Yet is there not found in their Books any Law
to that purpose; nor does it appear, that they made it much their business to
prevent the reading of those Writings, which they, justly, esteemed
Supposititious, and such, as had never been among their Archivi; nor yet that
they decreed any Punishment to be inflicted on the Readers, and Admirers, of
the Prophets of Israel: since the exercise of the Jewish Religion had been
always tolerated in the Empire, and the Synagogues were continued every where.
And, if the liberty of such, as were inclined to Judaism, was less, after the
tumult of Barchochebas, and the whole Nation more hated: yet did not that
Hatred occasion the interdiction of the Prophetical Books; but only the
Banishment of the natural Jews out of Palestine, and some addition to their
Taxes. And, as Justine neither says, nor could have said, That the Prohibition,
made to read the Fatidick Books in the Empire, was more particularly levelled
against the Christians, then others; since it was so general, that it
comprehended all Nations under the Roman Jurisdiction, without distinction or
exception; and that it is manifest, it was done upon occasion of the Books laid
up first in the Capitol, and afterward under the Base of Apollo Palatinus: So
was there not any ground to imagine, that it proceeded from the suggestion of
Devils rather, then from a deep Political Prudence; which very rationally
apprehended, that these Oracles, for which the Common People, though they knew
them not, had so great an esteem, upon this very account, that they introduced
Novelties into the ancient Superstition, and (if I may so express it) clad it
in a new Dress, notoriously derogated from the Customs, derived from Father to
Son, were likely to fill men's minds with fruitless Curiosities, and (as Cicero
says) Valebant ad deponendas Religiones.

As for the Supposititious Pieces of Hystaspes, and the Sibyl; which, under
pretense of teaching the Worship of one God, and recommending unto men the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, filled it with false Opinions, and raised upon
some sound Foundations a mud-wall of Chimeras: the Heathens justly laughed at
them. Every one (whatever Justine Martyr, and many others, imitating him, might
think) was obliged to believe it an Artifice of the Devil, suggesting it into
the minds of some besotted Zealots, to lie, that the Truth might be believed,
and (according to the Observation of Saint Paul) Romans 3. 8.
do evil, that good might come of it. And a compliance with so unworthy an
Imposture, and the confidence to produce it (as Justine, and others, out of
simplicity, did,) should not have satisfied any, that would have advised, ever
so little, with Reason. For St. Justine himself, minding things more calmly,
might easily have perceived; First, That he mistook, as well the Prohibition,
made by the Romans, to read the Fatidick Books, as the Motive of it. Secondly,
That he was as much to blame, in applying it to the Oracles, lately forged.
Thirdly, That the Heathens never had them in their possession, nor knew of
them. Which makes me wonder; how it has been, or can be possible, for any
Christian to entertain a persuasion; that the sight of such adulterate Pieces
should contribute to the advancement of true Piety: when the account of their
Extraction is as flat, and impudent; as if some Jew, having lately forged
VVritings, full of criminal Accusations against the Savior of the World,
should maintain to the very faces of the Christians, That he found them in the
New Testament; That the Apostles were the Authors thereof; and, That the Church
(having always had them in her custody) has concealed them, out of very shame
for the Imposture of him, whom she adores. But as, to prevail any thing with
the Jews, the way were not, to press them with Apocryphal Revelations of
unknown Prophets, feigned to have been of their Nation* for that such an
Imposture would be so far from convincing them, that it would exasperate them
against the Authors of it; And again, as, for the pulling down of Mahumetism,
it were no Prudence to bring in (as from Mahomet) a new Alcoran, directly
opposite to his Cheat: So was there not any probable reason, for any to promise
themselves, from the supposititiousness of the Books of Hystaspes, and the
Sibyl, any other of the Heathens, then a more inveterate detestation of
Christianity; some Professors thereof being engaged in so wicked a Design, and
that with so strange and incredible confidence, against them. Accordingly, was
it not God's pleasure, that any good should be the effect of such an Imposture;
for it filled men (not provided against such Surprises) with erroneous
Prejudications, and brought into repute, among the first Christians, the
extravagant Imagination of the Millenaries, and filled their minds with vain
and sottish Conceptions of the World to come.

CHAP. XIX. That the Letter, written by L. Domitius Aurelianus to the Senate,
gives no Credit to the Sibylline Writings.
NOr can we, lastly, derive any recommendation of the eight Books of these
false Oracles, which have been preserved even to our Times, from the Letter,
which the Emperor Aurelian, engaged in the Marcomannick War, writ to the
Senate, in the year of Christ, two hundred and seventy one; saying, Vopiscus,
in Aureliano.
I cannot but wonder, (Holy Fathers) you have been so long time in doubt,
whether the Books of the Sibyls should be opened; as if you were to treat in
some Christian Church, and not in the Temple of all the gods. For, though
Cardinal Appar. Sect. 20.
Baronius (who writes Valerian for Aurelian) infers thence; That it was not
safe for the Christians, to read, and search into the Sibylline Books: as if
that Prohibition, which had been made five hundred and fourscore years before
our Savior, had concerned them more, then others; and that the Church had ever
had an inclination to look into such Ordures: Yet is it most certain, that
Aurelian meant not the eight Books we now have against Idolatry; but those,
which the Quindecem-viri had in their Custody, under the Base of Apollo
Palatinus, in favor of Idolatry; and that there is a thousand times more
reason, to conclude from his Letter, what Doct Temp. lib. 13. ad A. D. 271.
M. Petavius, the Jesuit, has very well observed, to wit, That the Christians
had an horror for the reading of such profane Books in their Churches, where
they permitted not the reading even of the Apocryphal Books, excluded out of
the Canon of the Bible; as the Council of Can. ult.
Laodicea has since expressly decreed The Emperor says then, That the Delay of
the Senate had been excusable in an Assembly of Christians; who could not have
touched Books that taught Idolatry, but with an extreme remorse, and would have
thought it an intolerable pollution of the Purity of the Church to introduce
those execrable Monuments into it: but, that there should no such scruple arise
in the minds of an Assembly, consisting of persons, wholly devoted to the
Worship of the gods, and met together in their common Temple. Accordingly
Cardinal Baronius, as it were, came to himself, and to persuade us, that no
good could be expected from the Sibylline Oracles, acknowledges, A. D. 272.
Sect. 20.
That the Heathenish Priests, being greater Enemies then all others, under a
feigned pretense of Religion, bad out of them taken occasion to raise the
Persecution against the Christians. Which they could not have done, had they
expressly taught matters of Piety. And certainly this is remarkable, let there
be as much search, as may be, made in what Histories relate of the
Consultations, which Rome from time to time held about them, it will be found;
that she never had any recourse thereto, but the Consequence was some new
Abomination. For, if the Dispute was of Sacrificing, after some extraordinary
manner, to the Infernal gods, and instituting Solemn Games to them; if about
sending for the Mother of the gods from Pessinus in Phrygia, and Aesculapius
from Epidaurus, which is now Ragusa; or about Sacrificing a Gaul of either Sex,
to appease the Devils, under the Names of Jupiter, Juno, Cybele, Saturn,
Apollo, Venus, Ceres, Bacchus, etc. the Orders for it were taken out of them.
Josephus, in the first of his Antiquities chap. 5^ cites the words of a Pagan
Sibyl; who says, That the Gods having sent Winds, overthrew the Tower, and gave
to every one his own Language; and thence it happened, that the City was named
Babylon: which the Counterfeit Sibyl has expressed in part, (lib. 3. page 21.)
borrowing from Josephus.
See Varro, (De Lingua Latina, lib. 5. De Re Rustica, lib. 1. cap. 1.) Cicero,
(Epist. Famil. lib. 1. 7. and Verrina ult.) Livy, (Decad. 1. lib. 3, 4, 7, 10.
Decad. 3. lib. 1, 2, 5, 9. Decad. 4. lib. 1, 5, 7, 10. Decad. 5. lib. 1, 2, 3,
5.) the Epitome of Florus, (Decad. 3. lib. 2, 9. Decad. 4. lib. 1. Decad. 6.
lib. 9.) Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, (lib. 1, 3, 10.) Tacitus, (Annal. 15.)
Solinus, (cap. 7.) Valerius Maximus, (lib. 1. cap. 1, 9.) Plutarch, (in
Poplicola, Fabio Maximo, Mario, etc. and his Book, entitled, De iis, qui tarde
a Numine corripiuntur,) Pausanias, (Phocaic. lib. 10.) Capitolinus, (in
Gordiano Juniore) Trebellius Pollio, (in Gallienis) Vopiscus, (in Aureliano and
Floriano) Sextus Aurelius Victor, (in Claudio) Ammianus Marcellinus, (lib. 22,
23.) Macrobius, (Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 17.) Servius, (upon Aeneid. 6.)
Zosimus, (lib. 2.) and Procopius, (Gotthic. lib. 1.)

CHAP. XX. Other Remarks of Forgery, tending to show the Supposititiousness of
the Sibyilline Writing so called.
SOme of the Fathers, as Clemens Alexandrinus, who, in the first of his Books,
entitled, Stromata, transcribes these three Verses of an Idolatrous Sibyl;

(...),
(...),
(...).
Ye, Delphians, who Apollo's Servants are,
To you great Jove's mind I Am come to declare,
Being with my Brother Phoebus much incensed.
And Lib. 2. cap. 4, 7.
Lactantius, who acknowledges, that, after consultation with the Sibylline
Oracles, the Romans beset themselves to appease Ceres, sending Ambassadors to
Enna, and had made search in Asia for the Mother of the Gods; and St.
Augustine, Lib. De Civitate Dei.
who takes notice of the Transportation of Aesculapius: might well (had they
laid Prejudice aside) have concluded; That the Poems, out of which they drew
Proofs against Idolatry, though for no other reason, then that they were
directly opposite to the Oracles, consulted by the Romans, could not be of the
same Vein with those ancient Sibyls; which had been, for so many Ages, the
Admiration of the Heathen, and the proper ground of their Superstition. For how
should it come to pass, that the same Mouth should, at the same time, breath
Life, and Death? They had also another very clear Proof; to wit, That not any
thing of all, that is related by the Heathen, as from the Sibyls, is, either as
to the Substance, or in express Terms, in the eight Books of the pretended
Daughterin-law of Noah. For where shall we find, in all that simple Rhapsody,
the least Track of what De Divinat. lib. 1, and 2. Epist. 7. lib. 1. Famil.
Cicero, and In the places before-cited.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and (e) Livy, and In Julio.
Suetonius, and Cap. 8.
Solinus, and In the places before-cited, and in Theseo, Demosthene, Cicerone;
and the Book, De Pythiae Orac.
Plutarch, and Lib. 2. p. 97. Achaic lib. 7. page 41 2. Phocaic. lib. 10. page
626.
Pausanias, and In Caesare, Tiberio, and Nerone.
Dion, and Lib. 13.
Ammianus Marcellinus, and Zosimus, and Procopius, and (if you will) In
Peregrino, and Pseudomanti.
Lucian, and Eustathius (upon the Description of the Universe, written by
Dionysius the African,) cite for Sibylline? And Saint Augustine, who had
observed in his Book Of Grammar, that there were (...), Three mischievous K.
designed in the Sibylline Books; where could he have found them in these? Nay,
they should have thought it a violent presumption of their Supposititiousness;
that not one of the Heathens ever cited, I will not say, one Verse, or one
Hemistick, but the least conceit, taken out of these Books. For if (as is
presupposed) the Romans had had them in their Custody with the rest; could
they have always forborne to make some Mention, or give some Account of them?

But, to make it appear, that the Christians had not any knowledge of the
Pieces, which were in the Custody of the Quindecem-viri; and, that the Heathens
had never admitted any thing, of what the Christians opposed thereto, as taken
out of their Bosoms: excepting only those three Verses, which we just now
Transcribed out of Clemens Alexandrinus, (Strom. 1.) the three ensuing, cited
by Lib. 2. Ad Autolyc.
Theophilus Archbishop of Antioch, against the Generation of the Gods
according to the Heathen; If they should engender, and continue immortal, there
would be more Gods generated, then men, and there would be no place left for
Mortals, where they might subsist: these two others, of the same Vein, copied
by Lactantius, Lib. 7. cap. 19.
There will be Fire, and Darkness; when he shall come in the midst of the black
Night: and Lib. 7. cap. 24.
Hear me, ye Mortals, the eternal King reigns: and this Exclamation, in Prose,
attributed to the Erythraean Sibyl by Orat. ad sanctorum coetum. cap. 20.
Constantine the Great, Why (Lord) do thou impose on me a necessity of
Prophesying, and do not reserve me rather, raised up on high from the Earth,
till thy blessed coming? I say, besides these four Shreds, there is not a Verse
produced by the ancient Christians, since Justine Martyr's Time; which may not
be read, either word for word, or in Terms equivalent, in the body of those
Eight Books attributed to the Daughter-in-law of Noah: which being mangled, and
imperfect, in many places, nothing hinders; but that the Allegations of
Theophilus, and Lactantius, might be drawn out of them. Now, what the Fathers
have not derived, but from this source, clearly proves they knew not any other,
and that it was not opened to them by the Heathen; who not only drew not any
thing out of it; but cried out against it (as soon as ever it appeared) by their
Charges of Forgery put in against it: as is apparent by the Words of Apud
Origenem, lib. 7. contra Celsum.
Celsus, saying to the Christians; You have with good reason proposed the
Sibyl: but it is now in your own power to thrust in at random, among the
Pieces which are hers, many things, that are reproachful: (for this Discourse
was an earnest Charge against the Christians, concerning the Suppositiousness
of the Eight Books;) as also by Ad Sanctorum coetum.
Constantine's own Observation, writing, upon occasion of the pretended
Acrostick of the Erythraean Sibyl; There are many, who believe not, that the
Sibyl foretold things of our Savior; and acknowledging, that the Erythraean
Sibyl was a Prophetess, have a jealousy, that some one of our Religion, not
unfurnished with a Poetic Vein, is the Author of those Poems: that they are
adulterate; but, nevertheless, called the Oracles of the Sibyl. Whereto Lib. 7.
contra Celsum.
Origen's Answer gives no great satisfaction. He affirms, (says he of Celsus)
that we have thrust in, among the Writings of the Sibyl, many things, and such,
as are reproachful; and does show, neither what we have thrust in (which he
might have done, if he could have showed Copies, more ancient, and incorrupt;
and such, as had not what he conceives to have been foisted in) nor yet that
those things are injurious, and reproachful. For it was not Celsus's
intention, to acknowledge, that the eight Books, out of which the Fathers had
made Extracts, were legitimate; and to quarrel only at the insertion of some
things, that were false: but to reproach the Christians, that they had shuffled
together (as much as lay in their power) those eight Books, Pieces notoriously
spurious, among the Writings of the Sibyl, which were pretended to be
legitimate.

Secondly, Origen's Reply, that, to prove the spuriousness of the things
produced by the Christians, it was necessary, to show Copies that were more
ancient, more correct, and such, as wherein those things were not, was no way
to the purpose. For, first, The complaint of Celsus no less concerned the body
of the eight Books; then the Sentences, extracted out of them by the
Christians. Secondly, His Negative was not, These eight Books are not perfect;
but, They are not Legitimate: and, taking them for Supposititious, and shuffled
in (among the Legitimate Works) not long before, he thought not himself obliged
to seek out (what could never have been found ^ntient Copies of an Imposture
newly advanced.

Thi^y, To require a Pagan to produce ancient Copies of the true Sibylline
Writings, was to make a ridiculous, and uncivil request to him: since, first,
There could not have been, through the whole Roman Empire, besides the
Original, preserved under the Base of Apollo Palatinus; but that only Copy,
which had been Transcribed by the High Priests, in the Time of Augustus.
Secondly, For that it was not in any case permitted, that any private Person
should read, or interpret it; and that the Quindecem-viri themselves, whose
particular Privilege it was, durst not attempt any such thing, without the
express Order of the Senate. Whence it follows; that the Heathens had good
reason to Charge with Imposture the Pieces, produced by the Fathers, upon this
account particularly; That they saw them in their hands, and by them published:
nor could the Christians justly press them to produce what none of them could
come at, and was to continue locked up under the Key of a perpetual secret.

But, all this notwithstanding, Origen's Answer was not necessary; Celsus does
not demonstrate, that the things which he conceives shuffled into the Works of
the Sibyl are reproachful, or detractive; therefore they are not such. For,
though the imputation of Heathenish Superstitions be not properly detraction;
but a most true, and most just, reproach of their Impiety: yet was it a
Detraction, according to their Opinion, and to bring the Charge by a Sibyl
(that is, the Person, the most unfit to act such a part) was to exercise a kind
of Detraction, against her Memory, and to bear a false Testimony under her
Name, very well deserving to be taken off by the general complaint of all the
Unbelievers. Wherefore the Defense of Origin, against the Objection of Celsus,
who (as Contemporary with Justine Martyr, and Lucian, who dedicated his
Pseudo-mantis to him) had seen the breaking forth of the Imposture, being but
an Elusion, and no more, Saint Augustine has had a thousand times more reason,
to leave it to the Adversaries of the Church, to acknowledge, or disclaim, at
their own choice, the eight Books, pretended to be Sibylline; saying, De Civit.
Dei, lib. 18. cap. 46.
Therefore, though they should not believe our Scriptures, their own (which
they read with blindness) are fulfilled upon them; unless it happen, that some
may say, The Sibyl' s Prophecies are but the Fictions of the Christians. And
again; Augustine. ibid. cap. 47.
But what other Prophecies soever there pass concerning Christ, some may
imagine forged by the Christians, and therefore there is no way so sure, to
convince such, as are Strangers in this matter, and to confirm those of our own
Profession; as by citing the Prophecies, contained in the Jews Books.

I would to God the Church's children had continued in these Terms, and so have
cleared their hearts of the evil Ambition of having been the Authors of some
Pious Frauds, and conceive an holy shame at their being employed in those,
which Imposture had endeavored to introduce into the House of God. For, though
they had not thought it fit, to make any reflection on the Arguments I have
brought against the spuriousness of the Sibylline Writings, they needed no
more, then to have called to account those, that produced them, whence they had
had them, taking them up sharply with the ensuing Demands, or the like; How
could these Sacred Privileges of the Empire, and Religion, come ^o your hands?
By what Artifices could you (you, who call your selves The Faithful) possess
your selves of the Treasure, committed to the Custody of the Quindecem-viri,
the sworn Enemies of your Faith? How comes our Age to be so happy, as to have
the advantage to discover, and make public the Predictions, which had been
concealed above six hundred and twelve years? Especially, seeing the lateness
of their Discovery, made after the Death of Adrian, the confident Publication
of the highest secret of Paganism, and the contrariety of the Consequences,
arising from its Publication, to all, that Antiquity had heard of it, for six
Ages before, might have given them more, then a presumption of the Imposture,
particularly to Justine Martyr, who writ his Apology five years, or ten at
most, after the Advancement of it.

And here I can do no less, by the way, then advertise the Reader; that he,
who, after the year four hundred and six, took upon him, under the name of that
Holy Doctor, to answer the Questions of the Greeks, seems to be mistaken,
when, having writ, That Resp. ad Quaest. 74.
the end of this World is the Judgment of the Wicked by Fire, according to what
is said in the Writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, he adds, As also of
those of the Sibyl, according to what is said by the blessed Saint Clement, in
the first Epistle to the Corinthians. For, first, The Epistle of Saint Clement
(which has in some manner received a second life, fifteen years since, when
England restored it to the Church of God) says nothing of the Sibyl, and though
there be a Leaf wanting at the end, yet is there not any likelihood; that, in
that later part, which contained the Conclusion of all the precedent Discourse,
woven up of Scriptures, the Holy Martyr should have recourse to the Authority
of a strange Testimony, and draw out of a profane Source.

2. The Allegation of the Sibyl's Words, concerning the Judgment by Fire, is in
the Sixth Chapter of the fifth Book of the pretended Apostolical Constitutions:
where the fourteen last Verses of the fourth Book of the Counterfeit Sibyl have
been inserted, after the Texts of the Prophets, and Apostles; as of Genesis,
Chap. ii. 7. and Chap. iii. 14. Isaiah, Chap. xxvi. 19. Ezekiel, Chap. xxxvii.
13. Daniel, Chap. xii. 2. St. Matthew, Chap. iv. 23. St. Luke, Chap. xxi. 18.
and St. John, Chap. v. 28. and xi. 43. so, that it is evident, that the Author
of the Answers to the Questions of the Greeks was extremely mistaken,
negligently confounding the Constitutions, unjustly attributed to St. Clement,
with his Epistle to the Corinthians.

3. If the recourse to the Testimony of the Sibyl really be in the said
Epistle; it would be an Argument of the corruption of that precious Jewel of
Christian Antiquity, rather then a legitimate Confirmation of the Authority of
the Books, pretended to be Sibylline, which we have demonstrated to have been
forged after the Death of Adrian; that is to say, thirty eight years after the
Martyrdom of St. Clement, and sixty after his Banishment to Chersonesus.

CHAP. XXI. That it cannot, with any likelihood of Truth, be maintained, That
the Books, called the Sibylline, were written by Divine Inspiration.
HAving (according as the necessity of Reason, and Truth, required)
presupposed, that the eight Books, pretended to be Sibylline, are the Fiction
of some bold, and busy Christian, who would needs have his own fantastic
Imaginations pass for Oracles: This Question, Whether they were writ by Divine
Inspiration, falls of it self to the ground. For, it would argue a total
Eclipse of sense, and understanding, to think, that God, who is the source of
Truth, would be the adviser of an Imposture, and to say he were Author of it,
no less, then stark madness; since 2 Cor. (...) 6. 16.
there is no communion between the light of Wisdom and the darkness of Lying.
Whereof the Result is, That the Sibyls (from whose Oracles the Idolatrous
Romans always derived Encouragements of Impiety to heighten their
Superstition) neither were, nor could be, (in that regard) the communications
of the Spirit of God; to whose Glory, and Worship, those Divinations were
directly opposite. So that I cannot conceive any thing, but an over-earnestness
of Dispute, should force St. Hierome to make such ostentation of the Sibyls,
and maintain, against Jovinian, Lib. 1. cap. 26.
That They had, for their Livery, Virginity; and that Divination had been the
reward of their Virginity: for it is an horrid Reward, to be made the
Instrument of the Devil, to publish his Lies, and to contribute to his Deceits.
Nor can I see, how the greatest of Ills can be ranked among Goods, nor (at
hazard, to say something to the advantage of the Sibyls) that any Advantage can
be made of this improbable shift; that they made any other Predictions, then
these, which induced the Pagans into Error; and that, upon the account of
them, and their Virginity, they have been thought worthy recommendation. Not,
that I would deny; but it had been as possible for God, to declare by those
women the Secrets to come, as to make Balaam's Ass to Numb. 22. 28.
speak, or move Balaam himself to Prophecy the coming of the Messiah one
thousand, four hundred, ninety, and two years before it happened: especially,
seeing St. Opposite: inchoatae, in Ep. ad Romans
Augustine, expounding these words of Saint Paul, Romans 1. 2.
Whom he had before promised by his Prophets, took, from the Prejudice he had
conceived thereof, occasion to write; That there have been Prophets, who were
not of him; in whom also we find some things, which they have sang, as having
heard them of Christ; as it is said of the Sibyl. But I hope, he, and the other
Fathers, will pardon me; if I presume to answer: That they have grounded their
Opinion on a broken Reed; to wit, the Authority of the eight Books of the
pretended Daughter-in-law of Noah. For,

First, They have taken for very ancient a Piece, that was very new, and
adulterate.

Secondly, Though it were as ancient, as they thought; yet could it not be
Divine; for this very reason, that it contains (as has been already observed)
abundance of Errors: which no man, unless lost to his Senses, will ever impute
to Celestial Revelation.

Thirdly, Though it were granted, that those Pieces are as free from Errors,
as they are full of them, and that their Original is to be taken much higher,
then the Birth of our Savior, yet would Hilary, the Deacon, deny, that it
necessarily followed thence, that they came from God. 1 Cor. 2. 12. apud
Ambrosium.
The spirit of the world, (says he) is that, which possesses persons subject
to Enthusiasms; who are without God: for it is the chiefest among the worldly
Spirits. Whence it comes, that he is wont, by conjecture, to foretell the
things which are of this World; and it is he, who is called Python, or the
Prophesying Spirit; it is he, who is deceived, and deceives by things, that
have a probability of Truth; it is he, who spoke by the Sibyl, imitating ours,
and desirous to be numbered among the Celestial.

For my part, I freely confess, it were a very hard matter to maintain; that
the eight Books of the Sibyls, which copy out the best part of the History of
the Gospel had been written before our Savior's coming into the Flesh, and ^at
they were the Productions of some Python, or Prophesying Spirit: but it is
evident, that Hilary, reflecting on the fond Imaginations, wherewith they are
pestered, chose rather to think them the Work a Fanatic, then a Divine Person;
and in that, (though contrary to the Opinion of many of the Fathers), he is
much in the right. For, though we should lay the Sponge on all the marks of
their Supposititiousness before alleged, yet could we not any way wipe out that
Character, which the said Rhapsody has (with its own hands) imprinted so deep
in its forehead, that it is remarkable in the chiefest of those great men, who
would acknowledge its authority, and oppose it to the Heathens.

CHAP. XXII. The Sentiment of Aristotle concerning Enthusiasts taken into
Consideration.
ARistotle Problem. Sect. 30. q. 1.
had been of Opinion, That, the heat of Melancholy being near the place of
Intelligence, many were taken with Frantic and Enthusiastical Diseases; That
thence came all the Sibyls, Bacchides, and inspired Persons, that is, when they
became such, not through disease, but the temperament of nature; and thereupon
alleges, that, Maracus of Syracuse was a better Poet when he was besides
himself; discovering thereby, That (according to his Sentiment) to say of a
woman, that she was a Sibyl, was to put her into the qualification of
Hypochondriacks, and such, as are subject to black Choler.

But the common Opinion of the Heathens was, that the Sibyls were seized by a
supernatural power, and not warmed by a simple Ebullition of black Choler; and
that their being so seized made (while it lasted) so strong an impression upon
their minds, that it deprived them of all Intelligence and Memory. Thus
Heraclitus, in De Pyth. Orac.
Plutarch, affirms, that the Sibyl had with her frantic mouth said things,
which are neither ridiculous, nor gaudy, nor adulterate. Virgil introduces
Helenus, speaking to Aeneas of the Cumaean Sibyl;

Thou the enraged Prophetess shall see;

And elsewhere, making a Description of her Transports, he uses these express
terms:

This said, her color straight did change, her face
And flowing Tresses lost their former grace; J. O.

A growing passion swells her troubled breast,
And fury her distracted soul possessed.
And a little after,

When she, not able to endure the load
Of such a power, strives to shake off the God,
The more she chafed, the more he curbs her in;
Tames her wild breast, and calms her swelling spleen.
And again,

-- Then Phoebus slakes
His curbing reins, and from her bosom takes
His cruel Spurs, granting a little rest:
Soon as her Fit, and high Distraction ceased.
Lucan's Description is much to the same purpose; and Claudian, in imitation of
them, calls the Place of the Cumaean Sibyl The Porch of the enraged Sibyl. --


But this Description, which naturally expresses the violent possession of an
evil Spirit, tormenting the person it seises, in stead of raising an horror in
the Writer of the eight Books attributed to the Sibyls, enflames him with an
emulation; insomuch, that that impertinent person has not been ashamed to
attribute to the God of glory extravagant sallies, like those of the Devils,
and to say of himself what the profane Poets had writ of their Prophetesses:

Castal. edit. page 193.
Corpore tota stupens trahor huc, ignara quid ipsa
Eloquar; ipse sed haec mandat Deus omnia fari:
And elsewhere,

Page 214.
Sed quid cor iterum quatitur mihi? mensque, flagello
Icta, for as vocem prorumpere cogitur, omnes
Ut moneam. --
And again,

Page 238.
Ut mihi divino requieta a carmine men's est,
Orabam magnum genitorem, vis ut abesset;
Sed mihi suggessit vocem sub pectora rursum,
Perque omnes terras praecepit vaticinari.
And that she came from Babylon Page 282.
(...), furious, or fanatic.

All which affords us a manifest Argument, that the unhappy Impostour, who took
upon him to play the Sibyl, was besotted with such an extravagant conceit, that
he would, upon any terms, be taken for an Enthusiast, and make the world
believe, that the presence of some Celestial virtue produced the same in his
mind, as the invasion of Satan does in those of possessed persons, whom he
deprives of their Senses, and Transports with fury.

Nor are we (to excuse so extravagant a passion) to make any account of those
words of the eighth Book,

Novi ego arenarum numerum, mensumque profundi,
Tellurisque sinus, tenebrosaque Tartara novi,
Quot fuerint homines, quot sint, quotque futuri,
Astrorum numeros, stirpes, frondes que quot usquam,
Quot sint quadrupedes, quot pisces, quotque volucres.
For, besides the impossibility there is to reconcile this insolent brag, I
know all things, with the precedent confession, I know not what I say, any
other way, then by attributing it to that alienation of spirit, which he would
have described when he said, I know not what I say: it is absurdity enough, but
to think, that the 2 Cor. 13.
Father of mercies, who disposes his gifts with infinite Wisdom, and an
intention they should tend to the advantage, either of those which receive
them, or others, would puff up the heart of any man with the windy knowledge of
things absolutely unprofitable; such as are those, which the Counterfeit Sibyl
much glories in. For what advantage will it be to mankind, or thy self, that
thou know the number of the Sands, of the Leaves, of the Fishes, etc. Will this
variety of knowledge make thee any way better, or further thee in the way to
salvation, more then another, who shall have learned, from the great Acts 9. 15.
vessel of Election, who had been 2 Cor. 12. 4.
caught into the third heaven, and there heard words not capable of being
uttered, this admirably-modest protestation, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified? If therefore there were nothing else to be quarrelled at in the
eight Books of the Counterfeit Sibyl; but the insupportable vanity of the
Author, it should be more then sufficient to deprive him of his pretended
Dignity of Prophet, and to condemn his Verses to be blown away (as sometimes
those of the Cumaean Sibyl) disturbed in their order, And to the wanton Winds a
Sport be made.


CHAP. XXIII. That it was unadvisedly done by the Author of the Sibylline
Writings, to put himself into the number of the Enthusiasts.
BUt it may be these insolent Expressions, the affectation of Enthusiasin, and
the other sleights of Imposture, are not in the Original, and that the Fathers,
who have had the said Writings in great esteem, have not found them therein. On
the contrary, Justine Martyr (to satisfy us, that he very well knew as much)
takes particular notice of it, and observes them to the Greeks, adding to that
Discourse of Menon in Plato, concerning such as foretell things to come,
Exhort. ad Graec.
We shall say no less, then that those are Prophets, and they have Ecstasies,
being inspired of God, when they become famous for delivering many, and great
things, and know not any thing of what they say, the ensuing Application, He
clearly, and manifestly, saw into the Oracles of the Sibyl. For she had not (as
the Poets have) the power to correct her Poems, after she had writ them, and to
polish them, especially, as to what concerns the exact observation of Measures;
but she accomplished what was of her Prophecy, during the time of the
inspiration, and, the inspiration failing, she no longer remembered the things
she had said. Hence comes it, that all the Verses of the Sibylline Poems were
not preserved. For we our self being at the City (of Cumae) understood so much
from those, who led us up and down, and showed us the places, where she spoke
her Oracles, and a certain Urn made of Brass, where they said her Relics were
conserved. They also gave us this account, as having it from their
Predecessors, That those, who received the Oracle, being people without
instruction, many times failed in the exact observation of measures, and said
this was the reason, why some Verses were without measure; viz. that the
Prophetess, after the Ecstasy of inspiration was over, remembered not the things
she had said, and that those, who writ them, by reason of their ignorance, had
lost the exact measure of the Verses. And a little lower; Submit to the most
ancient of all the Sibyls, whose Books, it is so happened, are preserved all
the World over; and who, by Oracles, proceeding from a certain powerful
inspiration, has taught you concerning those, who are called Gods, that they
are not such.

In like manner Constantine introduces the Sibyl, making her complaint to God,
that he imposed upon her a necessity of Divining. Suidas, for his part, makes
this Observation of the Chaldaean Sibyl, The Prophetess is not her self the
cause, that her Verses are imperfect, and without measure; but those, who took
Copies of them: as not keeping close to the impetuosity of her way of delivery,
and being not well read in Grammar. Besides that, with the inspiration, the
memory of the things she had said failed her, and, for that reason, her Verses
are imperfect, and the sense halting. Whether it be that this is come so to
pass, through the dispensation of God; to the end, that her Oracles should not
be known to many unworthy of them, or that length of time has been the cause
of that, as well as many other things. Besides that, it is not to be admired,
if the obscurity of the things said by the Prophetess, and the frequent
Transcription of her Books, have occasioned the confusion of the sense, and
measures of the Verses. Whereto Praef. in libros Sibyllinos.
Marcus Antimachus adds (as taking it from Lactantius, whom he ridiculously
makes Priest of the Capitol, converted to the Christian Religion upon reading
of the Sibylline Writings.) That, what is to be had of the Sibylline Books, is
not only easily slighted by those, who are troubled with the disease of the
Greeks: for that it is easy to recover it (for scarce things seem more
precious) but also is thought not to deserve any credit; because there is not
an exact measure observed in the Verses. Now this is the fault of the
Transcribers These words are transcribed out of Suidas, and unjustly attributed
to Lactantius, who says no such thing.
(who were not able to reach the impetuosity of her way of delivery, and were
not well read in Grammar) and not of the Prophetess; for when the inspiration
was over, she no longer remembered the things she had spoken.

CHAP. XXIV. That the Fathers, who were surprised by the pretended Sibylline
Writings, supposed the Author to have been an Enthusiast.
IT is manifest then, that both the Ancient, and Modern Christians have been so
far from being ignorant, or distrustful of the Enthusiasm of the pretended
Sibyl; that they have taken it for the fundamental Principle of the Opinion
they had of her Poem, and been carried away with reports, without reserving to
themselves (as reason would have required) the privilege to examine them. For,

First, Justin Martyr, giving credit to the Discourses of those among the
Cumaeans, who had showed him the Antiquities of their City, dissents from the
common persuasion; viz. that the Cumaean Sibyl did not only speak her Verses;
but also writ them upon Leaves, which the Wind carried away: upon which
occasion Aeneid. 6.
Virgil brings in Aeneas, making this Prayer, Blessed Virgin, not to Leaves thy
Verse commit;
and Satyr. 8.
Javenal says to his Readers, to excite their Attention, Credit me vobis
folium recitare Sibyllae.


Secondly, He makes but an ill Parallel between the Stories, which the Cumaeans
had entertained him with, concerning their Prophetess, and these spurious and
upstart Oracles, which he said were preserved all over the World; never
considering, that the Cumaeans never knew any thing of them, and their very
being so common, as he imagines, should as well have raised a distrust in him,
as in the Greeks, who knew there was not any thing more carefully kept at Rome,
then the Sibylline Oracles; which had been got together from all places, as far
as the power of the Empire extended.

Suidas also, thinking to alledg sufficient excuses for the Poems attributed to
the Chaldaean Sibyl, has only made a Discovery of his own Impertinence: For,

First, Upon what score would he have the Transcribers to be so ignorant? Is
there any likelihood, that the Heathens, who thought them Divine Sentences,
would employ the simplest among them, to put together things, which they
accounted so precious, and Sacred?

Secondly, Is it not a great mistake, to think, that God (whose Works are ever
suitable to his own Majesty, that is to say, Divine, and Perfect) could ever
have pronounced Verses, that were imperfect, both as to their Sense, and
Measure, to those, whom he inspired?

Thirdly, Could the want of Measure, and Sense, which was obvious to all the
world, hinder the knowledge of the unworthy, more then of the worthy? Or are the
later in a greater capacity, to find sense, and order, where there is not any,
then the former?

Fourthly, Can any one say, that this manifest, and by-all-acknowledged,
imperfection proceeds from God; but he must withal sacrilegiously accuse him
of having, by his dispensation, opposed his own intention, by making fruitless
(at least in part) what he had (as is supposed) vouchsafed to reveal for the
advantage of men?

Fifthly, What disorder could length of time, and frequent Transcriptions, have
occasioned in the pretended Oracles of the Sibyls; when they were in the time
of Justin Martyr, (that is, at their very Hatching) imperfect? And, as for the
Copies, which some Christians (deceived by their own credulity) with abundance
of Zeal dispersed abroad, who sees not, that, besides their being absolutely
unknown to the Heathens, who received them only from their hands, they were
taken out of one another, with great care, and by persons, who professed
Letters; as Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, etc. so, as that
they they should rather have diminished, then multiplied the Faults: as indeed
it is evident; that the Different Lections, which are found in the citations of
these Fathers, are not Corruptions, that have disfigured, and defaced the Work,
pretendedly Sibylline; but Corrections, which have bettered it, and made it
less imperfect, then it was? And certainly, what has really occasioned the
Blanks, and other Defaults, that are in it, has been nothing else, but the
affectation of that incomparable Antiquity; which the Impostour, who first
advanced it, made so great ostentation of, with an Impudence, and malicious
vanity, as great, as what was, one hundred and sixty years since, betrayed by
Johannes Annio, a Jacobine, afterward Master of the Sacred Palace at Rome; who
would needs fill the Universe with Supposititious Books, under the Names of
Berosus, Megasthenes, (whom he transforms into a Chimaerical Metasthenes)
Zenophon, Archilochus, Philo, etc, and scatter up and down Italy, especially in
the Places about Viterbo) Pieces of Marble, made infamous by the Inscription of
his Invention, and Forgery And, about the year 1520. one John Wolf, an
Inhabitant of Zuikaw, in Woitland, with like sincerity, produced the Epitaph of
the Sibyl Suanichilda, Daughter of Ulba and Cygneus, descended fron^ Cygnus,
the Son of Hercules: wherein Langius, who made a great noise about it, was
deceived.
. For the Counterfeit Sibyl, to bring her Name into greater Veneration, and
(instead of absolutely smothering the Discoveries of her Imposture) to shift
all the blame upon the Transcribers, Progress of time, and the irretrivable
loss it has occasioned in the most precious things of Antiquity, put out her
ill-digested collection, maimed, and imperfect, imagining (what indeed the
event has confirmed) that the Readers would entertain it (as the wretched
Ruins of a great Wrack) with more compassion, then rigor; and rather hug, and
cherish the miserable remainders thereof, then censure it according to its
deserts. Thus, having confuted all the Suppositions of Suidas, I have with the
same labor destroyed those, which Antimachus borrowed out of his Dictionary,
to make a present of them to Lactantius; so that all I have to do is, to
advertise by the way; that, as this man had no reason to imagine Lactantius
taken out of the College of the Capitol-Priests, and brought to the Profession
of Christianity by the reading of the pretended Oracles; so was it most weakly
done of him to look for them at the Capitol in the Time of Constantine: since
that, three hundred years before, Augustus had transferred them thence, under
the Basis of Apollo Palatinus, where they continued till twenty five years
after the Death of Constantine, according to the Observation of Ammianus
Marcellinus.

CHAP. XXV. The common Sentiment of the Fathers concerning Enthusiasts.
COme we now to see, whether true Theology, and the Sentiment of the Fathers,
clear, and confirmed from Age to Age, may permit; that the pretended Sibyl (who
said of her self what the Idolatrous Heathens writ of their Prophetesses)
should have been taken by some of the ancient Christians for a Prophetess, and
truly inspired of God. It was so certain among the Heathens, that their Sibyls
had been possessed and when they Prophesied) cast into such an alienation of
Spirit, that (according to the Testimony of Diodorus) (...), to act the Sibyl,
signified among them, (...), to act the part of a person inspired, and
transported. And Suidas himself acknowledges; that, to say of a man, (...), He
Sibyllizes, has the same sense, as if it were said of him, (...), He is
seduced, He behaves himself like one, that has the Gift of Divination. Now it
might seem, that the Prophets felt some motion, like that of those, who
foretold things to come; since that, as we read of Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 10.
when the evil Spirit from God was come upon him, he Prophesied, whereas the
Scripture gives us expressly to observe, 1 Samuel 19. 23.
that the Spirit of God was also upon him, as upon Samuel, and David; adding,
that he went on, and Prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah; that Verse
24.
he stripped off his clothes also, and Prophesied before Samuel in like manner,
and lay down naked all that day, and all that night. Besides, the LORD,
threatening the Israelites by Hosea, says; Hos. 9. 7.
The Prophet is a fool; the Spiritual man is mad. So the Captains, sitting with
Jehu in Ramoth-Gilead, spoke no less disadvantageously of the Prophet, sent by
Elisha to anoint Jehu King of Israel, asking; (...) Kings 9. 11.
Why is this mad fellow come to thee? And Schemaiah the Nehelamite, stirring up
Zephaniah, and the other Priests, against Jeremiah, writ to them; Jer. 29. 26.
The Lord has made thee, etc. that ye should be Officers in the House of the
Lord for every man, that is mad, and makes himself a Prophet. And Saint
Ambrose does, in appearance, acknowledge it, by this Discourse; In Psalm. 39.
There are certain Insaniae.
Madnesses, and alienations of spirit, which are true, and (it may be) of the
Prophets; who, In excess^ mentis positi.
being transported, as to their understanding, Prophesied, being so filled with
the Spirit of God, that to some they seemed mad: when, not minding their own
safety, many times naked, and barefoot, as Esaias the Prophet did, they ran
among the People; crying, not what they would themselves, but what the Lord
commanded them.

But (for the beter understanding of all these Passages) the Christian Reader
is only to remember; that, as the Prophets (though they did not any action,
that was irregular, or void of reason) passed for Mad men in the apprehension
of the profane; such, as might be the Captains at Ramoth-Gilead, and Shemaiah,
the Presecutour of Jeremiah: so the Devils egged on their Foretellers of things
to come, to play the Apes, and imitate the Prophets, and to brag (even when
they were at the height of their Extravagance) of Inspirations, equal with
theirs. So that, if the true Prophets, moved by Celestial Grace, discovered the
operations of it, by some action suitable to their condition; upon which
account Saul (being among them) stripped himself of his Royal Robe, and lay
upon the ground, humbling himself before God, and celebrating the glory of his
Infinite Power, according as the Spirit gave him to speak: on the contrary,
when he was overpressed with Melancholy, and tormented by the evil Spirit,
which put him into Madness, and Ecstasie, he spoke also, in that condition, as
if he had Prophesied. And Saint Ambrose minds us of the difference, there is
between the servile transportation of Possessed Persons, which darkens the
light of their minds, binds up its Faculties, makes their Reason unprofitable,
and forces them to violent motions, and that holy Ravishment of the Prophets;
which, filling them with admiration, and joy, refined their understanding, and
left them the free use of their ratiocination, yet in such manner, as to diver
them from all humane Considerations, and bend their thoughts to an
extraordinary submission to God. Upon which account he said, They cried, not
what they would themselves; but what he commanded: intending to express thereby
the violence they did themselves, by renouncing their own will, that they
might, the more freely, pursue the motions of his Grace: and observed further,
that they minded not their own safety; representing, that they regarded not the
preservation of their Lives, nor their own convenience; but were always ready
to Sacrifice themselves, and protest with St. Paul; Acts 20. 24.
None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self. Nor
did he absolutely pronounce; that the action of the Prophetic Spirit upon the
Person, who was thereby inspired, made him a Fool, or so drew him out of
himself, as that he was without reason, and had no other motion, then what was
forced: but that (inclining him to do, not what his own ratiocination suggested
to him; but what it self advised him to) it many times put him upon such
extraordinary actions; that those, who vouchsafed not to consider the
signification thereof, were (by their own corrupt judgment) induced to
attribute them to Madness, and Extravagant Transportation: which obliged him to
say, not that He was, but that To some he seemed Mad.

Tertullian went yet much further; when, drunk with the cup of Montanus, he
esteemed highly of those Ecstasies, and Transportations, which so ravish a man
out of himself, that he looses (either wholly, or in part) the freedom of his
Ratiocination. But in regard Justin Martyr (as well as he) was of opinion; That
those Alienations, which he pretended to have been in the Cumaean Sibyl) might
proceed from Divine Inspiration, it is of some consequence, as well to clear up
his sentiment, as to consider what judgment Antiquity has made thereof: and
that the rather, for that we have now some Andr. du Val, a Doctor of Sorbon,
in the Life of Sister Mary of the Incarnation, a Carmelite Nun.
Divines, who imagine; That God does sometimes send such strong, and violent,
Irradiations of his Love, as strike through the Hearts of men, like
Thunderbolts, force those, who receive them, to cry out, and do so cast them
down, that they are as it were dead. Further, That the Persons, who are
honored with such an Illumination, have motions of Piety so impetuous, that
they cannot pray unto God; and, when they attempt it, suffer incredible pains,
their Bodies not being able to bear the vehement motions of so great a
Devotion. In his Book Of the Soul, Tertullian. lib. De Anima, cap. 9.
he has this Discourse; (which Pamelius unjustly applies to Prisca, or
Maximilla, dead fifty years before) There is at this day among us a At
Carthage; where Prisca, and Maximilla (who never were out of Phrygia) never
were.
Sister; on whom are fallen the Gifts of Revelations, which she endures, in
spirit, in the Church, during the Divine Solemnities, by Ecstasie. And in
another place (having supposed, that the Ecstasis, that is to say, the deep
sleep, that fell upon Adam, was Cap. 11.
the force of the holy Spirit, working Prophecy) he adds; Cap. 45.
God sent him an alienation of spirit, which is a spiritual force, wherein
Prophecy consists: and lower; Cap. 27.
We say, That Ecstasie is a sally out of sound sense, somewhat like Madness.
Item; Cap. 45.
This shall be the property of the said alienation of spirit; that it comes not
through any injury done to health; but according to natural reason: for it does
not exterminate the understanding; but force it out of the way. It is one thing
to shake, another to move it; one thing to overturn it, another to exercise it.
What therefore proceeds from the Memory argues the sound constitution of the
Mind; if the soundness of the Soul be stupefied (the Memory remaining entire)
it is a kind of Madness. Wherefore we are not said to be Mad, but to Dream:
and so, it is then, if ever, that we are wise; for our knowledge, though in
Umbrage, yet is not extinct, save that it may then seem to be wanting. And
Advers. Marcion.
elsewhere, wresting to a wrong sense the words of the Gospel, Luke 9. 33.
concerning Saint Peter's not knowing what he said, he put this Question, How
not knowing? was it through simple error, or Irratione?
want of reason? Lib. 5. Advers. Marcion cap. 8.
Wresting also the sense of Saint Paul's Discourse, he has these Expressions;
Let him take out some Psalm, some Vision, some Prayer, in a spiritual way
only, that is in Ecstasie, in alienation of spirit. And against Praxeas;
Advers. Prax. cap. 15.
Neither Peter, nor John, nor James, were sensible of the Vision of God without
a denial of Reason, and alienation of spirit; for which we maintain (in the
cause of new Prophecy) that Ecstasie, that is, alienation of spirit, is
consistent with Grace. For it is necessary, that the man ravished in spirit
(especially, when he sees the glory of God, or when God speaks by him) disclaim
his own sentiment; being overshadowed by the power of God: concerning which
there is a Dispute between us, and the Psychici. And indeed Saint Hierome
expressly numbers De Scriptoribus Eccles. verbo Apollonius.
among the Books, written by Tertullian.
him against the Church, six Volumes, Of Ecstasie, and a seventh, Against
Apollonius; wherein he endeavors to maintain whatever the other quarrels at:
his Design being, to vindicate Montanus, who had written thus; Epiphan. Haeres.
48. cap. 4.
Behold, man is like a Viol, and I am the Bow: man lies him down to rest, and I
watch. Behold, the Lord, who takes men's Hearts out of them, and who also
bestows Hearts on them: and Maximilla, who held this strange Discourse; Ibid.
c. 13.
The Lord has sent me, (etc.) forced me, I being both willing, and unwilling,
to learn the knowledge of God.

The Church therefore, formally condemning the Opinion of those, who believed,
that God made Ecstatick, and transported such, as he inspired, and that he
exercised violence on their spirits, expressed her self,

By Claudius Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis, to this effect: Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 16.
Montanus, through an insatiable covetousness of Primacy, giving access in his
Soul to the Adversary, being of a sudden transported in mind, and out of
himself, was inspired, and began to speak, and to pronounce strange words: and
his Prophetesses were filled with an adulterate spirit, so as that they spoke,
with a transportation of their understanding, unseasonably, and after a strange
manner: and Theodotus, his Complice, was besides himself, and delivered up to
the spirit of Error.

By Miltiades, Disputing against the same Montanus. (b) That false (d) Ibid. c.
17.
Prophet; being in a Transport of spirit (which is attended by Confidence, and
want of Fear) began by a voluntary Ignorance, which turned into an involuntary
Madness of the Soul; in which manner they cannot show that any Prophet (either
of the Old, or New Testament) has been transported.

By St. Irenaeus, who set forth, in the same colors, one of the Prophetesses
of the Marcosians. Lib. 1. c. 9.
Being foolishly swollen, and puffed up by the said words, and having her Soul
warmed by the expectation of what she should Prophecy, and her Heart beating
more, then it should, she presumed to utter things Fantastic, and whatever
occurred to her thoughts, vainly, and audaciously; in regard she is set on by a
vain spirit, according to what a better, then we, has said of such People: to
wit, that a Soul, enflamed by vain air, is a presumptuous, and shameless thing.

By Strom. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, giving the Impostours of his Time this Touch; They
Prophesied in Ecstasie, as the servants of an Apostate.

By Origin, who esteemed that kind of Emotion unworthy the Holy men of God. In
Ezekiel. Hom. 6.
The Prophets were not (as some imagine) alienated in spirit, and spoke not
through any violence of the spirit: If any thing (says the 1 Cor. 14. 30.
Apostle) be revealed to another, that sits by, let the first hold his
peace: Whence he shows; that he, who speaks, is at liberty to speak, when he
will, and to hold his peace, when he will.

By St. Basil, who presses the same Doctrine in these Terms. In Isai. Sermon. 1.
Praef.
There are some, who say, that the Saints Prophesied, being out of, or besides,
themselves; the humane understanding being shadowed by the Spirit: but this is
contrary to what the Divine presence does promise; that it should alienate in
spirit him, who is seized of God, and that, when he is full of Divine
Instructions, he should, himself, be deprived of Ratiocination, and, while he
contributes to the advantage of others, should reap no benefit from his own
Discourses. In a word, How does it stand with Reason; that, through the Wisdom
of the Spirit, a man should become as one besides himself? And, that the spirit
of Knowledge should deliver what is incohaerent? For neither is light the
Author of Blindness; but stirs up the Visual Faculty implanted by Nature: nor
does the spirit cause obscurity in men's minds; but raises the Understanding to
the contemplation of things intelligible, cleansing it from the stains of sin.
Nor is it improbable, that, through the Design of the evil Spirit (who lays his
Ambushes to ensnare humane Nature) the mind is confounded: but to say, that the
same is effected by the presence of the Holy Spirit, is impious.

By St. Epiphanius, who, strongly seconding him, says. Haeres. 48. cap. 3.
When there has been any necessity, the Holy men of God have foretold all
things with the true spirit of the Prophets, and a strong Ratiocination, and an
understanding, reaching the sense of what was said. Again; The Prophet spoke
with a clear ratiocination, and, consequently, saying all things with a certain
vigor, as Heb. 3. 2, 5.
Moses, the servant of God, who was faithful in all his House. The Prophet in
the Old Testament is called the Seer, Isa. 1. 1.
The Vision of Isaiah, the Son of Amos, which he saw, etc. Chap. 6. verse 1.
I saw the Lord, etc. And, after he had heard what the Lord said unto him,
coming toward the people he says, The Lord says these things. Do you not
see, that this is the Discourse of one, who comprehends, and not of one, who is
besides himself, and that he expressed not himself, as one that was transported
in his understanding? In like manner Ezechi^l, the Prophet, hearing the Lord
speak thus to him; Ezekiel. 4. 9.
Take thou also unto thee Wheat, and Barley, and Beans, etc. Verse 12.
and bake it with dung, that comes out of man, answers, Verse 14.
Ah! Lord God, behold, my Soul has not been polluted: for, from my youth up,
have I not eaten of that, which dies of it self, or is torn in pieces, neither
came there abominable flesh into my mouth. For, knowing that the Oracle had
come to him from the Lord, to serve for a Threat, he was so far from being
distracted in his understanding; that he It is in the Greek, (...); but it is
likely it should be, (...).
delayed to do it: but that he was of that Opinion, is to be attributed to the
settledness of his thoughts, which may be argued from his expostulation, Ah!
Lord God, etc. This indeed being proper to the true Prophets, to have their
reason fortified by the Holy Spirit, by Instruction, and Discourse. Daniel
also, had not he Dan. 1. 4.
knowledge, and skill, in all Learning, and Wisdom, and comprehended his own
imaginations^? He, who resolved the Riddles of Nebuchadnezzar, and explicated,
in such manner, what the other had seen in his Dreams, that he presently gave
him the Interpretation thereof, with a settled spirit, and, out of a
superabundance of the gift of God; having an intelligence of things above all
men, through the riches of the spirit truly instructing the Prophet, and those,
who (by the means of the Prophet) were honored with the Precepts of Truth? But
what Montanus, and his Followers.
these promise to Prophecy, they declare; being not well in their wits, nor
comprehending the meaning thereof: for their words are elusive, ambiguous, and
such, as are incapable of a right sense.

By St. Chrysostom, who writes; In Psalm. 45. 1.
Hence we learn also another thing; to wit, That the Prophets were not as
those, who foretell things to come: for there, when the Devil breaks in upon
the Soul, he blinds the Understanding, and so darkens the reasoning Faculty;
that they utter what they have to say, their understanding not knowing any
thing of what is said; but affording a Sound, as an inanimate Pipe, etc. But
the holy Spirit does not so; but suffers the heart to know what it says. For,
if it knew it not, how should it say, that the word is good? The Devil, as an
enemy, and one, that professes open Hostility, fights against the humane soul;
but the Holy Spirit, as taking care of it, and ready to do it good,
communicates his counsel to those who receive it, and reveals unto them things
divine with understanding. And elsewhere; In 1 Cor. 12. Homil. 29.
If any one has been seized by the unclean spirit, and has divined, as being
besides himself, he has been reduced to that condition, bound by the spirit,
not knowing what he said. For it is proper to such, as foretell things to come,
to be out of themselves, to suffer violence, to be drawn, pushed forward,
dragged, as one, that is mad. The Prophet is not so; but, with a watchful
understanding, and settled disposition, and knowing what he utters, he says
all things, etc. After that by certain Ceremonies, and Observations, some one
had bound the Devil in the man, the man foretold things to come, and was
tormented in Divining, and torn to pieces, and was not able to bear the
impetuosity of the Devil, etc. Such is the violence, which they suffer, who are
once delivered up to the Devils; that is, they are alienated from their natural
understanding, etc. The evil spirit filling the Prophetess with Fury, she
immediately unbound her hair; behaved her self, as one distracted, and foamed
at the mouth, and spoke extravagant things, as if she had been drunk, etc. Our
Prophets prophesied as became them, knowingly, and with absolute liberty; and
they were accordingly their own Masters, to speak, or speak not, as they
pleased: for they were not forced by necessity; but honored with power. Upon
which account it was; that Jonas fled, and Ezekiel deferred, and Jeremiah
excused himself: God not pressing them by necessity; but advising, admonishing,
threatening them; not darkning the understanding. For it is the property of the
Devil to make a tumult, to cause madness, and much obscurity, and the property
of God, to illuminate, and teach, with apprehension, the things, that are
necessary. Again; Homil. 36.
To the end a man should not contend, nor move any sedition; he shows that the
gift is subject: for in that place he calls the efficaciousness of it, the
spirit; but if the spirit be be subject, how much more thou, who do possess
it, shall not thou be just in contending?

By Praef. in Nahum.
Saint Hierome, who, treating of the same matter, says. We are also to observe,
that this assumption, or charge, or weight, of the Prophet, is a Vision; for he
speaks not in Ecstasie, (as Montanus, and Prisca, and Maximilla fondly imagine)
but what he prophecies is the Book of the Vision of one, who understands all he
says, and makes it appear in the midst of his People; that his Vision is the
weight of the Enemies. Again; Praef. in Haba^.
We are to observe, that the assumption, or charge, whereof we have already
spoken, is the Vision of the Prophet, and that (contrary to the perverse
Doctrine of Montanus) he understands what he sees, and speaks not as a fool,
nor gives (as distracted Women do) a sound, without any signification. Whence
it comes, that the Apostle commands, 1 Cor. 14* 30.
that, if any thing be revealed to another, that sits by, the first should
hold his peace. For, (says be presently after) Verse 33.
God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace. Whence it is manifest;
that, when any one holds his peace of himself, and gives way for another to
speak, be can either speak, or hold his peace, at his pleasure; but that he,
who speaks in Ecstasie, that is, against his will, is not at liberty to speak,
or be silent. And again; Praef. in Isai. 33.
The Prophets spoke not in Ecstasie (as Montanus, with his foolish Women,
dreams) so as they knew not what they uttered, and (when they instructed
others) were themselves ignorant of what they said; of which (sort of people
the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1. 7.
Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm: but, according
to Solomon, in his Proverbs, Prove. 16. 23.
The Heart of the Wise teaches his Mouth, and adds Learning to his Lips)
they also knew, themselves, what they said. For, if the Prophets were Wise men
(which we cannot deny) and Acts 7. 22.
Moses, learned in all Wisdom, spoke to the Lord, and the Lord answered him;
and it is said of Daniel to the Prince of Tyrus, Ezec. 28. 3.
Art thou wiser, then Daniel? and David was wise, making his brag in the Psalm,
Psalm.
Thou have manifested unto me the unknown, and hidden things of thy Wisdom: how
could the wise Prophets (like irrational Creatures) be ignorant of what they
said? We read in another place of the Apostle; 1 Cor. 14. 32.
That The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: so as that it is
in their power, when to be silent, and when to speak. But, if that seem weak to
any one, let him consider this saying of the same Apostle; Ibid. 29, 30.
Let the Prophets speak, two, or three; and let the other judge: If any thing be
revealed to another, that sits by, let the first hold his peace. How then
can they hold their peace, since it is in the power of the Spirit, who speaks
by the Prophets, to be silent, or to speak? If then they understood what they
said, all was full of Wisdom, and Reason: and it was not an empty Sound, that
came to their Ears; but God spoke in the spirit of the Prophets, according to
what another Prophet says; Zach. 1. 9.
The Angel, that talked with me; and, Gal. 4. 6.
Crying in our Hearts Abba, Father; and, Psalm.
I will hearken what the Lord shall say unto me, etc. In Isai. lib. 1. cap. 1.
If what the Prophet said be called Vision, let us hear no more of the
Extravagances of Montanus; who thinks, that the Prophets foretold things to
come in Ecstasie, or Madness; for they could not see what they were ignorant of.

By Apud Ambrosium.
Hilary the Deacon, who interprets these words of St. Paul; 1 Cor. 12. 8.
To one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, after this manner; That is,
Prudence is given him, not through the assistance of Letters, but by the
irradiation of the Holy Spirit; that his Heart might be illuminated, and
Prudent; and that he might discern the things, which were to be avoided, and
which were to be pursued. Again, upon these words, 1 Cor. 14. 4.
He that speaks in an unknown Tongue edifieth himself; but he, that
Prophecieth, edifieth the Church, he makes this Remark; For it may be, in
regard he alone knows what he says, he alone is edified: for he, who
Prophecies, edifies all the people; when what he says is understood of all.

By the Author of the Commentary upon the Epistles, attributed to Saint
Hierome, whereof I should make no account (since it is, if not the Work of
Pelagius, as it seems to be, sufficiently pestered with Pelagianisms) if
Primasius, Bishop of Adrumetum, had not almost wholly Copied it into his own;
even that very Passage, where that man (whoever he were) Contemporary of St.
Augustine, interpreting the words of St. Paul, ordering him, that spoke in a
strange Tongue, to be silent in the Church, and to speak to himself; and to
God, when there is not any to interpret, writes, Let him prudently keep it to
himself, and to God, that he has that grace. And upon these words; The Spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, he adds; He, who has the spirit
of the Prophets, is subject to the other Prophets, by the society of Grace:
whereby he is not jealous; that another should Prophecy, when it is revealed to
him.

By Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, who upon these Words, 1 Cor. 14.
The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, declares; That the
Gifts are called Spirits.

By Primasius, Bishop of Adrumetum, who concludes from the same place; In 1
Cor. 14.
That The Spirit of Humility, and Charity, ought to be in the Prophets; because
God is not the Author of Pride, and Dissension, who dwells not in them, but of
Peace; because the things they Prophecy are known to them. And, from the last
Verse of the same Chapter; He, who is a true Prophet, no doubt, knows, and
stands not in need of admonition, or reproof; because 1 Cor. 2. 15.
he judges all things: yet he himself is judged of no man.

By Remy, Archbishop of Lions, confounded (by Villalpandus, and others) with
St. Remy of Rheims, In 1 Cor. 14. 32.
when having read the Text of St. Paul in the Singular number; The Spirit of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, he observes, That The Holy Spirit is,
after a certain manner, subject to all the Saints: for that it forces them, not
of a sudden to break forth into speech, as the evil Spirit does in Possessed
Persons, and Lunaticks; but leaves them at liberty to speak, or be silent. Then
adds; Otherwise, if we read in the Plural Number, The Spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets; we must understand, by Spirits, the Gifts of the
Holy Spirit; that is to say, the Tongues, the Virtues, the Casting out of
Devils, the advice of Wise men. Now these Gifts are in such manner subject to
the Elect; that, when they please, they exercise them, and, when they please,
they keep them, as it were concealed. By these Words is given us to understand;
that, although many Doctors were together, who knew by the Holy Spirit what
they ought to say; yet are they not always so compelled by the Holy Spirit, but
that, one being silent, the rest may also be silent.

By Oecumenius See him also upon the 2d Epistle of St. Peter, chap. 1. verse
20, 21.
who inserts these Words in his Chain upon the same Passage; He calls the
Spirits of the Prophets the spiritual Gift it self. Then to the end no man
should say, And, how can I be silent; for the Holy Spirit inspiring forces a
man to speak, whether he will, or no? No (says he) for the Gift is subject to
the Prophet; that is to say, it is in his power to speak, or be silent:
contrary to what happens in Diviners; for those, after their Enthusiasm (even
against their wills, as Possessed Persons) say what they would not. If then the
Gift be subject to the Prophets; would it not be inconvenient, that you should
be subject to what profits in common; so as that, when it were requisite to be
silent, you should be silent?

Consonant thereto, is the common Sentiment of the Modern Latin Interpreters:
as Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris; Nicholas de Lyra, a Franciscan; Thomas de
Vio; Cardinal Cajetan; Ambrose Catharin, Archbishop of Conza; James de Feure
D'Estaples, John de Gagny, and Claudius Cuillaud, Doctors of Sorbon; Francis
Titelman, of the Order of Saint Francis; Arias Montanus, of the Order of Saint
James; ^anuel Sa, of the Society of Jesus; and others, whom, for brevity ^ke, I
forbear to mention.

CHAP. XXVI. Consequences following upon the common Sentiment of the Fathers
concerning Enthusiasm.
FRom all the precedent Testimonies it follows; First, That there never was any
Body deprived of their Understanding, by the efficaciousness of any celestial
Inspiration.

Secondly, That whoever says, he is compelled, transported, and alienated in
spirit, does, by that very allegation, discover, that he is not moved by the
Holy Spirit.

Thirdly, That the Sibyls, who (by the Confession of all Antiquity) were Mad,
during the time of their Enthusiasm, were Women, not only Heathens; but
possessed with Evil Spirits.

Fourthly, That the name of Sibyl having never been used, but to denote Persons
of that condition, could never have been appropriated to any of the Holy women
mentioned in Scripture. So that, as Annal. part. 2.
Glycas, who bestowed it on the Queen of Sheba, did, in so doing, treat her
very unworthily: so I. ib. De Sibyllis.
Onuphrius, writing, That Deborah, the Wife of Lapidoth, an Hebrew- woman,
mentioned in the fourth Chapter of Judges, might be the most ancient of all the
Sibyls, and that there might be added to her Miriam, the Sister of Moses, and
Aaron, as may be read in Exodus, and, lastly, Huldah, the Wife of Shallum, of
whom are read many things in 2 Chronicles. 34. under Josias, King of Judah^; not
only contradicts himself, in that, to the prejudice of his Supposition
concerning Moses's Sister; whom he places among the Sibyls, he conceives
Debora, who was not born, till one hundred, fourscore, and one years, after the
Death of Miriam, was the most ancient of them all but has also (for want of
reflection) put a notorious Affront upon those Devout and Religious Ladies, in
comparing them to Possessed Persons, and Sorceresses; such as were all those,
whom the Heathens put into the qualification of Sibyls, because of their
Transportation, which they believed to have been Divine.

Fifthly, That the Author of the eight Books, entitled the Sibylline (upon
this very account, that he brags of having pronounced his Oracles with
alienation of spirit, by violence; and not knowing what he said) has
disclaimed the quality of Prophet; which he would have usurped, and deserved:
we should apply to his Fantastic Imaginations the Judgment, which St.
Epiphanius made of those of Montanus; Haeres. 48. cap. 4.
Those are the Discourses of an Ecstatick, and one, who comprehends not what he
says; but shows another Character, then the Character of the Holy Spirit, who
spoke by the Prophets.

Sixthly, That, if the pretension of the foresaid bold Forger argued him guilty
of the greatest Impudence imaginable, that of the Author of the Predication of
St. Paul, which refers the Heathens, to the Sibyl, and Hystaspes, was yet more
unworthy, and more sacrilegious.

Seventhly, That St. Justin, who maintains the Transportation of the Cumaean
Sibyl, and attributes to her the Verses he had extracted out of the eight
Supposititious Books, under the name of Noah's Daughter-in-law, went upon a
most false ground, and such, as was contrary to the persuasion of the whole
Church, and to the form of Disputation between the Orthodox, and the
Montanists, and such Fanatics.

Eighthly, That the same St. Justin, and Clemens Alexandrinus after his
Example, having taken occasion to celebrate the Counterfeit Sibyl, as a
Prophetess; and to recommend Hystaspes, as inspired of God, from their having
found somewhat to their commendation in the pretended Predication of St. Paul,
have injured their own Reputation, by contracting an over-confident familiarity
with Apocryphal Writings. For, though their Learning, and the Rank they held in
the Church, exempted them from the rigor of the Prohibition, made since by St.
Cyril to his Catechumen, saying to her; Catech. 5.
Read not any thing of the Apocryphal Books; yet had they as great reason, as
St. Hierome, to cry out; In Isai. lib. 17. cap. 64.
Let us hear no more of the fond imaginations of Apocryphal Authors; and to
conceive the same Horror thereof, as he would have raised in Laeta, and his
little Disciple, Pacatula; giving them this remarkable Advertisement; Epist. 7.
Let her beware of all the Apocryphal Books; and, if at any time she have an
inclination to read them, not for the truth of the Tenets, but out of a
reverence for the Signs [which are observed therein] let her know, that they
are not of those, under whose Names they go, and that many evil things are
crept into them, and that it is the Work of a great Prudence to seek Gold
amongst Dirt, etc. Let her Delight be in the spirits of those, in whose
Writings the purity of Faith is unquestionable; and let her read the others so,
as to judge of them rather, then follow them. If the examination of Books of
doubtful Authority was recommended to a simple Maid, how much more should it
have been the care of those Great men; for whom Christianity has a veneration,
as its chiefest Doctors? And, if the most inconsiderable among the Laity
should be armed with Precautions in reading, how much more requisite was it,
that the Guids of the Church should read things with attention, and vigilance?
But, the desire of profiting out of all things, of taking advantages every
where, of forcing Truth even out of the mouth of Falsehood, and to become like
Torrents, whose violence carries away what ever they meet with, has made many
of the Fathers, that nothing might escape the greediness of their Memory,
neglect the best occasions they could have had to make Discoveries of their
Judgment; and not only endeavor to draw to themselves all the apprehensions
of the Heathen, as well solid, as ill-grounded (as those great Rivers, which
contain in their Channels Golden Sand, and Dirt, mixed together) but also
triumph in that kind of employment, wherein there must sometimes be foul Play;
as if it had been lawful for them to say with Aeneas, in Virgil, -- Aeneid.
lib. 2.
Dolus, an Virtus, quis in host requirat?
Thence came it to pass; that St. Hierome, carried away with the violent Stream
of this strange Prejudice, made no difficulty to alledg for his Discharge, that
the Fathers Apol. ad Pammach. pro libris Advers. Jovin.
were forced to speak, not according to their own Opinion, but to say what was
necessary against what the Gentiles maintained; and that St. Paul, himself,
grasped at all he touched; that he turned his Back, to gain the better; that he
pretended a Flight, that he might Kill; that the Testimonies, he made use of,
speak one thing in their proper Places, and another in his Epistles; that there
are some captive Examples, which fight not at all in the Books, whence they are
taken, yet serve him to get the Victory: as if ever the Apostle of God had, by
his own Example, authorized the Licentiousness either of wresting the
Scripture; or stealing, for Truth sake, a shameful, and basely-obtained,
Victory, by a dissimulation of his own sentiment; or of thinking all means
indifferent, nay commendable, so it tended to the prejudice of Error; or of
seeking (according to the Maxim of Anaxagoras) all things in all things, and
setting up (to play the expert Merchant, acording to what is recommended to
Christians, by the Author of the Constitutions, Lib. 2. cap. 36.
as from the Apostles) an open Bank in Religion. But it is not given to all to
thrive in this Spiritual Truckage, and (with Virgil, who boasted he gathered
Gold out of Ennius's Dung) to find the Gold of Christianity in the common-
Sewers of Apocryphal Writings.

CHAP. XXVII. Certain Dis-circumspections of the Fathers, concerning the
Writing mis-named the Sibylline, considered.
TO give the last Touch to this Discourse of the Sibyls, we have yet to observe
some slight Forgetfulnesses, as well of the Ancient, as Modern. For Example,
St. Augustine Epist. 155.
says; that Virgil confesses, he had transferred, out of the Sibylline Poem,
these words, which may be applied to our Savior; If any Print of Ancient
Crimes remain,
Thou shall efface them in thy happy Reign;
And from perpetual fear all Nations free.
and, That (it may be) the Poet meant thereby something of the only Savior of
the World; which he thought it necessary to confess. Again, Exposit. inchoat.
Epist. ad Roman.
That He should should not easily have believed of the Sibyl, that she had
spoken of Christ, were it not, that one among the Poets, the most eminent of
the Roman Language, before he spoke of the Restoration of the World things,
which seemed to be sufficiently consonant to the Reign of our Savior Jesus
Christ, begins it with this Verse, saying,

The last Time comes, which Sibyl's Verse declare: and that no body questions,
but that the Cumaean Poem is the Sibylline. And De Civitat. Dei, lib. 10. cap.
27.
elsewhere, that Virgil shows, that he said not these words of himself, In thy
happy Reign, when he says, The last Time comes. Whence it is apparent, without
any contradiction, that that was said by the Cumaean Sibyl.

To which I answer, First, That Virgil does not say, he either had, or could
have, taken any thing out of the Cumaean Poem; which could not be come at by a
Person of his Quality; but that the last Time, which was to accomplish the
Destinies, foretold by the Cumaean Poem, was then coming in.

Secondly, That from this Discourse it does not any way follow, that the
Cumaean Sibyl had uttered what the Poet writ; but that she foretold the Fate of
the Empire to its last Time: whereof (according to his manner) he makes a
Description.

Thirdly, That if there be any Piety in the Application of his words to our
Savior, it is wholly groundless: the meaning of the Author having been
absolutely different, as has been showed already, and not any way discovering
he had any knowledge, or indeed Suspicion, of the Salvation of the Elect by
Jesus Christ.

Orig. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Isidore of Sevil, having presupposed, that the Gauls were so called, because
of their Whiteness; since (...), in Greek, signifies Milk, adds, Whence it
comes, that the Sibyl calls them so; when she says of them, -- With Gold their
White Necks are adorned:


And yet it is not certain;

First, That these Words are not the Sibyl's, but Aeneid. lib. 8.
Virgil's, representing, in magnificent Terms, the Sculpture of the Buckler,
bestowed by Vulcan on Aeneas.

Secondly, That Isidore mistook the words of Lactantius, who had (according to
the Observation of St. Praef. in lib. 2. Comment. in Epist. ad Galat.
Hierome) in this third Volume to Probus, held this Discourse; The Gauls were
anciently, by reason of the Whiteness of their Bodies, called Galatae; and the
Sibyl calls them so. Which the Poet would express, when he said; -- Their
Milkie Necks enchac'd in Gold;
when he might as well have said, White. For it is evident;

First, That he attributes not to the Sibyl the Words, which Virgil made use
of; but only the Use of the word Galatae, derived (according to the common
Opinion) from (...), which signifies Milk.

Secondly, That he would not say, that Virgil took his Conception from the
Sibyl; but that he (as well, as the other) reflected on the Etymology of
Galatae, derived fron (...), and applied to the Gauls, by reason of the
Whiteness of their Bodies. Besides, in the pretended Sibylline Writing, upon
which Lactantius only cast his eye, the word Galatae is not used to signify
our Western Gauls; who are therein called Lib. 5.
(...), and (...), and their Land Lib. 7.
(...) but to design the numerous Colony they had sent into the East of
Gallo-Grecians, or Asiatick Gauls: and the Counterfeit Sibyl has not any where
insinuated, that these Gauls derived their Name from (...); but Lactantius
presupposed it as likely, though without any necessity.

CHAP. XXVIII. That the Conjecture of Cardinal Baronius, concerning the
Correspondence between Virgil, and Herod, is not maintainable.
CArdinal Appar. Sect. 23.
Baronius, fixed in the Imagination; that Virgil had learned from the Sibylline
Verses, the approaching Advent of the great King; and that he had out of
flattery wrested the Sense, and applied it to Pohio's Son, alleges the
Authority of the Emperor Constantine; whereto we have answeredalready: then
makes this Observation; The said Maro might also have understood something from
the Hebrews concerning this Business; f^r Herod, King of the Jews (when he came
to Rome) had often (as Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 15.
Josephus writes) been entertained at the House of Pollio, Virgil' s great
Friend. Now, I entreat the Reader to consider, that all this is nothing, but
Wind. For

First, Josephus, who acknowledges, that Pollio was (...), of the number of
those, who made greatest account of Herod' s Friendship, does not particularly
denote of which Pollio he speaks, and it is generally known; that, besides C.
Asinius Pollio, Virgil's great Friend, mentioned by Pliny, Lib. 36. cap. 5.
there was at the same time, in Rome, Vedius Pollio, a man no less familiar
with Augustus, then Asinius; as is observed by the same Lib. 9. cap. 23, 53.
Pliny.

Secondly, Though Herod came four several times to Rome; yet is it impossible,
to make the conceit of Baronius to suit with any one of them. For the first
Journey he made thither was in the year of Rome 714, during the Consulship of
Pollio, to implore the assistances of the Senate against the Parthians; and
then he was in a private Condition, made little stay, had other Things in his
thoughts, then Discoursing with Virgil (who was then only beginning to come
into Repute, without minding ought of Religion) and, having his Imagination
employed how to get (as he afterward did) the Crown of Judaea, he would have
been more likely to entertain Virgil, and Pollio, with the Rising of his own
Glory, then of that of our Savior; whom the Scripture calls the Jer. 10. 7.
King of the Nations, and Luke 1. 78.
the Dayspring from on high. As for the other three, they were all of them
some years after the Death of Virgil; which happened on the two and twentieth
of September, in the year of Rome, 735. For the first was in the year of Rome,
738. to carry away the children of Mariamne into Judaea; the second, in the
year 744. to accuse them before Augustus; and the last, in the year 746. to
restore into favor Archelaus, King of Cappadocia, his Ally. So that Virgil was
not then in a Condition to learn any thing, either of him, or of any of his
Retinue; or, yet, of his Friend Pollio.

Thirdly, Josephus does not say; that Pollio was ever Host unto, or
entertained, Herod at his House: but that he lodged his Children, from the year
of Rome, 733. at which time Virgil was in Greece, to the year 738. which was
the third after his Death. And it is so far from being a good Consequence,
Pollio entertained in his House the Children of Herod; therefore, He received
Herod himself into his House: that the contrary seems rather to be inferred, He
lodged the Children of Herod; therefore, He could not, at the same time, lodge
Herod himself, their Father; who had a Royal Retinue about him, and was more
vainglorious, then any Prince of his Time. I press not, that Cardinal Baronius
(directly contrary to the Emperor Constantine, who commends the Piety of
Virgil) censuring his profane Flattery, renders him so much the more criminal,
for that, having learned of the Jews the Mystery of the Messiah, he, out of a
voluntary Malice, applied the Prophecy to Pollio, and his Son. All which
considered, gives me the Confidence to affirm; that the presumed communication
of Virgil with the Jews is a groundless Imagination, and no more.

CHAP. XXIX. That the Opinion of Anthonius Possevinus concerning the Sibyls,
and their pretended Writings, is not more rational, then that of Cardinal
Baronius.
ANthony Possevin, carried away with the Tortent of the common Opinion, makes
(as the rest) no small Stir with the Sibyls; saying, That Biblioth. lib. 2.
cap. 71.
Plato, Iamblichus, Porphyrius, and the other Academicks, of whose Doctrine De
Honesta Disciplina, lib. 7. cap. 1.
Petrus Crinitus has written, have treated of the Sibyls. De Divin. lib. 1,
and 2.
Cicero has treated of them, and Pliny; and, before them, Varro in his Books
Of Divine things, To Caesar; As also afterward, Cornelius Tacitus, Solinus,
Fenestella, Marcianus Capella, Virgil, Servius, and others; and of the Greeks,
besides the Platonists, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Suidas, Aelian in his Books
De varia Historia; nay, among the Christians, and ancient Greek Fathers,
Eusebius, Justin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Stratonicus Cumanus, Theophilus in his
Books to Autolycus; and, among the Latins, Lactantius, Hierome, Augustine,
etc. Now, many of the Fathers Hierom. lib. 1. contr^ Jovin. Eusebius. lib. 5. Hist
Eccles. Lactant. lib. 1. Divin. Instit. August. lib. (...). cap. 23. De Civ.
Dei. Just. Martyr, lib. 4. Advers. Gentes.
have affirmed; that these Sibyls had foretold things through the inspiration
of God; and the Apostle St. Paul exhorted the Gentiles to read their Oracles,
as Clemens Alexandrinus has left in writing, etc. Peter Garcias Galarza has
so Treated of all this whole matter; that, comparing the Verses of the ten
Sibyls with the Prophecies of the Holy Scripture, he has showed the admirable
Harmony between them.

But the Reader will be pleased once more to consider the inconsiderateness of
this, otherwise learned, man; who cites, among the Authors, that have spoken
of the Sibyls, Theophilus of Antioch, and, in his Apparatus, questions, whether
he should be admitted into that number; saying, Theophilus of Antioch, in Case
that Theophilus ever writ of the Sibyls. For

First, The Heathens knew not of any Sibyl, but the Idolatrous; as has been
already proved, and cite not any thing of what the Christians thought
Sibylline: the Christians, on the contrary, made no account of what the Heathen
esteemed, and confining themselves to the Rhapsody of the eight Books, which go
under the Title of the Sibylline Oracles, were deceived, thinking them to be
the ancient Sibyls; and consequently the Testimony of neither Heathens, nor
Christians, is not strong enough to authenticate them; in as much, as the
former have charged them with Forgery; and the later, who made account of them,
were circumvented; and their Design to bring them into credit proves
ineffectual upon this account, that (according to the Civil Cod. lib. 1. Tit.
18. cap. 9. A. D. 305. December. 8.
Maxim) The consent of him, who is mistaken, is null.

Secondly, St. Paul neither was, nor could be, the Author of the
Recommendation attributed to him; but some Apocryphal Writer, who
(impiously-bold) took his Name upon him, to deceive the World with more ease.

Thirdly, Eusebius does not so much, as name the Sibyls in the fifth Book of
his History.

Fourthly, The Name of Stratonicus was never heard of, among the Fathers of the
Church. Cumae is not found to have produced any Ecclesiastical Writers: and
Possevin, himself, grants as much; for that he does not allow his Stratonicus
any place in his Apparatus Sacer.

Fifthly, It was no hard matter for Galarza to find a Conformity between the
Prophets and the Writings of the Counterfeit Sibyl, since she was (whatever she
may seem to the contrary) a Christian by Prosession; and that she writ them one
hundred, thirty, and eight years after the Birth of our Savior: only it is to
be remembered; that this Conformity is not such, as is imagined; and that the
pretended Prophetess, to whom it is attributed, was full of Errors, and a
corrupt Divine. If therefore we must (with Possevin) blame Opsopoeus the
Printer of Basil; it should be, for having inserted this confused Medley into
the Body of Orthodox Writers, and added thereto the Oracles of the false Gods;
when nothing of it is Orthodox, or ought to find place in the Christian
Library. And, as to what is added by Possevin; That It had been more expedient
to set apart some few things of many, and particularly what might be taken, as
most certain, out of the Writings of the Fathers, with Notes, or a Paraphrase
thereupon; such as Constantine the Great has put before the Cumaean Sibyl
cited by Virgil; or Lactantius before Firmianus; or Augustine before the
Acrostick produced by Cicero: it is an Error infinitely beyond what he was
guilty of before. For it will never be expedient to propose to Christians, as a
Direction, the Stumbling Blocks, against which the Fathers fell, much less to
raise them into an admiration of Supposititious Pieces. Besides, it is
inconsiderately done by some, to alledg either the Paraphrase of Constantine;
who has put Virgil, and his Poem so unmercifully to the Rack: or the Acrostick
of the eighth Book of the Sibylline Oracles; which Cicero no more thought on,
then he did on the Story of Apuleius's Ass.

The End of the First Book.
OF THE SIBYLS. The Second Book.
Of the CONSEQUENCES arising upon the Supposititiousness of the Writing
pretended to be Sibylline.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TO revenge the ancient Injury done to the Church (in whose Bosom it is now
above fifteen hundred years, that some have been willing to fasten the
Supposititious Work of the Sibylline Writing) and to Truth, which has been
miserably disguised thereby; and lastly to the Fathers, who have been surprised
by the unheardof Impudence of the Impostour; who, presenting them with a
counterfeit Jewel, instead of a right Diamond, made them take Coals out of
Hellfire for a Divine Treasure: I have been forced to search into the very
Roots of so deep an Imposture, as such, as whereto many of our Time (even among
the Protestants) are still inclined to give Credit. And in what I have done out
of this Design, I have cherished a certain Hope; that those, who shall be any
way offended at the seeming Novelty of my Sentiment, will vouchsafe to consider
it without Prejudice: that, upon their acknowledgment of the solidity of its
Grounds, they may acquiesce therein; or, if they think otherwise of it, with
Reason correct it. In the Interim (presupposing it as well, and sufficiently,
proved) I shall entreat the Reader's Attention, to consider the Consequences of
the Doctrine unjustly attributed to the Counterfeit Sibyl, and, to proceed
therein with some Order, Observe,

First, In what Year precisely the Apocalypse (whereof the false Prophetess
attempts to wrest the true Sense) was written by the Apostle Saint John.

Secondly, About what time the extravagant Imaginations of the pretended
Sibylline Writings came first abroad.

Thirdly, By how strong a Prejudice they were possessed, who were (out of an
excessive Easiness of Belief) induced to admit them.

A TREATISE OF THE SIBYLS.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. An Enquiry thout the Time, wherein Saint John wrote his REVELATION.
AS we have, on the one side, the Consent of Antiquity, assigning the Life of
Saint John to have ended on Sunday, the 27th of December, in the third year of
Trajan; coincident with the hundredth year after the Birth of our Savior,
according to the Computation now used: so have we, on the other, Saint
Irenaeus, who suffered Martyrdom in the one hundred, ninety, and eighth year of
Christ, affirming in the thirtieth Chapter of his fifth Book, cited by Eusebius
(both in the eighth Chapter of the third Book, and the eighth Chapter of the
fifth Book of his History) that the Apocalypse was written (...).
about the end of Domitian' s Reign: which is confirmed by Clemens Alexandrinus
about the year 200. writing at the place, Copied out by Eusebius, that St. John
Eusebius. ex Clemente, lib. 3. cap. 23. (...).
returned from Patmos, after the Tyrant' s Death; that is to say, after the
eighteenth of September, in the year ninety six, on which Domitian was
Assassinated. Eusebius seems the more absolutely to acquiess in their
Sentiment, in that, having further published, and observed, in the seventeenth
Chapter of his third Book, that Domitian, (...).
toward the end of his Reign, became the Successor of Nero in his enmity, and
War, against God, he certifies in the nineteenth Chapter, that Domitilla was
Banished for the Profession of Christianity in the fifteenth, and last, year of
that Prince's Reign, which falls in with the ninety sixth of our Savior.
Further, that the (...).
Tradition of the Ancients affirmed; that St. John was called back from Patmos
by Nerva; and in his Chronicle (upon the fourteenth year of Domitian, which he
makes coincident with the second of the two hundred and eighteenth Olympiad)
that (...).
Domitian was the second after Nero, who persecuted the Christians; and that,
in his Reign, the Apostle St. John, then banished to Patmos, had seen the
Apocalypse, as Irenaeus declares. Which words manifestly relate to the place of
that holy Prelate, which he had Transcribed twice in his History, and which yet
St. Hierome, as well in his Version of Eusebius's Chronicle, as in his
Catalogue, wrests to another sense, turning it, Quam Irenaeus interpretatur.
Which Irenaeus interprets; as if Euschius had written, not (...) but (...).
and his intention had been to tell us; that Saint Irenaeus declared the
Apocalypse; rather then to give us to understand, that (according to the
Declaration of that great Martyr) St. John saw his Apocalypse, not only under
Domitian, but the fourteenth year of that Prince, or (to express it in his own
Terms) toward the end of his Reign. But with this little distortion of the
words of Eusebius, St. Hierome, in his Catalogue, expresses their true sense,
saying, Quarto decimo igitur anno secundam post Neronem Persecutionem movente
Domitiano, etc.
Domitian in his fourteenth year, raising, after Nero, the second Persecution,
John (banished to the Isle of Patmos) writ the Apocalypse; which Justin Martyr
interprets, and Irenaeus. So that we must not, with A. D. 92. Sect. 3.
Cardinal Baronius, give that Interpretation to his Discourse; as if Domitian
had began his Reign fourteeen years after Nero. For, though it be indeed true;
since Nero died the tenth of June, 68. and Domitian came into his Brother's
place on the eighteenth of September, 81. thirteen years, three months, and
eight days after the unfortunate End of Nero; and consequently about the
beginning of the fourteenth year: yet was it not the intention of St. Hierome
to acquaint us, what number of years had passed between the Reign of Domitian
and that of Nero; but that Domitian, in the fourteenth year of his Reign,
(which was the twenty seventh after Nero's Death) raised the second Persecution
against the Church. So that it was inconsiderately done of him, who Translated
the Greek Version of Sophronius, the ancient Interpreter of St. Hierome's
Catalogue, into Latin, to make him say, as he fancied, Decimo quarto post
obitum Neronis anno.
The fourteenth year after the Death of Nero, instead of turning it (according
to the proper expressions as well of St. Hierome, as (...).
Sophronius) Decimo quarto anno, secundam Persecntionem movente, post Neronem,
Domitiano.
The fourteenth year, Domitian raising, after Nero, the second Persecution: nor
indeed could it have been without contradiction to St. Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Eusebius, nay, to himself; and that so much the more
notorious, by how much the more he pretended to follow the last; whose
Discourse he has Translated, in a manner, word for word. The Arabian
Prolegomena upon the Gospels, published by Peter de Kirstein, have these words
in them; John made his abode at Ephesus seven and twenty years; that is to say,
six under Nero, ten under Vespasian, two under Titus, and nine under Domitian:
then was he Banished by Domitian into the Isle of Patmos, where he stayed seven
years, till such time, as he was called back by Nero the younger; that is to
say, Nerva.

By this account, the Apostle of God should have retired out of Palaestine into
the Proconsulary Asia; not (as the Greek Fasti very probably suppose) in the
68. of our Savior, because of the Revolt of the Jews from the Empire, and the
Eruption of the War brought into the Heart of their Country by Vespasian;
immediately upon the retreat of the Church of Jerusalem to Pella: but in the
year sixty three, concurrent with the ninth of Nero, and the time of St. John's
Abode, both at Ephesus, and Patmos, should have been thirty four years,
comprehending six years of Nero, and the whole Reigns of Vespasian, Titus, and
Domitian. For Nero killed himself (as has been already observed) the tenth of
June, 68. Vespasian (having news brought him in Palaestina of the Murdering of
Galba; which happened on the sixteenth of January, 69. as also of the Tragical
End of Otho on the twentieth of April following, and of the Rising of his
Friends in Rome) assumed the Empire, and kept it till the twenty fourth of
June, 79. and Domitian, who had succeeded his Brother Titus, dying the 13th of
September, in the year 81. was violently forced out of the world on the 18th of
September, in the year 96. leaving the Empire vacant to Nerva; who nulled all
his Acts, and by that means, gave St. John the Liberty to return to Ephesus.
But if this Calculation be receivable, in as much as it maintains the common
Sentiment of the Fathers, concerning the time of St. John's return, yet can it
not agree with the Relation of St. Irenaeus, affirming; that, (...).
almost in his time, Domitian began the Persecution, toward the end of his
Reign, and leaving it to be inferred, that the Persecution was of no long
continuance: which could not be said, if (according to the account of the
Arabians) we must assign it seven years; that is to say, a full half of
Domitian's Reign, and not only the End: whereto St. Irenaeus, Eusebius, and
all the Fathers, strictly limit themselves; among whom Apolog. cap. 5. Orosius
also, lib. 7. cap. 10. says, that as soon as Domitian began the Persecution, he
was (continuo) soon after killed.
Tertullian, Contemporary with St. Irenaeus, expressly observing the Violence of
that Persecution to have made no great Havoc, says; Domitian, an Imp of Nero,
as to cruelty, had designed a Persecution; but, being also himself a man, he
easily smothered what he had begun, having re-established those, whom he had
Banished. So that, according to his Opinion, the mischief was stayed by his
very Order, who had occasioned it. But, whereas by attributing to him the
Re-establishment of the Banished, he derogates from the Authority of the
Tradition of the Ancients, which (according to Eusebius) delayed it till the
Reign of Nerva, whom the Prolegomena (I know not why) call Nero the younger, I
shall, by no means, presume so much upon his particular Opinion, as to oppose
it to the common belief of all the Fathers. Which having forced us to reduce
only to one the seven years assigned by the Prolegomena, for the Banishment of
St. John, imposes upon us yet a greater necessity to quit the Opinion of the
Greek Fasti; which place the return of St. John under the twelfth year of
Domitian, coincident with the ninety third of our Savior, and commit therein
an Error so much the more unmaintainable; in that they make the Persecution
cease, as also the effect it had (by the confession of all) caused two years
before it began, and ridiculously presuppose, that St. John was (by the Decree
for his Release) restored to his former Liberty, before he had been in a
capacity to lose it, by the unjust Decree for his Banishment.

He, who has busied himself in writing a Synopsis of the Lives of the Prophets
and Apostles, under the Name of This man was Abbot of Rome, as is acknowledged
by the Greek Menologie; so that many, without any ground, not only confound
him with that Priest of Tyrus, who suffered Martyrdom under Julian the
Apostate, on the fifth of June, 362. but also give him the Title of
Archbishop; not considering, that no Prelate of that Name took the Government
of the Church of Tyrus, before that Dorotheus substituted about the year 457.
in the place of Photius, who had been present at the Council of Chalcedon, in
the year 451.
Dorotheus, having, by mixture of his own Conceptions, corrupted the words of
the Synopsis of St. Athanasius, imagines; that St. John was Banished by Trajan;
that he lived one hundred, and twenty years, and returned from Patmos to
Ephesus after Trajan's Death. But all (yet followed, as it should seem, by
Suidas) is contrary both to Tradition, and the Truth; since

First, Trajan came not to the Empire, till the twenty eighth of July, in the
year 98. the very next to that, wherein St. John was restored by Nerva.

Secondly, St. John was (according to the Opinion of St. Hierome) honored with
the Apostleship Advers. Jovin. lib. 1. cap. 14. Adhuc Adolescens, ac penc Puer,
etc. ut sciamus Joannem tnnc fuisse Puerum.
in his Youth, and while he was yet a Boy; so that the hundredth year of our
Savior, wherein he was Translated to Celestial glory, could not have been much
beyond the ninetieth of his Age, (to which St. Epiphanius confines himself) nor
coincident with the ninety eighth, chosen by Beda; nor with the ninety ninth,
which Usuard has taken; nor yet with the hundredth, which Cedrenus (for some
reason unknown to us) thought most worthy his Choice; And

Thirdly, the Death of St. John was seventeen years before that of Trajan; who
dyed of a Flux at Selinuntium in Cilicia, on the tenth of August, in the year
117.

CHAP. II. The Sentiment of St. Epiphanius, concerning the Time of the
Apocalypse, refuted.
I Have hitherto given an account of their Opinions, who (dissenting from the
common Tradition) thought, that St. John had writ his Apocalypse, either before
the twelfth year of Domitian; about four years sooner, then he did: or under
the Reign of Trajan; much later, then is consistent with the Truth. I now come
to prove the mistake of Saint Epiphanius, who (contrary to the Opinion of all
precedent Antiquity) going back to the Reign of Claudius, would needs make that
Prince Author of St. John's Banishment to Patmos. Haeres. 51. cap. 12.
The Holy Spirit (says he) necessitates John; who, out of a Religious, and
humble respect, refused to Evangelize in his old Age, after the ninetieth year
of his Life; (...).
after his return from Patmos, happening under Claudius Caesar, and after an
abode of many years in Asia. And toward the End of the same Treatise; Cap 33.
The Holy Spirit Prophetically foretells, by the mouth of St. John, what
happened after his decease; (...).
he himself having in the Time of Claudius Caesar long before, when he was in
the Isle Patmos (for they themselves [that is to say, the Alogians] acknowledge,
that these things have been accomplished in Thyatira) written, through the
Spirit of Prophecy, to those, who professed Christianity there at that time;
that a Woman should call her self a Prophetess.

This Venerable man, pressed to Ward off the Objections of the Heretics
alleging the Supposititiousness of the Apocalypse, in that it presupposed, as
extant, Churches, that were not in the Time of St. John (as, for instance, that
of Thyatira) admits, without any necessity, the Objection of those troublesome
Spirits, as if it had been out of all Question: then Answers; That John spoke
by Prophecy, not of the Church, which was then; but of that, which should be
planted some time after at Thyatira: where the People, seduced by the Alogians,
and Montanists, should, after the ninety third year from our Savior's
Ascension, or the one hundred twenty sixth from his Birth, according to the
account of St. Epiphanius, corrupt that wretched City with their Error; and,
having cited the Text of the Apostle, makes Application of it in these Terms;
Do you not see, that he speaks of Women, who, having been seduced with an
Imagination, that they had the Gift of Prophecy, have seduced many others? Now
I speak of Priscilla, and Maximilla, and Quintilla; whose Seduction has not
been hidden from the Holy Spirit. In fine, after he had searched into the time,
when he thought John Banished to Patmos, he shuts up his Discourse with this
Conclusion; that is to say, That in Thyatira a Woman should call her self a
Prophetess.

But, the more I consider this Answer, the less I find it (without prejudice
to the respect due to its Author) capable of giving satisfaction to judicious
Persons. For,

First, Is there any likelihood, that the Holy Spirit should direct Letters
from the Son of God to Churches, which had no being, when it dictated them, and
that we must understand these words, Unto the Angel of the Church, which is in
Thyatira, write these things, I know thy works, etc. The last are more then the
first, etc. I have a few things against thee; because thou suffer the woman
Jezabel, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and seduce, etc. in this
sense, Write to the Angel of the Church, which shall be in Thyatira, I know the
works thou shall do; the last shall be more then the first; I shall have some
few things against thee; thou shall suffer the woman Jezabel, who shall call
her self a Prophetess, to teach, etc? It was no hard matter for St. Epiphanius
to write it; but whom has he hitherto convinced of it, besides himself? This
manner of Interpretation being such, as that not any one of either the
Ancients, or Modern, has followed it, the very Singularity thereof should be
sufficient, not only to bring it into suspicion; but also to represent it as
so much the more unmaintainable, in as much as all, that professed Christianity
from St. John to St. Epiphanius, (that is, from the year 100. to the year 375.
wherein the later wrote against the Alogians had held the contrary to what it
supposes, and took it for a thing indisputable, that the seven Churches, to
whom our Savior directed his Epistles, had been planted by the Ministry of
Saint John before his Banishment to Patmos.

Secondly, Contradicting his own Hypothesis, to wit, that Thyatira had not had
any Church in the Time of St. John, he comes, for want of reflection, to
maintain the opposite Affirmative, saying, Then the whole Church (of Thyatira
was wholly degenerated into the Sect of the Cataphrygians [or Montanists]
accordingly the holy Spirit would needs reveal unto you how it should come to
pass, that the Church should be seduced after the time of the Apostles, and St.
John, and those who came after; it was about ninety three years after the
Assumption of our Savior, that the Church of that place, (to wit, Thyatira)
should be seduced, and fall into the Heresy of the Cataphrygians. For, if the
Church were planted at Thyatira, it necessarily follows, it was there: the
Allegation of the destruction of a thing containing the formal presupposition
of its precedent existence.

Thirdly, But, not to meddle any further with that contradiction of St.
Epiphanius, nor the supposition, which he granted the Heretics, as
acknowledged by all, he advances a new one against the express Text of St.
John; for he writes expressly, that the whole Church of Thyatira was degenerated
into the Sect of the Cataphrygians; whereas the Holy Spirit, on the contrary,
says it was not the whole Church of Thyatira, that had committed Adultery with
Jezabel, and received her Doctrine; but that, in Thyatira, there were some
Members of that Church, which were not fallen into those Errors; as it
expressly declares, speaking To the rest in Thyatira, who had not received that
Doctrine, nor known the depth of Satan, I say, etc.

Fourthly, Saint Epiphanius, himself, does further destroy the Computation he
had taken to denote the falling-away of the Church of Thyatira. For whereas, in
his Dispute against the Alogians, he affirms, that, in the ninety third year
after the Ascension (and consequently the one hundred, twenty sixth after the
Birth of our Savior) this Revolt happened; in the forty eighth Heresy, where
he particularly refutes the Montanists, he comes thirty years later, then that
Date, saying; These, (to wit, the Montanists) were about the twenty fifth year
of Antoninus Pius, after Adrian: which (according to our Computation) cannot
concur, but with the year 156. and is necessarily false, as to their Judgment,
who preceded in Time. For Claudius Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis in
Phrygia, limits the first eruption of the Montanists to the Proconsulship of
Gratus, which is consonant to the year 142. or thereabouts: and Apolionius, the
Roman Senator, who suffered Martyrdom under Perennius, on the eighteenth of
April, 181. observes, that, forty years before, that Sect pretended to a
Prophetic Spirit; thereby insinuating, that it had broke forth about the year
139, or 140. not much differing from the time assigned by Apollinaris, but
three years later, then St Epiphanius would have it, in his Dispute against the
Alogians, and thirty six years sooner, then he said in his Treatise against the
Montanists.

Fifthly, This Sect rose up particularly in Phrygia at a little Village, called
Pepuzium, which the Inhabitants (upon occasion of their pretended Prophets, who
were Natives thereof) named Jerusalem, and not (as Epiphanius imagined) in
Thyatira in Lydia; which, though adjacent indeed, and lying upon the Frontiers
of Phrygia, yet made a Province of it self, as appears by the Testimony of
Strabo (in his thirteenth Book) by Ptolomy (in the second Chapter of his first
Book) by the Council of Nice, Assembled by the Emperor Constantine the Great,
in the year 325. and by that of Lydia, convened by Order of the Emperor Leo
the First, in the year 450. where the Bishops of Thyatira subscribed. with the
Lydians, as being of the same Division. Nay, though there were only to
satisfy us, but the very Denominations of Cataphrygians, Phrygastae, and
Pepuziani, given by the Catholics to the Montanists, they might suffice to
make us apprehend, that we are not to look for their extraction in Thyatira,
out of Phrygia, from which they are specifically denominated.

Sixthly, From the application of the Name Jezabel arises a new Difficulty
against the Sentiment of St. Epiphanius. For whether we read with St. Cyprian,
in his fifty second Epistle, and with Primasius, Andrew of Caesarea, and
Aretas, Uxorem tuam Jezabel. (...).
Thy Wife Jezabel, which is consonant to the Reading as well of the ancient
Copy of Alexandria, wrote above thirteen hundred years since by Thecla, and
given to King James of Great Britain by the Patriarch Cyril; as of that of the
French King's Library, followed by Robert Stephen, in the Edition of the New
Testament in folio; that of Alcala de Henares; and that, which was followed in
the Edition of the great Bible of Andwerp; and other Impressions of Plantine:
Or simply Mulierem Jezabel: (...).
The Woman Jezabel; as is done by Hilary the Deacon, upon the eleventh Chapter
of the second Epistle to the Corinthians; Tychonius, (in the Homilies unjustly
attributed to St. Augustine) Beda, Ansbert (who joins the two different
Lections) and Berengandus, whose Commentary was published by Cuthbert Tonstal,
Bishop of Durham, under the Name of St. Ambrose: Or, lastly, take the Names of
Woman, and Jezabel properly, to attribute either to the Wife of the Pastor of
Thyatira, or of some other particular Person subject to his Government: Or
whether, lastly, they be understood Figuratively of the Heresy; as most of the
ancient Interpeters do: we shall not find any reason to apply them (as St.
Epiphanius does) to the three Prophetesses of the Montanists, Prisca, or
Priscilla, Maximilla, and Quintilla put together, nor to any one of them in
particular: not only because they were neither born at, nor Inhabitants of
Thyatira, but Phrygians, Natives of Pepuzium; but also because the reprehension
of the Son of God, charging the Jezabel of the Thyatirians with Adultery, and
the use of things sacrificed to Idols, can no way be said either of those
Women, whom Saint Epiphanius would have designed by the Name of Jezabel, or to
any of the Montanists, persisting in the strict observation of the corrupt
Maxims, which made them to err. For those People were so far from introducing
Licentiousness, and Dissolution, into life, and (as De Corona. cap. 11.
Tertullian speaks) unbuckling the Thong of Christian Discipline, to give way
to crimes; that they passed to the other extreme of the most scrupulous, and
superstitious Austerity, condemning De Monogamia.
Second marriages, the Use of things sacrificed to Idols, De Iejun.
the Eating of juycie flesh, and meats, during the time of Fasting, De fuga in
persecutione.
Flight in time of Persecution, and much more the denial of Christianity,
Adultery, and Idolatry, from which (as indeed from all impurity of life, which
they reproached the Catholics with, attributing to them a De Iejun. cap. 1.
Beastial faith, and upon that acount, crying out against them by the Name of
Psychici) they thought themselves so free, that they called themselves De
Monog. cap. 1.
the Spiritualized, De Iejun. cap. 1.
followers of the Discipline of the Spirit, which endeavored (after the
Example of St. Paul) to De ^lic. cap. 16
smother all the lusts of the Flesh, and which, to subdue it, proposed those De
^^^^^og cap?
burden, om things, which the Son of God meant, when he said to his Disciples,
Jo. 16. 22.
I have yet many things to tell you; but you cannot now bear them. But the
crimes of the Jezabel of the Thyatirians were remarkable in the Sects of the
Gnostics, Nicolaitans, and others, whom St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Saint
Epiphanius himself, St. Augustine, and all the Heresiologists that came after,
charge with the commission of them, so far, that Tertullian (a Montanist, and
admirer of those Women, whom St. Epiphanius pretends to have been designed by
Jezabel) engages agaiust the Gnostics, because they were guilty of the crimes
mentioned by Saint John; as his Scorpiacum, and his other Writings justify.
This, I say, demonstratively proves against St. Epiphanius; that we must seek
out the Jezabel of the Thyatirians elsewhere, then among the Montanists, and
mildly interpret what seems harsh in the Discourse of that good man, wherein,
after he had said, that the Apostle speaks (under the Name of Jezabel) of the
seduced, and seducing Women of the Montanists, he adds, that, in that place,
St. John wrote, that a Woman should call her self a Prophetess. For one Woman,
(to take the word strictly) is not Women; but I am rather apt to suppose, he
took the word Woman collectively; and in that comply with his meaning.

As to his maintaining, that the Holy Apostle was Banished to Patmos, and there
writ his Apocalypse under the Reign of Claudius, at least forty two years
sooner, then is held by the common Tradition of the Truth; I desire the Reader
to see him refuted by the very Acts of the Apostles, where he may find in the
eighteenth and nineteenth Chapters, that Saint Paul, having (in the year of our
Lord 51. coincident with the eleventh of Claudius) sowed the first Seeds of
Christianity at Ephesus, departed thence, to go and keep Easter at Jerusalem,
and that, after his Return, he continued constantly at Ephesus two years; that
is to say, the fifty second, and fifty third of our Savior, concurrent with
the twelfth and thirteenth of Claudius, who died on the thirteenth of October,
54. on the twentieth day of the ninth Month of his fourteenth year. For, since
Saint Paul was the Founder of that famous Church, which has been, as it were,
the Mother of all her Neighbors; that it is not likely, St. John, who seems to
have been then teaching the Parthians, to whom his first Epistle was (according
to the Opinion of some Ancients) directed, should come thither, during the
abode of Saint Paul; and that, after the Departure of Saint Paul, hastened by
the Insurrection of Demetrius, Claudius Reigned but nine Months; there is no
likelihood to presume, that, in so short a space of time, there should come to
pass all those things, which Antiquity assures us happened to Saint John; that
is to say, that he Confirmed the Church of Ephesus, and Planted the
Neighbour-Churches, and Confessed the Name of Christ at Rome; where, Hieron.
advers. Jovin. cap. 14.
having been cast into a Vessel of seething Oil, he came forth more fair, and
more vigorous then he was, when he went into it, anointed indeed, and no way
burnt; That In Mat. 20.
afterward, pressing forward, as a Champion of Christ, to receive the Crown,
he was immediately Banished to the Isle of Patmos; and that, during the Time of
his Banishment, he was honored with Visions from God.

Secondly, Though a man should run the hazard of imagining, that all these
Accidents, which require much longer time, happened in the turning of his hand,
yet could he not thereby shift off the difficulty; in as much as all Antiquity,
attributing the Banishment of St. John to Domititian, who assumed the Empire
twenty six years, and eleven Months precisely, after the Death of Cla^us,
does, as it were, by an unanimous consent, contradict the particular Sentiment
of Epiphanius, which ought not (what esteem soever we may have for him) to be
opposed either to Probability, universal Tradition, or the Authority of such,
as are more ancient, and more creditable, then he, upon this account, that they
lived nearer the Age of Saint John, and might be more easily informed of the
Truth.

Thirdly, For that the Church has always held it for certain;

First, That, full eleven years after the Death of Claudius, the first
Persecution was raised by Nero, to derive upon the innocent Christians the
Indignation of the Romans, exasperated by the resentment of their own Losses,
in the firing of the City, which that Monster, himself, commanded to be done.

Secondly, That the Banishment of St. John was consequent to some Persecution:
St. Hierome, Contemporary with St. Epiphanius, and his familiar Friend,
assuring us, that, because of the Martyrdom, St. John, immediately before his
Transportation to Patmos, was at Rome, cast into the vessel of seething Oil.

Thirdly, That all (Epiphanius only excepted) reduce the Banishment of St.
John to the second Persecution; which they would have break forth toward the
end of Domitian's Reign.

Fourthly, That, with the same unanimity of Sentiments, they attribute to
Nerva, who nulled the Acts of his Predecessor, the calling back of St. John,
and that not any one (no, not St. Epiphanius himself) ever charged Claudius
(whose Acts were confirmed by his Apotheosis) with having ill-entreated the
Christians. Whence it must of necessity follow, that the Banishment of St.
John, could not have been under his Reign, and consequently, that the Opinion
of St. Epiphanius, which we have demonstrated not to be maintainable in any of
its parts, neither can, nor ought, in this, to be followed by any one.

CHAP. III. The Sentiment of the late Grotius, concerning the time of the
Apocalypse, refuted.
FRom the year, 375. wherein St. Epiphanius writ against the Alogians, to the
year 1640. the Opinion of that Father was not embraced, but only by one
Person, that made Profession of Letters; a man indeed of extraordinary
Endowments, whether we consider the transcendency of his Wit, the Universality
of his Knowledge, which cannot be too highly esteemed, and the diversity of his
Writings, or reflect on the greatness of his Employments; but still a Man, and,
upon that account, not free from the hazard of misapprehension, and sometimes
making the worst choice. This man, having published a little Treatise in
Latin, entitled, Commentatio ad loca quaedam Novi Teslamenti, quae de
Antichristo agunt, aut agere putantur, expendenda eruditis, makes this Remark,
well worth our Notice, on the ninth Verse of ^e seventeenth Chapter of the
Apocalypse; John went first to Patmos, and began to be illuminated by Visions
from God, in the Time of Claudius, which is the Sentiment of the more Ancient
Christians; and not in the Time of Domitian, as others would have it. See
Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Alogians. Claudius had (as appears by Acts
xviii. 2.) forced out of Rome the Jews, among whom, at that time, the
Christians were also numbered, as has been observed by many learned men. Which
example, there is no doubt, but diverse Governors of the Roman Provinces
imitated; by which means John was forced to leave Ephesus.

But I maintain, in opposition to the Prejudice of this Great man,

First, That not any one of the Ancient Christians, nor yet of the Modern,
either were of the Opinion of St. Epiphanius, or favored it.

Secondly, That St. Epiphanius (who was neither preceded, nor followed by any
one in his Sentiment) says not any thing, that is maintainable, and is not
peremptorily refuted, as well by the Tradition universally received in the
Church, as by Reason it self.

Thirdly, That the Singularity, and Novelty, of that Father's Sentiment, being
contrary to those of all the rest, and in some manner to himself, should rather
have raised his Distrust, then prepossessed him.

Fourthly, That it cannot, by any Monument of Antiquity, be made good, that the
mistake of the Heathen, taking the Christians for Jews, had reduced (in the
Time of the Emperor Claudius, under whom the Jews were the only Persecutours
of the Church) any one of the Faithful to suffer Banishment, upon the account
of his being of the Faithful, or a Christian; and that to presuppose it only
by way of simple Conjecture, without any Proof, is no other, then openly to
prejudice one's credit, and to abuse their plain dealing, and easiness of
persuasion, who might comply therewith.

Fifthly, That it is impossible to make it good, that the Edict of Claudius,
which Banished the Jews only out of Rome, had been, or could have been,
imitated by any of the Governors of the Roman Provinces, who knew there was
but one Rome in the World, and that it was not within any of their
Jurisdictions.

Sixthly, That, by the History of the Acts, it is evident, that, after the
Edict of Claudius, the Jews enjoyed, in all other places of the Empire, as
absolute Freedom, and Toleration, as they could have done before; since St.
Paul, and Silas, and Aquila, and Priscilla, his Wife, lived without any trouble
at Corinth, where those of their Nation had their Synagogue, and assembled, as
they were wont, without any Disturbance.

Seventhly, That though the Governors of the Roman Provinces should have been
inclined (in imitation of their Emperor) to pack the Jews out of their
Jurisdictions, yet would it not be just to imagine any such thing of the
Proconsul of Asia; nor to presuppose, that, to comply with that Extravagance,
he had driven St. John (who was not within his Jurisdiction) from any place;
when at the same time, that the Jews were forced to depart Rome, St. Paul,
Priscilla, Aquila, and Apollos (who were no less of Jewish Extraction, then
John) sojourned at Ephesus without disturbance, their Brethren according to the
Flesh enjoyed there as much liberty as ever: nay, even when Demetrius had (with
those of his Profession) made an Insurrection in the City against Saint Paul,
they thought themselves sufficiently Authorized to pacify the Tumult,
thrusting out Alexander their Brother out of the Multitude, and charging him to
speak to the enraged People; for, if it were to no purpose, that they attempted
it, it was at least without apprehension of any danger, either to themselves,
or him.

Whence it follows, that, not only without any necessity, but also without any
ground, it is imagined, that St. John (who was not yet come to Ephesus, when
the Edict of Claudius came forth against the Jews) was driven thence by Virtue
of that Edict, which no way concerned him; and that, if there never could be
any excuse to introduce Novelties into the Business of Religion, we should be
much further from advancing ruinous Hypotheses, to maintain the more ruinous
Design of opposing common Sentiments. So that no man should think it strange,
if (through the just Judgment of God) those, who take a pleasure in
contradicting things, that are most evident, unadvisedly engage themselves in
inconsistent Opinions, to the prejudice of their Reputation, and such, as are
more apt to raise Compassion for their Weakness, then Jealousy upon account of
the great Esteem due to them.

CHAP. IV. A Refutation of the Sentiment of Johannes Hentenius of Maechlin,
concerning the Time of the Apocalypse.
HAving demonstrated the Improbability of the Sentiment, as well of St.
Epiphanius, as of him, who would needs make it his ground to build upon, not
considering he should do himself a thousand times more injury by following it,
contrary to the Truth, then he could have done, by contradicting it, to promote
the Truth he made it his Design to establish, I conceive it lies upon me, to
discover the absurdity of another fond Conceit, which (to bring, with less
inconvenience, the Tradition of the Church into Dispute) about the year 1545.
has referred the writing of the Apocalypse to the Time of Nero, ten years, and
more, later, then according to the Computation of Saint Epiphanius. Johannes
Hentenius, an Hieronymite, born at Maechlin, who is the Author of it, would
needs, in his Preface upon the Commentary of Arethas, entertain us with the
following Discourse. It seems to me, that John the Apostle, and Evangelist, who
is also called the Divine, was Banished to Patmos by Nero, at the very same
time, that he put to death at Rome the blessed Apostles of Christ, Peter, and
Paul. Tertullian, who lived near the Times of the Apostles, affirms as much in
two several places. Eusebius also treats of the same thing, in his Book of
Evangelical Preparation, though in his Chronicle, and Ecclesiastical History,
he says it happened under Domitian, which St. Hierome, and diverse others
follow. But to these last mentioned Books, as such as were written some years
before, there is not so much Authority attributed, as to that of Evangelical
Preparation; which was an after Work, on which more care, and exactness was
bestowed.

Thus are we furnished by this man with a third Opinion, inconsistent as well
with the two precedent, as the Truth it self, which declares only for the
first, confirmed by St. Irenaeus, and others of the Ancients; and what should
make this new Production the more contemptible, is, that it will be found
grounded only upon Chimaerical Suppositions, and, taking it at the best
advantage, speaks nothing positively Affirmative. For, whereas it is
confidently affirmed, that Tertullian assures us in two several places, that
Saint John was Banished at the time of the Martyrdom of the Holy Apostles,
Peter, and Paul, it is absolutely false; that Father, who makes mention of the
Sufferings of the Saints, Peter, Paul, and John, jointly all together in one
only place, to wit, in the thirty sixth of his Praescriptions, expressing it
only in these Terms: Stat. felix Ecclesia. cui totam Doctrinam Apostoli cum
sanguine suo profuderunt; ubi Petrus Passioni Dominicae adaequatur; ubi Paulus
Johannis exitu coronatur; ubi Apostolus Johannes, posteaquam in Oleum igneum
demersus, nihil passus est, in Insulam relegatur.
That Church (to wit, that of Rome) is very happy, for which the Apostles spent
their Doctrine, and spilled their Blood; where Peter was equalled to the
Passion of his Lord (that is to say, Crucified) where Paul was crowned with the
same way of Departure, as John (that is to say, Beheaded, as St. John Baptist
was) where the Apostle John, after he had been cast into the seething Oil, yet
suffered nothing, was Banished into the Isle. Whence it is evident, that his
Design was, to show, that St. John was persecuted not at the same Time, but at
the same Place, where St. Peter, and St. Paul were: so that his Discourse
(which proves nothing of what is in Question) abates naught of its Truth,
though it be believed, that Saint John's Banishment happened under Domitian,
and that, eight and twenty years after the Martyrdom of the Holy Apostles,
Peter, and Paul, under Nero. Besides the place before cited, there is, in all
the Works of Tertullian, no more mention of the Writing of St. John, then there
is of the Discovery of the West Indies; so that Hentenius, who brags, that he
had read, what he says, in them, must needs read it in his Sleep.

Nor is there less Imposture in what he attributes to E^sebius, who in his
third Book of Evangelical Preparation, and the seventh Chapter, having spoken
of the Imprisonment of all the Apostles by the Highpriests of Jerusalem, and
afterward of their Scourging, of the Stoning of St. Stephen, of the
Decollation of St. James the Son of Zebedaeus, of the Restraint of St. Peter,
and the Stoning of St. James the Brother of our Lord, adds, Peter was crucified
at Rome, with his Head downwards; Paul had his Head cut off, and John was
Banished into an Isle. For it is manifest, that this Discourse, designing
neither the Place, nor the Time of the Sufferings of these Holy men, cannot
oblige any Body to believe, that they were persecuted by the same Tyrant, and
at the same Time; and that nothing hinders, but that (according to Eusebius
himself, as well in his Chronicle, as History) the two former were put to Death
by the command of Nero, and the last Banished, eight and twenty years after, by
Virtue of a Decree of Domitian's. So that for a man to imagine the contrary
from Eusebius, cannot be without wresting his Words, and to think to deduce it
from the same words, by the force of Ratiocination, will amount to as much, as
a discovery of want of Reason, and argue, that the Person, who attempts it,
dreams waking.

The said Author thinks to give us a third Proof for confirmation of his
Opinion, when (relying on a wrong Interpretation of the word (...), which is
equivocal he supposes the Chronicle of Eusebius, and his History, were written
before his Work of Evangelical Demonstration, and, as less elaborate, were of
less Authority. For whence does he infer it? Eusebius in the thirteenth
Chapter of his sixth Book of his Evangelical Demonstration had used these
worrds; (...).
And, if our own enquiry into things, that concern our selves, is of any
account, we have seen with our own eyes Sion, which was of old so celebrious,
plowed up with Oxen, and subjected to the Romans. And every one knows, that
Eusebius, who lived not far from Sion, and was a Native of the Country, might
discourse to that effect with the more certainty, by reason of his having had
the opportunity to go thousands of times to the Place; nay, what is more, that
at this day (as in the Time of Adrian, who re-edified Jerusalem, under the Name
of Aelia) Sion, which in our Savior's Time was within its Walls, and the
Fortess thereof, is wholly out of the Compass of it, and in a manner
uninhabited, so that the ground thereof is, and may be, cultivated by the
labor of Oxen. But Hentenius, imagining that the word (...) could not signify
any thing, but his Ecclesiastical History, suffered to slip out of his Memory
what the Place of the Author he had in hand should have suggested to him, to
wit, that that very word is there (as frequently in other good Writers) used to
denote an enquiry, a survey, a visit; as when (...).
Plutarch in his Book Of the Cessation of Oracles, and (...).
Theodoret in the second Chapter of the first Book of his Ecclesiastical
History, make use of it; and when Suidas explicates the word (...) by (...).
Nay further, though we were apt to understand it otherwise, Eusebius, himself,
would not permit it, nor yet, that we should suppose, his Evangelical
Demonstration was, or was written after, or of greater account, or more
elaborate and correct, then his History; since that, in the third Chapter of
the first Book of his History, he cites the Demonstration, saying, Having
disposed into Commentaries, purposely designed for that end, the Extracts of
the Prophets concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, and in others demonstratively
confirmed the things, which have been declared of him, and clearly proves that
he had written it before; and it follows not, that, if he had writ it
afterward, it should be ever the more elaborate, for as much as The Life of
Constantine, whereof (contrary to what many at this day think) he declares
himself the Author, Lib. 2. De Vitae Constan in. cap. 24, 44, 45. lib. 4. cap.
34, 35, 36.
was written after the year 337. long after his Ecclesiastical History, yet was
never the more elaborate; since that, what it has common with the History, is
alleged in express Terms in several places: which shows, that Eusebius had not
any thing better to entertain us with, nor could have expressed himself in
better Terms, then he had done in his History, which he carried on but to the
the year 325.

The same may be said of his Chronicle, which being cited as well in the
Evangelical Praeparation, as in his Ecclesiastical History, must of necessity
have been written first. For it is so far upon that account from being less
correct, and elaborate; that, on the contrary, we must necessarily by it
correct several Passages, which he has, without sufficient recollection,
thrust into his History; which in that regard is the less elaborate. Add to
this the likelihood there is, that the Chronicle (which at present makes
mention, not only of the Death of Licinius, of the Council of Nice, and the
wretched end of Crispus, killed in the year 326.) was reviewed by him, after
the setting forth of his History, and consequently more elaborate, then any
other of his Works: which Consideration contributes as much, or more, then any
thing has been said, to the conviction of Hentenius of mistake, and to the
making of his imagination of no account.

It is therefore manifest, by the Testimonies of St. Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and St. Hi^rome, in the places alleged, as
also by Severus Sulpitius, in the second Book of his Sacred History, by Paulus
Orosius, in the tenth Chapter of the seventh Book of his History, by Primasius,
Bishop of Adrumetum, in his Commentary upon the Apocalypse, by Jornandes in his
Book De Regn. success* by Isidore of Sevil in his Chronicle, and his Book of
the Death of the Saints, by the Author of the Preface put before the Treatises
of St. Augustine upon St. John, by Maximus on Dionysius his tenth Epistle, by
the Counterfeit Abdias, and Prochorus in the Life of St. John, by Bid on the
Apocalypse, and Of the six Ages, by Him who wrote Of the Martyrdom of St.
Timothy, by Ambrose Ansbert upon the Apocalypse, by Paul the Deacon in Miscelia,
by Freculsius of Lizieux, Tom. 2. Book 2. Chap. 7, and 8. by the Roman
Martyrologies of Bid, Usuard, Ado, Notker, etc. by Michael Syncellus in
Encomio Dionysii, by Regino, by Arothas Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
by Simeon Metaphrastes, by the Greek Fasti, by the Arabian Prolegomena, by
Hermannus, surnamed Contractus, by Lambert of Schaffnabourg, by Marianus
Scotus, by Zonaras, by Cedrenus, by Nicephorus Callistus (in the eleventh
Chapter of his first Book, and the forty second Chapter of his second Book) by
Georgius Paechymerius on ^ionysius his Episiles, and by almost all those, that
have written since the Time of St. John, that that great Apostle received the
Revelations from God under Domitian, near the end of his Reign; that he was
recalled from Pa^mos by Nerva, and writ his Gospel after his return to Ephesus,
and ended this Life in the third year of Trajan: so that whosoever will have
the Obstinacy to maintain the contrary, must needs, before he pretend to have
any credit given himself, wholly take away that of all Antiquity.

Forty two years after the re-establishment of Saint John at Ephesus, and
thirty eight years after his Death, the Emperor Adrian, troubled with a mortal
Disease, and without Issue, did upon the five and twentieth of February in the
year 138. adopt Antoninus, surnamed The Debonnaire, conditionally, that the
Adoption should be extended to Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, the Sons of
his former adopted Son, who died on the first of January, in the year 137. and
he, himself, coming to die the 12th of July following, immediately thereupon
came abroad the Poem attributed to the Sibyls; wherein the Author, who,
toward the end of the 8th Book, assigned the utter destruction of Rome to
happen in the four hundred, ninety eighth year after its Foundation, coincident
with the year 195. of our Savior, upon this very account, that, giving two
several times a List of the Emperors, he reckons, after Adrian, Antoninus, and
his two adopted Sons, evidently shows, that he lived, and writ after their
Adoption. His own words make it manifest.

Lib. 5.
After him (that is to say, Trajan) another, one with a Silver Head, (that is
to say, Grey-haired) shall reign, who shall derive his Name (Adrian) from the
(Adriatic) Sea. There shall be another Person absolutely good, who shall know
all things (that is to say, Antoninus the Affable:) and under thee, O most
Excellent, and best of men, who art Brown-haired, and under thy Branches, (to
wit, Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus) will come the time of the
accomplishment of all things. Three shall reign; and the third shall have the
government after all the rest. And elsewhere, speaking to Rome, he says, Lib. 8.
After that three times five Kings (that is to say, Julius, Augustus, Tiberius,
Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Piso, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus,
Domitian, Nerva, and Trajan) shall have reigned in Thee, and subdued the World
from East to West, there shall be a King with an Hoary head, taking his Name
(to wit, Adrian) from the Sea (Adriatic) etc. Besides him, there shall reign
(to wit, Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, and Verus) under whom shall be the last of
Times, and by the Name they all shall have (of Antoninus) fill the Name of the
celestical God, (to wit, Adonai) whose Power is now, and will be for ever.

CHAP. V. A Refutation of Possevinus concerning the Time, when the Sibylline
Writing came first abroad.
IT must therefore of necessity follow, that the Impostour, who, to draw up
Catalogues of the Emperors, had borrowed the Name of the Sibyl, put that Cheat
upon the World, since the year 138. let us now see how long after. Possevin, in
his Apparatus Sacer, upon an imagination, that he speaks of the second
Conflagration of the Temple of Vesta, makes him live after that Accident, and
thereupon is mistaken in four several respects. For

First, he makes an ill concurrence between the year, 199. with the Empire of
Commodus, Assassinated the 31th of December, 192.

Secondly, he, no less unjustly, assigns the Conflagration of Vesta's Temple in
the year 199. since that (according to Dion, in his seventy second Book,
Herodian, in his first Book, and Orosius, in the sixteenth Chapter of his
seventh Book) it happened toward the end of Commodus's Reign; who left this
world seven years before. To which may be added, that Eusebius, whose Authority
he notoriously abuses, determines the time of that ruinous Accident; affirming
it to have happened in the third year of the 242. Olympiad, and the twelfth of
Commodus: which concur only with the 191. year of our Savior.

Thirdly, When he designs the three Successors of Adrian, omitting Verus taken
into Partnership of the Empire by Marcus Aurelius, he reckons in his stead
Commodus, on whom the pretended Sibyl neither thought, nor could have thought,
since she writ her Poem above fifteen years before the Birth of that Prince,
which was on the thirty first of August, 161. and above thirty years before his
association in the Empire, happening on the twenty seventh of November, 176.

Fourthly, Though the Author of that Romance might have spoken somewhat of the
Conflagration of Vesta's Temple; since that upon the very account of his having
supposed, that Rome should be burned in the year after its Foundation, 948.
concurrent with the year 195. of Christ, and the third of Severus, he would
insinuate, that all the Temples of that City (that of Vesta among the rest)
should be consumed by Fire, and could not (as being dead before) either see the
Conflagration of it, or (according to his own Hypotheses) say, that he had seen
it; yet how, after he had measured the duration of Rome by the Lives of
Antoninus, and his two Adopted Sons, Marcus Aurelius, and Verus (showing
thereby he writ in their Times, and consequently, before the year of Christ
160.) could he have been in a capacity to speak of commodus, who was born the
last of August, 161. five Months, and twenty four days after the Death of
Antoninus, and affirm he had seen the second Conflagration of Vesta's Temple;
which came not to pass till the year, 191. and the twelfth year after the Death
of Marcus, with whom he seemed to imagine that Rome, and the whole World,
should perish?

For instance, in the third Book (page 27.) he had written, that Rome should
become (...), that is to say, a Village; which he had done in imitation of the
Apocalypse, Chap. xvii. Verse 16. and Chap. xviii. Verse 8. and Chap. xix. Verse
3. openly threatening it with a final destruction by Fire, saying in the second
Book, (page 14.)

Rome's seven-hill'd People God shall shake;
And Fire of much Wealth shall destruction make,
Snatched up by Vulcan's ravenous Flames --
And page 20.

-- By a sad Fate,
There shall be three will lay Rome desolate:
All men shall in their Houses be destroyed,
By Cataracts of Fire from Heaven --
And in the fifth Book, (page 40.) Surrounded with a burning Fire, go dwell
In the dreadful abode of lowest Hell.


And in the eighth Book, (page 58.)

-- To Naphta thou,
Bitumen, Sulphur, Fire reduced shall be:
But Ashes to be burnt t'eternity.
Nay, that there should not be the least difficulty, as to what concerns the
Time of that Catastrophe, he had declared himself in these Terms, page 59.

-- Thou shall complete
Three times three hundred years, and forty eight:
Of thy Name then the Number being past,
Thy wretched Fate shall Thee surprise in haste.
That is to say, the word (...), whereof the Letters produce the Number 948.
thus; (...) 100. (...) 800. (...) 40. (...) 8.

But could he, without being ridiculous, and passing for a Fool, brag, that he
had survived those, under whom Rome, and the World, should come to its Period;
but also, that he had been Spectatour of an Accident, which but four years
preceeded the day, he had assigned for that utter desolation? Or could he, with
any countenance, have acknowledged, that he had outlived the Time, which he
had assigned for the determination of the Empire, and the Universe? But he has
not showed himself so much a Fool, as a confident Impostour, and his words,
which Possevin thought might be applied to the second Conflagration of Vesta's
Temple, relate only to the final Destruction of that of Jerusalem; which he
calls the Amiable House, the Guardian-Temple of the Divinity: an Elogie, which
could not be given the Temple of Vesta by him, who undertook to dispute against
the Idolatry of the Heathen, for the worship of one God. Besides the Remark,
which Possevin makes of the Author of the second Conflagration of that Temple,
which the Counterfeit Sibyl meant, saying; That he had, with an impious hand,
attempted, clearly discovers, that he reflected on the Hand of that Infidel
Soldier, who had fired the Temple of Jerusalem, and was declared impious by
the Judgment of Titus, General of the Roman Army. For the Counterfeit
Prophetess might well brag of the sight of that horrid Accident; since it had
happened in the year of our Lord 76. sixty eight years full before the reign of
the Antonini; under whom she writ; though it was no less, then the height of
impertinence in her, to call her self (as she did) Noah's Daughter-in-law, and
to boast, that she had seen a ruin 2068. later then the death of Noah, and
2427. years after the Deluge; as if (according to the Fable advanced by Ovid,
in the thirteenth Book of his Metamorphoses) that pretended Prophetess, having
obtained the Privilege of living as many years, as there were Grains in the
heap of Sand showed by the Cumaean Sibyl to Apollo, she had (at the time of her
Writing) already passed not 700. years, as that Prophetess of Ovid, but above
2400. and expected to continue till the end of the World; whereas the Cumaean
Sibyl (as is reported of her) thought she was to become, at the end of a
thousand, so wasted, as not to have any Body at all; having after the
dissolution of her precedent Form, only her voice left her to foretell what
was to come. Her words, taken out of the fifth Book (page 49.) are these:

(...), etc.
Nor longer shall in Thee the Virgin quire
The Fuel find of their perpetual Fire.
The Amiable House long since by thee
Has been destroyed. The second I did see,
The guardian-Temple of the Divinity,
That ever flourishing house, in 'ts Ashes lie
Fired by an impious hand, etc.
Which Discourse cannot clearly relate to any thing, but the Conflagration of
the Temple of Jerusalem by the Roman Army; as a Punishment for which act, the
Author of the Sibylline Oracles pretends, that Rome should be laid desolate,
in such manner, as that the Vestals should not any longer keep in the Fire,
which they called Sacred, and Divine.

CHAP. VI. Of the Time, when the Sibylline Books were written.
FRom what has been said, is manifest, that the Opinion of Possevin,
concerning the Time, wherein the Person, who counterfeited the Sibyl, lived, is
ill grounded; and our Method now calls upon us to make enquiry, how many years
we must ascend, assuredly to find it out. That he Writ under Antoninus, his
own words were sufficient to convince any man, that should well consider them;
but his credit, sequestered from the things, which may otherwise keep it up,
being with good reason, of no account, his sincerity is greatly to be
suspected, and his discourse requiring much caution, it is necessary we find
other helps to confirm what is advanced, and prefer the Testimonies of those,
whom his Imposture has circumvented, before any thing he could have
represented of himself.

Theophilus of Antioch, who died on the thirteenth of October, in the year 180.
in regard he has inserted into his Books To Autolycus diverse things taken out
of the Sibylline Writings, does irrefragably prove; that they were before him
in Time; and that (contrary to the conjecture of Possevin) the Author, who
first writ them, reached not the Reign of Commodus; who, when Theophilus died,
only began the eighth Month of his Reign. Athenagoras, who (in his Embassy to
the Emperors, Marcus Aurelius, and Verus, on the behalf of the Christians)
copied six Verses out of the second Book, shows, that this counterfeit Prophecy
was in Vogue some time before the year 170. in which Verus died. Hermas, (whom
-- Cui germine Frater Angel. cus Pastor --.
Tertullian affirms to have been Brother to Pope Pius the First, who took the
Chair on Sunday, the seventh of March, 146. under the Consulship of Clarus, and
Severus, and died on the eleventh of July, 150. under the Consulship of
Gallicanus, and Vetus) discovers, that he had a particular knowledge of the said
Writings; since that, in his Work, entitled, The Pastor, he has not only
shuffled many fantastic Imaginations, suitable to those of the pretended
Sibyl; but designed the Author by the very Name he would go under: For as much
as in the second Vision of the first Book, having imagined that an Aged Woman
had, while he was in Ecstasie, given him a little Book to transcribe,
containing Exhortations to Penance, he expressed what he seemed to believe of
it in these Terms; Brethren, it has been revealed to me in my Sleep, by a
Young man of a goodly appearance, and saying to me, Who do you think this Aged
Woman is, of whom you received the Book? and I said, The Sibyl.

Whence it follows; That, before the year, 150. this Opinion had gained Footing
at Rome, among the Christians; That a Sibyl, much unlike that of the Heathens,
gave Sinners wholesome Instructions in order to the Exercises of Penance, and
true Piety. And whereas Pope Pius, in his second Epistle to Justus of Vienna,
makes mention of the Death of his Brother; saying, The Priest, called The
Pastor, has founded a Title, and is worthily departed in the Lord, it
justifies, that between the year 146. and 150. Hermas had maintained the
Suppostion of the Sibyl, and that the Author of the Books attributed to her
must be yet more ancient. St. Justin, a Christian Philosopher, a Native of
Neapolis in Palaestina, sometime called Sichem, and who afterward suffered
Martyrdom at Rome, on the first of June, 163. does in his First Apology,
presented to the Emperor Antoninus his Adopted Sons, and the People (before
Marcus Aurelius had been received into Partnership of the Empire, and
consequently, about the year 141, or 142.) complain of the Prohibition had been
made, that none upon pain of Death should read the Books of Hystaspes, and the
Sibyl, which he presented to the Princes, and Senate, as things deserving to be
highly esteemed: and it is not to be doubted, but that Holy Person spoke of
those, which are come to our hands; since that in his Exhortation to the Greeks
he copied three Verses out of his Preface, three out of the third Book, and
Seven out of the Fourth; a manifest Argument, that they were already
published; since they had passed through his Hands, and that he objected them
(as Pieces generally known) to the Heathen themselves; whose Errors he opposed.

CHAP. VII. A Conjecture concerning the Author of the Sibylline Writings.
IT were at this Day impossible for any man to be so happy in the discovery of
the Author of that Imposture, as that he might, without any fear of Mistake,
make his Name public, to be covered with the shame, and enormity of his
sacrilegious attempt, against the sincerity of the Church. But methinks there
is some ground to charge, if not as the principal advancer of the Cheat, at
least as a complice of his crime, Hermas, who (as has been observed) spoke of
the Sibyl in the year 148, or 149. and who was grown infamous for another kind
of Supposititious dealing, whereby he presumed to feign Apparitions of Women,
and Angels, disguised like Shepherds; who furnished him with Instructions of
Penance, pestered with fantastic Imaginations, which he has expressed in as
wretched Greek, as that of the Sibylline Writings, and such as (equally with
the other) deserves perpetual dishonor. Though he were a Native of Aquileia,
yet was his residence, with his Brother Pope Pius, at Rome, that is, in the
Heart of that place, which (for the space of seven hundred and tweny years) had
pretended to the custody of the Sibylline, and Prophetical Books, dictated by
the Spirit of Impiety, and Lying, to the Heathens; in the same City, and at the
same time, that Justin Martyr (as Lib. 4. cap. 11. (...).
Eusebius has observed) made his Exercises; so that he was present at the
first production of the abortive Issue of the Counterfeit Sibyl, and had been
one of the most ready to take care of it. But when I consider, on the one side,
that the Adulterous Father of the Poem pretendedly Sibylline, insinuating that
he was a Phrygian by extraction, represents Phrygia, as the first of the
habitable parts of the Earth after the Deluge, calls it, upon that occasion,
Lib 3. page 27. (...).
Lifebringing, and Ancient, introduces, in the first Book of his pretended
Oracles, (page 9.) Noah, making this Discourse, -- Above the Floods
T'appear, thou Phrygia first shall strive;
That so a second Race thou may derive
Of men, and be the common Nurse of all.
and adds presently after; In Phrygia's Confines a black Mountain is,
Called Ararat, high, reaching to the Skies:
Translating Ararat out of Armenia into Phrygia: it may be, because he found
there, between the Mountain Taurus, and the Maeander, the City of Apamaea,
surnamed (...), Cibotos, situated at the foot of the Mountain Signias in the
midst of the Rivers of Marsyas, Obrima, and Orga, all falling into the
neighboring Maeander, and imagined, that it was called (...), which signifies
an Ark, in memory of Noah's Ark, which he supposed to have rested on the
Mountain Signias; never considering, that that Mountain is not of such height,
and extent, as to bear the Epithets he gives it, nor that Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Josephus, whose Writings he might have read, and whose person he might have
seen, affirms from Berosus, Hierome of Egypt, Mnaseas, and Nicholas of
Damascus) that Noah's Ark rested in Armenia upon the Mountain Baris, in the
Country of the Cordueni, above Minyas; that the Ruins of it were there
preserved, and that the Inhabitants were wont to scrape off bitumen, to use as
a Preservative; which is also confirmed by De praepar. lib. 9. In the third
Book of Theophilus to Autolycus, it is said; That the Relics of the Ark were
to be seen in the Mountains of Arabia.
Eusebius, from Abydenus: and on the other, that, just at the time that the
Counterfeit Sibyl came first abroad, Claudius Apollinaris, Bishop of Hierapolis
in Phrygia, and Apollonius, the Roman Senator, and Martyr, affirmed (as has
been already observed) that Montanus, a Phrygian, and their Contemporary, took
upon him to act the Prophet; I find so much the more likelihood to lay this
Bastard to him, the more free I find it (as the Pastor of Hermas) from
containing any Passage, that might displease the Montanists; but I determine
nothing, and am very willing to resign to any one, that shall take the trouble
upon him, the task of teaching us better things.

CHAP. VIII. Diverse Extravagances remarkable in the Sibylline Writing.
IN the beginning of this Treatise, I gave several Instances of the fond
Imaginations observable in that Work, most part whereof are either without
order, and coherence, or no way prejudiced the Truth. I might further reduce to
this Head an affectation of the Author sufficiently importunate, and no way
suitable to the end, he seemed to propose to himself namely, that of shuffling
into his Discourse most of those terms, which the Heathens in their Mythologie
had used for the Description of Hell, and Infernal places, as if he had made it
his Business to bring it into reputation. Such are, for instance, that of
^rinnys, used by him, lib 3. page 38. Styx, lib. 3. page 22. that of Tartarus,
lib. 1. page 7, 8. lib. 2. page 18. lib. 5. page 44. lib. 8. page 61. that of
Frebus, lib. 1. page 7. lib. 3. page 33. that of Acheron, lib. 1. page 11. lib.
2. page 18. lib. 5. page 51. that of Flysium, lib. 2. page 18. lib. 3. page 32,
34. his licentiousness of expression, not well suiting with Christianity, taken
in good part by the Fathers, has been constantly dissembled by them, in like
manner as were the Fables of the Titans, Saturn, and others; which were of no
small account in the pretended Sibylline Poem: but there are some other
Passages scattered up and down in it of a much greater concern, and such as
have occasioned Consequences of far greater importance. I shall not insist on
the Author's having thrust into his eighth Book an Acrostick made up of these
five words, (...) whereof the initial Letters, put together, made up the word
(...), which signifies a Fish; from which supposition Tertullian, (in his Book
De Baptismo) Zeno de Verone, (Sermon. 5. ad Neophytos) Optatus Milevitanus, (lib.
3.) St. Augustine (De Civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 23) and others, have derived so
great prejudice; that they have, with a certain emulation, made a noise about
it; calling the Lord Jesus, Piscem nostrum, that is to say, our Fish; the
Christians, regenerated by Holy Baptism, pisciculos, little fishes; the
Baptismal Font, piscinam, the fish pond, or place where the Fishes are kept: in
consequence whereof a pleasant Humor took them of Allegorizing upon the
Piscina, or Pool, mentioned in the Latin Version of the fifth Chapter of Saint
John's Gospel.

CHAP. IX. The first Principal Tenet of the Sibylline Writing.
THe same Author, having fondly derived from Lib. 1. p. 7. (...).
Adam, which is originally Hebrew, that of (...), Hades, which is purely Greek
(and signifies in the New Testament, either Hell, as in Matthew. xvi. 18. Luke x.
15. and xvi. 23. or the Sepulcher, and State of the departed in respect of
their Bodies, as Acts ii. 27, 31. 1 Cor. xv. 55. Apocal. i. 18. and vi. 8. and
xx. 13, 14.) lays it down, as a thing manifest; that all men from Adam are
(after their death) confined in Hell, till the time of their resurrection;
saying in the first Book (page 7.) All men, who have been Inhabitants of the
earth, are commanded (or said) to go to the habitations of Hell: and page 11.
where he speaks of the three Sons of Noah, whom he feigns never to have been
sick, or troubled with the inconveniences of Old Age;

They by a certain sleep overcome shall die;
And gone to Ach'ron there in honor be:
For, happy, they were of the blessed Race,
In whom (God) Sabbath did his Wisdom place.
His will to these he ever did declare;
To these, who, though in Hell, yet happy are.
He lays it down, I say, as a thing manifest; That all men, from Adam, descend
into hell, and there expect their Resurrection: a Supposition refuted by the
History of Eliah, 2 Kings 2. 11.
whom Elizeus saw ascending into Heaven in a Whirl-winde; and by the Gospel,
which assures us, that the Thief, converted upon the Cross, was the same day,
that he died, Luke 23. 43.
with the LORD in Paradise; and by St. Paul, who teaches; that, as being in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, so 2 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
being absent from the body, we are present with the Lord; and protests that
Phil. i. 23.
his desire is to depart, and to be with Christ; showing, that, on the one
side, these things, to be abjent from the body, or from the Lord, and being in
the body, or with the Lord, are irreconcileably opposite; on the other side
these, to be absent from the body, and to be with the Lord, and on the
contrary, to be present in the body, and to be absent from the Lord, are
inseparably conjoined; so that the very Thus St. Gregory Nazianzene interprets
St. Paul; affirming of him, that he says, (...), that Our departure ought to be
^ith the Lord. ^at. 10.
act of the separation of the body necessarily translates the Faithful into
the presence of the Lord, of which their presence in the body deprives them.
Yet this Supposition, though refuted, as aforesaid, had such a strange
influence upon the spirits of many great Churchmen in the Second, and Third
Age; that they outvied one another, in the maintaining of it.

Thus Hermas (at the same time, that the Counterfeit Sibyl made her first
attempt upon the sincerity of the Christians) became the Patron, and
Propagatour of it, writing of the Apostles, and Faithful departed before; The
Apostles, and Doctors, who have preached the Name of the Son of God, and are
dead, by the power (of God) and by Faith, preached to those, who were dead
before, and gave them the Seal of preaching. They are descended with them into
the water, and they ascended again out of it; but those, who were dead before,
descended dead, and ascended living. Which words are so much the more
observable, in that they have been subscribed by Clemens Alexandrinus, (Strom.
2, and 6.) inferring from them, that the Apostles (conformably to what had been
done by our Savior) preached the Gospel to those, who were in Hell, and that
it was necessary, that the best of the Disciples should be imitatours of their
Master there, as they had been here; supposing, after Justin Martyr, and St.
Irenaeus, that our Savior being descended into hell, after his Passion, had
preached the Gospel to those, who were detained there, in which Opinion he has
been followed by St. Athanasius, St. Hilary of Poictiers, Hilary, Deacon of the
Roman Church, St. Epiphanius, St. Hierome, St. Cyril of Alexandria,
Oecumenius, etc. And secondly, for that they insinuate not only, that the
Apostles descended into hell after their death, for to preach there, but that
the Faithful, departed after the Passion of our Savior, had been there,
taught, and converted; and consequently, that all, without any exception, were
there detained.

Presently after the publication of Hermas's Writings, Pope Pius the First,
Brother to that pretended Prophet, complies with him, in his first Epistle to
Justus of Vienna; saying, The Priests, who (having been nourished by the
Apostles) have lived to our days, with whom we have divided together the word
of Faith, being called hence by the Lord, are detained, shut up in eternal
Repositories; sufficiently discovering (by these words, which denote a
perpetual detention, if not absolutely, at least in some respect) that he had
embraced the same Opinion. Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew
(writ some years after the presentation of his Apology, where he makes mention
of the Sibyl) endeavors, all he can, to maintain it, as well by his Hypothesis
of the Souls of the Just being exposed to the rage of evil Spirits, as by an
Apocryphal Passage he attributes to Jeremy (and which Irenaeus, sometime after,
cites, Lib. 3. cap. 24.
one while under the name of Esaias, Lib. 4. cap. 39.
another, under that of Jeremy, and certainly with as little reason one, as the
other) in these Terms, The God of Israel has remembered his dead, lying in the
slimy earth; and descended to them to preach his salvation among them. Which
St. Irenaeus does five several times apply In the places before-cited and lib 4
cap. 56, 66. and lib. 5. cap. 31.
to the descent of our Savior into hell after his Passion; saying, If the
Lord, that he might become the first fruits from the dead (Col. i. 18.)
observed the Law of the dead, and continued to the third day in the lower parts
of the Earth (Ephesians. iv. 9.) etc. since he went to the valley of the shadow of
death (Psalm. xxiii. 4) where the souls of the dead were, etc. it is manifest,
that the souls of his Disciples (for whose sake the Lord did those things)
shall also go to the invisible place designed them by God, and remain there
(expecting the Resurrection) till the Resurrection. Whence it must needs be,
that the Latin Interpreter, having found in the Original Text the word (...),
(which properly signifies Invisible, and has been taken by all the Heathens
either for Hell, or the God, which they imagined presided there) Literally
translated (...), Into an invisible place. By which place, the lovers of Truth
are not (as many at this day, who, to free St. Irenaeus form the Error first
proposed in the Sibylline Writing, attribute to him Conceptions he neither ever
had, nor could have had) to understand the State of the souls of the Saints
departed, which those Gentlemen conceive might be expressed by the Term of
invisible place, because 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Eye has not seen the things, which God has prepared for those, that love
him, wherever they may be laid up for them, rather then the place, properly so
called, where they effectually enjoy them. For St. Irenaeus his manner of
reasoning, and the contexture of his Discourse expressly refutes their Glosses,
in as much, as if the Disciples (whom the Gospel assures us Matthew. 10. 24.
not to have been above their Master) ought both in life, and death, to imitate
him; and if the Master (according to the sentiment of St. Irenaeus, and the
Church of Rome at this day) passed from the Cross Ephesians. 4. 9.
to the lower parts of the earth, and Psalm. 23, 4. 44, 19. 88, 7.
to the valley of the shadow of death; that is to say, to hell, properly so
called, and remained there all the time, from his Passion, to his Resurrection:
it must of necessity follow; that by the invisible place, whither the Disciples
go after their Death, should (according to the said Father) be understood hell,
situated in the lower parts of the earth, and in the Valley of the shadow of
Death, and that they remain there, till the time of their Resurrection.

It is apparent from the words before transcribed, that Clemens Alexandrinus,
Contemporary with St. Irenaeus, was of the same Opinion. And Tertullian (whom
St. Cyprian acknowledges for his Master, and whom Saint Hierome affirms to have
died about the year 217. being arrived to a very great Age) discovers in many
places, that all the Montanist Party had embraced it. For instance, in the
seventh Chapter of his Book Of the Soul; After the divorce, says he, (or
separation) of the body, the soul is transferred to hell, she is there
detained, she is there reserved, ^ill the day of Judgment, etc. Christ, at his
Death, descended to the souls of the Patriarchs. And in the ninth Chapter; The
souls of Martyrs are understood to be under the Altar. And in fifty fifth
Chapter; Hell is in an hollowness of the earth, a vast space, as to its depth,
and there is an undiscovered profundity in its entrails, etc. Christ descended
into the lowest parts of the earth, to the end, that be might there communicate
his presence to the Patriarchs, and Prophets, etc. You have enough to put by
those, who, insolently enough, think not, that the souls of the Faithful
justly go to hell, by telling them they are Servants above their Master;
conceiving it not much, it may be, in the bosom of Abraham, to reap the comfort
of the resurrection, which is to be expected, etc. Heaven is not opened to any
one, while the Earth is entire, etc. We have (in our Book Of Paradise) made it
good, that every soul is sequestered in hell, till the day of the Lord. And in
the fifty sixth Chapter; Why do you not judge worthy hell those souls; which
are pure, and innocent? And in the fifty eighth Chapter; All souls, say you,
are (whether you will, or no) in hell: there you have already both the
Punishments, and the Refreshments; there you have the poor man, and the rich,
etc. By that prison, we mean hell, which also the Gospel shows: and the utmost
farthing, we interpret to be any light offense, which is to be punished there,
by the delay of the resurrection. And in his third Book Against Marcion, and
the twenty fourth Chapter; Marcion having said, that he expected (after this
life ended) Refreshment in hell, in the bosom of Abraham, Tertullian inferrs
thence against him, that God is merciful, and makes this Exclamation, Oh God!
merciful even in hell! And in the thirty fourth Chapter of the fourth Book; I
say, that Abraham's Bosom is a Region, though not celestial, yet higher then
hell; which in the interim shall afford refreshment to the souls of the Just,
till such time, as, all things being accomplished, all receive the fullness of
their reward at the general resurrection, etc. And in his Scorpiacum, in the
twelfth Chapter; In the mean time, the souls of the Martyrs rest quietly under
the Altar, etc.

Novatian, that famous Priest of the Roman Church, who, in the year 250. was
opposed to Pope Cornelius, does in the first Chapter of his Book Of the
Trinity, follow the Track of Tertullian; saying, That even those very things,
which lie under the earth, are not void of certain powers; being placed, every
one according to its rank, and order: for there is one place, into which are
brought the souls, as well of the godly, as the wicked, feeling beforehand the
sentence of the future Judgment.

Lastly, Origin, that famous Priest of Caesarea, whom St. Hierome, in his
Preface before his Interpretation of Hebrew Names, sometime acknowledged Master
of the Churches after the Apostles, and whom he observes to have departed this
life in the year 254. or thereabouts, expresses himself to the same effect;
saying in his fourth Book Of Principles; Those, who withdraw out of this world,
according to the death common to all, are disposed of, according to their acts,
and merits, as they shall be judged worthy; some to the place which is called
Hell; others into Abraham's Bosom, into several Mansions. Where it is to be
noted, that by Hell he means the lower parts of Hell, and by Abraham's Bosom
the place of sequestration, where the dead (in his judgment) are detained
before the final Judgment, and not celestial glory; which, in his seventh
Homily upon Leviticus, he pretends, that none of the Saints are admitted to:
since he formally excludes from the enjoyment thereof the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles; saying, that they have not yet received their joy; that they
expect ours, and that they mourn for our sins.

It is therefore manifest, from the unanimous consent of the precedent
Testimonies; that all the Authors we have left us of the second, and, as far
as the middle, of the third Age, were all of the same Opinion, as being imbued
with the Doctrine contained in the Sibylline Books, and proposed by each of
them, as the common sentiment of the whole Church. Somewhat to the same purpose
may analogically be said of those, who followed them in the after-ages; as, for
instance, of the Author of the Constitutions attributed to St. Clement, in the
forty second Chapter of his eighth Book; of the Author of the Recognitions,
in his first Book; of the Author of the Liturgy, which goes under the Name of
St. James; of Victorinus, Bishop of Poictiers, and Martyr, upon the sixth
Chapter of the Apocalypse; of Lactantius, in the twenty first Chapter of his
seventh Book; of St. Ambrose, in the second Chapter of his second Book of Cain,
and Abel, and the tenth Chapter of his Book De bono Mortis; of Saint
Chrysostom, in his fourth Homily upon Genesis, and the thirty ninth Homily
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the seventh, and twenty eighth
Homilies upon the Epistle to the Hebrews; of Prudentius in his Hymn upon the
Obsequies of the dead, and of the eighteen Martyrs of Saragossa; of St.
Augustine, upon the thirty sixth Psalm, and the seventh Chapter of the eleventh
Book De Genesi ad Literam, and the thirty fifth Chapter of the twelfth Book,
and in the hundred and eighth Chapter of his Enchiridion, and in the ninth
Chapter of his twelfth Book Of the City of God, and the fourteenth Chapter of
the first Book of his Retractations; of the Author of the Questions attributed
to Justin Martyr, in the sixtieth, and seventy sixth Question; of Basil of
Seleucia, in his tenth Oration; of Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius upon
the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews; of Andrew, and Aretas of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, upon the sixth Chapter of the Apocalypse; of Euthymius upon the
twenty third Chapter of Saint Luke; of the Author of the Imperfect Work upon
Saint Matthew, in the thirty fourth Homily; of St. Bernard, in his third, and
fourth Sermon upon the Feast of All Saints, and of Pope John the two and
twentieth. For though many of these later, moderating (after their manner) the
Opinion of those, who preceeded the year 300. do either forbear making any
specifical designation of the place, where the Saints are entertained after
their death, contenting themselves to call it indefinitely, with St. Augustine,
Receptaculis abditis, secretis.
secret and, hidden receptacles, or, with Primasius, the secret of God, as it
were to insinuate, that it is known to God only; or are so confident, as to
affirm it to be out of Hell, not precisely determining, what other habitation
it pleased God to assign them: yet all agree in this; that they often make use
of those Expressions, which seem to defer the Glory, and Beatitude of their
souls till the Day of the general Resurrection.

CHAP. X. The second capital Tenet of the Sibylline Writings.
THe second Point of Doctrine advanced by the Author of the Sibylline Writings,
concerning the State of the dead, is, that all, without any exception, shall
pass through the last Conflagration of the Universe, which shall purge the
just, and shall refine them, in such, as we say, that Gold is melted, or
refined in the Crucible. To this effect is what we read in the second Book
(page 17.) And then shall all pass through the burning, River, and the
unextinguishable Flame: all the just shall be saved; but the wicked shall
perish to all ages, etc. The Angels carrying them through the burning River,
shall bring them into Light, etc. He will give men the power to save themselves
from the burning fire, and eternal gnashings of Teeth, etc. And then shall God
send from heaven the King, and shall judge every man by blood, and the
splendor of Fire.

This Imagination, considered by the most ancient of the Fathers, as taken out
of a Book of divine Authority, made so strong an Impression upon them; that
they took it for an infallible Lesson. Hence Saint Irenaeus, in the ninth
Chapter of his Book, having applied to the end of the world those words of
Malachy, Mal. iv. 1.
The day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, adds, John the Baptist tells us who
that Lord is, at whose coming there shall be such a day, saying of Christ, He
shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with Fire, having his Fan in his
hand to cleanse his Floor; and he will put up the Corn into his Garner; but
shall burn the Chaff in unquenchable Fire. He therefore, who made the corn, is
no other, then he, who made the chaff; but one, and the same, judging those
things, and separating them.

Origin, in his third Homily upon the thirty sixth Psalm. If in this life we
slight the words of the Scripture, admonishing us, and will not be either
healed, or amended by the reprehensions thereof, it is certain, we must come to
the Fire, which is prepared for sinners, even to that Fire, [1 Cor. iii. 13.]
which shall try every man's work of what sort it is. And (as I conceive) it is
necessary, that we all come to that fire, though one be a Paul, or a Peter, he
will nevertheless come to that fire. But those, who are such, shall hear,
Though thou walk through the Fire, the Flame shall not kindle upon thee.
[Isa. xliii. 2.] But if any one be a sinner, as my self, he shall indeed come
to that Fire, as well as Peter, and Paul. And as the Hebrews came to the Red
Sea, so did also the Egyptians; but the Isralites passed through the Red Sea,
and the Egyptians were overwhelmed therein. In like manner we, if we are
Egyptians, and follow Pharao, who is the Devil, obeying his commandments, shall
be overwhelmed in that fiery Lake, or River, when we shall be guilty of the
sins, which we are addicted to, no doubt, through the commandment of Pharao.
But if we are Israelites, and redeemed by the blood of the 1 Pet. i. 19.
Lamb without spot; if we carry not about us the 1 Cor. v. 8.
leaven of malice, and wickedness, we also must enter into the fiery River: but
as the Waters were, to the Israelites, Exodus xiv. 22.
a wall on the right hand, and on the left, so shall the Fire be as a Wall, if
we do, as it is reported of them, that is to say, that they Ibid. 31.
believed the Lord, and his servant Moses, that is to say, his Law, and
Commandments, and by that means follow Exodus xiii. 21.
the Pillar of Fire, and the Pillar of the Cloud. And in his fourteenth Homily
upon Saint Luke; I think, that even after the Resurrection of the dead, we
shall stand in need of the Sacrament to cleanse, and purge us; for none will be
able to rise again without Filth.

Lactantius, in the twenty first Chapter of his seventh Book. When he shall
judge the just, he shall also try them by Fire; then shall those, whose sins
have prevailed, either as to their weight, or number, be smitten by the Fire,
and burnt; but those, whom a fullness of Justice, and maturity of Virtue shall
have hardened, shall not be sensible of that Fire.

Saint Hilary, who, in the second of his Canons upon Saint Matthew, had
observed in general, that it lies even upon those, who are baptized with the
Holy Spirit to be consummated [or accomplished] by the Fire of the (last)
Judgment, in his third Sermon, upon the one hundred and eighteenth Psalm,
according to the Greeks, applies it particularly to the blessed Virgin; to
show, that, in his judgment, it cannot admit any exception, saying; Since we
are to give an account [Matthew xii. 36.] for every idle word, do we desire to
come to the day of Judgment, wherein we are to pass through that indefatigable
Fire, wherein we are to suffer those grievous Torments, which tend to the
expiation of the soul from its sins? Luke ii. 35.
If a sword did pierce through the soul of the Blessed Mary, that the thoughts
of many hearts might be revealed; if that Virgin, who was capable of receiving
God, was to come to the severity of Judgment, who will presume to desire to be
judged of God?

Saint Gregory Nazianzene, Orat. 26. The day of the revelation will declare
manifestly, whether it be through a sound Ratiocination, that I please not: as
also the last Fire, by which all our works shall be judged, and purged. And in
the thirty ninth, speaking of those, who think themselves so pure; that they
think they have reason to bid their Brethren, Stand at a distance from them; It
may be that there [to wit, at the end of the world] they shall be baptized by
Fire with the final Baptism, which is the most grievous, and most long, which
feeds on the matter, as on grass, and consumes the vanity of all wickedness.
And in the fourtieth, where he bewails his own imperfection; Who will secure
me, that I shall be saved at the end, and that the judicial seat will not look
upon me still, as a debtour, and one that stands in need of the Cons^agration,
which shall be then?

Saint Basil, upon the 4th of Esaias, Verse 4th, where the Prophet treats of the
cleansing of Jerusalem, has this consideration; Are there not three Notions of
Baptism? The Purgation of the Filth, the Regeneration by the Spirit, and the
Examination by the fire of Judgment? And upon these words of the Tenth, Howl,
for the day of the Lord is at hand: by the day of the Lord he means that of the
last Judgment. Then adds, If none be pure, in respect of the works, that are
forbidden; let every one fear that day: for says he [to wit Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
iii. 15.] If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he,
himself, shall be saved; yet so, as by Fire. And in the fifteenth Chapter of
his Book Of the holy Ghost; Saint John calls Baptism of Fire the Trial, which
shall be made at the day of Judgment, according to what the Apostle says, The
Fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. And in the nine and
twentieth, speaking of Athenogenes, a Man famous among the Ancient Christians,
he says; That he strove to arrive at the consummation, or accomplishment, which
shall be made by Fire.

Saint Gregory of Nyssa, Brother to St. Basil, in his Oration upon the eight
and twentieth Verse of the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. All the wickedness, which, as so much false Alloy, is mixed among
the things that are, being taken away by the melting of the Purgative Fire,
whatsoever drew its Original from God, shall become such, as it was at the
beginning, before it had received the tincture of that wickedness.

Saint Ambrose, in his Sermon upon the thirty sixth Psalm according to the
Greeks. By Fire therefore shall the Sons of Levi be purged, by Fire Ezechiel,
by Fire Daniel: but though they are tried by Fire, yet shall they say, We have
passed through the Fire, and through the Water; others shall remain in the
Fire, upon these the Fire shall fall down like dew, as upon the Hebrew
children, etc. We shall be saved by Faith, yet shall we be saved so as by Fire:
though we shall not be absolutely burnt up, yet shall we burn; and the Holy
Scripture teaches us, how some continue in the Fire, others pass through it,
to wit; as the Egyptians were overwhelmed in the Red Sea; through which the
children of Israel had passed before them, etc. And on the twentieth Section of
the hundred and eighteenth Psalm according to the Greeks. It is necessary, that
all those, who desire to return to Paradise, be tried by Fire: for it is not
without reason written, that Adam, and Eve, being thrust out of the seat of
Paradise, God placed at the entrance of Paradise a flaming Sword, which turned
every way. All therefore must pass through the Flames, whether it be Saint John
the Evangelist (whom the Lord loved so dearly, that he said of him to Peter; If
I would have him to stay, what is that to thee? Follow thou me: some have
doubted of his death; of his passage through the Fire we cannot doubt) or
whether he be Peter, who was entrusted with the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
he must say, We have passed through the Fire, etc. One only, who is the
Justice of God, was not subject to the sense of that Fire; to wit, Christ, who
has committed no sin; for the Fire found not in him, what it might have
burned. And in his Book Of Widows. God requires not of thee the price of a
glittering Metal; but the Gold, which the Fire cannot burn at the day of
Judgment.

Saint Hierome, toward the end of the sixty sixth Chapter of Esaias, disputing
against those, who denied the perpetuity of Torments suffered by the Damned,
proposes his sentiment in these Terms; which suppose a general examination by
Fire at the last day: As we believe the Torments of the Devil, and of all such,
as deny God, and of wicked men, who have said in their heart There is no God,
to be eternal; so do we believe moderated, and capable of compassion, the
Sentence of the Judge concerning those, who, though sinners, and wicked, are yet
Christians; whose Works are to be tried, and purged by Fire.

Saint Augustine, in the four and twentieth Chapter of his sixteenth Book Of
the City of God; where he speaks of the Vision of Abraham, mentioned in the
fifteenth Chapter of Genesis; By that Fire (which Abraham saw) is signified The
Day of Judgment, distinguishing between those, who are to be saved by the Fire,
and those, who are to be condemned to the Fire. And in the five and twentieth
Chapter of the twentieth Book, where he explicates the second and third Verses
of the third Chapter of Malachy. By the things, which have been said, it seems
to be very manifest; that in that Judgment (that is, the Last) some are to
undergo Purgatory pains, etc. We are to take the Sons of Levi, Juda, and
Jerusalem, for the Church of God, assembled, not only among the Hebrews, but
also among other Nations; not such, as it is at the present, where, if we say,
(...) John i. 8.
We have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: but such,
as it it shall be then; cleansed by the last Judgment, as a floor, that is
swept: those, to whom such a cleansing is necessary, having been also cleansed
by the fire.

The Author of the third Homily upon the Epiphany, unjustly attributed to
Eusebius Emissenus; since it seems to have been written either by Eucherius of
Lions, or by Faustus of Rhegium. There (that is, at the last Day)
Conflagrations changing their nature, the Just shall pass through horrid Gulfs.
Their Bodies, which are to derive Glory from their pains, because they are not
burdened by sins, shall not be touched by the Fires; for the cruel Burnings
shall prevail nothing on those, whom the Flames of sinful lusts had not
overcome before: and the rational heat shall not be able to injure those; on
whom Purity has conferred reverence. Otherwise, avoiding wrath, it shall make
way for the vapors; and will of its own accord obey: because it shall not
find any thing, on which, it may be necessary, it should exercise Judgment.

Diadochus, Bishop of Photica in the Ancient Epirus, in the last Chapter of his
Book Of Spiritual perfection. Those, who at their death shall express ever so
little fear, shall be left in the multitude of all other men; as undergoing the
Judgment, to the end, that, being examined by the Fire of Judgment, they may
receive from the All-good God, and the King Jesus Christ, the reward due unto
them, according to their Works.

From the joint Testimony of these twelve Witnesses now produced, it is
apparent; that the second head of the Opinions proposed by the Sibylline
Writing, was (equally with the former) constantly maintained by the most
eminent Prelates of both the Greek, and Latin Churches; till after the year
459. wherein Diadochus subscribed (with the Council of the Ancient Epirus) the
Letter written to the Emperor Leo the First, concerning the proceeding of
Timothy, surnamed Aelurus, Usurper of the Chair of Alexandria against
Proterius, whom he had Assassinated. Nay, it further appears from the Epitaph
of Vilithut^, a Parisian Lady, writ in the year 560. by Venantius Fortunatus,
afterward Bishop of Poictiers, that the Church of that Time was not free from
that Opinion; which he expresses in these Terms;

Digni lumen habent, damnati incendia deflent:
Illos splendour alit; hos vapor igne coquit.
Res est una quidem; duplici sed finditur actu:
Nam cremat indignos, quo probat igne pios.
"The Blessed have Light, the Damned their Fires bewail:
"Those are in Bliss; over these the Flames prevail.
"The same thing does t'a double Act divide:
"The Bad in the Fire are Burned, the Just are Tried.
CHAP. XI. The Third main Tenet proposed by the Sibylline Writing.
THe third Head of Doctrine proposed by the Sibylline Writing concerning the
State of the Dead, is; that The Saints, after their Resurrection, are to be
reconducted to live in that Paradise, of the possession whereof Adam, and Eve,
were, for their disobedience, deprived. For the Author of that Romance, having
taken literally, and understood carnally, what he had read, Luke xxiii. 43. 2
Cor. xii. 4. Apoc. ii. 7. concerning Paradise; and John vi. 31. concerning the
Bread of heaven, and Apocal. ii. 17. concerning the Hidden Manna, tells us in
his Preface, copied out by Theophilus of Antioch, and Lactantius, that, Those,
who honor God, inherit the true, and eternal Life; that is to say, the time of
Eternity, having their abode in Paradise, the flourishing Garden, and eating
the delicious Bread of heaven; which, at the end of the seventh Book, (page
56.) he means of Manna; saying, All together eat of the bedewing Manna with
their white Teeth.

This Doctrine was so much the more acceptable to the Fathers, the more they
thought themselves obliged to conceive an aversion for the extravagant
Imagination of the Gnostics; who transformed Paradise into an Archangel, and
assigned for its station the fourth Heaven. Thus Theophilus (who gave Paradise
the qualification of perpetual, and hanging in the midst, between heaven and
the world) Lib. 2.
grounded the persuasion, he would give of it to Autolycus, on the Authority of
the pretended Sibyl; and, after his Example, Lactantius, in the twelfth Chapter
of his second Book. St. Irenaeus, having (in the thirty sixth Chapter of his
fifth Book) alleged these words of Esaias, (out of the two and twentieth Verse
of the sixty sixth Chapter) As the new heavens, and the new earth, which I will
make, shall remain before me, assigns to each of them its Inhabitants; saying,
Then shall those, who are worthy the conversation of heaven, pass thither;
others shall enjoy the pleasures of Paradise; and others shall possess the Holy
earth, and the splendor of the City, that is to say, Jerusalem.

Tertullian, in the forty seventh Chapter of his Apologetick: We know Paradise
to be a place of Divine pleasure, destined for the reception of the spirits of
the Saints, and separated from the knowledge of the common world by a certain
enclosure of that fiery Zone. And, in the eighth Chapter of his Poem of the
Last Judgment: There is a place in the Eastern Parts, wherein the Lord takes
great delig^ where there is a clear Light, etc. it is a Region most rich in
Fields, etc. thither comes every godly man. But, in the fifty fifth Chapter of
his Book Of the Soul, this Great man, dazzled by the delusions of the
Montanists, moderates the Opinion he had taken out of the Books of the
Counterfeit Sibyl, and reserving Paradise for the entertainment of the Martyrs
only, excludes out of it all the rest of the Faithful; saying, You say, that
our Sleep (that is to say, the place of our Repose) is in Paradise, whither the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, upon the Resurrection of our Lord, being Appendages
thereof, passed from Hell; but how comes it, that that Region of Paradise,
which is under the Altar, revealed to St. John, discovered no Souls, but those
of the Martyrs? How came Perpetua, that most courageous Martyr, in the
Revelation, which was made to her of Paradise, not long before her Suffering,
to see there only her companions in Martyrdom; but that the Sword, which keeps
the Entrance of Paradise, suffers none to get in, but those, who are departed
in Christ, not in Adam?

Saint Cyprian, after the Example of his Master Tertullian, speaking of our
Lord to Demetrian, Proconsul of Africa, a passionate Enemy of Christianity,
has this expression; He opens to us the way of Life; he is the Author of our
return into Paradise. And in his Book Of Mortality, toward the end; We account
Paradise (says he) to be our Country, we have already begun to have for our
Fathers the Patriarchs. And, in the Chapter of Exhortation to Martyrdom. If it
be glorious for the Soldiers, engaged in common Wars, after the Conquest of
their Enemies, to return Triumphant into their Country; how much a nobler, and
greater Glory is it to return Triumphant to Paradise, after we have overcome
the Devil, and to carry away victorious Trophies, after we have subdued him,
who had foiled us before, to the place, whence the Sinner Adam had been thrust
out.

Lactantius, in the place above cited. God, having pronounced his Sentence
against Sinners, that every one should work out his own livelihood, cast man
out of Paradise, and encompassed Paradise round about with Fire; that man might
not approach it, till he had exercised sovereign Judgment upon Earth, and
recalled to the same place those Just men, that worshipped him; Death being
taken away.

Saint Athanasius, in his Treatise upon these Words, (Matthew. xii. 27.) All
things are given to me, etc. Death prevailed from Adam to Christ, the Earth was
cursed, and Hell opened, and Paradise shut, etc. But as soon as all things were
given to him, and that he was made man, all was amended, and accomplished. The
Earth, in stead of the Curse it lay under before, was blessed; and Paradise
opened; and Hell daunted. And in his Exposition of Faith: Christ showed the
entrance into Paradise, whence Adam had been thrust out; and into which he is
again entered by the Thief, according to what our Savior said, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: whither Paul also is entered.

Saint Cyril of Jerusalem, in his Mystagogical Instruction. The Paradise of
God, which he had planted toward the East, is open to thee: whence our first
Parent was banished, because of his Transgression. And this is signified by thy
turning from the West to the East, the place of Light.

Saint Basil, in his Treatise Of Paradise. How shall I be able to bring thee
into sight of thy Country, to the end thou may recall thy self from
banishment? etc. If thou art carnal, thou have the description of him, that is
corporal. And in the seven and twentieth Chapter of his Book Of the Holy Ghost.
We all, in our Prayers, look toward the East: but there are few of us, that
know, we thereby seek our ancient Country, that is to say, the Paradise, which
God planted in Eden.

Saint Gregory of Nyssa, in his Oration of the forty Martyrs. That then, which
is demanded, is; Whether Paradise, because of the Turning Sword, is also
inaccessible to the Saints: and, If the Champions (of Christ) are excluded
Paradise, what Promise there remains, upon which they should undertake Combats
for Piety: and whether they should obtain less, then the Thief, to whom the
Lord said, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; though the Thief came
not voluntarily to the Cross; but, when he was come near Salvation, that
Eagle-sighted, and generous Thief saw the Treasure, and, finding an
opportunity, stole Life, honorably, and happily abusing the nature of Theft,
and saying, Lord, have me in remembrance, when thou come into thy Kingdom. He
was honored with Paradise, and does the Flaming Sword keep the entrance of
Paradise against the Saints? But the Question resolves it self. For thence it
is, that the Word has not represented the Sword always placed against those,
that enter; but Turning, that it might be opposite to the unworthy, and be
behind the worthy, opening unto them the not-forbidden entrance of Life, into
which those (that is to say, the forty Martyrs) are entered, in the assurance
of their Combats; having, without suffering, passed through the Flame: which we
also having, undaunted, passed through, may be received into Paradise. And
thence it comes, that in his Funeral Orations upon Pulcheria, and Flacilla, her
Mother, he says of the former, The Plant has been removed hence; but it has
been replanted in Paradise: and of the later, By that (that is, by Faith) was
she carried hence into the Bosom of the Father of Faith, Abraham, near the
Fountain of Paradise.

Saint Ambrose, upon the twentieth Section of the hundred and eighteenth Psalm
according to the Greeks, lays it down (as has been already showed) for
certain, that it is necessary those, who desire to return into the Paradise,
out of which Adam had been driven, should pass through the Fire of Judgment.

Paulinus, having forsaken the World, to lead a Religious Life, afterward
Bishop of Nola, in his second Fpistle to Severus his intimate Friend. This is
acceptable, and well-pleasing, in the sight of God; that our good should be
voluntarily, that we might receive the things, which are ours; that is to say,
the house of Paradise, and eternal Life, wherein we were created; and which, if
we, purged from the possession of this earth, whereinto we came through
condemnation, regain; then may we, as truly recalled from Banishment into our
Country, or returned after a long Pilgrimage into the house we were born in,
say, God is our Portion in the land of the living, etc.

Prudentius, in the tenth of his Hymns. While thou (O God) recallest, and
reformest thy body, subject to dissolution, in what Region will thou command
the pure Soul to rest it self? Hidden in the bosom of the Blessed Old man, it
shall lodge there, where Eleazar is; whom the rich man burning sees, from afar
off, encompassed with flowers all about. O Redeemer, we follow thy Sayings,
whereby, Triumphing over black Death, Thou command the Thief, who was
Companion of thy Cross, to come after thee. Behold already the lightsom way of
spacious Paradise opened to the Faithful; and it is lawful to go into that
Grove, of which man had been deprived by the Serpent.

The Author of the Homily upon the Thief, unjustly attributed to Eusebius
Emissenus. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; as in thy hereditary,
and paternal seat; which at thy entrance shall be opened; though, upon the
expulsion thence of Adam, nay of two (to wit, Adam, and Eve) it had been shut
up to innumerable people. Enter thou therefore the first of all; but with a
happier entrance, then the first into Paradise; it being not required, thou
should with Adam see hell. Fear not thou shall there meet with any mortal
Viand, any Law, any Tree. I will be to thee both Food, and Life. And, that thou
may not have the least apprehension, that there may happily be some enemy, in
that blessed Grove, and that the ancient Thief may lay Ambushes for thee; I
will bring thee into it, and confirm the possession thereof to thee.

The Author of the Questions attributed to Justin Martyr, in the seventy fifth
Question. The souls of the Just are carried into Paradise, where they have the
conversation and sight of the Angels, and Archangels, and the Vision of Christ
our Savior. And in the seventy sixth Question. It was profitable for the
Thief, at his entrance into Paradise, to learn, by the effects, the advantage
of Faith, by which he had the honor to be admitted into the Assembly of the
Saints; where he is kept till the day of the Resurrection, and retribution. Now
he has that Sentiment of Paradise, which is called Cogitative; according to
which the Souls see, themselves, the things, that are below them, and moreover
the Angels, and Demons.

It were no hard matter to add to this number those Authors; who have followed
the same prejudicate Opinion: as the Monk Caesarius in his third Dialogue; St.
Hierome, in his hundred twenty ninth Epistle, etc. But the fourteen before
cited are sufficient, to show, that, till after the year 450 their Opinion,
which had its first rise from the pretended Sibylline Books, was so common in
the Church, that it met not with any Contradiction.

CHAP. XII. The fourth Capital Tenet proposed by the Sibylline Writing.
THe fourth Supposition, advanced by the Author of that Counterfeit Piece,
concerning the State of the departed, is; That, Jerusasalem, rebuilt, and made
more glorious, then ever, the Son of God, being descended from heaven, shall
establish a reign of a thousand years; full of sensible enjoyments, and a
miraculous fertlity, and abundance of corporal goods. He spreads his Fiction
before us, in these Terms, in the second Book (page 14.) The fruitful earth
shall again bring forth several Fruits. And page 18. The Angels, raising (the
Good) out of the midst of the burning River, shall convey them into light, and
bring them to a life free from care. There is the immortal way of the great
God, and three Fountains, of Wine, Honey, and Milk; the earth also common to
all, and being divided by neither walls, nor hedges, shall then, of it self,
bring forth several Fruits. And in the third Book (page 32.) Then shall God
give uno men a very great joy. For the earth, the Trees, and the innumerable
flocks of Sheep, shall furnish men with the true fruit of Wine, sweet Honey,
white Milk, and the best Corn, that ever mortals had. And page 35. The Wolves,
upon the Mountains, shall eat grass with the Lambs; the spotted Lynxes shall
feed with the Goats; the Bears with the Calves, and all Mortals; the
flesh-devouring Lion shall eat straw in the Manger, etc. And the Dragons shall
rest themselves with the motherless little ones. And in the six and fourtieth
page of the fifth Book. The Land of the Hebrews shall be holy, and bring forth
all things; (viz.) the River of the Rock, that distills Honey, and the immortal
Milk shall fall down upon the tongues of all the Just. And in the fourtieth
page. All those, who live a godly life, shall live again upon the earth. And in
page the nine and fourtieth, God has made the City, he delighted in, more
bright, then the Stars, the Sun, and the Moon. So, that it is without all
question, it was the design of this Impostour, who (in imitation of the second
Book of Esdras, in the 19th Verse of the second Chapter, and the 35th Verse of
the fourteenth Chapter) would needs entertain us with such extravagant
Narrations, to abuse the words of Esaias, and Saint John; who, in the twentieth,
and one and twentieth Chapters of his Apocalypse, mystically represents the
Church, under the Name of Chap. 21. 2
the holy City, the new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven; Verse
18, 19.
built of Gold, and precious Stones; Verse 23.
having no need of Sun, or Moon; Chap. 22. verse 2.
and in the midst of it, and of either side of the River, was there the Tree of
Life, which bare twelve manner of Fruits, yielding its fruit every Month: and
the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.

The same Imagination so gained upon the holy Fathers, that lived after the
middle of the second Age; that those good Souls, prepossessed by the Opinion
they had conceived of the pretended Sibylline Writing, took literally, and
apprehended, after the Jewish sense, whatever they met with in Esaias, and Saint
John, concerning the First Raesurrection of those, who died for the Testimony
of Jesus, their reign of a thousand years, and all the glory of the celestial
Jerusalem. Thus Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue against Trypho, answering that
Jew, who (page 306) had asked him, Whether he acknowledged, that Jerusalem
should be rebuilt, and the Christians assemble there, and rejoice with Christ,
in the company of the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. not only confesses it; but
maintains further, that he had already averred it: reflecting, no doubt, on
those words, of page 271. where he says, that Christ, being raised, should
come again in^^ Jerusalem, and then drink anew, and eat, with his Disciples.
And secondly, that he had signified unto him, that Many among those, who were
not of the pure, and religious sentiment of the Christians, acknowledged it
not: whereupon he adds; I, and as many others, as are of the right, and truly
Christian, sentiment in all things, know, that there must be a Resurrection of
the Flesh; and the Prophets, Ezechiel, Esaias, and others confess, that after
Jerusalem shall be built, adorned, and amplified, a thousand years shall be
spent there: alleging, to that purpose, the sixty fifth Chapter of Esaias, and
the twentieth of the Apocalypse. And reinculcating it, page 340. where he says,
He (viz. Jesus) is the eternal Light, which is to shine in Jerusalem; and page
369. where he writes of the Christians, that they know with whom (Christ) they
shall be in that Land (viz. Judaea) which he had called the Land of all the
Saints; and that they shall inherit eternal, and incorruptible goods.

Eusebius, in the nine and thirtieth Chapter of the third Book of his
Ecclefiastical History, attributing the same opinion to Papias, Bishop of
Hierapolis, who had been a follower of the Disciples of Saint John, has this
Discourse. He affirms also many other things, that are more fabulous: among
which he says, that there are a certain thousand of years to pass after the
Resurrection; and that Christ shall reign corporally in the same Land. Things;
which, I think, he has only imagined upon a misapprehension of the
Apostolical Expositions.

Saint Irenaeus, in the thirty fifth Chapter of his fifth Book, does not only
agree with Papias; but relyes upon his authority: citing out of his fourth Book
these words, which Papias attributed to Saint John. The days shall come,
wherein there shall grow up Vines, having each of them ten thousand Branches;
and upon every Branch ten thousand Boughs; and on every Bough ten thousand
Buds; and on every Bud ten thousand Bunches; and on every Bunch ten thousand
Grapes; and every Grape, pressed, shall yield twenty five Measures of Wine:
And, when any one of the Saints shall take one of the Grapes, another shall
cry, I am a better Grape, take me, and bless God by me. In like manner, one
Corn of Wheat shall bring forth ten thousand Ears; and every Ear shall have ten
thousand Crains; and every Grain shall give ten Pounds of clear and fine
Flower; and all other Fruits, Seeds, and Herbs, proportionably. Was ever the
Synagogue, cut off from the Covenant of God, delivered of an Extravagance, more
deserving contempt, then this: which feigns Bunches of Grapes speaking; and
Vines yielding (infinitely beyond all imaginable force of Nature) millions of
millions of measures of Wine? And yet, the Holy Martyr, Saint Irenaeus (out of
an excess of respect, by no means, excusable in him, preferring the authority
of Papias, deceived by the counterfeit Sibyl, before all reason) blindly
swallowed it, and, in his two and thirtieth Chapter, inferred from it, that The
Just shall reign here below before the day of Judgment; that, on the day of the
Sabbath of the Just, they shall have a Table furnished from God, Pascentem
Epulis omnibus.
who shall replenish them with all manner of Viands. That The Wolves shall feed
with the Lambs, and the Lion shall live on Straw: and, in the thirty fifth
Chapter, that The Just shall reign on earth; in the thirty sixth, that
(proportionably to the fruit they have brought forth an hundred, sixty, or
thirty for one) they shall be placed either in Heaven, or in Paradise, or in
Jerusalem; and that In that regard it was, that the Son of God said, John xiv.
2.
In my Father's House are many Mansions.

Tertullian, who lived near the same time, to show us, that he was carried away
with the same Prejudice, cries out in the twenty fourth Chapter of his third
Book Against Marcion; We confess, that the Kingdom is promised us upon Earth,
for a thousand years, after the Resurrection, in the City of Divine
workmanship, John: xxi. 2.
Jerusalem, coming down out of Heaven. There is some ground to think that
Meliton, Bishop of Sardes, Contemporary with Justin Martyr, was of the same
Opinion with him concerning the temporal Reign of Jesus Christ in Jerusalem; in
as much as (to maintain it) he writ upon the Revelation of Saint John: the words
whereof have been extremely wrested by the Patrones of that Imagination; but,
in regard I am nothing pressed, and have only Conjecture to infer it from, I
shall forbear to urge it.

I come to Nepos, the Egyptian Bishop, reverenced by Dionysius of Alexandria
for his Faith, and great Learning, in the attainment whereof he had spent
himself to the Last. Of this Prelate Lib. 7. cap. 23, 24.
Eusebius says, (...), etc. Teaching, that the Promises, made to the Saints in
the Holy Scriptures, were to be accomplished after the manner conceived by the
Jews; supposing, that there were to pass a certain thousand of Years in the
pursuit of corporal Enjoyments upon Earth: and being of opinion, he might
confirm his Supposition by the Revelation of John. He writ, concerning the said
Revelation, a certain Discourse, entitled A Reprehension of the Allegorists,
as not able to endure, that men should take otherwise, then Literally, the
Promises proposed by the Holy Spirit for the comfort of the Church; nor that
they should be understood mystically.

About fifty years after appeared our Victorinus, Bishop of Poictiers, who
suffered Martyrdom on the second day of November in the year 303. after he had
composed diverse Treatises, great indeed in respect of the sense, and slight in
respect of the contexture of the Words, according to the observation of In
Catalago Scriptorum Ecclesiastie little:
Saint Hierome: which cannot be contradicted; since there is nothing left of
them, and that the Commentary upon the Apocalypse, which goes under his name,
contains, at this day, nothing of what the Ancients had read in it. But, In
Eliz. lib. 11. cap. 36.
Saint Hierome assuring us, that he was of the number of those, who expected
Apoc, xxi. 2. 18, 19.
to come from Heaven a Jerusalem, adorned with precious Stones, and Gold: we
need not fear, upon his Affirmation, to put him into the Catalogue of the
Millenaries.

Not long after came Lactantius; who, in magnificent Terms, entertains us with
all the particulars of their Opinion; saying, Lib. 7. 24,
Cum deleverit injustitiam, etc. When God shall have taken away Injustice, and
kept Sovereign Judgment, and restrored to life the Just, who were from the
beginning; he will converse among men, for the space of a thousand years, and
shall rule over them with Justice. Which is no more, then what the prophesying,
and distracted Sibyl somewhere proclaims; Mortals attend, the eternal King does
reign.


And then those, who shall be found alive in their Bodies, shall not die; but,
during the said thousand years shall propogate an infinite multitude, and their
progeny shall be holy, and dear to God. Those also, who shall be raised out of
Hell, shall, as Judges, command the living, etc. The holy City shall be
established in the midst of the earth: in which God, the Founder thereof, shall
make his abode with the Just, who govern. After which; he supposes all we have
said of the fruitfulness of the earth, of the peace, which there shall be in
it, and of the change of the natures of cruel, and savage Beasts; alleging to
that purpose (though with some little diversity) the words of the third Book of
the pretended Sibyl, in the thirty second, and thirty fifth pages, and those of
the fifth Book in the forty sixth page, cited by us already.

Dionysius of Alexandria (who had undertaken the Refutation, not of Saint
Irenaeus (as In Esai. lib. 8. praefat.
Saint Hierome thought) but of Nepos, in two Books, entitled Of the Promises
Eusebius. lib: 7. cap. 13.
was (about one hundred years after) engaged by Apollinarius of Laodicea; as we
learn from the same Saint Hierome saying, Duobus voluminibus respondit
Apollinarius, etc. That is to say, Apollinarius answered in two Volumes; whom
follow not only the men of his own Sect, but also a great multitude of ours as
to that particular only. So, that I now see, with a spirit foreseeing what
will happen, what considerable Persons will be exasperated against me.

Much about the same time lived Tychonius, the learned African of the Donatist
Party; of whom Gennadius writes, in his Catalogue, Cap. 18.
Mill annorum quoque regni, in terra Justorum, post resurrectionem futuri,
suspicionem intulit, etc. He also gave some suspicion of imagining a Reign of
the Just upon Earth, for the space of a thousand years, after the Resurrection.
To which may be added, that in the confused Collection of Homilies, which is
attributed to Saint Augustine, and was indeed extracted out of the Writings of
Tychonius upon the Apocalypse, we read these words, Homil. 17.
Retulit Spiritus (dum haec scriberet) regnaturam Ecclesiam mill annos in hoc
saeculo usque ad finem mundi. That is to say, The Spirit (while he writ these
things) delivered, that the Church should reign a thousand years upon Earth,
even to the end of the World.

The same Gennadius observes of one Commodianus; Cap. 15. Gennad.
De divinis repromissionibus adversus illos (Paganos) agens, vili satis, and
crasso (ut ita dixerim) sensu disseruit: illis stuporem, nobis desperationem
incutiens; Tertullianum, and Lactantium, and Papiam sequutus, etc. Treating
against the Heathens concerning the divine Promises, he discoursed thereof in a
sense sufficiently flat, and unpolished: casting them into Insensibility, us
into Despair; wherein he followed Tertullian, Lactantius, and Papias for his
Authors.

We have it also upon the account of In Ezekiel. lib. 11. cap. 36.
St. Hierome, that our Severus Sulpitius, who writ the Life of St. Martin, had
committed the same Error in his Dialogue, entitled Gallus; wherein yet there
is not, at this day, any thing of that nature to be found.

Nay, the same St. Hierome, himself (though not chargeable with the Error;
which, to his grief, he saw generally followed by the Christians of the fifth
Age) betrays himself guilty of so great a respect toward those, who first
maintained it, that he dares not condemn it; saying, about the year 415. In
Hierem. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Licet non sequamur; tamen damnare non possumus: quia multi Ecclesiasticorum
virorum, and Martyrs ista dixerunt; and unusquisque in suo sensu abundat, and
Domini cuncta judicio reservantur, etc. In regard many Ecclesiastical Persons,
and Martyrs have said these things; as also that every man abounds in his own
sense, and that all is reserved for the Judgment of the Lord: though I do not
follow them; yet can I not condemn them.

CHAP. XIII. Inducements of Praying for the Dead, arising from the Hypotheses
proposed in the pretended Sibylline Writing.
BY this means had the Opinion of the Millenaries (with a success equal to that
of the other Supposi^s of the pretended Sibylline Writing) not only found
Partisans among the Christians; but also gained the applause of many of the
most eminent among them: and all had conceived this apprehension thereof; that
it was impossible to maintain all the Hypotheses contained in it, without
inducing, by a necessary consequence, Prayer for the Dead: whom they imagined
to stand so much the more in need of the Assistances of the living; by how much
they imagined them exposed, as well to the disturbances, which those might be
subject to, who are reduced to the expectation of their Happiness, as to the
Temptations, and Assaults, which the Faithful are exercised with, through the
implacable malice of Evil Spirits; and are obliged, at last, to stand to the
rigorous Judgment of the God of glory. We cannot make a better representation
of the State, whereto the Christians of that Time conceived their deceased
Brethren to be reduced; then by copying-out what Justin Martyr, who had seen
the Eruption of the first Sibylline Imposture) has written of the condition of
our Savior himself, to whom he very justly applied those words of the two and
twentieth Psalm (according to the Hebrews) Psalm. xxii. 21.
Save me from the Lyon's Mouth. That he prayed his Soul might be delivered from
the Sword, from the Lyon's Mouth, and the Paw of the Dog, was a request, that
none should prevail over his Soul; to the end, that, when we come to depart
this life, we should desire the same things, as he did of Almighty God; that
every wicked bold Spirit may be prevented from taking our Souls, as being what
the Souls expect. I have shown as much, in that Saul required, that the Soul of
Samuel might be evocated by the Witch. It appears also, that the Souls of all
those, who have been Just, and Prophets, are subject to such Powers, as (by the
effect) it is manifest, was that, wherewith the Witch was Possessed. Whence it
is, that he teaches us by his Son, that we (for whose sake it is clear, that
that was done) should Fight all manner of ways, and desire, at our Departure
out of this life, that our Souls may not fall under any such Powers, for as
much, as when he gave up the Ghost upon the Cross, he said Luke xxiiii. 46.
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

From which Discourse we learn; that he had a certain persuasion of four things;

1. That our Savior, at the time of his Passion for our salvation, prayed,
that his Soul might not fall under the power of the Devils.

2. That we are obliged, upon our approaches to Death, to imitate his Example.

3. That the Prophets were, after death, exposed to the insolences of Evil
Spirits, in such manner, that the Soul of Samuel could be evocated by the Witch
of Endor.

4. That the Souls, of the Faithful, who daily depart this world, are subject
to the same inconveniences; and, consequently, do all stand in extraordinary
need of being relieved by the Prayers of the Living.

In like manner do we see, that upon this mold must needs be fashioned those
Ancient Prayers, which the Church of Rome makes, at this day, for the Faithful
departed; saying, Domine Jesu Christ, Rex gloriae, libera animas omnium
Fidelium defunctorum de manu Inferni, and de profundo lacu. Libera eas de ore
Leonis; ne absorbeat eas Tartarus; ne cadant in obscura Tenebrarum loca. Fac
eas, Doni^ transire te de morte ad vitam San ctam, etc. Liberatae de
principibus Tenebrarum, and locis paena rum, etc. Repelle, quaesumus, Domine,
ab ea omnes Principe Tenebrarum, etc. That is to say; O Lord, Jesus Christ,
King of Glory, deliver out of the hand of Hell, and from the deep Lake, the
souls of all the Faithful departed. Save them from the mouth of the Lion; that
Hell do not swallow them up; and that they may not fall into the obscure places
of Darkeness, etc. Lord make them to pass from Death to an Holy Life, etc. may
they be delivered from the Princes of Darkness, and the places of Torments,
etc. Drive away from them all the Princes of Darkness, O Lord we beseech thee.
Nay the tender Saint Augustine had such a kind of Letany in his Imagination;
when, celebrating, in his Confessions, the Memory of Saint Monica his Mother,
who was May the fourth, in the year of Christ 389.
dead at least six years before, he has this Language. Lib. 9. cap. 13.
Nemo a protectione tua dirumpat eam: non se interponat, nec vi, nec insidiis,
Leo, and Draco; nec enim respondebit illa, nihil se debere, ne convincatur, and
obtineatur ab Accusatore callido, etc. Let no body snatch her out of thy
protection: let not the Lion, or the Dragon interpose themselves, either by
force, or by ambush; for she will not answer, that she ows nothing, lest she be
convicted, and carried away by the crafty Accuser.

CHAP. XIV. The Motives, proposed by Justin Martyr, disallowed; and those,
which St. Epiphanius had to pray for the Dead, taken into Consideration.
BUt since the Hypothesis of Justin Martyr was not embraced by all Antiquity;
Tertullian telling us in general, Absit, ut animam cujuslibet Sancti, nedum
Prophetae a Daemonio credamus extractam, etc. Far be it from us, to believe,
that the Soul of any Saint whatsoever, much less of a Prophet, has been
extracted by the Devil; and Pionius Metaphrastes, upon the first of February;
Methodius, in a particular Treatise against Origin; St. Basil, upon the eighth
Chapter of Esaias, and in an Epistle to Eustathius; Saint Gregory of Nyssa, in an
Epistle to Theodosius; Saint Gregory Nazianzene, in the second Invective
against Julian; Saint Hierome, upon the sixth Chapter of Saint Matthew; St.
Cyril of Alexandria, in the sixth Book of Adoration in Spirit and Truth;
Procopius of Gaza, upon the eight and twentieth Chapter of the first Book of
Kings; Georgius Syncellus, in his History; and others, particularly charging
with Imposture the pretended Evocation of Samuel; and Philastrius numbering it
expressly among Heresies: we are now to examine, upon what reasons, Praying for
the Dead has been since grounded, and to hear, upon this Point, St. Epiphanius
disputing in the year 376. against Aerius; who, thinking it not enough to deny,
that there accrewed any advantage to the deceased from the Prayers made, on
their behalf, by the living, had withal, upon that account, left the Church of
Sebaste. He engages against him with these Considerations; (...), etc. Those,
who are here, believe, that those, who are departed this world, live: and that
they are not deprived of being; but that they both are, and live to the Lord.
And to the end, that this excellent Doctrine may be explained; that there is an
hope for those, who pray for their Brethren, as for persons in their journey;
the prayer made for them is also profitable, although it does not cut all, that
may be alleged against them: but (in as much, as, many times, while we are in
this world, we sin voluntarily, and involuntarily) to signisie what is
accomplished. For we make mention of the Just, and pray for sinners; for
sinners, directing our Eyes to the mercy of God, which they have obtained; for
the Just, for the Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops, Anachorets, and the whole Battalion, to the end,
that we might make a distinction between the rank of men, and the Lord Jesus
Christ; because of the honor, which is due to him, and render him convenient
Veneration, as having this apprehension, that our Lord is not to be parallelled
with any of mankind, though every one of mankind were possessed of Justice
ten thousand times, and more.

It is evident, that the first Consideration of Saint Epiphanius could make
nothing against Aerius; who denied the advantage of Prayer for the Faithful
departed: the Ratiocination, or Argument of this Father being not necessary,
either absolutely, or in respect of his Adversary He is living, Therefore he
must be prayed for; since that, if this were allowed, Prayers should be made
for all the living Creatures that are, Angels, Men, and Beasts, without any
exception; and that for this reason, that all these, every one of these kinds
is possessed of Being, and Life, in some degree. Besides the Consequence of
such a way of reasoning would go much beyond, as well the intention of its
Author, as the practice of the Church of Pontus; in vindication whereof he had
framed it: since that no Community of Christians ever did, or thought it self
obliged to communicate its Suffrages to the Angels, who live, and stand in the
presence of the Lord; as supposing that Office could not be due to them, nor be
conceived a rational service, in regard they neither stand in need thereof, nor
can receive any advantage thereby.

The second Consideration, which concerns the Hope the Christians of the fourth
Age conceived of the effect of their Prayers for their deceased Brethren, could
not be of greater weight, then the former, as far as it concerned Aerius; who
denied, not that the Faithful of his Time, had a certain hope of profiting the
Dead by their Prayers (for that they had, was manifest) but that their hope was
well grounded, and that their Prayers for the Dead were, or could be, of any
advantage. But, as I cannot, without some trouble, reflect, that a Person so
great (as Saint Epiphanius) should be (through I know not what forgetfulness)
reduced to alledg for a reason to his Adversary the very thing he put in
question, and which had most need of proof; so I think my self obliged to make
this Observation; That the Christians at that time used their hope concerning
the communication of their Suffrages to the Dead, with so much indulgence; that
they extended it even to those, whom they thought dead in mortal sin, and out
of the communion of the Church.

CHAP. XV. Of the Prayers made, and Alms given heretofore by the Christians for
the damned.
NOt to bring upon the Stage the vain imaginations of Origin, and his Party;
who conceived no other Punishments to be inflicted on either men, or Devils,
then such, as were Purgatory, and for a time; nor yet much to urge, that some
very Great Person (as St. Gregory Nyssen, in his great Catechistical Oration,
in his Treatise Of the Soul, and in that which he made upon the eight and
twentieth Verse of the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians; and St. Hierome, in the eighteenth Book upon Isaiah (Chap. lxvi.
24.) seem to have some time countenanced it: I shall insist on this, that some
others, no less eminent, were of Opinion, that there might be obtained some
diminution of the Torments of the Damned; and that they might be relieved by
Prayers, and Alms. Hence St. Chrysostom, in his third Homily upon the Epistle
to the Philippians, speaking of those, who thought it much to dispose of their
wealth to Good Uses, cries out, (...), etc. Let us bewail them; let us assist
them according to our power; let us find out some little relief for them:
little indeed; yet let us help them that little. And how shall we do it? By
praying our selves, and exhorting others to pray for them; giving frequently
for their sakes to the poor. That brings some comfort. The same St.
Chrysostom, affirming that the Catechumens have no part in the public Prayers
made for the Faithful departed, adds, (...), etc. The Catechumens are not
honored with that consolation; but are deprived of all assistance of that
nature, one only excepted. What is that? It is in your power to give to the
poor for them; and that gives them some refreshment. And, in the sixty second
Homily upon the Gospel of St. John, (...), etc. If he, who is dead, were a
sinner, and had many ways offended God, it is requisite we weep, for that would
be of no advantage to him, but do that which may procure him some consolation;
viz. give Alms, and Offerings. This also we are to rejoice at; that he is
deprived the opportunities of commiting wickedness.

Prudentius, in the fifth of his Hymns, upon a Supposition, that the Night
between Easter-Eve, and Easter Day, the Souls of the Damned receive some ease,
and remission of their pains, says;

Sunt and spiritibus saepe nocentibus
Poenarum celebres sub Styge Feriae.
Illa nocte, sacer qua rediit Deus,
Stagnis ad Superos ex Acheronticis, etc.
Marcent suppliciis Tartara mitibus,
Exultatque sui carceris otio
Umbrarum populus, liber ab ignibus;
Nec fervent solito flumina sulphur, etc.
That is,

The Infernal Spirits sometimes gain
An intermission of their pain.
That Night, when God, from Acheron,
Ascended to his heavenly Throne, etc.
A milder torture reigns in Hell,
The Ghosts in Flames no longer dwell,
Proud that their bonds were eased awhile;
The streams of Sulphur cease to boil, etc:
The same Prudentius, at the end of his Hamartigenia, numbering himself among
the Damned, has this Discourse,

Esto, cavernoso (quia sic pro labe necesse est
Corporea) tristis me sorbeat ignis Averno;
Saltem mitificos incendia lenta vapores
Exhalent, aestuque calor languente tepescat.
Lux immensa alios, and Tempora vincta coronis
Glorificent; me poena levis clementer adurat, etc.
If (since our Stains corporeal so require)
I shall be swallom'd by Avernal Fire,
Yet may (at least) those Flames a gentler heat
Exhale, and Vapors less intense beget.
Whilst others glorious Crowns of Light obtain,
Let me but have a gentler heat, and pain.
And in the Hymn of St. Fructuosus, Bishop of Tarragone; Fors dignabitur, and
meis medelam, tormentis dare, prosperante Christo, etc. It may be also he will
give ease to my Torments, Christ granting the good success. For, referring the
giving of that ease to the Ruente Mundo.
Destruction of the World, he shows, it was not his meaning to speak of
Purgatory such, as the Church of Rome conceives it at this day; but of the
final condition of Souls at the last Judgment.

Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, applying to himself the Parable of the sixteenth of
Luke, and imagining himself in the place of the wicked rich man, whom the
Gospel represents as damned, says to Nicetas, Bishop of Dacia, beyond Danubius,
which we now call Transsylvania;

Nos locis, quantum meritis, dirempti,
Eminus celsis humiles patronis,
Te procul sacris socium catervis Suspiciemus.
Quis die nobis dabit hoc in illa,
Ut tui stemus lateris sub umbra,
Et tuae nobis requietis aura Temperet ignem.
Tunc, precor, nostri nimium memento,
Et patris sancti gremio recumbens,
Roscido nobis digito furentem Discute flammam.
We, who in place from thee as far,
As in our merits, distant are,
From our Abyss to thee on high Direct our cry.
Who is it, when that day comes, will yield,
Thy shade may serve us for a shield,
And some cool air from thy blessed seat May fan our heat?
Ah! then preserve us in thy mind,
And, on thy Father's Breast reclined,
But one drop from thy finger shake, Our thirst to slake.
Saint Augustine, in the four and twentieth Chapter of his one and twentieth
Book Of the City of God, professes; that he does not oppose such as applied, to
the damned, those words of the seventy seventh Psalm according to the Greeks,
Psalm. lxxvii. 9.
Has God forgotten to be gracious? saying, Quibus placet istam sententiam
usque ad illa impiorum tormenta protendere, etc. I would have those, who are
pleased to extend that Sentence even to the Torments of the damned, understand
it at least in this manner; that the Joh. iii, 36.
Wrath of God, which was pronounced against them for their eternal punishment,
still remaining upon them, Psalm. lxxvii. 9.
God shuts not up in anger his tender mercies, and causes them not to be
tormented with so much rigor, as they deserve; not so as they should never
undergo those pains, or that a time should come, when they should be
determined; but to the end they should suffer them more remissly, then their
deserts might require. For by that means, both the Wrath of God shall remain,
and he shall not withhold his compassions even in his wrath, which I confirm
not, though I do not oppose. But in the tenth Chapter of his Manual copied-out
by Isidorus, Archbishop of Sevil (Offic. lib. 1. Chap. 18.) by Julian,
Archbishop of Toledo, (Prognost. lib. 1. Chap. 21.) by Bid, (in 2 Cor. v.) by
Eterius, Bishop of Osmo, (Adversus Elipand. lib. 1.) he makes a clearer
discovery of his sentiment; writing, Cum sacrificia sive Altaris, sive
quarumcunque Eleemosynarum pro Baptizatis defunctis omnibus offeruntur, etc.
When the Sacrifices, whether of the Altar, or of Alms, of what kind soever
they be, are offered for all the Faithful departed, they are acts of
thanksgiving for those, that have been very good, Propitiations for those, who
have not been very Bad, consolations in some sort to the living for those, who
have been very wicked, though there are no assistances of the dead; and as for
those, who reap advantage by them, they benefit them in this, that either their
sins are fully remitted, or their damnation made more supportable. The result
whereof is, that (according to the Opinion of this Father, whom so many others
have followed, as their Guide, and Directour) it was not impossible, but that
Alms might procure an Alleviation of the Torments of the damned, for whom they
had been offered to God by the Living.

Athanasius of Antioch, in his Answer to the thirty fourth Question of
Antiochus, asking, (...), etc. How then, do not the Souls even of Sinners
receive some benefit, when Assemblies meet, Good Deeds are done, and Offerings
are offered for them? concludes, that they do, and says, (...). If they reap no
good thereby, there would be no mention made of them at their Intorment. And
note, that he speaks of the Souls of those Sinners, of whom he had said in his
Answer to the two and thirty Question, that they minded nothing, but their
punishment; and in that to the thirty third, that they could do neither good,
nor ill, opposing them to the Souls of the Saints, which, (...).
seized by the Angels, praise God.

From this Source sprang several ill-digested Stories, and Relations about the
year 416. Vincent Rogatista objected to St. Augustine, that St. Perpetua had by
her Prayers obtained the dismission of Dinocrates, her Brother, out of the
place of Torments. Nay, after the year 730. Damascene undertook to deliver out
three thence upon his Warrant; the first taken out of the Legend of St. Thecla,
converted in Iconia by Saint Paul; where the Author (who seems to have been
very desirous to take upon him the Name of Basil, Bishop of Seleucia, upon this
account, that in his City rested the body of that Blessed Virgin) says, that
Tryphaena, a Kinswoman to the Emperor; who, after the death of her Daughter
Falconilla, though dead in the darkness of Paganism, had entertained at her
house Thecla, persecuted by Alexander, and, upon his prosecution, condemned to
be torn in pieces by the Beasts in the Theater of Antioch; that this Tryphaena,
I say, in a Dream saw her Daughter Falconilla, earnestly begging of her to
implore the assistance of the Saints Prayers, that by her intercession she
might be (...).
transferred into the abode of the Just; and that her desire was immediately
granted.

The Second is taken out of the History of Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis
(where there is no Track of any such thing to be found now) to this effect;
that Saint Macarius the Hermit, having made some question to the dry Skull of
a certain Heathen, God inspired that dry Bone with this true Discourse, by way
of Answer, When thou offerest thy Prayers for the Dead, we receive some little
consolation.

The Third, attested (as he says) by (...).
the East, and West (though not any one of the Latins speak of it) attributes
to Saint Gregory the Great the deliverance of Trajan's Soul; who was not only
an Infidel, but a Persecutour also, 470. years, and above, after his death, and
detention in Hell. But it is to little purpose to disturb the dust of an old
Imagination, frivolous enough, and disclamed even by those, who are at this day
the most earnest Patrones of Prayer for the Dead.

CHAP. XVI. The Third, and Fourth Motives of Saint Epiphanius taken into
consideration.
THe third Consideration of Saint Epiphanius to confirm the custom of Praying
for the Dead: viz. That the departed are (in relation to the living) as persons
that Travel, seems to presuppose the first Hypothesis of the pretended
Sibylline Writing, which gives occasion to imagine, that those, who die, arrive,
upon the dissolution of the Body, not at the place of their sovereign
Happiness; but are transferred to some unpleasing receptacle under the earth,
where their patience is no less exercised, then that of Travelers, who have a
long and tedious Journey to go through. This Hypothesis indeed (if so be it
were maintained by Aerius) might justly have been objected to him, to induce
him to admit Prayer for the Dead? since it is evident, that those, who are at a
distance from their Happiness, and languish in the expectation of it, stand in
need of comfort, and the Prayers requisite to obtain grace of him, who is the
author of Grace. But it cannot be of any consideration, as to what concerns the
Protestants, who unanimously Impugn it, and constantly teach, that the Souls of
men, at the very departure out of their Bodies, enter either into Eternal fire,
whence there is no deliverance, and where there is no comfort; or into the
Glory of God, which for ever exempts them from all those exigencies, which they
are Subject to, who are deprived thereof, while they endeavor to attain it.

The fourth Consideration of the same Father, to wit, that those, who die, have,
during the time of their Pilgrimage in this world, Sinned both voluntarily, and
involuntarily, is very Just, and as Aerius never had any reason to deny it, so
is it not at all contradicted by any of the Protestants; who, by that which
they have learnt of Saint John, that those men, who (at any assignable time of
their Life) say they have no sin, deceive themselves, make God a Liar, and have
neither his word, nor truth in them, do very well comprehend, that it must of
necessity follow, that those, who should deny they had any till the hour of
Death, would deceive themselves no less then others, and with equal presumption
charg with falsehood the God of truth. But (omitting what Aerius might have
said according to his Hypothesis, of which we have nothing certain) the
Protestants hold, that there is no necessity of this consequence, he has
(whether voluntarily, or involuntarily, it matters not) sinned during his life:
therefore we must Pray for him after his death.

Secondly, that the Church of Rome grants it, inasmuch as she, acknowledging
that this Antecedent, he has sinned, is and shall eternally be as undeniably
true in respect of the Saints, which are, and ever shall be in the Glory of
God, and the Damned, who shall never come out of Hell torments, as of the
living, who aspire to felicity, and desire to escape Damnation: she, I say,
neither prays, nor thinks she ought to pray, for either the Saints Glorified,
nor the Sinners Condemned, but only for the Faithful, whom she presupposes to
expect their Glorification, and that only for a certain time.

Thirdly, that if from this antecedent, he has sinned, it did of necessity
always follow, We must Pray for him, the Church of Rome would be obliged to
Pray; First, For the Apostatized Angels, who, having quitted their first
station, sinned no less then men do, but in such manner, that their offense
condemned by an irrevocable decree is absolutely incapable of remedy. Secondly,
For the Damned, who are not in a state capable of amendment. Thirdly, For
those, that are Glorified, who have not any good to obtain, and that as well
after, as before, the last Judgment; since that after the Pronuntiation of it,
this truth, that men, and Devils have sinned, will remain evident, and
irrefragable as before, though that after the retribution, which shall be for
ever made to every one according to his works, it will not be any longer either
necessary, or convenient, or rational to pray for him.

CHAP. XVII. Saint Epiphanius's fifth Motive considered.
FOr a fifth consideration Saint Epiphanius alleges, that Prayers for the Dead
are made by the surviving, out of a design to signify what is accomplished;
and thereby insinuates, that he conceived the state of the Faithful, from the
moment of their death, to the time of their resurrection, to be imperfect, and
capable of melioration; it is possible Aerius might have been of the same
Sentiment, and upon that account have been forced to acknowledge some necessity
of praying for them, until the absolute accomplishment of their Glory. But
this imagination neither has, nor can have, any force against the Protestants;
who believe, that the Faithful, at the very demolition of the 2 Cor. v. 1.
earthly Tabernacles of their bodies, are received (according to the saying of
St. Paul) into their celestial habitations, and that, at the very instant of
their putting-off of Flesh, God clothes their souls with the glory, which they
are eternally to enjoy; so that what till then was 2 Cor. v. 8.
in part, and imperfect in them, is from thence absolutely abolished; and that
these Considerations, that the Prayer does not cut off all, that is laid in
charge against the dead, and that it is made to signify what is accomplished,
cannot be any way seasonable in respect of those, who (as they) are persuaded
by the Scripture, that to no purpose are alleged, either the need, which the
Faithful departed stand in of their accomplishment; since they are already in
actual possession thereof, 2 Cor. v. 8. Phil. 1. 23.
being present with the Lord, and absent from the body particularly, to that
end: or the charges, which are pretended to remain against them after death,
since there can be no Romans viii. 33.
accusation, nor any one to lay ought to their charge, who are justified by the
Lord, who protests (according to the tenor of his own Covenant) that he Heb.
viii. 12. and x. 17. Jer. xxxi. 33.
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and iniquities
will he remember no more.

CHAP. XVIII. Saint Epiphanius's sixth Motive Considered.
IN the sixth place, St. Epiphanius tells us, That some, in his Time, prayed
for Sinners departed, having a respect, or recourse, (...), to the Mercy of
God; (...), imploring the Mercy of God; and it may be said, that upon this
ground, That sinners continued charged with sins, and imperfections after their
decease, Antiquity was induced to demand, by Prayers, the remission of their
sins, and consequently their establishment in a place of rest. To this purpose
is what we read in the one and fourtieth Chapter of the eighth Book of the
Constitutions, attributed to Saint Clement; (...), etc. That God, the lover of
men, having received his soul, would turn away his face from all his sins
voluntary, and unvoluntary, and out of his Graciousness, and Mercy, place him
in the Region of the godly, who enjoy themselves in the Bosom of Abraham, etc.
whence trouble, sadness, and sighing are departed, etc. Look upon this thy
servant, whom thou have chosen, and taken to thy self, to receive another lot,
and pardon him what he has (voluntarily, or involuntarily) sinned, and place
about him good Angels, and dispose of him into the Bosom of the Patriarchs,
etc. where there is neither sadness, nor trouble, nor sighing, etc.

In the Liturgy of the Armenians. Memento, Domine, miserere, and fac gratiam
animabus requiescentibus, pacifica, illumina eas, etc. Remember, O Lord, show
Mercy, and be Gracious unto the souls, which are in rest, pacify them, and
illuminate them, etc.

In the Liturgy of St. Basily (...). For the repose, and remission of thy
Servant.

In the Anaphora, or Liturgy, translated out of the Syriack, and attributed to
St. Basil, whereof the Summary is alleged by Cassander; That God would conduct
the departed through the horrid receptacles, and place them in habitations of
light. That God would deliver them out of the thick darkness of tribulation,
and grief, that he would not enter into judgment with them, etc. If they have
sinned in any manner, as men clad in flesh, that he would pardon them.

In the Missal of the Latin Church. Animabus famulorum, famularumque tuarum,
remissionem cunctorum tribue peccatorum; ut indulgentiam, quam semper
optaverunt, piis supplicationibus consequantur, etc. Grant (O Lord) unto the
souls of thy Servants, of what Sex soever, the remission of all their sins;
that, by devout supplications, they may obtain that indulgence, which they have
always desired, etc. Do away, by the pardon of thy most merciful Piety, the
sins, which he has committed through the frailty of worldly conversation, etc.
Do thou (O God) mercifully, out of thy wonted Goodness, wipe away the stains,
which the souls have contracted from the contagion of the World, Amen.
Mercifully pardon them, etc. put them into perpetual oblivion, Amen, etc. O
Lord, enter not into judgment with thy Servants; for no man shall be justified
in thy sight; deliver their souls from the Gates of Hell, etc. Grant them the
remission of all their sins, etc. free them from all their sins, etc. We
beseech thee, that thy judicial sentence fall not heavy upon them, etc. That
what vices soever she has, through the subtlety of the Devil contracted, thou
would, out of thy compassion, and mercy, indulgently do away, etc. Free, O
Lord, we beseech thee, the soul of thy Servant from all chains of sin. Which
Prayers are for the most part repeated in the first Book of Sacred Ceremonies,
(Sect. 15. chap. 1.) See also lib 2^ Sect, 2. capp. 24, 25, 26, 34, 35.
and the ensuing is there added, over and above, by a late Cardinal; Non intres
in judicium tuum, Domine, cum servo tuo, etc. O Lord, enter not into judgment
with thy servant: for no man shall be justified in thy sight; if the remission
of his sins be not granted him by thee. We therefore beseech thee, O Lord, that
thy Judgments may not by strange Sentences be rigorous toward him, whom the
true supplication of Christian faith recommends to thee; but that, through the
assistance of thy grace, he may be thought worthy to escape the Judgment of
eternal vengeance, he, who, while living, was honored with the Seal of the
Holy Trinity, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, Amen.

Upon some such considerations was it that St. Cyril of Jerusalem, in his fifth
Mystagogical Catechesis, speaking of the departed, said, (...), etc. We offer
prayers to God for the departed: and, if they are sinners, we do not weave
Crowns for them; but offer up Christ sacrificed for our sins: appeasing on
their behalf, and our own, him, who is the Lover of mankind. Upon which passage
it is to be noted by the way; that the Text is disordered by the Transcriber;
who, having found in his Copy, (...), etc. thrust in a whole line after (...),
writing, (...).

From the same Hypothesis also St. Augustine, in the forecited place of his
Confessions, took occasion to make these Prayers for his Mother, Dimitte illi
and tu debitu sua; non intres cum ea in judicium; superexaltet misericordia tua
judicium, etc. Do thou also forgive her her Trespasses, enter not into judgment
with her; Let thy mercy be above thy judgment, etc. But though it were granted,
this Hypothesis might do somewhat against Aerius; who might have been drawn
into the common Opinion; that the departed, being after death in an imperfect
State, were detained, in a place by themselves, till their resurrection; yet
does it not amount to any thing against the Protestants, who are of a different
Opinion; since that, if it be always lawful to conclude, He was guilty of sin,
Therefore we must pray for him, the Church would be obliged to pray eternally
for all its Members, even after their Resurrection, and the last Judgment;
which none hitherto has conceived she ought to practice.

CHAP. XIX. Saint Epiphanius's seventh Motive Considered.
IN the last place, St. Epiphanius affirms, that, in his Time, Men prayed for
the Saints, and the Just, whoever they were, upon this account, that there
might be a distinction made between them, and our Savior; who, interceding for
all, does not stand in need of any one's intercession: and to show, that there
ought not to be parallelled with him any of those, who were most recommendable
for their Piety. Upon which last Hypothesis it may be said; that from most
certain Principles, to wit, that we must be tender of the honor of Jesus
Christ, and distinguish him from the men redeemed by him, and by no means
suffer, that any one compare them to their Savior; it draws a false
Consequence, to wit, that we must pray for them. For, if it were admitted, it
were also necessary to pray for the Faithful, as well after their
Resurrection, and the last Judgment, as before; since the honor proper to the
Son of God, will be no less due after the Resurrection, then before, and that
it will be, at all times, impiously done to take away the distinction there is
between him, and men, for whom he died, and interceded, by making any one equal
to him.

Thence it appears, how weak St. Epiphanius's Reason is, even from this; that
it proves more, then he had proposed to himself; nay, more, then the Church of
Rome at this day desires: the Church of Rome, I say; which has not only for
the space of 1200. years past, left off Praying for the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, etc. but would look on that kind of Devotion
as injurious, having grounded her proceeding on this Discourse of St.
Augustine, copied by Beda, upon the twelfth Chapter De verbis Apost. Sermon. 27.
to the Hebrews, and others. Habet Disciplina Ecclesiastica, etc. It is
according to Ecclesiastical Discipline, as the Faithful know; that, when [the
Names of] the Martyrs are recited before the Altar of God, men pray not for
them; but for all others, that are Commemorated, Prayers are made. For it is an
injury to pray for the Martyr, by whose Prayers we are to be recommended. And
yet what (to use the Terms of this Father) the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the
Christians of Africa, Rome, and in a word, of all the West, thrust, as
injurious, and ill-grounded, out of the both Public, and Private Service;
after they had quitted the Hypotheses of those, that had preceeded them, is
continued in the Offices of many other Churches. Whence we read, in the
Liturgy of the Armenians, Da aeternam pacem omnibus, qui nos praecesserunt in
fide Christi, Sanctis Patribus, Patriarchis, Apostolis, Prophetis, Martyribus,
etc. Give eternal peace to the holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, who have preceeded us in the Faith of Christ.

In that, which goes under the Name of Saint Mark, (...), etc. O Lord, our God,
give rest unto the Souls of our Fathers, and Brethren, who are departed before
us in the Faith of Christ; being mindful of the first Fathers, who lived in
the beginning of the World, the Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops, Saints, Just men, the spirits of all those, that
have had their accomplishment in the Faith of Christ, of whom we this day make
Commemoration, as also of our holy Father, the Apostle, and Evangelist St.
Mark, who has shown us the way of Salvation.

In that of St. Chrysostom, though very much altered, (...), etc. We offer
unto thee this reasonable service for those, who rest in Faith, our Ancestors,
Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, continent persons, and every spirit accomplished in Faith,
especially for the absolutely-holy, undefiled, blessed above all things, our
glorious Lady, the Mother of God, and ever Virgin, Mary.

In the Sacramentary of St. Gregory; Divina mysteria Sanctis tuis prosint ad
gloriam, etc. Let the divine Mysteries be profitable to thy Saints for their
glory.

We might find as much in that, which St. Epiphanius had seen in use among the
Christians of Cyprus, Palestine, Syria, and all the other Provinces; not
excepting even Africa it self: if we had them at present, since that in the
year 250. St. Cyprian in his 34th Epistle, speaking of Celerina, Grandmother to
Laurentinus, Uncle by the Father's side, and of Ignatius, Uncle by the
Mother-side to Celerinus, Confessor, and Reader in the Church of Carthage,
said, Palmas a Domino, and coronas illustri passione meruerunt; sacrificia pro
eis semper (ut meministis) offerimus, quoties Martyrum passiones, and dies,
anniversaria commemoratione celebramus, etc. They have, by their illustrious
sufferings, obtained of the Lord Palms, and Crowns. We daily offer sacrifices
for them (as you remember) as often, as we celebrate the Anniversaries of the
Passions, and Days of the Martyrs. But they have been either abolished, or so
altered; that they contain not any thing of what was in them before, of
greatest consideration. And thence it is come to pass, that in those, who go
under the name of St. James, St. Peter, St. Basil, and St. Gregory, we meet not
with (as in the first) Prayers to God for the Saints, but Prayers to the
Saints; the fear of making them equal with Jesus Christ being by degrees
vanished, and experience forcing us to acknowledge, that all the imaginations of
men, as well what are good, as what bad, pass away; but that Jesus Christ,
alone, is, and shall be the same eternally; as St. Paul, to our comfort, gives
us to observe in the 8th Verse of the 13th Chapter to the Hebrews.

CHAP. XX. The Motive of Dionysius, the pretended Areopagite, taken into
consideration.
HE, who about the year 490. took upon him the name of St. Denis the
Areopagite, to gain the greater credit to his Books Of the Celestial and
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, grounds, upon one only consideration, the
Commemoration of the departed, which was made in his time in the Public
Service, and declares his sentiment with the ordinary ostentation, in these
Terms, Hierarch. Eccles. cap. 3.
(...), etc. The recitation of the sacred Rolls, which is made after the
kissing of the Pax, declares the names of those, who have lived holily, and who
are irreturnably gone to the perfection of virtuous life, exhorting, and
leading us to the most blessed and Godlike condition by resemblance of them,
and pronouncing them, as it were living, and (as Theology expresses it) not
dead, but Sap. v. 16. Jo. v. 14.
passed from death to a most divine life. But withal observe, that they are
reposited by sacred Memorials in the Remembrance of the Deity, and not
according to the manner of men transmitted from the fancy to the memory, (but
to speak suitably to God) according to the venerable, and irrecoverable
knowledge of the God-like deceased, which is in God. For (as the Oracles say) 2 Timothy ii. 19.
he knows those, who are his, and Psalm. cxvi. 19.
The death of his Saints is precious in his sight; the death of the Saints
being named, instead of their accomplishment in sanctity. Think devoutly upon
this; viz. that the venerable Signs, whereby Christ is signified, and
participated, having been placed upon the divine Altar, immediately after
follows the Description of the Saints; declaring thus much, that they are
inseparably conjoined by the supercelestial, and sacred union, which is between
them.

This Discourse, which makes no mention of any thing, but the recital of the
Names of the Departed, denoting the perpetuity of the blessed life they enjoy,
in consequence of their living conformably to the will of God, might stand,
without the use of any Prayer, made on their behalf by the living. But, in the
seventh Chapter, he not only speaks very clearly; but expresses his meaning of
it thus: (...) etc. The divine Hierarch (or President over things sacred)
advancing, makes the holy Prayer for the Person departed; and, after the
Prayer, the same Hierarch kisseth him; and afterward all, that are present, do
the like. Now the prayer requires of that Goodness, which divinely governs all
things; that whatsoever sin the departed has, through humane frailty,
committed, might be forgiven him; and that he might be placed in Light, and in
the Region of the Living, in the Bosoms of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whence
trouble and Isai. xxxv. 10.
sorrow, and sighing shall flee away.

Thus does this learned, but insincere Author, ground what he says on the
sixty of St. Epiphanius's Motives, as the most rational of all, and has
persuaded thereto all the Modern Greeks. And, as St. Epiphanius's alleging of
several other Considerations argues, he writ before the pretended Areopagite
ever thought of his Supposition: so this latter's copying the words of the
Constitutions, attributed to St. Clement, and above transcribed, and not
allowing of Prayer for the damned, shows, that his work is later, and of as
little authority.

CHAP. XXI. The Motives of Tertullian examined.
TErtullian, before any of these Authors, alleged two Motives of praying for
the Dead; that is to say, their refreshment, and the hastening, or advancement
of their Resurrection. For this Great man (I know not how) bewitched by the
pretended Sibylline Writing, supposed, that, before the last Judgment, the Son
of God, being descended upon Earth, to establish a new Kingdom in Jerusalem,
and to govern it himself, should bring together all his Faithful, and should
there fill them with all delights, even corporeal, for the space of a thousand
years. And, whereas St. John had foretold in his Apocalypse, that, the Old
Serpent being bound for a thousand years, there should be a first Resurrection,
in favor of their Souls, who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, he, with
Justin Martyr, Papias, St. Irenaeus, and all those, who have since gone under
the name of Millenaries, took that Praediction literally, and, wresting it to a
contrary sense, imagined, that, during the thousand years of Jesus Christ's
Reign, which he pretended should be in Jerusalem, the most eminent for
Sanctity, among the Faithful departed, should rise again before the rest of
mankind; but successively, and every one at this appointed time; so as that, if
one took possession of his body in the first of the thousand years, another
should not have that privilege, till a hundred, two, or three hundred years
after, and so to the end of that period of ten Ages; and that those should have
least advantage thereof, whose Resurrection should be either delayed, till near
the end of the thousand years, or put off till after it, and referred to the
last day assigned for the general Resurrection, as well of the rest of the
Just, as the Wicked. To induce us to embrace that Opinion, St. Irenaeus, in the
thirty fourth Chapter of his fifth Book, making a coherence between the words
of St. John in the twentieth Chapter of the Apocalypse, and those of the Son of
God in the twelfth of St. Luke, said, Hoc est, quod a Domino dictum est, etc.
This is it, which is said by our Savior; Luke xii. 37.
Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find
watching: Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to
sit down to meat, and, will still come forth and serve them: and, if he come in
the Evening-Watch, and find them so doing, they are blessed; because he shall
make them sit down, and shall serve them; nay, though it be in the second, or
the third Watch, they are blessed. The same thing says also John in the
Apocalypse, Apoc. xx. 6.
Blessed, and holy, is he, that has part in the first Resurrection. For,
comparing the Faithful departed to the Servants, that wait for the return of
their Lord, he would have those, that are raised the first; those, who next to
them; and those, who after them; designed by those, who are visited at the
first, second, and third watch. And Tertullian, having embraced the same
Opinion, presupposes; that the Faithful might, either by their own Devotions,
or those of their surviving Friends, have the honor of rising, if not the
first, at least before the expiration of the thousand years. And thence takes
occasion to exhort the Husband, that has lost his Wife, not to propose to
himself any change of condition; but affectionatly to preserve the remembrance
of his deceased Consort, and to do, upon her account, all possible Offices;
saying, (e) Pro anima ejus orat, and refrigerium interim adpostulat (c) De
Monog: cap. 10. Et De Anima, cap. 58. novissimum Quadrantem modicum quodque
delictum, more resurrectionis illic luendum, interpretamur.
ei, and in prima Resurrectione consortium, etc. He prays for her Soul, and in
the mean time wishes her, by his Prayers, refreshment, and a society with her
in the first Resurrection; as if he had said, Let him wish, that she be of the
number ber of those, who shall rise again, during the thousand years of the Saints
in Jerusalem; and that in expectation of that Resurrection, hastened by his
Prayers, she might receive those consolations from God, which should refresh
her Soul, languishing in expectation of her Happiness.

CHAP. XXII. The Sentiment of St. Ambrose brought to the Test.
ACcording to this Pattern was drawn the Ancient Gothic Liturgy, containing
these words; Quiescentium animas in sinu Abrahae collocare dignetur, and in
partem primae Resurrectionis admittat, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, etc.
That the Lord would vouchsafe to dispose the Souls of those, that rest, into
the Bosom of Abraham, and admit them to a participation of the first
Resurrection, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

It might seem (and there want not Great men, who have thought so) that St.
Ambrose was of the same Sentiment; when, closing up his Funeral Oration upon
the Death of Valentinian the Second, he writ in the year 392. Te quaeso, etc. I
beseech thee, Sovereign God, that, by an hastened Resurrection, thou would
awake, and raise up these most dear young men (Gratian, and Valentinian) so as
that thou recompense by an advanced Resurrection the course of this life, which
they have terminated, before it was come to its perfection: as if by the
hastened, or advanced Resurrection, which he desired, he had meant the first
Resurrection, which the Millenaries imagined to themselves; and had begged it,
as well for Gratian, who was born on the eighteenth of April, 359. and had been
murdered twenty four years, four Months, and seven days after, that is to
say, on the twenty fifth day of August, 383. as for Valentinian, whose birth,
happening on the eighteenth of January 370. had not preceeded his death
(falling on Whitsun-Eve, May the fifteenth, 392) but twenty two years, three
Months, and twenty seven days: upon which account he called them both Young
men, and bemoaned them, that the course of their Life had been cut off before
its maturity, and just perfection.

But neither the Expression of Resurrectio matura, etc. Hastened Resurrection,
upon which this Imagination was grounded, does necessarily imply any thing,
whence such a Conceit might be induced, nor can the Explication, which St.
Ambrose made of his Faith, nine years before, permit it. For in his Treatise
concerning the Faith of the Resurrection (writ immediately upon the Death of
his Brother Satyrus, which happened on the seventeenth of September 383.)
supposing that the sound of many Trumpets shall awake the dead at the Last day,
he has this Discourse, absolutely incompatible with the Opinion of the
Millenaries; Adverte, juxta Typum Legis, ordinem Gratiae, etc. Consider,
according to the Type of the Law, the order of Grace. When the first Trumpet
shall have sounded, it gathers together those toward the East, as the
Principal, and Elect. When the second, those, who are nearest in point of
Merit, such, as, being situated toward Libanus, have forsaken the vanities of
the Nations. When the third, those, who tossed, as it were, in the Sea, by the
Wind of this World, have been overwhelmed with the Waves of the present Time.
When the fourth, those, who could not sufficiently soften the hardness of their
understandings, by the Precept of the spiritual Word; and are, for that reason,
called Those toward the North; for Eccles. xliii. 20. (...).
Boreas (according to Solomon) is an hard Wind. Although therefore 1 Cor. xv.
52.
all shall be raised again in a moment, and the twinkling of an Eye, yet are
all raised according to the order of their Merits, and thereupon those shall be
raised first; who, by an early Advancement of Devotion, and a certain dawning
of Faith, have entertained the Rays of the eternal Sun rising upon them, as I
may justly instance (according to the Tenor of the Old Testament) in the
Patriarchs, or (according to the Gospel) in the Apostles. But the second are
those, who, quitting the Custom of the Nations, are passed from the
sacrilegious Error, to the Discipline of the Church, and for that reason those
first are of the Fathers; those next, from among the Gentiles.

This Discourse of St. Ambrose is an allusion to the Ordinance contained in the
tenth of Numbers, concerning the Verse 2.
Assembling of the people of Israel; and he applies, to the Resurrection of the
Dead, what is said Verse 5.
of the calling of those, who possessed the Quarter toward the East.

Secondly, Of those who were Quartered toward the Verse 6.
South, and, as it was in his Translation, toward Libs: which he mistaking,
confounded with Libanus; making, for want of reflection, a Mountain of a Wind;
and changing the South-Quarter, whence Libs blows, into that of the North, on
which side Libanus is, in respect of the Desert.

Thirdly, Of those, who were disposed toward the Sea.

Fourthly, Of those, who were toward the Quarter of the North, or of Boreas.

And, as he applied the calling together of these several Quarters to the last
Resurrection; so he acknowledged, withal, it should be general; and that all
should rise, not only the same day, but in the same moment. Which Assertion of
his was grounded on the express Declaration of Saint Paul in his first Epistle
to the 1 Cor. xv. 52.
Corinthians, and absolutely destroyed the Hypothesis of the Millenaries; who
believed there would be two Resurrections, one preceding the other by above a
thousand years: but he supposed, that in that moment of the general
Resurrection, there would be several divisions, and a certain precedence of
order among those Divisions, according to the dispositions of each of them.

Next he pretended, that the first Class of those, that were raised, should be
that of the Patriarchs, and Apostles; who had never been infected with the
Sacrilegious Error of the Gentiles, but were come, by an early advancement,
and as it were at a start, into the light: and in that he also opposed the
Error of the Millenaries; who imagined, that the Patriarchs were risen with
our Savior; that the Apostles, and others of the most Eminent among the Saints
should rise, when (according to their Opinion) he should come to establish a
Kingdom of a thousand years ^t Jerusalem; and the rest of the Dead (after the
determination of the thousand years) at the last Day.

When therefore he desires, for Gratian, and Valentinian, that God would grant
them an early Resurrection, as a recompense for their short Life, his meaning
was not to require, that they should rise before the Last Day, but in the same
moment with others; but, as to order, in the most worthy, and first in
excellence, viz. that of the Patriarchs, and Apostles; and that, because those
Princes were descended of a Christian Father; because they had from their
Mother's Breasts been imbued with Piety, and had never (no more then the
Patriarchs, and Apostles) been defiled with the Superstition of the Heathen,
out of which most of the Christians of their time had been delivered.

CHAP. XXIII. The Time, when Praying for the Dead was first introduced into the
Service of the Church.
HAving given an account of the Motives, which the Ancients had to Pray for the
Dead, it may, happily, be questioned by some, When this kind of Office, which is
not grounded upon any Precept, or Example, of either Old, or New Testament,
came to be used in the Church? In answer to which, I make no difficulty to
affirm, That it might be practiced some time before the year 200. in as much as
Tertullian, the most Ancient of all those, that say any thing of it, numbered
it, even then, among the Customs received in his Time; writing in the year 199.
De Corona, cap. 3.
Oblationes pro Defunctis, pro Natalitiis, annua die facimus, etc. Upon a
certain Anniversary-day we make Oblations for the Dead, and for Birth-days:
meaning by those Birth-days, the days of the Passions of the Martyrs; on which,
putting a Period to their Lives, and Combats, they entered, as it were, by a
second-Birth, into the enjoyment of their true Life, and their Glory. And in
another place, treating of the Duties of the Surviving Husband toward his
deceased Wife; De Monogamia, cap. 10.
Pro anima ejus orat, and refrigerium interim adpostulat ei, and in prima
Resurrectione consortium, and offert annuis diebus dormitionis ejus, etc. He
prays for her Soul, and, in the mean time, begs she may find refreshment, and
that he might enjoy her Society at the first Resurrection; and offers upon the
Anniversary-days of her falling-asleep, that is to say, of her departure.
Again; De exhortatione Castitatis, cap. 11.
Jam repete apud Deum, pro cujus Spiritu postules, pro qua Oblationes annuas
reddas. Stabis ergo ad Deum cum tot uxoribus, quot illas oratione commemoras,
and offeres pro duabus, and commemoras alias duas per Sacerdotem, de Monogamia,
ob pristinum de virginitate sancitum, circumdatum virginibus, and univiris?
etc. Consider now well, for whose Spirit thou make thy Addresses to God, for
whom thou do return annual Oblations. Will thou therefore stand before God
with as many Wives, as thou do in thy Prayers commemorate, and will thou
offer for two, and do thou make Commemoration of those two by the Priest,
who, after his once marrying, because of the precedent Ordinance concerning
Virginity, is encompassed with Virgins, and Women, that have had but one
Husband?

From the things, which this Great Person, the most Ancient, and most Learned
of all the Latins, that we have remaining, does advance, as to matter of fact,
concerning the Oblations, which were publicly made, and the employment of
Priests, the only Ministers of the Public service, as a thing ordinary, and
grown into Custom, it is manifest; that Praying for the Dead was, in his Time,
used, not only by particular Persons, but also in the Body of the Church; and
that the Liturgies thereof were full of it. So that, if we admit, as equally,
if not more, ancient then Tertullian, the Formularies of his Service, such as
we have them now, we should not, upon that account, have any Inconvenience to
fear. But, seeing that Tertullian, who (the first of all the Authors we have
remaining) gives us occasion to observe what the Practice of the Christians of
his Time was, relied (as well for the Prayers, as the Offerings) upon no other
Hypotheses, then those proposed by the Author of the pretended Sibylline
Writing; and that he had reverenced it, as a Piece not to be charged with any
insincerity (alleging it with this Elogie in the year 208. De Pallio, cap. 2.
Et Sibylla, non mendax, that is, And the Sibyl, no Liar) I find my self
forced to believe, that, from that Sink, over-easily taken by Antiquity, for a
pure and sacred Source, was (from the midst of the second Age) derived the
Custom, which had already gained strength, when Tertullian writ the Books we
have cited. I think also, that who will but consider, that there are threescore
years, and above, between the year 138. wherein the Romance of the Counterfeit
Sibyl seems to have come first abroad, and the year 199. in which Tertullian
writ his Book De Corona, and that the Books De exhortatione Castitatis, and De
Monogamia are yet later, will easily judge that space of Time, more then
sufficient, to give Birth unto, spread, and confirm, as well by solemn
Formularies, as by constant Practice, the Custom, which (though with great
alterations) has continued even to this day.

Add to this, that as none of the Ancients, who in the second Age made mention
of the State of the Dead, either writ before the year 138. or made any
difficulty to go upon the Hypotheses of the Counterfeit Prophetess, who has
described it according to her Fancy, or thought it much sometimes to have
recourse to her Authority; so all those, who (after Tertullian, and the use
confirmed in his Time) spoke of Prayers for the Dead, have built upon the same
Foundations; some (as Lactantius) have alleged her pretended Oracles, and not
any one would presume to derogate from the Reputation, which she had but too
too easily acquired.

I could wish, for their sakes, who (after they had disclaimed the first
causes, for which Tertullian, St. Epiphanius, and others of the Ancients,
thought it necessary to Pray for the Dead) are yet resolved to retain the
Custom of Praying for them, that it were in their power, to discover a beter
ground, whence their Observation might derive its Origin. I should entertain
with joy, and respect, what they might have to acquaint me with in
recommendation thereof, and would freely subscribe what satisfactory Testimony
can be produced; but I hope they will bear with me, if (taking the liberty to
discover my Thoughts) I say, they have not any thing of greater weight, then
the Custom alleged by Tertullian, and introduced by those, who, for the space
of threescore years together, had been deceived by the Writing, unjustly called
the Sibylline. I am not ignorant how that St. Chrysostom, two hundred years
after Tertullian, spoke advantageously of this Custom, writing in the twenty
first Homily upon the Acts of the Apostles, (...) etc. It is not in vain, that
the Deacon cries for those, who rest in Christ, and those, who make
Commemorations for them, etc. the Spirit has ordained all these things, etc.
it is not the Deacon, which utters that voice, but the Spirit. And in the
forty first Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he speaks
of Prayers, Offerings, and Alms for the Dead, and says, (...) All these things
are done by the direction of the Spirit. For what other Judgment could he have
made of a Custom, which he approved, and admired, the more he saw it confirmed
by the Practice of those, who had preceded him, and for whom he had an high
esteem, as Persons truly taught of God? With the same confidence did he allege
the Authority of the Apostles, writing in the third Homily upon the Epistle to
the Philippians, (...) It is not in vain, that the Apostles have made Laws
concerning these things. For though he found not so much as one Iota in their
Writings, that might invite him to that persuasion; yet, according to the
prejudgment of St. Hierome in his Epistle to Licinius, Epist. 28.
Unaquaeque Provincia abundet in suo sensu, and praecepta Majorum Leges
Apostolicas arbitretur, etc. Let every Province abound in its own sense, and
account the Precepts of our Ancestors as Apostolical Laws, he presumed, that
what ^ad been practiced by men, that had lived near the Apostles Times, and
were famous for their Piety, came from the Apostles themselves; and indeed, it
were impossible to conceive any thing more plausible, then to attribute to the
Apostles the Custom, which men, reputed Apostolical, had introduced. For who
would have thought upon the first Start, that Papias, that Ancient Bishop of
Hierapolis, whom St. Irenaeus in the thirty third Chapter of his fifth Book,
Eusebius in the nine and thirtieth Chapter of the third Book, St. Hierome in
his Catalogue, and the Martyrologies upon the two and twentieth of February,
have (with an excess of sincerity) qualified (...). Papias in the words, which
Eusebins cites of him, acknowledges he had not seen any of the Apostles.
Auditour of St. John, and Companion of Saint Polycarp, and whom St. Hierome
assures us to have given out the Apostles for Authors of his Relations, was
such as Eusebius qualifies him (...). a man of little understanding, apt to
circumvent, and to scatter abroad, under venerable Names, as of our Savior, or
his Disciples, or of Aristion, and John, their Auditors, all the feigned
Stories he had either dreamed, or heard of? And who could have imagined, that
Saint Irenaeus, of whom St. Basil, in his Book Of the Holy Ghost, in the nine
and twentieth Chapter says, that he was, (...). A neighbor of the Apostles;
and St Epiphanius, in his twenty fourth Haeresie, (...), Successor of the
Apostles; and Tertullian, in the fifth chapter of his Book Against the
Valentinians, Omnium doctrinarum curiosissimus explorator, etc. The most
diligent Inquisitour of all Doctrines; and St. Hierome, in his twenty ninth
Epistle, Vir Apostolicorum temporum, etc. A man of the Apostolical Times; and
upon the sixty fourth Chapter of Esaias, Vir Apostolicus, etc, An Apostolical
man, who writ with great diligence; and St. Augustine, in his first Book
Against Julian, Antiquus homo Dei, etc. The ancient man of God: who, I say,
could have imagined, that this Great man should suffer himself to be so far
surprised by the fond Conceits of Papias, as to have (as we have already made
appear by what is above alleged out of the thirty fifth Chapter of his fifth
Book) embraced them, and given occasion to St. Hierome to write, that he was
Papiae discipulus, etc. the Disciple of Papias, etc. from whose hands he
received the Principal Hypotheses of the Sibylline Writing, concerning the
State of the departed? Yet has he done it, with all those, who were his
Contemporaries, of whom we have any thing left; and though they might all, or
most of them, in some respect, have attributed to them the Name of Apostolicks,
Lights of the Church, and Martyrs of God, yet have they cast Shadows, and
furnished Posterity with examples of Infirmity, which oblige it, and all
Christians religiously to practice the advice of St. Paul, 1 These. v. 21.
Prove all things, hold fast to that, which is good, and to conclude with the
Prophet, Psalm. cxviii. 8.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in man. But since
St. Chrysostom^ ^th thought fit, to deduce the Original of Praying for the
dead, from I know not what Law, and Ordinance of the Apostles; whereof there is
no Track to be found in their Writings; since that, of this kind of Office,
which he pretended prescribed by such a Law, no Christian Author, of whom we
have ought, truly Authentic, remaining, has made any mention before
Tertullian, who first spoke of it in the year 199. and continued till about the
year 212. And lastly, since that there are, at this day, some Persons, who will
needs ascend much higher, and derive (as to this particular) the Christian
Liturgy from the Custom they are pleased to attribute to the Jews, as if the
shame they conceive it to acknowledge (as they are obliged to do) Tertullian, a
Montanist, a Millenary, and Admirer of the pretended Sibyl, to have been the
first certifier of one of their Principal Observations, had reduced them to a
necessity of appealing to the Synagogue, and taking up its Authority for a
Buckler against the Protestants; who do not think themselves any way obliged to
the admission of any Worship proceeding from the Will of man, without the Word
of God. we come now to see what probability there may be in their Opinion.

CHAP. XXIV. Whether the Prayers made by Christians for the Dead, are indeed
grounded on the Second of the Maccabees, and the Examples of the Jews.
THey affirm then, that there was no necessity of making any Regulations in the
Church concerning the Offices of the living toward the dead, in as much as the
Faithful, being at first called from among the Jews, had learned the necessity
thereof even in the Synagogue, before they were admitted into the Society of
the Christians. They further hold, that it is manifest from the Sentiment of
the Jews under the Old Testament, by the Example of Judas their General, who
(as we find it in the twelfth Chapter of the second Book of Maccabees) caused
Sacrifices to be offered, and Prayers to be made for those of his Army, who had
been killed in the fight against Gorgias. In answer to which, not to insist on
the Considerations, which might be made, as well on the difference there is
between the States of the Synagogue, and the Church, as the remarkable
diversity of the Legal Administration, and Evangelical Grace, which is enoug to
hinder a man from concluding necessarily, This was practiced under the Old
Testament, Therefore it ought to be under the New, I make in the first place
this Observation;

That those, who have recoursee to this kind of Defense, make a formal
disacknowledgment of St. Chrysostom, who, grounding his Hypothesis only upon
the Law of the Apostles, under the New Testament, has even in that discovered,
how vain and frivolous, he thought their undertaking, who would prove their
Custom out of the Old, in the same manner, as these later disclaim all the
advantage, which St. Chrysostom had promised himself in the allegation of the
Apostolical Law.

Secondly, That it argues want of circumspection, to suppose, as acknowledged,
what is in Question; viz. That the Synagogue under the Old Testament made any
Prayers for the dead, and that their Practice can be justified by Writings
either precedent, or immediately subsequent to the Birth of Christianity. For,
since the Hierosolymitane Talmud was not (by the Confession even of the Jews
themselves) began till one hundred sixty two years after the Destruction of
both Jerusalem and its Temple, and consequently fifteen years at least after
the Death of Tertullian, which happened (as S. Hierome would have it) under
Caracalla, Assassinated on the eighth of April, in the year 217. seventy nine
years after the first littering of the pretended Sibylline Writings; that the
compilation of the Babylonian Talmud began not, till the 476. year after the
final Destruction of the Temple, that is to say, in the year of our Lord, 546.
that it took up an hundred years to finish it, that these two Collections were
made by the implacable enemies of the Gospel, and its Truth, such as have
thrust together, without either sincerity, or judgment, all the Extravagancies,
that ever troubled the Brains of their Ancestors, delivered over (as
themselves) into a reprobate sense; and that their Opinions concerning the
State of the dead hold correspondence, neither with the Sentiment of the
Fathers, nor with that of the Greeks, nor lastly with that, which the Church of
Rome holds at present; there cannot with reason any certa in relyance be made
thereon.

Thirdly, That to no purpose is alleged the seventeenth Verse of the fourth
Chapter of Tobit, which runs thus, Pour out thy Bread (the old Latin Version,
made according to the Chaldee, adds and thy Wine) on the Burial of the Just,
but give nothing to the wicked: because, First, it is not manifest, that there
ever was really such a man as Tobit, and that the Relation of his Adventures
smell (as much as may be) of a Romance. Secondly, That the Jews, as well
Ancient, as Modern, have not attributed any authority thereto. Thirdly, That
all the Greek Fathers unanimously, and many of the Latin, have held it to be
Apocryphal. Fourthly, That though of all the Canonical Books it were the most
Canonical, yet neither ought the words alleged out of it to be taken
literally, since they are notoriously figurative, nor could they have any
relation to the Custom either of praying, or making Offerings for the Dead;
but, according to the use of Funeral Entertainments, or Banquets, ordained, not
to procure ease to the Departed; but to relieve the kindred he had left, to
induce them to an oblivion of their mourning, and to comfort them. For, as the
Prophet Jeremy, threatening the Jews with the Judgment of God, which was likely
to deprive them of all means of comforting one another, said, Jer. xvi. 7.
Neither shall men break Bread for them in mourning to comfort them for the
Dead; neither shall men give them the Cup of consolation to drink for their
Father, or for their Mother; so Tobit, exhorting his Son to the Offices of
Charity toward his afflicted Brethren, orders him to Pour out his Bread, and
his Wine on the Burial of the dead, and (by a kind of speaking) to fill it, by
kindly treating those, that were in mourning, upon their account, and raising
them out of their Heaviness; which does not infer either Prayer, or Offering,
for the dead; but only a charitable care, and tenderness toward the living.

Fourthly, That the words of the Son of Sirach, in the thirty third Verse of
the seventh Chapter of his Ecclesiasticus, A gift has grace in the sight of
every man Living, and for the Dead detain it not, make nothing to the Business
of Offerings, and Prayers for the Dead, to which some would have them relate:
in as much as that Author, who made his Collection of Sentences in the year
247. before the Birth of our Savior, is so far from saying, that the gift,
which was to be given upon the account of the dead, was to be exercised toward
the departed Person himself, that he expressly declares, it was so done upon the
account of the dead, that it referred, as to its proper object, to the
surviving, adding in the next verse, Verse 34.
Fail not to be with them, that weep, and mourn with them, that mourn; as if he
said, That that kindness, which he desired should not be detained for the dead,
consists not in praying for the dead; but in having a sympathy for their
affliction, who bewail him, and endeavoring to comfort them. Besides it is to
be noted by the way, that the Book of Ecclesiasticus (though very ancient,
since it was written 247. years before the Birth of our Savior, and very full
of good Doctrine, upon which account it has been cited by the Fathers) was
never enrolled among the Canonical Books, neither by the Jews, nor by any of
the Greek Fathers, nor by most of the Latins.

Fifthly, That there cannot be a clearer Evidence, to convince those of Error,
who suppose that the Custom of Praying for the Dead was anciently among the
Jews, then to urge, that there is not the least track of it in those, who were
Contemporary with the Apostles, viz. Philo, who had made himself Master of all
profane Wisdom, and the Philosophy of Plato, and who was (in Caligula's Time)
reputed the Glory of his Nation; and Josephus, who was one of the chief
Commanders of the Jewish War under Nero, and the most diligent searcher into
the Antiquities of his Nation under Domitian. So that the later Jews must needs
have borrowed the Custom they still continue, either from some piece of
Heathenish superstition, or from the Opinions crept into Christianity, through
their means, who were admirers of the pretended Sibylline Writing.

Sixthly, That the second Book of the Maccabees was neither known, nor of any
account among the Jews. For, as it is manifest, that it has no coherence with
the first, neither in respect of the observations of time, nor in respect of
events, and their circumstances; so we both may, and ought to hold it for
certain, that Josephus, who very strictly followed the first, either had not
any knowledge of it, or (if he had) made no account of it; since that even when
it was his business to represent some History, whereof there was also a
relation in that Book, he has not only related it according to his own way;
but has often laid it down in circumstances, as to the matter of fact,
incompatible with what was reported thereof in the said Book. Whereto may be
added the strange obscurity of it: which is such, that it is not known, neither
who they were, nor about what Time flourished either Jason the Cyrenian, the
first Author; or the Abbreviator, who reduced into a small Epitome the five
Books of Jason; nor yet in what Language Jason had first writ them; nor whether
he was more ancient, then Josephus, who finished his Work Of the Antiquities,
in the year of our Lord 94. concurrent with the thirteenth of Domitian, and the
forty fourth before the Forgeries of the counterfeit Sibyl appeared; nor
lastly, whether that Abridgment came betimes into the hands of the Christians;
it appearing not, that any of them had seen it before the year of our Lo^d 200.

Seventhly, That it is absolutely impossible, that any of the Christians of the
second, third, and fourth Ages, should, in their Prayers for the dead, have
proposed to themselves, for a Pattern, the Example of Judas Maccabaeus, and the
Judgment, which either Jason the Cyrenian, or his Abridger made of it. And that
for these reasons;

First, Because it was not cited by any of the Fathers till 280. years after
the first coming abroad of the pretended Sibylline Writing. For, St. In his
Books De anima, and De cura pro mortuis.
Augustine, having first cited it in the year 416. De praedict. and promiss.
par. 2. cap. 40.
Prosper Africanus followed him, about the year 450. It was afterward cited by
Bacchiarius, in his Epistle to Januarius, about the year 460. and Julian of
Toledo, about the year 680. in the one and twentieth Chapter of the first Book
of his Prognostics; and Damascene, about the year 760. in his Oration De
d^nctis; and Peter, surnamed the Venerable, Abbot of Clugny, about the year,
1150. in the second Epistle of his first Book; and Ecbert, a Priest of Bonne,
near Cullen, about the year 1160. Adversus Cathar. sermon. and Guy of Perpignan,
first General of the Order of the Carmelites, afterward Bishop of Majorca,
about the year 1318. De Haeresibus.

Secondly, Because we do not find, that any of the Fathers have cited, or so
much as made the least discovery, that they had seen the second Book of the
Maccabees, before Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origene among the Greeks, about the
year 200, and 240. (the former in the fifth of his Stromata, and the later in
the first Chapter of the second Book De Principiis, and his third Homily upon
Solomon's Song, and his eighteenth Tome upon St. John, and upon the fifth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans) and St. Cyprian among the Latins, in
the year 252. in his four hundred, and fifty sixth Epistle, De exhortatione
Martyrii, the eleventh Chapter, and Zeno of Verona, about the year 360. Sermon
de Resurrectione, and De Sancto Arcadio.

Thirdly, In regard that, as not any one of the Greek Fathers, either in
Council, or in any particular Writing held the second Book of the Maccabees for
Canonical; so many of the Latins, for instance, Tertullian in his fourth Book
Adversus Marcionem carmine scripto, cap. 7. St. Hilary in his Prologue upon the
Psalms; Philastrius, Bishop of Brescia, in the Chapter de Apocryphis; St.
Hierome, in his seventh Epistle, and the one hundred and third, and his
Prologue upon the Book of Kings, and Solomon; Ruffinus, upon the Creed; the
Priests of Marseille, Hilary's Epistle to St. Augustine; Primasius, Bishop of
Adrumetum, in Apocal. lib. 1. cap. 4. Junilius, another African Prelate, in the
seventh Chapter of his first Book De partitione Divinae Legis; St. Gregory, in
the seventeenth Chapter of the nineteenth Book of his Morals upon Job; the
Author of the Book, De mirabilibus Sanctae Scripturae, lib. 2. cap. 33. Beda,
De sex aetatibus, and In Reg. lib. 4. In Apocal. cap. 4. Ambrose Ansbert, In
Apoc. lib. 3. cap. 4. Alcuinus, Adversus. Elipand. lib. 1. Charle-Maigne in his
Capitulary of the year 789. cap. 10. and the Commentaries attributed to St.
Victorinus Bishop of Poictiers, those to St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millain, and
those to St. Augustine, upon the fourth Chapter of the Apocalypse, have all (in
imitation of the Greeks, especially of the Council of Laodicea) put this Book
out of the Canon, that is, out of the List of the Writings inspired by God, to
be received as a Rule of Faith.

And this Remark seems to be the more necessary, in as much as it contributes
to the reconciling with the Greek Fathers, and with the Latins, that have been
of the same Opinion, those others of the Latin Church, who have comprehended
within the Canon of the Holy Scriptures, as well the Maccabees, as the other
Books accounted Apocryphal by the Jews, and several of the Christians. For, if
the Council met at Carthage on the twenty fifth of August, 397. during the
Popedom of Siricius, and since adapted, by I know not what Rhapsodist, under
the Name of the Sixth Council of Carthage, to the twenty fifth of May, 419.
under the Papacy of Boniface the First; if St. Augustine, in the eighth Chapter
of his Second Book Of Christian Doctrine, writ immediately after the Council of
the year 397. if Innocent, in his Epistle written to Exuperus Bishop of Tolosa,
on the twentieth of February, 405. if the Council assembled at Rome in the year
494. under Pope Gelasius; and, if Isidore Archbishop of Sevil, in the sixth
Chapter of his first Book of his Etymologies, sent to Braulio Bishop of
Saragossa, after the year 626. inserting the Books of the Maccabees into the
Canon of the Scriptures, had taken the words Canon, and Holy Scriptures, in the
same sense, as the Jews, the Greeks, and the Latins, adhering to their
Sentiment, concerning the List of the Books bestowed on the Church for a Rule
of Faith, since they have esteemed Canonical the Books, which the rest of the
Fathers formally excluded out of the Canon, and that holding in appearance, one
the affirmative, the other the negative of the same Proposition, they seem to
be formally contradictory, it were absolutely impossible to reconcile them all,
and there would be a necessity of charging with prevarication (contrary to the
judgment of the Roman Church, declared by Innocent the First, and the Council
assembled under Gelasius) Gregory the Great, who expressly qualified
not-canonical the Maccabees received into the Canon of the Holy Scriptures by
Innocent, and numbered by the Council, under Gelasius, among the Prophetical
Scriptures, and Histories of the old Testament. Nay, it would be contrary also
to that of the African Church, declared by the Council of Carthage, and by St.
Augustine, Primasius, and Junilius, Africans; who formally confined themselves
to the Canon of the Jews; nay it were hard to avoid making St. Augustine
contradict himself, in as much as, after he had affirmed, that the Maccabees
were held by the Church to be Canonical, he presently adds, That they are not
among the Holy Scriptures called Canonical; saying De Civitate Dei, lib. 18.
cap. 36.
Supputatio Temporum non in Scripturis sanctis, quae Canonicae appellantur, sed
in aliis invenitur, in quibus sunt and Maccabaeorum libri, quos, non Judaei;
sed Ecclesia fro Canonicis habet, etc. The computation of Times is not found in
the Holy Scriptures, which are called Canonical; but in the others, among which
are also the Books of the Maccabees, which are held to be Canonical by the
Church, but not by the Jews. Whereby it clearly appears, that he (and, no
doubt, with him, the Councels of Rome, and Carthage, and Pope Innocent)
admitted two Canons, or Catalogues, of the Holy Scriptures; one more strict,
viz. that of the Jews, whereto all the Greeks, and some of the Latins confined
themselves, and to which he thought himself obliged particularly to submit,
holding for a Rule of Faith, and Canonical, the Books contained therein; and
another larger, proposed as well by him, and Pope Innocent, as by the Councels
of Carthage, and Rome, as comprehending the Books, which (in some certain
respect, viz. the public reading thereof in the Church, and the common
Edification arising from them, though they were not esteemed to appertain to
the Rule of Faith) were called Canonical, Sacred, and Ecclesiastical by the
Latins. And indeed, to make his meaning more obvious to the meaner Capacities,
he says, that the Church holds the Books of the Maccabees to be Canonical, not
as absolutely, and properly, as those comprehended in the Canon of the Jews,
and Greeks, which contained the Rule of Faith; but improperly, and taking the
word Canonical in a larger signification; which the better to insinuate, he
says, They are held to be Canonical, propter quorundam Martyrum passiones
vehementes, atque mirabiles, etc, because of the grievous, and miraculous
Sufferings of some Martyrs: and, in the three and twentieth Chapter of his
second Book Against Gaudentius, that the writing of the Maccabees recepta est
ab Ecclesia, non inutiliter, si sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, etc. is received
by the Church, not without profit, if it be read, or heard soberly; as if he
had said in terminis, that she accounted it among the Canonical, in a certain
respect only, not through an obedience of Faith, but out of a desire of
Edification, and upon that account was it to to be read, and understood
soberly; without which caution, the admission of it into the Canon, or
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Books would not have been profitable.

Consonantly to this sense, Ruffinus, after he had proposed Secundum
Traditionem Majorum, etc. according to the Tradition of our Ancestors, the
Catalogue of the Books truly, and properly Divine, and Canonical, concludes it
in these Terms, Haec sunt, quae Patres inter Canonem concluserunt, ex quibus
Fidei nostrae assertiones constare voluerunt. These are the Books, which the
Fathers have comprehended in the Canon, out of which they would have the
Assertions of our Faith to be made manifest. To which he immediately adds;
Sciendum tamen est, quod and alii Libri sunt; qui non Canonici, sed
Ecclesiastici a Majoribus appellati sunt, etc. quae omnia Legi quidem in
Ecclesiis voluerunt, non tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex his Fidei
confirmandam, etc. Yet is it to be known, that there are also other Books;
which were called by our Ancestors, not Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, etc.
all which they were willing should be read in the Churches, but not cited to
confirm the authority of Faith.

Upon which it may be noted, that this Sentiment, being revived by Cardinal
Cajetan, was so stiffly maintained in the Hist. del Concilio, lib. 2. pagg.
148, 149, 150.
Council of Trent; that, from the two and twentieth of February 1546. to the
ninth of March, the Assembly continued divided into three Opinions; some
desiring, that the Scriptures might be distinguished into three Classes, of
different Authority; others, that they should be disposed into two; and the
third Party, which prevailed on the fifteenth of March, requiring, that a
Catalogue should be drawn up, without any Distinction, apparent in the Decree.
By which Decree the Council, intending to thunder-strike (at least in
appearance) the Sentiment of the Protestants, though they saw it strongly
maintained by many of their own Body, declared, that they comprehended in the
Index of Sacred Books those, which the Protestants (in imitation of the Greeks,
and most of the Latin Fathers) admitted not into the Canon; which might be
understood in the sense proposed by Ruffinus, and without any derogation from
those, which the Church ever held properly, and absolutely Canonical.

In the next place the Council anathematized those, who would not receive them
for Sacred, and Canonical: which might also very well be; observing the
Distinction of Ruffinus, and Cajetan, which makes nothing against the
Protestants. And, at last, they, declare their Anathema is discharged to let
the World know, Quibus potissimum Testimoniis, ac. praesidiis in confirmandis
dogmatibus, and instaurandis in Ecclesia moribus usura sit.
what Testimonies, and Arguments, principally, they should make use of, to
confirm Tenants, and regulate Morality in the Church; insinuating further, in
favor of the Partisans of Cardinal Cajetan, who, as to the main Ground, agreed
with the Protestants, the distinction, which they had made, after Ruffinus, of
the Books properly Canonical, subservient as well to the Confirmation of Faith,
as restoration of Manners; and the improperly, and in a certain respect,
Canonical, appointed only for the restoration of Manners.

This presupposed, it clearly appears, that the Fathers, who had any knowledge
of the second Book of the Maccabees, upon this very account, that they either
absolutely denied it, or only half-granted it, and upon great Qualifications,
the Title of Canonical, could not any way ground upon the report of it, the
right, which the Church of Rome pretends to at this day for Praying for the
dead; and that that Report could not be urged any further, then to an
Attestation, that it had really been in use, from the Time of the Maccabees.
And indeed, St. Augustine, the first who cited it to that purpose, and at the
very place where he alleged it, pretended not to go any further; for his
Discouse, cited by Julian of Toledo, runs thus; In Maccabeorum libris, legimus
oblatum pro mortuis sacrificium. Sed etsi nusquam in Scripturis veteribus
omnino legeretur, non parva est universae Ecclesiae, quae in hac consuetudine
claret, authoritas, etc. We read in the Book of Maccabees, that Sacrifice was
offered for the dead; but though there should be no such thing any where in the
ancient Scriptures, yet is the authority of the universal Church, which shines
in that Custom, not of little weight.

Fourthly, Besides the precedent Reasons which demonstrate the impossibility of
deriving the Original of Oblations and Prayers for departed Christians, from
the pretended Example of Judas Maccabaeus, and the Application which the
Abridger of Jason the Cyrenian conceived he ought to make of it; this (no less
considerable then the rest) is to be added, viz. that the first, who undertook
the Patronage of such a Custom, built very much upon the not-written Tradition
only, and by that means, acknowledged, and professed, that neither they, nor
(in their Judgment) their Predecessors, had any ground to recurr to the
Authority of any Scripture, either properly, or improperly said to be
Canonical; and consequently, that their imagination is absolutely Erroneous,
who believe that the Ancients grounded their Custom on the fourth of Tobit, or
on the seventh of Ecclesiasticus; or lastly, on the twelfth of the second of
Maccabees. Thus Tertullian, in the year 199. in the third Chapter of his Book
De Corona, tells us, Quaramus an and Traditio, etc. Let us enquire, whether the
not-written Tradition is not also to be received? No doubt we shall deny that
it ought to be received; if no prejudice arise from the Examples of other
Observations, which we challenge to our selves, without any recommendation from
Scripture, only upon the account of Tradition, fortified by the Patronage of
Custom, etc. Upon anniversary-days, we make Oblations for the departed, and for
their Birth-days, etc. viz. Of the departure of Martyrs.

In like manner, St. Epiphanius in the year 376. concludes his Disputation
against Aerius with the Allegation of Tradition, saying; (...), etc. Next I
shall again take the consequence of this, that the Church accomplishes this
thing necessarily, having taken the Tradition of the Fathers. Now, who can
violate the Ordinance of his Mother, or the Law of his Father? according to the
words of Solomon Prove. i. 8.
My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother, showing, that the Father, that is to say, God, the only Son, and the
Holy Spirit, has taught as well by writing, as without writing, and that our
Mother the Church, has Laws made in her self, such as are indissoluble, and
cannot be destroyed.

Denis, the pretended Areopagite, about the year 490. follows the same track,
in the seventh Chapter of his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, saying; It is necessary
to speak of the Tradition come even to us from our conductours inspired by God,
concerning the said Prayer, which the Hierarch pronounces over the Deceased.
The like may be said of St. Augustine, who had first of any alleged the
pretended example of the Maccabees; for, distrusting what Arguments might be
drawn thence, he flies to the Authority of the Church, and thereby shows his
main strength lay on that side.

The same thing is further insinuated as well by the ingenuous confession,
which the Fathers make of the doubts of many of the Christians in their times,
concerning the advantage of Prayer for the dead, as by the answers given by
them thereto. For Aerius, in St. Epiphanius, in the year 376. put this
difficulty; asking, (...), etc. Upon what account do you name after their death
those, who are dead? For whether the surviving prays, or dispenses his goods,
what advantage accrews thereby to the deceased? If the Prayers of those, who
are here, be any way beneficial to those, who are there, let not any one live
religiously, nor do well, but so behave himself, as he would have Friends,
whether it be by procuring them for many, or entreating them at his death to
pray for him, to the end he may not suffer there, and that there be no
inquisition made into the incurable sins he has committed. Some twenty years
before, St. Cyril of Jerusalem had acknowledged, in his fifth Mystagogical
Catechesis, that in Palaestine, there were many persons troubled about the
difficulty made by Aerius in Armenia, crying out, (...), etc. I know many say
thus, What advantage is it to the Soul transported out of this World with sins,
or without sins, that you remember her in your Prayers? And, about one hundred
years after, Denis, the pretended Areopagite, writing in the seventh Chapter of
his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, (...), etc. It may be (will you say) that these
things are well said by us; but that you are in doubt as to the Hierarch' s
desiring of the Sovereign goodness of God, for the deceased, the remission of
his Sins, and the portion of light assigned for those, who are like God. For,
if every one shall receive from the justice of God the reward of all the good
things, and others, which he has done in this life, and the deceased has
accomplished all Functions suitable to the life, which is led here, by what
Hierarchical Prayer shall he be transferred (beyond his merit, and the reward
due to the life he has led here) into another lot?

From this diversity of Questions, renewed from time to time, it is apparent,
that the first answers made to those, who could not conceive any benefit
arising from Prayer for the dead, had not given them satisfaction; and that
neither they, nor those, who answered them, saw any Text of Scripture that
could decide the difficulty proposed by them. For who could expect from a
Christian, that he durst bring into question what he knew to have been resolved
by the Oracles of God? On the contrary, who will not be easily induced to doubt
of things, whereof he finds no other confirmation, then that of Custom, and
that not fortified by any Command of God, to whose Worship, it is pretended,
that Custom relates? Nay, when we do not find, in the Fathers Answers to the
Objections, whereby that Custom was opposed, any mention either of the second
of the Maccabees, or of any place of Scripture, concerning the State of the
dead, ought we not, of necessity, to conclude, that not only they had not any
to allege, but also that they made not, in their Offices for the dead, any
reflection on the second of the Maccabees, or any of the Books, justly, or
unjustly reputed Canonical, but only on the example of their Predecessors?

CHAP. XXV. Whether there be any reason to ground Prayer for the Dead upon the
Second Book of the Maccabees.
I Have hitherto made it my business only to prove, that praying for the Dead
never was, as to matter of fact, grounded by the first that practiced it among
the Christians, upon the second of the Maccabees, nor any other Book, either
Canonical, or Apocryphal. I am to show, that, as to matter of right, it could
not have been grounded thereon; and to that purpose, I am in the first place to
give a relation of the fact of Judas Maccabaeus, and secondly, an account of
the application made of it by Jason the Cyrenian, or his Abridger. The fact is
set down in these Terms.

So Judas gathered his Host, and came into the Macc. xii. ^8, etc.
City of Odollam, and when the seventh day came, they purified themselves (as
the Custom was) and kept the Sabbath in the same place.

And upon the day following, as the use had been, Judas, and his Company came
to take up the Bodies of them, that were slain, and to bury them with their
Kinsmen in their Father's Graves.

Now, under the Coats of every one that was slain, they found things
consecrated to the Idols of the Jamnites, which is forbidden the Jews by the
Law. Then every man saw that this was the cause, wherefore they were slain.

All men therefore, praising the Lord, the righteous Judge, who had opened the
things that were hid,

Betook themselves unto Prayer, and besought him, that the sin committed might
wholly be put out of remembrance. Besides, the noble Judas exhorted the people
to keep themselves from sin; for so much as they saw before their eyes, the
things that came to pass for the sin of those, that were slain.

And when he had made a gathering throughout the Company, to the sum of two
thousand Drachms of silver, he sent it to Jerusalem to offer a sin-offering.

In this Relation we are to observe, 1. The crime of the Persons killed,
condemned in the seventh of Deuteronomy, verse 25. in these Terms: The Graven
Images of their Gods shall ye burn with fire, thou shall not desire the Silver,
or Gold, that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein;
for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.

2. The judgment of all the people, acknowledging that they had been punished
according to their sin.

3. The procedure as well of Judas, as the whole Army thereupon, in praying,
that the sin might be forgotten, and pardoned, not to the dead, who had
perished upon that occasion, but to the Army, which had been infected
therewith, as with a pestilent contagion; in like manner, as when, upon the
sacrilege of Achan, God said to Joshua, Josh. 7. 11, 12.
Israel has sinned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant which I
commanded them; for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also
stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even amongst their own
stuff. Therefore the Children of Israel could not stand before their enemies,
but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed, etc.
There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel, thou can not stand
before thine Enemies, till ye take away the accursed thing from among you. As
also when God, having sent a Famine of three years, answered David, 2 Samuel 21.
1.
It is for Saul, and for his bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites. And
when some years after, God, upon David's pride, slew in one day 2 Samuel 24. 15.
seventy thousand persons. For the people had not contributed to the sin of
Achan, nor to that of Saul; nor lastly, to that of David, who, acknowledging
them no way chargeable therewith, made this observable reflection on it, 2 Samuel
24. 17.
Lo, I have sinned, and done wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done?

To prevent the like misfortunes, God had made these Ordinances, And Levit. 4.
13, etc.
if the whole Congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be
hid from the eyes of the Assembly, and they have done somewhat against the
Commandments of the Lord, concerning things, which should not be done, and are
guilty. When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the
Congregation shall offer a young Bullock for the Sin, and bring him before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. And the Elders of the Congregation shall lay
their hands upon the Head of the Bullock before the Lord; and the Bullock shall
be killed before the Lord, etc. And the Priest shall make an atonement for
them, and it shall be forgiven them. Again, Deuteronomy. 21. 1. etc.
If one be found slain in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to
possess, lying in the field, and it be not known who has slain him; Then thy
Elders and thy Judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the Cities,
which are round about him that is slain; And it shall be, that the City, which
is next unto the slain man, even the Elders of the said City, shall take an
Heifer, which has not been wrought with, and which has not drawn in the Yoke.
And the Elders of that City shall bring down the Heifer unto a rough Valley,
which is neither eared, nor sown, and shall strike off the Heifer's neck there
in the Valley. And the Priests, the Sons of Levi, shall come near (for them the
Lord thy God has chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the Name of the
Lord) and by their Word shall every Controversy, and every stroke be tried.
And all the Elders of that City, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the Heifer, that is beheaded in the Valley. And they shall
answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen
it shed; Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed,
and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel' s charge; and the blood
shall be forgiven them.

If the Elders of the People were obliged, in their own Names, to beg pardon
for the evil, which had been committed without their knowledge, as soon as they
had discovered it, if there was a necessity, that the Priests should make an
atonement for the whole Body of the Congregation, whereof some Members only
had been guilty; and if the City, in the Confines whereof a Murder had been
committed, though the Authors of it had not been known, stood in need of
purification, and the Elders, innocent of the Crime, were, not to pray for the
dead Person murdered, but to make a public Protestation of their innocence,
and to beg of God, that he would be pleased to turn away, from the innocent
Community, the miseries, where with the Murder seemed to threaten it; how
should not Judas, and all the Army, acknowledging, that the hand of God had
been upon many of the Soldiery, who had some days before lost their lives, for
the sacrilege committed by them, and whereof they were found seized, think it
necessary to pray, not for those wretches that died in their sin, but for the
whole Body of the Army, which they had (as much as lay in them) profaned, and
deprived of the protection of God? He therefore (according to the Law) makes
Prayers immediately for himself, and for all the people, that were left; and
because Jerusalem was the only place, where the Expiatory Victims were to be
sacrificed, and that the urgency of Affairs permitted him not to go thither in
Person with the Army, he sends thither, and raises a Contribution for the
Sacrifice of two thousand The Latin Version says, 12000. amounting to 250.
Marks, a vast Sum, in respect of the Time, and the Abilities of the People,
reduced to Beggary by the War.
Drachms, amounting to about forty two Marks of Silver; after he had exhorted
the people, not to Pray for the dead, but to beware of doing that, which was
evil, and take example from the calamity of those, who came to destruction
through their own fault.

As therefore it is manifest, from what we have observed, that the procedure of
Judas Maccabaeus was most conformable to the Law; and that it may be conceived
such without any difficulty: so it will be most easy to deduce, that the same
thing cannot be said of the Application, which Jason, the Cyrenaean, or his
Abridger, would have made thereof, since it disguizes the Intention of that
Prince, under pretense of making a natural representation of it. Having then
related how he had sent two thousand Drachms to Jerusalem for the Sin-offering,
the Historian adds of his own, these words; Doing therein very well, and (...).
civilly, in that he was mindful of the Resurrection. (For, if he had not
hoped, that they, that were slain should have risen again, it had been
superfluous, and vain to pray for the dead.) And also in that he perceived,
that there was great favor laid up for those, that died godly (it was an holy
and good thought) whereupon he made a Reconciliation for the dead, that they
might be delivered from sin: supposing of his own head; First, what could not
justly be inferred from any part of the precedent Relation, viz. that Judas had
prayed, and given order for the offering of Sacrifices at Jerusalem; not for
himself, and his Army (as the History teaches) but for those, who had been
slain before, because of their profane covetousness. And secondly, that Judas,
and his Army, conceived those Wretches to have died godly, and in a capacity to
receive the Favors reserved for those, who die godly, since that it is evident
from the Historian's own words, that they were destroyed in the midst of their
wickedness, and not departed in godliness; that every one had known it, and,
from that knowledge, taken occasion to bless the Lord, who had by a just
Judgment discovered their secret Impiety, beseeching him not to impute it to
the Army, whereof they had been a part; and lastly, that Judas had exhorted
every one to be careful of himself, learning Prudence at their cost, who had
so justly received the punishment due to their sin.

All which premised, it naturally follows, that whether we stick to the
Consideration of Judas, such as it has been related to us by the Abridger of
Jason; or represent to our selves the account, which the Fathers made of his
Abridgment, thrust out by them among Apocryphal Writings, and consequently of
too weak Authority to serve for the foundation of a Religious Custom; or
lastly, keep to the Declaration of the same Fathers, deriving their Custom
purely from Tradition; there is no ground at all to allege the History of the
Maccabees, for a reason of what the Ancient Christians practiced, and much of
what the Modern practice at this day, as well in the East (where Prayers are
made, not simply for the Resurrection of the dead, as the Author of the second
of the Maccabees would have it, presupposing with the Jews at present, that the
Wicked rise not again, and that Judas had prayed for the remission of the Sin
committed by those sacrilegious Persons, to the end, they might be raised
again, as those, who die godly, but for the daily consolation of those, who are
supposed, in some manner, to languish in expectation of their Happiness) as in
the West, where men propose to themselves only the obtaining their deliverance
out of the Pains of Purgatory. But it may with very great probability, or
rather evident necessity, be believed, that the first Custom of praying for the
Dead, was a consequence drawn by the Fathers from the Suppositions contained in
the Writing by them pretended to be Sibylline. For the first minute of its
coming abroad, they not only entertained it without contradiction, but as a
divine Piece, the most ancient of all the Prophecies; that of Enoch only
excepted, the Contriver of that Imposture having cunningly put it out under the
Name of one of the Daughter-in-law's of Noe; the most ample, since it gives an
account of the principal Heads of the Evangelical History, and extends its
Predictions to the end of the World; the most clear, since it presents us with
the Acrostick of the Names, and Titles of the Son of God; and the most
advantageous against the Error of the Heathens; since that those among the
Christians, who first cited it, imagined they had it from them, and were come
to the knowledge of it through their means. Which very Considerations might
happily have moved Pro^. page 50.
Clemens Alexandrinus, when he promised them the allegation of the Prophecies,
to place that, which he conceived to be the Sibyl's, before all, and afterward
speak of Esaiah, Jeremy, etc. as less ancient, and many times less clear. And
thence also it seems to have come to pass; that those who quitted (if not
absolutely, at least in some measure) the Hypotheses of the pretended Sibyl,
either dissembled the Imperfections of the Prophetess, and forbore to charge
her with Imposture, treating her in that particular with more regard, then they
did some of the Books divinely-inspired, or openly paid her the accustomed
respect^ continuing a reverence to her Work, notwithstanding it betrayed it
self a thousand ways unworthy their esteem.

CHAP. XXVI. That diverse of the Fathers have expressed more respect toward the
Book attributed to the Sibyl, then to the Apocalypse.
TO make this the more clear, I shall only make a short recapitulation of the
heads of Imposture I have already observed, in which any one might have seen,
that the counterfeit Sibyl, taking carnally whatever she had read in the
Prophecies, and particularly in the Revelation of St. John, concerning the
glory, and happiness of the mystical Jerusalem, had imagined, and persuaded
Papias, and St. Irenaeus, and all the Millenaries, that our Savior, before the
last Judgment, should establish a Kingdom abounding with corporeal delights in
the earthly Jerusalem, laid desolate by Titus. This fond Imagination met with,
about the beginning of the third Age, such as stiffly opposed it; but who can
forbear deploring the miscarriages of humane Infirmity? The first, that took
this task upon them, engaged in it with a Judgment so prepossessed, that,
proposing to themselves to confute a palpable Error, they ran themselves (for
want of circumspection) into a kind of Treason against God, and so unworthily
treated the Apocalypse, wherewith he had honored his beloved Apostle, that they
presumed to cry it down, as a counterfeit Piece, composed, and published by the
Heretic Cerinthus, under the name of St. John, while they suffered to spread
up, and down, unquestioned, uncensured, the Romance attributed to the Sibyl
with the strangest impudence, that ever was heard of.

Thus Caius, an Ecclesiastical Person, whom Lib. 2. cap. 25.
Eusebius, and Hierom. in Catalogo.
St. Hierome observe to have been contemporary with Pope Zephyrinus, and
consequently to have written his Disputation against the Montanist Proculus,
between Sunday, August the seventh, 197. on which day Zephyrinus succeeded
Victor, and August the twenty sixth, 217. on which God took the said Zephyrinus
to himself; this Caius, I say, made no difficulty to disburthen his stomach of
this injurious Discourse against the Apocalypse: Euseh. lib. 3. cap. 28.
(...), etc. Cerinthus also by Revelations, pretended to be written by a great
Apostle, endeavors to introduce monstrous Discourses, feigning, that they were
shown him by the Angels, and saying that, S. John says expressly, that the
Angel of God showed him the mystical Jerusalem; Apoc. xxi. 10. Apoc. xxi. 1.
Apoc. xxii. 1.
after the Resurrection, the Royal Palace of Christ shall be Terrestrial, and
that the flesh conversing in Jerusalem shall be again subject to sensual
appetites, and pleasures; being also in opposition to the Divine Writings, and,
out of a desire to deceive, he says Apoc. xx. 4.
that the term of a thousand years shall be spent in Apoc. xix. 7, 9.
Nuptial Entertainments.

Indeed, some thirty years after, Denis of Alexandria passed a more sound
Judgment, condemning the Imaginations of Cerinhhus, after whose Example the
coun^feit Sibyl had wrested; to an ill sense, the Predictions of St. John; and
acknowledging the Apocalypse (which he confessed to be above his understanding;
and conceived to have been the work of some other Author, then the Apostle St.
John) should be understood in a more spiritual way, then Cerinthus, the
pretended Sibyl, and the Millenaries had conceived. In so much that in the year
380. or thereabouts, Haeres. 10.
Philastrius, Bishop of Brescia, put into the Catalogue of Heresies the
Sentiment of Caius; saying, Sunt Haeretici, qui Evangelium Joannis, and
Apocalypsim non accipiunt; and non intelligunt virtutem Scripturae, etc. Audent
dicere Apocalypsim non Beati Joannis Evangelistae and Apostoli, sed Cerinthi
Haeretici, qui, tunc ab Apostolis Beatis Haereticus manifestatus, abjectus est
ab Ecclesia, etc. There are certain Heretics, who receive not the Gospel of
St. John, and his Revelation, and understand not the efficacy of Scripture,
etc. They presumptuously affirm, that the Apocalypse is not the Work of the
Blessed John the Evangelist, and Apostle, but of the Heretic Cerinthus; who,
having been then discovered to be an Heretic by the Blessed Apostles, was cast
out of the Church. And yet some sixteen years before, the Council of Council.
Laodic. ca.
Laodicea, and that in the Time of Philastrius, Nazianz. carm. 33.
Gregory Nazianzene, and Amphilo^ carm. ad Seleucum.
Amphilochius of Iconia, and most of the Greeks, though they were not so
unreasonable, as to follow the Sentiment of Caius, in making Cerinthus Author
of the Apocalypse, did nevertheless incline so far to his side; that they denied
the said Book the Title of Canonical; not vouchsafing to afford it any place
among the Divine Writings. Which obliged St. Hierome to write to Dardanus,
Epist. 129. Nec Graecorum Ecclesiae Apocalypsim Joannis eadem liberate
suscipiunt.
That as the Custom of the Latins admitted not the Epistle to the Hebrews
among the Scriptures, so the Greek Churches, with the same liberty, admitted
not the Apocalypse of St. John. Upon which may be noted; that none of them, who
expressed so much distaste toward those two Sacred Books (for ought we know at
this day) discovered any aversion against the Impostures of the pretended
Sibyl; which shows, that as the Spirit of man is of it self inclined to love,
and admire its own Inventions (let me not say, Recreations) in the things, that
are most serious, and sacred; so is it naturally backward, as to the obedience
of Faith in respect of the Divine, which would not make any Impression upon
him, if God himself, pressing them internally, did not efficaciously insinuate
the Truth thereof. To be short, the Error of the Millenaries, opposed from the
beginning of the third Age, being to be weeded out of the Sentiments of
Christians, those, who first refuted it (to compass their design) engaged
against, not the Writing pretended to be Sibylline, which formally contained
what was most obviously reprovable therein; but the Apocalypse, which, well
considered, had ever been free from all suspicion of affording it any
countenance; and it was the good pleasure of God, that diverse Great Men should
rise up; who, to pull down that erroneous Opinion, should knock against one of
the most remarkable parts of that Rule, which condemns them all, and be so
unfortunate, as to spare a Fabulous Piece, no way deserving their support;
while they deprived one of the most Divine of the honor, and acknowledgement,
due thereto.

CHAP. XXVII. That the third Hypothesis of the Sibylline Writing so called is,
at this day, abandoned by all Christians.
THe third Hypothesis before extracted out of the Sibylline Writing so called,
and relating to the conservation of the Terrestrial Paradise, and the
establishment of the Saints after their Resurrection in that blessed
habitation, out of which the First-man had been driven, was so far from having
given Antiquity any trouble; that, though it supposed what was false, it found
favor, and countenance, from Age to Age, the Paradise mentioned in the New
Testament neither being to be understood carnally, nor having any thing common
with the other, whereof the keeping, and culture, had been at first committed
to Adam. And, as to this particular, I conceive that, without any injury done
to the Holy Fathers, who (as it were with a certain emulation) presupposed the
Introduction of the Blessed into that Paradise toward the East, where, after
the fall of Adam, the Cherubims were placed to keep the way of the Tree of
Life, it may be confidently said of the Christians of all Nations, that they
have at the present (as it were with an unanimous consent) embraced a belief
more conformable to the Truth, then their Ancestors had; since that there is
not at this day (that I know of) any Church in the Universe, which proposes to
the Hope and Faith of Believers any other Paradise, then the Celestial, and
which makes mention of that planted by the hand of God in the Garden of Eden,
out of any other Design, then to recommend it to their consideration as a Type,
representing the Spiritual Paradise with the same imperfection, according to
which the first Adam, who had been driven out of the Paradise of Eden, was the
Rom v. 14.
Figure of the second, who was to come, to open unto us the entrance into the
Holy places Hebr. ix. 12.
by his precious blood, and the sword of the Cherubim, a representation of the
Gal. iii. 13.
curse of the Law, remains, in respect of the Sinner, only. 2 Cor. iii. 7.
the ministration of Death. However it be, the Supposition of the Counterfeit
Sibyl is, as to this respect, insensibly vanished; so as, that it is quite
discarded.

CHAP. XXVIII. That the second Hypothesis of the Sibylline Writing so called
made way for the new Opinion of Purgatory.
THe second Hypothesis, which taught, that the fire of the general
Conflagration of the Universe should at the last day purge the Bodies of the
Saints, had not been long e're it opened a Gap to imaginations yet more
Fantastic, and irrational; among others, that of the cessation of all Infernal
pains; an Opinion taken out of the Schole of Plato into the Bosom of the Church
by Origin, and his Party, to which (not to mention the multitude, that had
followed it from the year 250. to the year 399.) stuck the most eminent among
the Fathers, as Saint Gregory Nyssenus, Didymus, and (in his Youth) St.
Hierome. But the Councels of Alexandria, Cyprus, and Rome, having almost at the
same time issued out their Decrees against that inveterate corruption of
Christian Doctrine, and the fifth General Council having solemnly fulminated it
in the year 553. it, by little and little, vanished, to make way for an Opinion
before unknown to all Antiquity, and which drew its origin; First, from the
prejudication, which the Christians of the sixth Age conceived of the necessity
of their proper satisfactions to appease the wrath of God.

Secondly, From the design, which many among them had to reform the Custom of
their Predecessors, praying even for those, whom they presupposed Damned, as
we have seen before.

Thirdly, From the New Philosophy, which some Melancholy Spirits, apt upon any
occasion to conceive Horrors, began to advance in the West, about the time of
St. Gregory. For some persons, having observed, that the Heathens called by the
Name of Ollas Vulcanias, or Kettles of Vulcan, the Crateres.
gaping places, through which the Mountains of Gibel, Vesuvium, Lipara,
Strongoli, and other places, full of sulphur, disburthen themselves of the
Flames, which (either by intervals, or a constant burning) devour their
Entrails, and taken (either out of astonishment, or of set purpose) the
crakings of those subterranean Fires, for the groans, and cries of Tormented
persons; and lastly met with men, who had the confidence, either out of the
excess of their malice against some Persons Departed, or a desire to make their
advantage of the credulous simplicity of the Living, to compose Histories of
the Apparitions of Souls separated by Death from the Bodies, which they had
animated before, would needs (without any Oracle of Scripture, or Tradition of
the first Ages of the Church, and without the Example of any of the Saints,
that lived in them) suppose, that the Souls of those Christians; which, during
their lifetime, had been defiled with Sin, were after their death, as it were
melted again in a subterranean Fire, where they were purified, some sooner,
others later, and all before the Last Day. And as we find the Poet Dante (by a
Liberty truly Poetical) confined to the Hell, where the Damned were, all his
enemies; advanced into Paradise the best of his Friends, and reduced the rest
to be content with Purgatory; so were there about the midst of the sixth Age, a
sort of People, that had the boldness to affirm (upon the Authority of their
own pretended Visions) the damnation of the Greatest men. About that time was
it, that the Gregor. Dial. lib. 4. cap. 30 Et ex eo Frec^phus, and Armonius.
Hermit of Lipara had persuaded the Father of the Step-father of Julian, one of
the Agents of the Roman Church, that he had seen Theodoric, King of the
Ostrogoths, who died on the one and thirtieth of August, 536. led between Pope
John the First, and Symmachus, without a Girdle, without Shoes, his hands tied,
and, at last, cast into the next Vulcanian Cauldron; whence honest Cap. 35.
St. Gregory inferred, in the year 593. that, by the Eructations of Fire, which
happened many times in Sicily, and other adjacent Islands, the Tormentorum
Ollae patuerunt.
tormenting Cauldrons were discovered. Thus also came it to pass, that, after
the Death of Charles Martel, which happened on the two and twentieth of
October, 741. the Monks of St. Tron, having published, that Eucherius, Bishop
of Orleans, had seen in a Vision the eternal Torments of that Prince, who had
dealt very roughly with him, and given Ecclesiastical Revenues to those, who
had assisted him in the War; and that thereupon, there had been found in his
Sepulcher only a Dragon, with the visible marks of his Body's being Divinely
consumed by Fire; the Story (though so much the more evidently false, in as
much as the Death of Eucherius, who died the fifteenth of February, 727.
preceded, by fifteen years, eight Months, and two days, that of Charles
Martel, whom he is ridiculously supposed to have survived) was so pleasing to
the humor of the Clergy, that the Writers of the Legends of Rigobert of
Rheims, of Eucherius, and Peter the Librarykeeper, and Flodoard, undertook the
dispersing of it; and in the year 858. in November, the Council. Gall. Tom. 3.
p. 122.
Prelates of the Provinces of Rheims, and Roue^n, gave it for certain to Lewis
King of Germany, whom they knew to be descended of Martel, by Pipin, his second
Son (who, upon the twenty ninth of July, 753. concurrent with the fourth of his
Reign, Hist. Sancti Dionys. a. I. Doublet scripta, page 696.
gave, for his Father's sake, Saint Michael's-Mount in Verdunois to the Abbey
of Saint Denis, and by Lewis the Debonnaire, Grandson of Pipin, Tom. 2.
Council. Gall. p. 630.
who Writ in the year 836. to Hilduin, Abbot of Saint Denis) that Charles, his
Great-grandfather, had religiously recommended himself, and had for that end
principally shown his Devotion, and confidence toward that his particular
Patron; a manifest Argument, that the Fable of his Damnation was not yet
invented; and that those Gentlemen, who two and twenty years before bragged,
they had heard the Relation of it from Lewis, imposed upon him, and very boldly
abused the credulity of Lewis King of Germany, and Charles the Bald his
children. And in the year 1090. Chron. August.
In Saxony, a Clergyman (Dead, as was conceived) dragged into Hell, and
returning thence, three days after, confirmed by the Prediction of his own
Death, and the discoveries of other things, the Judgment he had before given
concerning the Torments of Pope Gregory the Seventh, and the Petty Kings,
Rodolph of Su^wbe; Herman of Salmes in Arduenna.
Rodolph, and Herman: the first of whom died the twenty fourth of May, 1085.
the second, the fifteenth of October, 1080. and the third, in the year, 1088.

These three Examples (whereto a thousand others of equal authority might be
added) are sufficient to make it appear, what a strange power malice has over
those, who are once infected with its venom. There may be produced also such,
as shall demonstrate what Impressions Interest can give; for, to raise an
horror against Schism, there was spread up and down Rome Greg. Dial. lib. 4.
c. 40.
this Discourse concerning Paschasius Deacon of the Roman Church, who had
been, to his death, engaged in the Party of the Antipope Laurence, put by his
pretenses the 23 of October 501. That, notwithstanding the merit of his Person,
being such, that the very touching of the Surplice placed upon his biere had,
while he was carrying to the ground, healed a possessed person; yet had his
soul been condemned to endure the ardors of the boyling-waters in the Baths
surnamed the Angulani, whence it was afterward delivered upon the Prayers of
Germanus Bishop of In Vita Dagoberti.
Capua. And to encourage men to liberality, it was said of Dagobert, who died
January 19. 644. that the Devils beating him as they were carrying him away in
a Boat toward the Isles of Vulcan, St. Denis, St. Maurice, and St. Martin,
whom he continually called to his relief, came with Thunder and Tempest to his
rescue, and disposed him afterward into Abraham's Bosom; all which passages
John the Hermit, who lived in a little Isle not far thence, saw in a Vision,
and gave the Relation of it to Anseald then Agent, and afterward Bishop of the
Church of Poictiers. In like manner, the Impostor, who took upon him the name
of Turpin, for that of Tilpin, Archbishop of Rheims, who died the third of
September 789. (never considering that Wolfarius, Successor to Tilpin, did in
the year 811. subscribe the Testament of Charle-maigne) feigned, that that
Prince dying on Saturday, Jan. 28. 814. and Canonized by Paschal the Third,
Antipope, in the year 1166. had Cap. 32.
been carried up to the Celestial Kingdom by the assistance of St. James, to
whom he had built many Churches, and that a certain Devil, whom he had seen
running after the Troops of his Companions, and drawing toward Aix la
Chapelle, whither they were all going, in hope to be present at Charles's
death, and afterward to carry away his Soul to Hell, had told him at his
return, that the headless St. James, beheaded at Jerusalem, and afterward (as
the Spaniards pretend) carried into Galicia.
Galician had put into the balance so many stones, and pieces of Timber, out
of his Churches, that the good works of Charles had out-weighed the evil, and
that notwithstanding he had taken away his Soul from them. And lastly, toward
the declination of the tenth Age, to advance the reputation of the Order of
Clugni; and indeed, of all the Religious Orders in general, Peter Damiani,
Cardinal of Ostia, and from him Chron. Hincmar. Epist: 50. and Flodoard, lib.
3. c. 18. say, that a certain Native of Rheims, named Bernold, saw Charles the
Bald, gnawn by worms, and wallowing in putrefaction: and William of Malmsbury,
lib. 2. supposes, that Charles the Fat saw Lewis the Debonnaire in a Tun of
seething water; which that Manuscript Chronicle of Monsieur De Thou affirms,
had been shown to Charles the Bald, Uncle to the said Charles the Fat.
Sigebert, have left in writing, That a Religious man, by Country, of Rouergue,
coming from Jerusalem, entertained for some time in Sicily by the kindness of a
certain Monk, was told by him, that in the Neighborhood there were certain
places casting up flames of fire, and called by the Inhabitants the Cauldrons
of Vulcan, in which the Souls of the departed endured several punishments,
according to their deserts; and that there were in those places certain Devils
appointed to see the execution done. Of whom he said, that he had often heard
their voices, indignation, and terrors; as also their lamentations, when they
complained, that the souls were taken out of their hands, by the Alms and
Prayers of the Faithful, and especially (at that time) by the devotions of
those of Clugni, who incessantly prayed for the repose of the deceased. That
the Abbot Odilo, receiving this information from him, ordained, in the year
998. through all the Monasteries subject to his Order, that as the solemnity of
All Saints is observed on the first of November, so the next day should be
celebrated the memory of all those, that rest in Christ: which Custom, passing
to several Churches, proved the ground of solemnizing the memory of the
faithful departed.

Hence then came it, 1. That, Princes and the People, moved with compassion for
their kindred, and friends, and conceiving a fear of themselves, with
Consciences disturbed and racked with amazement, multiplied their Donations to
Churches, and Monasteries, even to infinite. 2. That in the Instruments of
those Donations, they began to insert, as necessary and essential, this
President, whereof it were hard to produce many Examples more ancient, pro
remedio animae, and animae parentum, etc. for the relief of my soul, and the
souls of my kindred. And 3. That, whereas Antiquity would hardly have been
brought to grant any true and real apparition of souls, some endeavored to
persuade people they are so common, that they happen every minute. To be short,
they thought they might with some probability introduce into the Church what
the Platonic Philosophy had suggested to Virgil, who gives us this draught of
the state of separated Souls, and of what he conceived of Hell.

Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit, Aeneid. 6.

Non tamen omne malum, miseris nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes, penitusq necesse est
Multa diu concreta modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt; aliae panduntur, inanes
Suspensae ad ventos; aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni, etc.
Nor when (poor souls) they leave this wretched life, T. W.

Do all their evils cease, all plagues, all strife
Contracted in the body: many a stain
Long time inured needs must, even then, remain;
For which sharp Torments are to be endured,
That vice invet'rate may, at last, be cured.
Some empty souls are to the piercing winds
Exposed, whilst others, in their several kinds,
Are plunged in Icy, or sulphurous Lakes, etc.
For, according to the Visions of Germanus, Bishop of Capua, and the Hermit of
Sicily, it would be insinuated, that the Souls might be purged by Baths and
subterranean fires, and there remained only (to make it absolutely Heathenish
Mythologie) to feign some exposed to the Winds, and hung up in smoke, for which
the Council of Florence (as it were to excuse Canto 5. of Hell.
Dante and Canto 34. of Orlando.
Ariosto) has taken care, supplying what the precedent Theology of the
Cloisters, to whose advantages all these Relations do ever contribute, seemed
to have omitted.

CHAP. XXIX. Proofs of the Novelty of the precedent Opinion of Purgatory.
THe precedent opinion concerning Purgatory came so lately into play, that in
the year 593. Petrus Diaconus, astonished at the novelty of it, was in a manner
forced to make this question to St. Gregory, Dial. l. 4. c. 40.
Quid hoc est, quaeso te, quod in his extremis temporibus tam multa de animabus
clarescunt, quae ante latuerunt, ita ut apertis Revelationibus atque
ostensionibus venturum saeculum infer se nobis, atque aperire videatur? etc.
What means it, I pray thee, that in these last times so many things, which
before were hidden, are now become so manifest concerning souls, that the world
to come seems, by clear Revelations, and Declarations, to bring and discover it
self to us? And as by what we have heard of Odilo, Abbot of Clugny, it might be
evident, that at the expiration of the tenth Age, but 400 years after St.
Gregory, Of the ancient House of Meroeur.
that Religious man (by Country of Auvergne) extremely moved at the discourse
of I know not what Pilgrim of Rouergue, had the confidence to put the last hand
to the draught of Purgatory, which the first Antiquity had been ignorant of for
five whole Ages; so from this very Position, that it was not believed from the
beginning, it follows, that it neither is, nor can be a Catholic Tenet.

But this has appeared also by other means, viz. First, by the opposition of
the Greeks, and all the East, which was no less constant and earnest, then that
of Peter De Bruis, Henry his Disciple, the Waldenses, and the Albigenses, and
at the present all the Protestants in the West.

Secondly, By the falling off of the Latins, who have in some measure quitted
the Sentiment of St. Gregory, and Odilo, which was restrained only to the pain
of fire, when upon the ninth of June 1439. (but some few hours before Joseph
Patriarch of the Greeks, then dying had signed his last Declaration running in
general Terms, Council. Florent. Sess. 25.
(...), etc. (...). I confess the Purgatory of Souls) they thought good to
declare themselves by this indefinite expression, (...). The Souls of a middle
condition, between the just and sinners, are in a place of torments, and
whether it be fire, or darkness, or tempest, or some other thing, we differ not
about it.

Thirdly, By the Concordate signed by them on Sunday July the fifth, and
published the next day under the name of Pope Eugenius, in these words, (...).
We decree, that if those, who have unfeignedly repented them of their sins, die
in charity toward God, before they had, by works worthy repentance, made
satisfaction for their sins, as well those of Commission, as Omission, the
Souls of such are after death purged by Purgatory pains.

Fourthly, By the formal disallowance, and Protestation of the Greeks,
immediately after their return, against what ever extreme necessity had
extorted from those of their Nation at Florence, maintained by public
Writings, by Mark Archbishop of Ephesus, and Nilus.

And lastly, by the Answer, which the Greeks of the State of Venice made in the
year 1560. to the fourteenth of the Questions proposed by the Cardinal of
Guise, in these Terms; Eorum hominum animae, quorum quasi media quaedam
conditio est, etc. The Souls of those men, that are, as it were, in a middle
condition, between the just and the unjust, that is to say, those, who gave not
up their last breath in mortal Sins, yet were not absolutely free from guilt,
nor manifested the Fruits of Repentance, the Souls, I say, of such are thought
by ours to be purged in this manner, not by any Purgatory Fire, or by any
determinate Punishment in some certain place, but some by pure fear, at the
very separation from the Body; others, after the separation, it may be also
detained in Hell, not so, as if they were in Fire, or Punishment, but as if
they were kept in Prison, and Chains. Of which Sentiment though there is as
little ground, either in Scripture, or Reason, as there is for the Fire
generally believed by most of the Church of Rome; yet may it suffice to force
her to acknowledge, that her Supposition, advanced after the year 500. and
consequently New, and not Catholic, nor was, nor is avowed, neither every
where, nor by all People; whereof the Inference again is, that it neither is,
nor can be Catholic, by her own Confession, since that, in imitation of
Vincentius Lirinensis, (whose words she perpetually abuses against the
Protestants) it may be said Advers. Haeret. cap. 3.
Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc vere proprieque
Catholicum, etc. What has been believed in all places, at all times, and by
all people, that is truly, and properly Catholic. Besides that, it is
impossible, that the indefinite and doubtful Proposition of the Council of
Florence, declaring that they admit for Purgatory, either fire, or darkness, or
tempest, or any thing else, as if they would have said expressly, that they
were content with any thing, provided it had some appearance of conformity with
their Opinion, should serve to any other end, then to show, that they knew not
what to fasten on, and found in their consciences, that their Purgatory, which
they neither durst, nor could determine, could not any way be an Article of
Faith.

Nor has the Council of Trent been more fortunate in the business, then the
other; for though the Prelates there began their Decree on the fourth of
December, 1563. in very magnificent Terms, saying, Cum Catholica Ecclesia,
Spiritu Sancto edocta, and sacris literis, and antiqua Patrum Traditione, in
sacris Conciliis, and novissime in hac Oecumenic a Synodo, docuerit Purgatorium
esse, animasque ibi detentas fidelium suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptabili
Altaris sacrificio, juvari, praecipit sancta Synodus Episcopis, ut sanam de
Purgatorio Doctrinam, a Sanctis Patribus, and sacris Conciliis traditam, a
Christi fidelibus credi, teneri, doceri, and ubique praedicari diligenter
studeant, etc. Whereas the Catholic Church, taught by the Holy Spirit, the
divine Scriptures, and the ancient Tradition of the Fathers, in Sacred
Councels, and lately in this Ecumenical Synod, has taught that there is a
Purgatory; and that the souls there detained, are by the Suffrages of the
Faithful, but especially by the acceptable sacrifice of the Altar, relieved,
the holy Synod enjoins the Bishops, that they endeavor, that the sound.
Doctrine of Purgatory, delivered by the holy Fathers, and sacred Councels, may
be believed by the faithful, maintained, taught, and preached in all places.
Yet all this well considered comes to nothing, since the Scripture does not any
where teach there is either any subterranean Fire, that purges the separated
souls, or any place, where they are purged; since that not any one of the
Fathers, before St. Gregory, either durst define, that there was any place of
Torment appointed for the purgation of Souls after this life, or positively
affirmed, that they pass through any subterraneous Purgatory fire; since that
no Council (no not even that of Lateran, under Innocent the Third: whereto
nevertheless Cardinal Bellarmine, De Purgator. lib. 1. ea 9.
either deceived himself by others, or not caring much how he deceives us, is
pleased to referr us) no Council, I say, before that of Florence, affirmatively
assigned any Purgative place, after any manner whatsoever, for the Souls of the
Faithful departed; and consequently, that the Council of Trent, which had
(though it boasted as much) neither Scripture, nor Fathers of the first five
Ages nor Council, before that of Florence, from which it might derive ought in
the Question of Purgatory, a thing unknown to Antiquity, has taught us, not
what it had learned from ancient Tradition, but what it pleased it self; and
purely upon its own Authority. As to what the Council adds, concerning what it
had, it self, taught before, as if it had taken it, either out of the ancient
Tradition of the Fathers, or their Councels, it is a pure Illusion; for before
the twenty fifth Session, we have not in all its Decrees, and Anathematisms,
but two words, whence any supposition of Purgatory may be deduced, and those,
without any proof of Declaration of what it is: the Former in the thirtieth
Anathematism, fulminated on the seventeenth of January, 1547. in the sixth
Session, where it pronounces Anathema, Si quis it a reatum Poenae aeternae
deleri dixerit; ut nullus remaneat reatus poenae Temporalis exsolvendo, vel in
hoc saeculo, vel in futuro Purgatorio, etc: If any one shall affirm, that the
guilt of eternal Punishment is so forgiven, as that there remains no guilt of
Temporal Punishment to be paid, either in this life, or hereafter in Purgatory,
etc. The later in the twenty second Chapter of the Decree of the Mass, drawn up
on the seventeenth of September, 1562. in the two and twentieth Session, where
it says again, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is offered, pro defunctis in
Christo, nondum ad plenum purgatis, etc. for the departed in Christ, not yet
fully purged.

Having therefore heard the Council referring, at its last Session, to the
precedent, if you pretend to find therein any allegation, either of Scripture,
or Tradition for Purgatory, or any Reason insinuating it, or any Declaration,
expressing the nature of it with any satisfaction, you will make no great
advantage of the Allegations; they containing in effect, but a simple, and
naked description, and no more. And whereas the Council thinks it enough, by
its Decree, to say, that it is, without declaring, in what manner, and whether
it does, or does not, consist in Fire, such as Saint Gregory, and Odilo,
conceived it, and the common Opinion seems to insinuate; it is thence apparent,
that it knew no more of it, then other Councels, and that its Exhortation to
the Bishops, to observe, and cause to be observed the sound Doctrine thereof,
is, and shall ever be a sound without signification, while there shall only be
an Ostentation to name it and men shall wave to express the Nature of it, to
give the Eastern Greeks, and the Protestants, who absolutely deny it, some
proof of the Tradition, which they pretend to produce for the Confirmation
thereof.

CHAP. XXX. Showing, that the first Hypothesis proposed by the Sibylline
Writing, so called is generally disclaimed.
AS to the first Hypothesis, which concerns The detention of all souls
whatsoever, in Hell, from their separation from the Bodies, which they had
animated, to their Resurrection; though it were in such high esteem that it
induced the Christians of the second and third Ages to compose the ibera, and
the other Prayers, in which the departed Person is introduced, desiring to be
delivered from eternal Death, and the Living require that he be delivered from
the Gates of Hell, and preserved from the places of Torment, Tartarus, the deep
Lake, from the pains of Darkness, from the mouth of the Lion; yet was it at the
very beginning moderated by those, who seemed to have embraced it with greatest
resolution. For Tertullian, persuaded by the Relation had been made to him of
the Visions of St. Perpetua, was of Opinion (as we have already observed) that
the Souls of Martyrs were, by way of preference, placed in the Terrestrial
Paradise, and the rest confined in Hell. And since, it has, by little and
little, been abandoned; yet so, as that those, who quitted it, would not be
obliged either to the rejection of the Sibylline Writing, which had occasioned
the production of it, or to a change of the Prayers introduced into the Public
Service, which presupposed it. For many (making no mention of Hell) contented
themselves to assign (at least in words) the souls of the Faithful a certain
sequestered place, as under the Altars, and Holy Tables, appointed for the
conservation, and distribution of the Eucharist; and upon that account (if we
may rely on the Judgment of the late Bishop of Orleans, In Notis ad Canones
Concilii Eliberitani.
Gabriel de l'Aubespine) the Council Assembled about the year 305. from all
Parts of Spain, at Elvira, near Granada, had drawn up its thirty fourth Canon
in these Terms; Cereos per diem placuit in Coemeterio non incendi: inquietandi
enim spiritus Sanctorum non sunt, etc. It is thought good, that, in the
daytime, no Wax-candles should be lighted in the Churchyard: for the spirits
of the Saints are not to be disturbed. In effect, it might seem; that (the
Christians at that time meeting in Coemeteries, or Churchyards, the Altars
being, upon that occasion, placed there, and many believing, that the Angels,
and separated souls were disposed into some subtle Bodies, capable, as ours,
of resenting strong Perfumes) Prohibition was made by the Spanish Prelates,
That Wax-candles should be lighted in the daytime; lest the smoke of them
might prove offensive to the spirits of the Faithful, whose Bodies had been
there interred.

It might also be thought that Vigilantius, by Birth indeed of Aquitain, but a
Priest of Barcelona, who had, with all Spain, received the Decree of Elvira,
Disputing, in the year 406. viz. an hundred years precisely after the said
Decree, against the Maintainers of the Worship done (according to the Custom of
that Time) to the Relics of the Saints whom he justly conceived Hieron.
Adversus Vigilantium, cap. 2.
illuminated by the Majesty of the Lamb sitting in the midst of the Throne of
God, crushed them with the Inconvenience, which he found in their Opinion;
saying, Ergo cineres suos amant animae Martyrum, and circumvolant eos,
semperque praesentes sunt; ne forte, si aliquis Precator advenerit, absentes
audire non possint, etc. The Souls therefore of the Martyrs are in love with
their own dust, and fly about it, and are ever at hand; lest, if any one comes
to pray, they should not, being absent, hear him. For this Argument makes only
against those, who assigned, at least in appearance, the Souls of the Faithful
departed, for their habitation, the Place under the Altars, that were near
their Sepulchers.

There is also some Ground to number, among the Followers of this strange
Opinion, those, who had been so confident, as to give it for certain to the
good St. Augustine, that St. John, having caused himself to be buried alive at
Ephesus, August. in Joann. Tract. 124. Illic terra sensim scatere, and quasi
ebullire, perhibetur.
the Earth continually sprung up, and boiled, as it were over the place of his
Interment. For, if they thought it no Inconvenience to say of our Savior's
Beloved Apostle, that he was confined to his Sepulcher, there to expect, in
Body, and Soul, the Day of Judgment; how much less would they have thought it,
to reduce the Souls of other Saints departed to the same condition? St.
Augustine thought it better Cedamus opinioni, quam cerus documentis refellere
non valemas.
to comply with the Opinion, which he conceived could not be refuted by certain
Proofs. But it is so vanished of it self, that, being at this day generally
declined, we need not trouble our selves with the Confutation thereof, no more,
then of that of Justine Martyr; who, from the Hypothesis of the pretended
Sibylline Writing, and the Story of the Witch of Endor, inferred, that all
Souls, without any exception, either of Saints, or Patriarchs, or Prophets, are
in Hell under the power of the Devils. For though the Prayers, whereby it is,
even to this day, required in the Church of Rome, that God would deliver the
Souls of the Faithful departed from the power of Hell, from the Mouth of the
Lion, from the Pains of Darkness, and that he would put away far from them the
Princes of darkness, do notoriously discover they drew their Original from such
a presupposition; yet has it nevertheless so absolutely lost all Credit, that
even in the year 380. Philastrius, Bishop of Brescia, charged it with Heresy;
saying, Haeres. 26.
Alia est Haeresis de Pythonissa, etc. There is another kind of Heresy
concerning the Witch; whereby some, covering a Woman with Clothes, hoped they
might obtain certain Answers from her, whence it is said, that that Witch
raised, out of Hell, the Soul of the blessed Samuel: and for that reason is it
principally, that many men, even to this Day, suspect; that she might be
believed, especially for that it is known, that she (as it were a second time)
gave in that excitation true Answers of those things, which the blessed Prophet
had said to King Saul: and because many are content to acquiesce in a Ly, they
descend into perpetual death; since the Prophet says, Wisd. iii. 1.
The Souls of the Just are in the hand of the Lord, and Death touches them
not. How then could an impious Soul raise out of Hell a pious, and holy one,
especially that of a Prophet?

But what a strange astonishment must we necessarily conceive at this, that the
Opinion of Justine Martyr, concerning the State of Souls, should displease the
whole Church; which yet, in her Service, presupposed some such thing? For, if
it be Heresy to think, that the Souls of the ^aithfull, after their retirement
out of this World, should be in danger of being exposed to the Rage of Devils,
what pretense can there be to continue the Prayers, which infinuate such a
persuasion? And, if the Groundwork of such Prayers be taken away, what reason
can be alleged sufficient to authorize the continuance of them? Can it be
said, It is lawful, and consistent with the Piety of the Church to put up to
God Requests, that are erroneous according to her own Sentiment, and impossible
according to the persuasion she has of the merciful disposal of her Savior in
respect of his Elect; whom he has Esa. lvii. 1.
taken away from the Evil to come, Can Mi^.
to sleep in a sleep of Peace, and Apoc. xiv. 13
to rest from their Labors? And, supposing these things grounded upon the
express Text of the Scripture, and the Note, that those, who have written the
R^^ane Order, ass^, that Pope Pelig us the First, advanced to the Chair on
Sunday, Aug 23. 554. inserred the M^nto into the (...) which (...) that, by
th^^r own (...) ession, that part of the Service which concerns the Departed,
is new.
Canon of the Mass, which makes commemoration to God only of those, who,
sleeping a sleep of Peace, are accordingly in Peace, should not men think
themselves obliged, either to discard those Prayers, which contain a formal
expression of what is contrary to Peace, in respect of those, for whom they are
made, and prove so much the more fruitless, and inconvenient, by how much the
Foundations thereof are undermined, by rejecting the Hypotheses, as well of the
pretended Sibyllm^ Writing, as of Justine Martyr; or, by retaining them, to run
into the Inconvenience of a Contradiction; and that so much the more
inevitable, the more unadvisedly they engage themselves upon the maintaining of
both the Terms of it at the same time; affirming on the one side, that those,
who are to be delivered out of the Bonds of a dreadful death, and from the
Gates of Hell, a place of Trouble, and (as the Text of the Prayer bears it) of
Pains, are neither in Death, nor in Bonds, nor in Hell; that those, far from
whom must be driven away the Princes of Darkness, are not only not engaged in
any War against them; but are in a condition to sleep the sleep of Peace, to be
in possession of Peace, to rest, in the enjoyment of that Peace, from their
Labors: And on the other side, that those, who are taken away from the evil to
come, so as they sleep in Peace, and rest from their Labors, are in the most
dreadful Abyss of Miseries, in the horror of the most irrevocable War, and the
extremity of Troubles? And what does this amount to less, then to affirm, that
they are, and are not, either in Peace, and Rest, or in Trouble, and War; and
consequently, that they both can, and cannot, be delivered out of them? Time
was, when those, who followed the Party of the Millenaries, imagining, that
during the term of a thousand years, which they assigned for the Earthly
Kingdom of our Savior in Jerusalem, there should be a Resurrection preceding
the general one of the Last-day, and upon that account be called the First,
thought they had just ground to beg, that their deceased Friends might have
their part in that first Resurrection: But as soon as their Imagination, lost
to all credit, came of it self to be absolutely laid aside, the use of that
kind of Prayers came, upon this very score, that every one thought them
ill-grounded (...) to be so far abolished; that there is no Track of them in
any of the Formularies, that are come to us, but only in the ^^othick, Which
if who sees not there is the same Obligation to ^br^g^te the Pra^ers, which are
(as has been clearly demonstrated) formally contradicted by the Canon of the
Mass, whereby the Church of Rome is wholly directed at the present?

CHAP. XXXI. That the Passage in the twelfth Chapter of the second Book of the
Maccabees has no relation to the Opinion of Purgatory, nor to the Service of
the Churches.
THe Doctors of the Roman Communion pretend, that the Christians of the
second Age grounded their Prayers for the Dead upon the Authority of the second
Book of the Maccabees, unknown (as we have observed) to the Jews; who were
contemporary with the Apostles, or at least, slighted by them, and looked upon
with so much indignation by the Christians, that not any one of them, before
St. Augustine, cited it with any respect to the Offices rendered by the
surviving Faithful to their departed Brethren. Nay, indeed, none among them
could (without destroying his own presuppositions concerning the State of the
Dead) make any advantage of that Testimony, which notoriously wrests the
action, and intention of Judas Maccabaeus to a wrong sense, and applies it to
the false Hypothesis, which the Jews of the last times did, and do still
maintain, so much the more obstinately, the more they are persuaded, that it
may be derived from the words of the first Psalm, in the fifth Verse; saying,
that the wicked shall not stand, or (as the Greek Version, and the ancient
Latin has it) shall not rise up, in Judgment. Since therefore they were of
this extravagant Opinion, that the Resurrection of the Last-day should be only
for the Just, and that those, who had concluded a criminal Life in the Wrath of
God, should not participate thereof, it must needs be, that, having persuaded
thereto either Jason the Cyrenaean, or his Abridger, the said Jason, or other
man, had conceived it necessary, that Judas should make a Prayer for a sort of
unhappy wretches, whom he acknowledged destroyed in their Sacrilege, to the end
that (being freed from their sin) they might be made capable of the
Resurrection; which (according to their prejudicated judgment) was to be
peculiar only to those, who had continued, and concluded their lives in piety.
This Imagination could not relate to any of the Opinions of the ancient
Christians, assured by St. Paul, 2 Cor. v. 10.
that every one should appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive
the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be
good, or bad, and unanimously presupposing, Apoc. xx. 13.
that Judgment should be given of all, good, and bad, according to their works,
and consequently believing, that there would be a double Resurrection, that is
to say, that of the righteous Dan. xii. 2. Matthew. xxv. 34, etc. Joan. v. 29.
to eternal life, and glory, and that of the wicked to death, and shame, and
everlasting contempt.

But let us put the Case, that the Sentiment, whether of the Author of the
Second Book of the Maccabees, or of his Abridger, was absolutely conformable to
so manifest, and so known a Truth, and that he alleged this only end of the
Prayer attributed by him to Judas, that the Dead, for whom only he pretends,
that he made it, being freed from their sins, were thereupon conveyed to the
enjoyment of Beatitude, which shall have its full accomplishment in the
Resurrection, which the Fathers call the proper Faith of Christians, and the
consummation of the glory, which they expect. Nay, let us put the Case, that
the Latin Church had, from the beginning, a great esteem for the Testimony of
that Person, if (as is supposed) she drew up her Service according to the
President of Judas Maccabaeus, whence comes it, that, in the Canon of the Mass,
she has made no mention of the Resurrection? And, that among the Liturgies of
the Greeks, Armenians, etc. there are only two, viz. those of St. Basil, and
St. Chry^ostome, drawn up, one by the other, which have only this word of it
by the way; (...) Resting in hope of Resurrection, and eternal life? Where it
is evident, to any one, that has but common sense, that he, who pronounces the
Prayer, desires not for the Dead, either Resurrection, or Life; but only
declares, that both of them have ever been the Object of their hope. To be
absolutely silent in it, as the Canon of the Latin Mass is, or to speak
uncertainly of it, without making any request, is that proposing to one's self
the pretended Example of Judas Maccabaeus, and the Tradition of the ancient
Synagogue? Or can it either enter into any man's Imagination, to say, they
imitate, who, neither in their Discourses, nor in their Actions, express any
thing of what is contained in the Original? If it be said; that the Latins, in
the Office of the Dead added to the Canon, demand the Resurrection of the
departed Person, whom they recommend to God in their Prayers; it will be easy
to reply; that of three and forty Prayers, whereof that Office consists, one
only, viz. the fifth, proposes, in one word, that kind of supplication,
saying, Partem Resurrectionis accipiat Anima famuli tui, etc. That the soul of
thy servant may participate of the blessed Resurrection: three others, which
spoke of the Resurrection: presuppose it, without making any demand, and amount
to no more, then to require only the effect of it; as, for instance, the
second, laid down in these Terms, Inter Sanctos, and Electos tuos resuscitati,
gloria manifestae contemplationis perpetuo satientur, etc. That thy servants,
being raised again, may be perpetually silled, among the Saints, and Elect,
with the glory of a manifest contemplation: the fourth, which has, Ad propria
corpora quandoque reversuras, Sanctorum tuorum caetibus aggregari praecipias,
etc. That thou would command, that the souls of all the Faithful, which are
one day to return to their bodies, may meet together in the Assemblies of thy
Saints: and the nine and thirtieth, which contains these words; In
Resurrectionis gloria inter Sanctos, and Electos tuos resuscitati, respirent,
etc. That thy servants of both Sexes, being raised up, may live among thy
Saints, and Elect, in the glory of the Resurrection.

From all which Forms it necessary follows, that the Latin Church never
thought of framing her Service according to the Example of Judas Maccabaeus;
and that it is vainly, and without any shadow of Proof, that any Venture at
this day to maintain it; never considering, that, if the first Authors of
Praying for the Dead among Christians had had any design to build their Form of
Service upon the pretended Pattern of the Maccabees, they could not, without
prevarication from their own Intentions, fo far have missed the Lineaments
thereof, as to have omitted in their Canon what they had proposed to themselves
to put in Practice; or not to insist on it, but obliquely, and perfunctorily;
not making it, as they should have done, their Principal business.

CHAP. XXXII. That the Primitive Sense of the Prayers, whereby the Remission of
Sins is demanded for the Dead, is not embraced by any.
THe Prayers, which the ancient Church made for Remission of Sins on the behalf
of the Faithful departed, did not only proceed from the Hypothesis of the
Sibylline Writing, concerning the consinement of all Souls in Hell, and of
Justine Martyr, concerning the power of the Devils, even over those of the
greatest Saints; but is also an effect of their Opinion, who imagined, that our
Savior, and his Apostles, after his Example, being, after their departure,
descended into Hell, had preached there, and, in effect, converted many of
those, who were gone thither in the state of Sin. For, looking upon, as reduced
to the Trial of some punishment, those, whose Beatitude was (during their
restraint in the common prison of the Dead) deferred, and conceiving that their
Condition was capable of being changed into better, they inferred, very
suitably to these Opinions, that it was necessary to implore the mercy of God,
and to demand, on their behalf, the forgiveness of their Sins, which for a time
kept the Gates of glory shut against them, and exposed them in some manner to
the violences of Evil spirits, till such time, as that, by their own
supplications, and the suffrages of their surviving Friends, they might better
their Condition.

We have already produced Examples of those Prayers, and there is not any
Expression so strong, or efficacious, which we find not employed to make us
comprehend, that heretofore the surviving Faithful were of a Belief, that
their departed Brethren were treated as Malefactors, and in a manner, covered
with the wrath of God. But from the beginning of the Third Age, and afterward,
those among the Fathers, who had more attentively considered the Oracles of
God, affirming, That Romans viii.
There is no condemnation for those, who are in Christ Jesus; That Joan. x. 28.
No man is able to pluck them out of his hand; That Esa. lvii. 1.
They are (at the hour of death) taken away from the evil to come; That Phil.
i. 23.
They depart out of the Body, to be with the Lord; That Jer. l. 20.
Their iniquity shall be sought for, and there shall be none, because God has
pardoned them; That, as soon as they are dead in the Lord, Apoc. xiv. 13.
they rest from their labors, and (according to what we find in express Terms
in the Canon of the Mass) sleep a sleep of Peace, as being actually in Peace,
and freed from Sin, which deprives a man of it, and Esa. lix. 2.
makes a separation between the Lord, and him, that commits it: the Fathers, I
say, not discontinuing (out of the respect they had for their Ancestors) the
Prayers inserted by them, upon prejudications both ill-grounded, and extremely
mistaken, into the Service of the Church, do, by the formal Confession of the
insufficiency of those Principles, make a certain disclaim of the Prayers,
enough to justify, that (according to them) being taken literally, they are
absolutely unprofitable, as being destitute of Truth, and a maintainable
Foundation.

Hence is it, that in the year 252. St. Cyprian tells us of the advantage,
which accrews to the Faithful at their death, De Mort^litate.
Lucrum maximum jam nullis peccatis, and vitiis carnis, obnoxium fieri, etc. It
is a very great gain not to be any longer subject to sins, and the lusts of the
flesh. St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. 18.
about the year 350. (...) Remission having its Ordinance only in this life.
St. Epiphamus, in the year 375. in the nine and fiftieth Haeresie, (...) There
is not any progress either of Piety, or Repentance, after death. St. Ambrose,
De bono Mortis.
about the year 378. Qui hic non acceperit remissionem, illic non erit, etc.
He, who shall not have received remission here, shall not be there; that is, in
glory. St. Hierome, In Eccles. cap. xi.
in the year 386. Ubicunque tibi locum praeparaveris, futuramque sedem, sive ad
Austrum, sive ad Boream; ibi, cum mortuus fueris, permanebis, etc. Mortis
tempestate subversus, ubicunque cecideris, ibi jugiter permanebis: sive te
rigidum, and trucem, sive clementem, and misericordem, ultimum invenerit
tempus, etc. Lignum, quod in hac vita corruerit, and concisione mortalitatis
fuerit incisum, aut peccavit, dum staret, and in Boreae part postea ponetur,
aut, si dignos Austro fructus attulit, in plaga jacebit Australi, etc.
Wherever thou shall have provided a place for thy self, and the seat thou
shall come into, whether it be toward the South, or toward the North, there
shall thou remain after thy death, etc. Being once overwhelmed by the tempest
of death, in what place soever thou shall fall, there shall thou perpetually
remain: whether thy last hour have found thee there harsh, and cruel, or mild,
and merciful, etc. The Tree, which shall be fallen in this life, and has been
cut down by the stroke of Mortality, or has sinned, while it stood, shall
afterward be placed on the North- side; or if it has brought forth Fruits
worthy the South, he shall be disposed into the South- Quarter. St.
Chrysostom, De Lazaro, Hom. 2.
in the year 396. (...) After we are departed, it is no longer in our power to
repent, and to cleanse our selves of the sins, which we have committed. St.
Augustine, Epist. 80.
in the year 420. Qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis in die illo
judicabitur, etc. Such, as every one dies in this day, as such shall he be
judged in that day. Again; In Psalm. xxxvi.
Qualis exieris ex hac vita, talis redderis illi vitae, etc. Such, as thou
shall depart this life, such shall thou be delivered up to the other.
Olympiodorus, In Eccles. xi.
(...) In what place soever a man, at his departure, has been seized, whether
it were of light, or of darkness, as also in what work, whether of iniquity, or
of virtue, he shall remain in the same degree, and rank; either in Light, with
the just, and Christ the King of all; or in Darkness, with the unjust, and the
Prince of this World.

For, if from the very hour of their departure the Faithful are no longer
subject to any sin; if repentance, and remission of sin have place only in
this life; and, if such as men die, such they shall rise again, and be judged
at the Last-day, there neither is, nor can be any pardon, either to be asked,
or to be obtained for them, after their death. Whereof the Consequence is, that
the Prayers, which are made for them, are (by their very Confession, who have
most recommended them) unreasonable, in that they suppose what (according to
their own Principles) neither is, nor can be, viz. that the Faithful departed
in Jesus Christ are subject to sin: besides, they are fruitless, in that they
demand (according to the same Principles) an effect, which is already fully
accomplished, and is to be unchangeably such to all Eternity.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Censures, pronounced by the Doctors of the Church of Rome
against the Fathers, taken into Examination.
BY those Prayers it was, and still is demanded, that God would place the
Departed in the Bosom of the Patriarchs, in the Society of the Saints, in the
Region of the Godly, the Saints, and the Living, in the Pleasures of Paradise,
in a place of Refreshment, Light, and Peace; granting them the passage from
Death to Life, the participation of the redemption of God, the rest of
Beatitude, the opening of the Gates of glory, the Happiness and Joy of an
everlasting Light, the fullness of Glory, etc. All these things, I say, are
prayed for on the behalf of the departed; as if they were not in the enjoyment
of any of them; or as if (it being granted they were) it were convenient to
demand for them what they are already in possession of, as if they were
absolutely deprived thereof. This kind of Office is very consonant to the
first Hypothesis, as well of the pretended Sibylline Writing, as of those, who
were of a persuasion, that all Souls were sent to Hell, and there confined till
the Resurrection of their Bodies. Nor is it unsuitable to what is told us by
several of the Fathers of later Times, who (continuing the Forms of their
Ancestors) endeavored to avoid the inconvenience of the Imagination, which
their Predecessors had, as it were, from hand to hand, transmitted to them.
Thence comes it, that Stapleton (measuring the more, and the less Ancient by
the same measure; never considering whether the later any way moderated what
had been in high esteem among the former) makes no difficulty to entertain us
with this disadvantageous Language; which equally charges them all: Defensio
Auctorit. Ecclesiast. lib. 1, 2.
Tot illi, and tam celebres, antiqui Patres, Tertullianus, and Irenaeus, etc.
So many ancient, and so eminent Fathers, as Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, Ambrose, Clemens Romanus,
Bernard, were not of that Sentiment, which, at last, after so great
Disquisition, was defined to be an Article of Faith in the Council of Florence,
viz. That the Souls of the Just enjoy the Beatifical Vision before the day of
Judgment; but delivered the contrary Opinion.

Bibl. lib. 6. Not. 345.
Sixtus Senensis had put also into the same Predicament Justine Martyr,
Lactantius, Victorinus of Poictiers, Aretas, and Pope John the Two and
Twentieth. Nor do I deny, but that very ill Consequences may be drawn

First, From what St. Ambrose has written, in the second Chapter of his second
Book Of Cain and Abel. Anima, post finem vitae hujus, adhuc tamen futuri
Judicii ambiguo suspenditur, etc. After this life ended, the soul is yet in
suspense, through the uncertainty of the future Judgment, etc. And elsewhere; De
bono mortis, cap. 10.
Videntur, usque ad diem Judicii, per plurimum scilicet temporibus, debita sibi
remuneratione fraudari, etc. Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae
de corporibus (...) peterent, id est, locum, qui non videtur, quem Latin
Infernum dicimus, etc. Expectant remunerationem debitam, etc. Men's souls, till
the day of Judgment, that is to say, for a very long space of time, seem to be
defrauded of the remuneration due to them, etc. It had been sufficient to tell
them (viz. the Heathens) that the souls, freed from their bodies, go to (...),
that is to say, to a place, not to be seen, which in Latin we call Infernum,
Hell, etc. They expect the reward due to them.

Secondly, From what St. Chrysostom says in several places (making use of a
Figurative, and ambiguous manner of Expression) when he conceives it enough to
call the place, where the souls of the Just are disposed, Abraham's Bosom; and,
in some other Places, seems to deny their Beatitude: writing in the nine and
twentieth Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, (...), etc. Without
the flesh, the soul shall not receive those unspeakable goods; in like manner
shall she not also be punished, etc. If the body be not raised again, the soul
remains uncrowned, deprived of that Beatitude, which is in the Heavens, etc.
And again, Homil. 28. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews.
(...), etc. You also think what, and how great, a thing it is, that Abraham,
and the Apostle Paul should sit down till such time, as thou shall be
accomplished, to the end, that then they might receive their reward: for if we
also are not arrived, the Savior has foretold, that he would not give it,
etc. What shall Abel do, who overcame first of all, and is sat down without
being Crowned?

Thirdly, From what is said by Prudentius: who, speaking of the Martyrs of
Saragossa, seems to deny their Souls admission into Heaven; saying, Sub Altari
sita sempiterno turba, etc. The company seated under the Eternal Altar. To
which may be added; that St. Augustine, In Psalm. 36. De Civit. Dei, lib. 12
cap. 9. Enchirid. cap. 108.
not content to have said, That, after this life ended, we shall not be there,
where the Saints shall be, as if he could not have designed by its proper Name
the place of the Soul's habitation, is forced in several places to make use of
the most general Term of all, viz. that of Receptacles: And to that, that of
Paulinus, who, in his Epitaph upon Epist. ad Severum.
Clarus, as if he knew not where to assign him Entertainment, makes this
Discourse to him,

Sive Patrum sinibus recubas, Dominive sub ara
Conderis, aut sacro pasceris in nemore,
Qualibet in regione Poli situs, aut Paradisi,
Clare, sub aeterna pace quietus agis, etc.
Whether in the Patriarch's Bosom thou remain,
Or under the Lord's Altar art detain d,
Or an Abode in the sacred Grove have gained,
What part, or place, of Paradise thou have got,
Clarus, eternal Peace, and Rest's thy Lot.
But all this is not enough to induce me to subscribe to the disadvantageous
Censure given by Stapleton; who, not making any distinction of either Times, or
Persons, or Expressions, durst attribute to all Antiquity, what the Author of
the pretended Sibylline Writing had persuaded those, who had first consulted
it. Nor do I see, that from the places, above cited, it may rigorously be
inferred, that the Fathers, out of whose Writings they are extracted, delayed
the Beatitude of the Saints, till after the Day of Judgment. For, though the
words of Saint Ambrose seem to bear, that they expect their Happiness with
uncertainty, and doubtfully; yet he neither understood, nor could have
understood it so; since that, in the second of the places objected to him, he
writes, that the Soul of the Faithful Person departed, Non busto tenetur, sed
quiet pia fungitur, etc. is not detained upon the Funeral Pile, where the Body
had been consumed, but enjoys a pious Rest. His design then (as it was also St.
Chrysostom's, who means, by the Bosom of the Fathers, the Kingdom of Heaven)
was to have it understood, that the supreme Happiness, and absolute
accomplishment of the glory of the Saints departed, was to be a Consequence of
the Resurrection, and Last Judgment, at which time the souls already in Glory
shall receive their true Crowns, in the remuneration promised to complete
Persons, whereof they before made the principal part; and that, in expectation
of the Judgment, which shall fully consummate their Glory, they remain in
suspense, not as uncertain of the effect it shall produce; but as ignorant of
the time, when it shall please God, that so admirable an Event shall come to
pass: So that his particular Judgment reaches no further, then that the souls,
freed from their bodies, are transmitted to Hell; but simply supposes, that, as
to the Heathen, it was enough to say so much.

As for Prudentius, and Paulinus, their conception of the Eternal Altar is not
after a gross, but after a refined, and mystical manner: Prudentius saying of
the blessed souls, that they shall rest in the Gremio senis abdita Sancti
Recubabit, ubi e^^ Eleazar. etc. Pates, ecce! fidelibus ampla Via lucida jam
Paradisi.
Bosom of the blessed Old man, where Lazarus is, and in Paradise: And Paulinus
expressly declaring of Clarus;

Libera corporeo, men's, carcere, gaudet in Astris,
Pura probatorum sedem sortita piorum, etc.
-- Spiritus aethere gaudet,
Discipulumque pari sociat super astra Magistro, etc.
Among the Just his Habitation is,
Of Body freed, possessed of Heavenly Bliss, etc.
-- His soul to Heaven is gone,
The Scholar to the Master's equal grown.
So that, according to these two Authors, to rest under the Eternal Altar, in
the Bosom of Abraham, in Paradise, in Heaven, above the Stars, is one, and the
same, thing, as to the effect, and design (though by diverse expressions) the
Beatitude, and Glory of the children of God, as well in general, as in
particular.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Uniformity of the Sentiment of the Fathers, and of the
Protestants.
I Add, that most of the Fathers, who lived after Tertullian (what Expressions
soever they may make use of) were of a Sentiment consonant to what is at the
present held by the Protestants, and firmly maintained, that all the Souls of
those, of whose Names there was a Commemoration made in the Service of the
Church, were, at the very hour of their death, conveyed to the enjoyment of
their Rest, and Glory. Hence was it, that St. Cyprian, even in the year 252.
resolutely pronounces, De Mortalitate.
De istis mundi turbinibus extracti, etc. Having escaped the Tempests of this
World, we make toward the secure Haven of an eternal Mansion, etc. We are not
to put on Mourning-Garments here, when they there have already put on their
White Robes, etc. It is not a departure, but a passage, and (the Temporal
journey being at an end) a transportation toward the things, That are Eternal,
etc. Let us embrace the day, which assigns to every one his own Mansion, which
restores us, taken away hence, and disingaged from the snares of this World, to
Paradise, and the celestial Kingdom, etc. Again; Lucrum maximum, etc. exemptum
pressuris-urgentibus, and venenatis Diaboli faucibus liberatum, ad laetitiam
salutis aeternae, Christo vocante, prosicisci, etc. It is an exceeding great
advantage, etc. to go (Christ calling us) to the Joys of Eternal Salvation;
after we are freed from those pressures, which lie heavy upon us, and delivered
from the poisonous jaws of the Devil.

To the same effect Origene, Advorsus Celsum, lib. 6.
about fifteen years before, (...), etc. We hope to be above the Heavens, after
the Combats, and Troubles, which we have run through here.

St. Basil, In Psalm. cxiv.
in the following Age, about the year 370. (...) An eternal Rest is proposed to
those, who shall have lawfully maintained the Combat of the Life, which is here.

St. Gregory Nazianzene, in his tenth Oration, pronounced about the year 369.
(...), etc. I am persuaded by the Discourses of Wise men, that every Soul,
which is good, and loved of God, after that, being disengaged from the Body, to
which she was conjoined, she is retired hence; that, which clouded her, being,
as it were, purged, or laid down, or I know not how to express it, immediately
having a resentment of, and in the contemplation of the happiness she is to be
advanced to, is in the possession of an admirable Pleasure, and rejoices, and
joyfully passes toward her Lord, shunning, as a loathsome Prison, this present
Life.

St. Epiphanius, Haeres. 59. 10.
the most zealous Maintainer of Prayer for the Dead, speaking, about the year
375. of the closure of this Life, and the consequences of it, in relation to
the Faithful; (...) The time is accomplished, the Combat is at an end, the
Lists are cleared, and the Crowns are bestowed. Again; (...) All is manifestly
accomplished after the departure hence.

St. Chrysostom, In Genesis Hom. 36.
between the years 390. and 404. (...), etc. Those, who have carefully spent
their Lives in the exercises of Virtue, after they shall have been transported
out of the present life, shall truly be, as if they had obtained a dismission
after the Combats, and as delivered out of Bonds: for there is for those, who
live virtuously, a certain transportation from worse things to better, and from
a temporal to a perpetual, and immortal life, and such as shall have no end.
Again, De deplor. peccati.
(...) The Faithful depart to go with Christ, and are with the King, face to
face. Again, In Matthew. Hom. 70.
(...) After Death is once come, then is the Wedding, then is the Spouse.
Again, In 2 Corinthians. Hom. 16.
(...) Be of good courage, when thou art cut off (by death) for it exempts thee
not only from corruption, and trouble; but it also sends thee immediately to
the Lord. And elsewhere; Hom. in 1 These. 4. 13.
(...) Consider toward whom the departed Person is gone, and take comfort
thence; there Paul is, there Peter is, there is the whole Quire of the Saints.
Again; In Hebr. Hom. 4.
(...) We give thanks unto God, that he has moreover crowned him, who is
departed hence, that he has exempted him from all troubles, that, delivering
him out of all fear, he keeps him near himself.

St. Augustine, giving an account of the common Sentiment of the Churches of
Africa, about the year 400. Moritur aliquis? Dicimus, Bonus homo, fidelis homo;
in pace est cum Domino, etc. Does any one die? We say, The Good man, The
Faithful man, is in Peace with the Lord. Which shows, that the Christians of
that Time were fully persuaded of what Pope Pelagius the First, about one
hundred and fifty years after, caused to be inserted into the Canon of the
Mass, viz. that Those, who die in Christ, sleep in Peace.

The Questions unjustly attributed to Justine Martyr; since the Author was
contemporary with St. Augustine: Quest.
(...) The Souls of the Saints are conveyed to Paradise, there is the
conversation, there the sight of the Angels.

St. Cyril of Alexandria about the year, 420. In Joann. lib. 11. page 1067.
(...), etc. I conceive, it ought (and that very probably) to be held for
certain, that the Souls of the Saints, leaving their earthly Bodies, are for
the most part committed to the indulgence, and Philanthropie of God, as
resigned into the hands of a most loving Father, and not (as some Unbelievers
suspect, that they love to walk among dead men's Graves, expecting Sepulchral
Libations, much less, that they go (as those of such, as have loved sin) to a
place of unmeasurable Torment, that is, to Hell. They rather run to be received
into the hands of the Father of all, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who has
also Hebr. x. 20.
consecrated this way for us, for he Luke xxiii. 46.
commended his Soul into the hands of his Father, that we also, taking Example
thence, as in it, and by it, may entertain noble hopes, as being in that firm
disposition, and belief; that, having undergone the death of the Flesh, we may
be in the hands of God, and in a better condition, then when we were in the
Flesh: Whence it also comes, that the wise Paul writes unto us, Phil. i. 23.
that it is far better to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Prosper, De vita contempl. lib. 1. cap. 1.
about the year 450. Post hanc vitam succedit pugnae secura victoria; ut
Milites Christi, laboriosa jam peregrinatione transacta, regnent felices in
patria, etc. After this life ended, certain Victory is consequent to the
Combat; that the Soldiers of Christ (their laborious Pilgrimage being over)
might reign happily in their Country, etc.

Gennadius, De Eccl. dogm. cap. 79.
about the year 490. Exeuntes de corpore ad Christum vadunt, etc. The Faithful,
dislodging out of the Body, go to Christ.

Andrew of Caesarea, In Apoc. xiv. 13.
about the year 800. (...), etc. The voice from Heaven does not beatifie all
the Dead, but those, who die in the Lord, those, who are mortified to the
World, and bear in their Bodies the mortification of the Lord Jesus, and who
suffer with Christ; for to those the departure out of the body, is truly a
releasment from labors.

To conclude, of the same Sentiment was Aretas, about the year 930. (...) Upon
the vanishing away of Labors, shall be introduced the reward of Works.

CHAP. XXXV. The Sentiment of the Protestants further proved by the
Description, which the Fathers made of Abraham's Bosom.
FRom the Harmony of all the precedent Testimonies, it may justly be inferred,
that, according to the constant Doctrine of the Christian Church, from the year
250. those, who die in the Lord, are with him, and that to them the time, which
follows this life, is a time of joy, and marriage, which, from the moment of
their Death, brings them into the company of the Saints, and Angels, in the
Paradise of God, where they live, and are in peace, and are crowned, and reign
with him. The same thing may be also deduced from the Description, which the
Fathers unanimously make of Abraham's Bosom, the place assigned by all
Christian Antiquity for the entertainment of the Souls of the Faithful after
this Life. For St. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 10.
places it in Heaven; saying to his Brother Caesarius, who had dyed not long
before, (...), etc. May thou go to Heaven, etc. and rest in the Bosom of
Abraham. In like manner St. Chrysostom, In Matthew. Hom. 17.
(...) He named Bosom of Abraham for the Kingdom. St. Ambrose tells us, Orat.
fun. Valentin.
that, Sinus Patriarcharum recessus quidam est requietis aeternae, etc. The
Bosom of the Patriarchs is a certain retirement of Eternal Rest. St. Augustine,
Quaest. Evang. lib. 2. qu. 38.
Sinus Abrahae requies est Beatorum, etc. The Bosom of Abraham is the rest of
the Blessed Again, Epist. 99.
Non utique sinus ille Abrahae, id est, secreta cujusdam quietis habitatio,
aliqua pars Inferorum esse credenda est etc. satis apparet non esse quandam
partem, and quasi membrum Inferorum, tantae illius felicitatis sinum, etc.
Certainly, the Bosom of Abraham, that is to say, the secret habitation of a
certain rest, is not to be thought any part of Hell, etc. It is sufficiently
manifest, that the Bosom of so great a felicity is not any certain part, or, as
it were, Quarter of Hell. And elsewhere; De Genesis ad Litteram, lib. 2. cap. 13.
Post hanc vitam etiam Sinus ille Abrahae Paradisus dici potest; ubi jam nulla
temptatio, ubi tanta requies post dolores omnes vitae hujus, etc. After this
Life, that Bosom of Abraham may be also called Paradise; where there is not any
Temptation, and where, after all the afflictions of this life, there is so
great rest. Dionysius, the pretended Areopagite; Hierarch. Eccles. cap. 2.
(...). The Bosom of the Patriarchs are most divine, and most blessed
Habitations. Fulgentius; Epist. ad Venant.
Lazarus in aeterna senis Abrahae quiet securus, etc. Lazarus is in safety, in
the eternal rest of the Old man Abraham. If therefore the Bosom of Abraham be a
Paradise, a Celestial habitation, an eternal Rest, a most divine, and most
blessed portion, and all those, who die in the Lord, go into it, when they die;
it is impossible, but they should, from that very minute, be in actual
possession of an incomparable felicity, and of a rest so much the more certain,
the more free it is from temptation.

CHAP. XXXVI. The same Sentiment confirmed by the Pomp and Ceremonies of the
Ancient Interments.
THe same Consequence may also be drawn from the great Solemnities of the
Ancient Funerals, and the demeanours of Christians preparing themselves for
them: which were not indeed without regret for the absence of the Departed
Person; but with joy also, and thanksgiving to God for the Felicity, whereto he
had advanced him to all Eternity. For as St. Cyprian remonstrated to the
Faithful of his Time, that they should not put on black Garments, to express
their Mourning for those, who had already put on their White Robes of Glory; so
the Fathers, that came after, maintained, that men should rejoice, and not be
disconsolate for the retirement of those, whom God was pleased to call out of
the Bosom of his Church, to be gathered into his own. Thus St. Chrysostom,
Homil De Sancta Berenice.
(...) etc. There are nowadays, in the Funeral Obsequies of deceased Persons,
singing of Hymns, Prayers, and Psalms; all which declare, that there is
pleasure in it: for Psalms are a sign of mirth; Is any one among you merry
(says Jam. v. 13.
Saint James) Let him sing Psalms. Because we are full of Gladness; for that
reason we sing over the Dead such Psalms, as may excite us to take comfort for
their departure; for (says David Psalm. cxvi. 7.
to us) Return unto thy rest, O my Soul; for the LORD has dealt bountifully
with thee. Again; In These. Homil. 13.
(...) etc. The singing of Psalms, and Prayers, and the assembling of the
Fathers, and the meeting of a great multitude of Brethren, are not to the end,
that thou should weep, and lament, and be disconsolate; but that thou
might give thanks to him, who has taken the departed Person to himself. And
elsewhere; In Hebr. Homil. 4.
(...), etc. What mean these joyful Torches at the Obsequies of the Dead? Do
we not convoy them, as Champions, that have gone through the Combat? And what
mean the Hymns? Do we not thereby glorify God, and give him thanks, for that
he is, at length, pleased to crown him, who is departed, that he has exempted
him from labors, and, having delivered him out of all fear, taken him to
himself? Are not the Hymns appointed to signify so much? Is not the singing of
Pslams for the same end? All these things are done by persons, that rejoice,
for (says James v. 13.
Saint James) Is any one merry? let him sing Psalms, etc. Consider what thou
singest at that time; Psalm. cxvi. 7.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul; for the LORD has dealt bountifully with
thee: and again, Psalm.
Thou art my refuge against the tribulation, that encompasseth me: and again,
Psalm.
I will not fear any evil; because thou art with me: and again, Psalm. xxxii. 7.
Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: consider what
is the meaning of these Psalms. Nay, after so many fair Remonstrances, this
Great man threatens with Excommunication those, who being disconsolate, and
thereby showing, that they call in Question the crowning, and blessed State of
their Brethren, whom God had called hence, do a signal injury, as well to their
Memory in particular, as to the whole Church in general, which has so ordered
the Solemnities of Funeral Obsequies, that she would not have any thing
therein, which should not in some manner express joy, and gladness.

The rest of the Fathers maintain his Sentiment with so much the greater
earnestness, the more they think the confirmation of it derivable from the
common Practice of the Church. Thus St. Gregory Nazianzene, speaking of the
Funeral Obsequies of his Brother Caesarius, after he had observed, that his
Mother carried a great Wax-candle thereat, adds, that he was, (...), etc.
(...), Orat. 10.
carried away with Hymns upon Hymns, etc. the singing of Psalms drowning the
noise of the ^amentations; whereas, in the Funeral Solemnity of Saint Basil,
the Resentment which the Church of Caesarea had conceived of its own loss,
(...), made that Orat. 20.
the singing of Psalms was smothered by the Lamentations. The same thing is
observed by Saint Gregory of Nyssa to have happened at the Interment of the
Empress Flaccilla, and her Granddaughter Pulcheria, who had been attended with
public mourning, yet so, as that it came not into any one's Imagination, that
their Condition deserved to be deplored, and lamented.

The Same St. Gregory, to comfort the People of Antioch, deprived of the
presence of their beloved Pastor, the Great Meletius, speaks to those who
accompanied his Corpse into Syria, to give them an account of the Solemnity of
his transportation thither, whereat the concourse of the Populace, and of the
Court, the singing of Psalms, and the light of Torches, had, as it were, given
an assurance of his Beatitutde; saying to them, (...), etc. Speak to the
People, which is there (viz. at Antioch) relate unto them good News, tell them
a Miracle beyond Belief, how that an infinite number of people, crowded
together, like the Sea, seemed, as it were, by reason of the Throng, to make
but one, and the same, Body, like Water, floating about the Tabernacle (of the
departed Person;) how that there reached, as far as Eye could possibly
perceive, Channels of Fire, gliding on each side, by reason of the uninterrupted
course of the almost contiguous Torches; tell them of the readiness of all the
people, and of the Association (of Meletius) with the Apostles in the same
Tabernacle; how the Napkins, that were about his face, were snatched away to
serve for Preservatives to the Faithful; that the King, putting on a sad
Countenance, by reason of the affliction, and rising from his Throne, be added
to the Relation, and that the whole City met together at the Obsequies of the
Saint. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 18.
Wherefore comfort one another with these Words, etc.

Saint Hierome represents something of the like Nature at the Interment of
Paula; saying, Epist. 27.
Exhinc non uluatus, etc. As Soon as she had given up the Ghost, there was no
more Bewailing, nor Lamentation heard, as is wont among the men of this World;
but the noise of swarms of Psalms resounding in several Languages: and being
transported by the Hands of Bishops; and some among the Priests putting their
Shoulders to the Bier; whilst others carried Torches, and Wax-Candles before;
and others brought up the Quires of those, that sung Psalms, she was carried
into the midst of the Church (called) the Grot of our Savior, a multitude of
people, out of the Cities of Palaestina, meeting at her Funeral Obsequies. He
says as much of those of Fabiola, dead three years before; writing to Oceanus,
Nec dum spiritum, etc. She had not yet given up the Ghost, and recommended to
Christ the spirit, she ought him; but Fame, the flying Messenger, publishing
beforehand the great Lamentation there should be, brought together all the
People of the City to her Funeral; the Psalms resounded, and the cry of
Halleluiah, Ecchoing, smote the gilt Roofs of the Temples, etc. Nor is it any
wonder, that men should rejoice for her salvation, for whose conversion the
Angels were Luke xv. 7.
rejoicing in Heaven.

Eusebius assures us, De Vita constantini, lib. 4. cap. 66.
that threescore and four years before, the same Honor had been done to
Constantine the Great; saying of those of his Court, (...) Lighting Lamps, all
about, in Vessels of Gold, they presented an admirable spectacle to the
Beholders. And this is enough to justify, that the Ancient Church exercised,
in respect of all those, who died in the faith, the same Offices, whereby she
celebrated the Memory of the greatest Martyrs, and Confessors. For what a
strange Solemnity was that of the Transportation of the Relics of the Prophet
Samuel from Palaestine to Constantinople? Advers. Vigilant.
Omnes Episcopi, etc. All the Bishops (says St. Hierome) carried them in Silk,
and in a Vessel of Gold, etc. the People of all Churches met them, and (as if
they had seen the Prophet present, and alive received them with so great joy,
that swarms of people joined together from Palestine even to Chalcedon, and
with one voice celebrated the praises of Christ, etc. Nay, though there be no
Relics of Martyrs, yet when the Gospel is to be read, the Luminaries are
lighted through all the Churches of the East, even though the Sun be up: which
certainly is not done to chase away the Darkness; but for a sign, and
demonstration of Joy. Whence it also came, that when the Body of St.
Chrysostom was to be brought, from Comana, to Constantinople, it was received
with the same Solemnity; People going in Multitudes to meet it, with lighted
Torches in the daytime. (...), etc. The Assembly of the Faithful (says Lib.
5. cap. 36.
Theodoret) making use of the Sea, (by the convenience of Boats) as they would
have done of the Continent, covered with Lights the entrance of the Bosporus
toward Propontis.

Thus have we seen there were Assemblies of the Clergy, and of the People, the
singing of Halleluiahs, and Psalms, and Lights employed at the Interments of
all the Faithful, without exception; so as that there could not be observed at
the Funerals of the less considerable, and less eminent for Piety, and those of
the most celebrious Martyrs, and Confessors, any other difference, then that
of more, and less, which never were able to change the nature of the thing in
it self, nor hinder, but that it remained in such manner common among all, that
the Offices exercised in those Solemnities have been (all together as well, as
some one in particular) so many Discoveries of the joy of the surviving; First,
for the Victory, obtained by the Departed over sin, and the world; Secondly,
for the Happiness, whereto the Church thought them actually advanced. And
thence also it follows; That, in the Office of the dead, she sung, not the
Libera, as is done at this day, but Psalms of Instruction, and Thanksgiving to
God, as for instance, the three and twentieth, and the two and thirtieth, and
the one hundred and sixteenth, according to the Hebrews, particularly alleged
by St. Chrysostom; or happily such other, as the Friends of the Deceased made
choice of for their consolation, as the one hundred and first, which Euodius
appointed to be sung at the departure of St. Monica, the Mother of St.
Augustine, as that Holy man relates in his Confessions; saying, Confess. lib.
9. cap. 12.
Cohibito a fletu illo puero, Psalterium aperuit Euodius, etc. The Body being
quieted, Euodius opened the Psalter, and began to recite this Psalm, Psalm. ci.
I will sing unto thee, O LORD, Mercy, and Judgment: to which all the House
answered. And when the people heard what had happened, many Friars, and
Religious Women came thither to us; and particularly they, whose Office it was,
taking care for the Burial. I, the whilst, when conveniently I could, did
entertain those (who thought it not fit to leave me) with something pertinent
to the occasion.

CHAP. XXXVII. A particular consideration of the Sentiment of St. Augustine,
and his Prayers for his Mother.
THe particular Relation of all these proceedings concerning departed persons,
and their Interments irrefutably proves; That neither St. Augustine, nor his
Company, nor those of Ostia, who came to visit him in the time of his
Affliction, were any way doubtful of her felicity, who was then newly departed
this life; since that, instead of imagining her detained in any place of
Torment, and, upon that account, of standing in need of their Tears, and the
assistance of their Prayers, necessary (according to the presuppositions at
present) for her deliverance, they had their thoughts unanimously inclined to
Exercises, which presupposed no such thing; as the singing of the one hundred
and first Psalm, whence there cannot be any thing inferred, relating to the
state of the dead, in as much as it contains only a Protestation to glorify
God in living well; and, afterward, to familiar Discourse, such as was
suitable to the time, and occasion. Besides, St. Augustine, in the precedent
Words, had given an equally-evident Testimony of his intention; when, after he
had made a description of the grief, which had lain so heavy on him, during the
Agony of his Mother, he had added, Confess. lib. 9. cap. 12.
Tum, ubi efflavit extremum spiritum, puer Adeodatus exclamavit in planctum,
atque ab omnibus nobis coercitus tacuit, etc. At the Instant of her giving up
the Ghost, the Boy Adeodatus brake forth into a loud lamentation; but,
reprehended by us all, he held his peace. I will not argue, whether St. Monica
was reduced to the suffering of some Torment, but only, if her Beatitude was
(in any manner conceiveable) delayed, what could be more just, then the
Lamentation of little Adeodatus, or more unjust, and inhumane, then the check
given by all the company, to make him forbear lamenting what was truly to be
lamented? And what less could be expected of a Son, who was, and would be
thought good-natured, then to be guilty of such a flintiness, as not to afford
so much as a Tear for so good a Mother; a Mother so much the more deserving his
compassion, the further she was (if the Maintainers of Purgatory may be
believed) from the attainment of her happiness?

I will not deny, but St. Augustine was overcome with an excessive Grief upon
her Departure; but I maintain, from his own Testimony, that his affliction was
for himself, and not properly for her. For, after he had said, that the
silenced his Son Adeodatus, who broke forth into Lamentations, he expresses
what his own dispositions were in these Terms: Ibid.
Hoc modo meum quiddam puerile, etc. Nay, there did also slip from my self some
show of childishness that way; but I repressed it by the discretion of a man,
and held my peace. Nor did we think fit to solemnize that Funeral with weeping,
and howling Complaints; because such demonstrations of sorrow are wont to
deplore the misfortune, or, as it were, utter destruction of those, who die
miserably: whereas she neither died miserably, nor indeed died at all, as we
were assured, both by her true faith, and exemplar Life, and by other certain
Reasons. What was then the cause, why inwardly this Green Wound did so
extremely grieve me; but only the sudden breaking off of that Custom, which I
had to live in her most sweet, and most dear conversation, etc? Because
therefore I was deprived of so great a comfort, my Soul was wounded, and my
life was, as it were, torn in pieces, which, till then, had consisted of mine,
and hers, etc. And, because I was very much troubled, that these humane
respects had such power over me; which yet cannot but sometime happen,
according to the course of nature, and our condition, I bewailed my former
Grief, and was afflicted with a double sorrow, etc.

He resented then, it seems (by his own confession) two different Afflictions:
one, the Principal, occasioned by the regret of his loss; the other accessory,
arising from the regret he conceived to see himself subject to that humane
Infirmity of bewailing a dead person; and all the day (as he says) he could
think of nothing else, though he endeavored, as much as lay in his power, to
conceal it. After the Solemnity was over, he went to the Bath; hoping to rid
himself of his Grief by diversion: but he returned also thence as much
afflicted, as before; the smart of his Wound admitting no remission, till he
had slept. And then, having with a greater settledness of Spirit, called to
mind the whole Life of his Mother, and being exposed to the sight of none, but
God only, he gave way to those Tears, which he had all day, with much violence
to himself, kept in; saying, Libuit flere in conspectu tuo de illa, and pro
illa; de me, and pro me: and dimisi lachrymas, quas continebam, ut effluerent
quantum vellent, etc. I took pleasure to weep in thy sight concerning her, and
for her; and concerning my self, and for my self: and to those Tears, which I
had formerly repressed, I gave the liberty to run their full Carriere, etc.

It seems, with some Pretense conclusible from the foregoing words, that he was
troubled about the Condition his Mother might be in; but there are Two things
oblige us to believe the contrary.

The First is, That, if he had been instructed in the Belief of Purgatory,
taught by the Church of Rome, he could not, without a kind of injury to Piety,
and Charity, have delayed, till he had slept, the contribution of his
Lamentations, and Tears, for the ease, and relief of a Person so dear; and
spent the whole Day in Discourses, and Divertisements, which he thought might
have disburthened him of his Grief, but proved ineffectual.

The Second, That, considering with himself, that his action might be thought
ridiculous, and unreasonable, he accuses it, upon that very account, that he
thinks himself obliged to excuse it; saying, Legate, qui volet, etc. Let him
read it, who will, and interpret it, as pleases him; and, if he think it a sin
in me, to have bewailed my Mother for a small part of an hour (that Mother, I
say, who was dead to my eyes, and had wept for me so many years, that before
thine eyes I might live) let him not deride me, but rather (if he be full of
Charity) let him weep for my Sins to Thee, who art the Father of all the
Brethren of thy Christ our Lord, etc. If the Opinion of Purgatory had been, at
that Time, crept into the Church; who could, with any Justice, either have
accused him of having done amiss in deploring, with unfeigned sorrow, and
tears, the hard Condition of his Mother, confined (whether for a short, or a
long time, it matters not) in a place of Torments? or excuse him, that he had
not,

First, Bethought him, as soon as ever the Breath was out of her Body, to assist
her with his Suffrages, and quitted all other kind of Discourse.

Secondly, That (when it came into his mind to discharge that sad Duty) he had
bestowed but a small part of an hour in the Exercise of an Office, then which
there could not be any of greater Concernment to her, to whom he ought his
Life, and (under God) his Conversion? Would the Church of Rome, which approves
of the Reitoration of the Service of the Dead for hundreds of years for the
same Person, think it rational at the present, that any one of her children
should promise himself the deliverance of his Friends in the turning of a man's
Hand, and at so easy a rate, as a short Prayer, or the weeping of a quarter of
an hour amounts to?

Thirdly, That he had not been able to forbear spending some part of that
little time, which he had designed for his Tears, in fruitless bewailings of
his own loss; expressing the resentment he had conceived thereof by these
words, I took a pleasure to weep concerning my self, and for my self; as if it
had been seasonable, even at the very Time, that he was (as is pretended) to
represent to himself the extraordinaty Exigences of his Mother, to look another
way, and make any reflection on his own concernments?

Fourthly, That he did not (for ought appears to us) engage himself, to any
kind of continuance, of either his Devotions, or his Tears, which he had kept
in from the beginning, with a certain violence; as conceiving an indignation,
that the frailty of Nature tempted him to shed them? Is it suitable to the
Maxims of the Church of Rome, and the Practice of those of her Communion for
some Ages past; that a Child, not without some trouble induced, either to
bewail the misery of his Father, or to beg his deliverance out of it, shunning
the performance of his Duty, as soon as he were obliged, should forbear applying
any remedy thereto? Yet is this the manner of proceeding, which, it seems, may
be objected to St. Augustine. He had stayed till the Night after his Mother's
Death, e're he beset himself, either to do his Devotions, or Weep on her
behalf; he spent in that Exercise but a small part of an hour, and never (that
we could hear of) offered to reiterate it that Night, or the next Day, or the
days ensuing, but absolutely gave over, as if he had, with one word speaking,
discharged all his Duty. And to represent his Action more truly, and naturally,
I have used several Expressions, attributing to him, either Vows, or Devotions,
or Tears; in as much as these words, I took a pleasure to weep concerning her,
and for her, do not necessarily signify, I took a pleasure to pray for her;
but may bear this sense, I have wept for her sake, and deplored for her: not
only that she is Dead, but that she was forced to submit to the necessity of
Dying, e're she had come near Old Age, viz. in her fifty sixth year: Secondly,
That she died out of her Country; and, Thirdly, Without any hope of being
disposed into the Sepulcher she had prepared for her self at Tagaste. For, as
all these Accidents were prejudicial to him, so might they well occasion Tears,
yet he, that shed them, not be engaged to pray for her; and, according to the
Rule of Contraries, I see no more Reason to conclude, He wept for his Mother,
therefore, He prayed for her, then that, when we read, that St. Chrysostom
advises in several places to mourn for the Catechumens, who died in their
Ignorance, any one should thence think to conclude, that he (contrary to the
intention of the Church) ordered, that men should expiate their Crimes by
Tears, and Prayers, that is to say, vainly attempt what is impossible.

It Is true, that most Divines, as well Ancient, as Modern, acknowledge that
David wept for his Son Absalon, and that so much the more bitterly, in as much
as his affliction was (in his judgment, at least) beyond all consolation; since
that unhappy Parricide, pursued by the Wrath of God, and taken away by a
violent Death, suitable to his Crime, was not capable of any assistance, either
by his Prayers, or otherwise. But in regard St. Augustine Nec in it is precibus,
quas tibi fudimus, cum offerretur pro ea sacrificium precii nostri, jam juxta
sepulchrum posito cadavere, priusquam deponeretur, sicut illic fieri solet, nec
in aliis precibus ego flevi.
affirms of himself, that, at the hour of his Mother's Burial, the accustomed
Service of the Church of his Time was celebrated, and, that he prayed to God, I
am willing to grant, that he renewed his Supplications the Night following; and
that, when he says, He had wept for her, his meaning was to have it understood,
that he had prayed for her weeping. So that, without debating the matter of
Fact, and presupposing it such, as it may be pretended, it shall be my Business
to observe;

First, That he neither thought, there should be any great account made of that
kind of Office, since he conceived he had discharged his Duty in the
performance thereof; though he had spent in it but a small part of an hour; nor
that there was any great necessity of it, since he continued it not; nor that
it was well-grounded, since he conceived there might be Sin in it, in as much
as (according to the true Belief of the Church of Rome) he engaged himself to
demand a thing already done; praying for her, whom he esteemed (as advanced to
Glory) not to stand in need thereof. To give this last Consideration its full
Weight, and to raise it to an higher Pitch of Evidence, I am only to produce
what he adds immediately after, fastening his Discourse to the Time, when he
Writ his Confessions. Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Ego autem, etc. But (now my heart being recovered of that Wound, for which it
might be blamed of a carnal affection) I pour out to thee, O our God, in the
behalf of that thy Servant, a kind of Tears far different; which flow from a
contrite Spirit, out of a consideration of the danger of every soul, that dies
in Adam. Where I entreat the Reader to note, that he attributes to an Heart
wounded with carnal affection, and such, as was worthy blame, the Tears he had
shed for his Mother, the night after her Decease; and that, making it his
Business to give us a Relation of it, he was obliged to change his former
Disposition, and all this no less, then nine years after that Accident; in as
much as his Mother died at Ostia on the fourth of May, 389. and was interred
the same Day.

Secondly, That the Night between the Fourth, and the Fifth, he wept concerning
her, and for her.

Thirdly, That in the year 389. (according to the Observation we have of his
own, in his Retractations) he writ his Confessions, which he there acknowledges
composed after his Questions dedicated to Simplicianus, already Archbishop of
Milan; and who, (according to the Ancient Order of Ordinations) could not,
before Sunday, April the twelfth, the day of Quasi-modo, have taken the place
of St. Ambrose; who departed this World on Easter-Eve, April the fourth, 397.

And whereas, after he had dried up his first Tears; and recovered of the Wound
of his Heart, whereof he had been his own accuser, in the beginning of the
tenth year after his Mother's Death, he thought good to open another Source of
Tears; proposing to himself, with a compassionate Spirit, his deceased Mother
exposed to some danger; and withal, that it were neither just, nor becoming
the respect we ow his Blessed Memory, uncircumspectly to impute to him what the
Poet said of Persons in Love, that sibi somnia fingunt; as if this Great Man,
merely to exercise his Wit, coud have taken pleasure in imagining Accidents
without any occasion, and feigning (especially speaking to God) what was not;
Let us see how far his Discourse may agree with his own Principles, and
forbearing to interpose our Judgment in what concerns his manner of proceeding)
be content to receive it from himself, and absolutely to submit to his own
Rules.

In the first place, it is manifest, he admitted but two Receptacles for the
Souls, that had left their Bodies; for thus he determines, in the tenth
Treatise upon the First Epistle according to St. John; Ille, qui vixit, and
morticus est, rapitur ad alia loca anima ipsius; corpus ipsius ponitur in
terra: an fian* illa verba, an non fiant, non ad eam pertinet; tamen aliud
agit, aliud patitur; aut in sinu Abrahae gaudet, aut in igne aeterno aquae
modicum desiderat, etc. He, who has been alive, is also dead, his Soul is
carried away into other places, his Body is put into the Earth; whether those
words (which he recommended, expiring) come, or come not, to pass, does not
concern him at all; yet he does, or endures something, he either rejoices in
Abraham's Bosom, or he begs a drop of Water in everlasting Fire. Now, as,
according to this Doctrine, the two Conditions of eternal misery, and felicity,
Abraham's Bosom, and everlasting Fire, are immediately opposite; so is it
necessary, that whoever departs this life, must immediately enter either into
the Joy, which is unspeakable, and glorious, which shall never be taken away
from him, or into a Misery incapable of Comfort, and such, as shall never end.

Secondly, It is no less certain from the Testimony of St. Augustine formerly
alleged, that Abraham's Bosom is the rest of the Blessed, where there is no
place for Temptation.

Thirdly, It is not possible, he should have thought his Mother, after her
Departure, any where, but in Abraham's Bosom; since he thought it not fit to
celebrate her Funeral with Tears; that he was of this Opinion, that she could
not die miserably, or, rather, that she could not die at all; that he
acknowledged, that Illa in Christo vivisicata, etc. Sic vixit, ut laudetur
nomen Tuum in side, moribusque ejus, etc. Sepositis ejus bonis actibus, pro
quibus tibi, gaudens, gratias ago, etc. Scio misericorditer operatam, and ex
cord dimisisse debita debitoribus suis, etc.
being quickened, and renewed in Christ, she had so lived, as that the Name of
God had been praised both in her Belief, and Life; that he thought himself
obliged to give God Thanks with Joy for her good actions; that he numbered her
among the Children of God, and Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, who have
the privilege to answer the Accuser, that their Debts are discharged, and who
have done works of Mercy, and have freely from their hearts forgiven their
Debtours.

All this (which cannot any way be contradicted) presupposed, I ask, what
Consideration of danger could prevail upon the Spirit of Saint Augustine to
make him shed Tears for a Mother, whom he thought so dead in Adam, as that she
rested in the Lord; since that, if he conceived he ought to say, she was dead
in Adam, in regard of the dissolution of her Body, he was withal as much
obliged to confess, that she was also dead in the Lord, in as much, as she had
ended her Life in the Faith of his Name; and that the dissolution of her Body
(in some manner, changing its Nature) was become to her an happy passage to the
true Life of her Spirit, which he acknowledged had been before quickened in
Christ, and by him discharged of all Sins? For, what danger can there be for
those, who, dying in the Lord, do (according to the saying of the Holy Spirit)
thenceforth Apoc, xiv. 13.
rest from their labors; Are not Romans xi. 29.
the Gifts, and Calling of God without repentance? And, as it is not possible
Romans viii. 32, 33, 38, 39.
to separate from the love of God those, whom he has loved in Jesus Christ; so
is it also true, that John x. 28.
None can pluck them out of his hand, nor lay any thing to their charge, nor
condemn them; and consequently; that There is no condemnation for tham, that
Joh. viii. 5.
They shall not see death; and that John v. 24.
They are already passed from Death to Life. Saint Augustine confesses it, and
proclaims it, saying, in the forty eighth Treatise upon St. John, Quid potest
Lupus? etc. What can the Wolf do? What can the Thief, and Robber, do? They
destroy only those, that are predestined to Death, etc. Of those Sheep (such
as was, according to his own description, his good Mother, St. Monica) neither
shall they be the prey of the Wolf, nor shall the Thief take them away, nor the
Robber kill any of them; he, who knows what they cost him, is secure as to
their Number.

I most willingly acknowledge, that the ensuing Considerations of St. Augustine
are most just, and well-grounded; Non audeo dicere, etc. I dare not affirm;
that from the time, that thou did regenerate her by Baptism, there issued no
word out of her mouth against thy Commandment; and it is said by thy Son, who
is Truth it self, that, If any one call his Brother Fool, he shall be guilty of
Hellfire; nay, woe be even to those, who lead commendable lives, if thou
examine them without Mercy. For, since St. John protests of himself, and all
the Faithful, 1 John 1. 8, 10.
If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us, and we make God a Liar; since the Prophet (to whose Oracle St. Augustine
expressly refers himself) cries out, Psalm. cxliii. 2.
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified; since Job, a man (according to the judgment of God himself)
upright, and just, fearing God, and shunning evil, since Job, I say, being come
to himself, found himself obliged to make this humble Confession Job xlii. 3, 6.
I have uttered that I understood not, etc. wherefore I abhor my self, that I
spoke in that manner, and repent in Dust, and Ashes; who would be so far out of
himself as to deny, either of St. Monica, or any other of the Blessed Saints,
that he ever sinned in speaking against the Commandment of God, since his
Baptism, or imagine, that his Life in the profession of Christianity has been
so perfect, as might stand to the disquisition of a judgment without mercy?

But, allowing all the pious, and necessary Considerations made by St.
Augustine upon the course of his Mother's Life, I am still to seek, and cannot
find the reason of the Consequence, he would have drawn thence, to think
himself obliged, as one shaken by the fear of some imminent danger, to pray for
her, who (by his own confession) had obtained a discharge for all her sins, and
(as St. Cyprian said of all the Faithful) delivered out of the Tempests of
this world, had reached the Haven of eternal safety. Nay, what sin soever she
might be supposed to have committed after her Baptism, having seriously
repented of it, and deplored her condition with a faithful recourse to the
Cant. i. 3.
good Ointment of Christ, 1 Jo. i. 7.
whose Blood (as St. John declares) cleanses us from all Sin, her Hebr. ix. 14.
Conscience being purged by that precious Blood, and fully purified from dead
Works, is so absolutely discharged in the sight of God, as St. Augustine
himself, expounding the Words of St. John, acknowledges; saying, In Joan.
Tract. 1.
Magnam securitatem dedit Deus, etc. God has given us a great assurance, with
good reason is it, that we celebrate the Pasch; since the Blood of our Lord,
whereby we are cleansed from all sin has been shed (for us) let us fear
nothing: The Devil kept the Writing of Slavery against us; but it has been
cancelled by the Blood of Christ, etc. If, through the infirmity of Life, sin
has crept unawares upon thee, discover it immediately, be offended at it
immediately, condemn it immediately, and, when thou shall have condemned it,
thou will come confidently before the Judge: there thou have an Advocate, be not
afraid to lose the Cause of thy Confession.

Since then St. Monica expired, 1 Pet. iv. 19.
recommending her Soul to her faithful Creator, and imploring his Mercy
through the eternal Merit of that blessed Blood, the Hebr. x. 14, 19, 20.
pure Oblation whereof had already washed off her Original Sin, and consecrated
her for ever, nothing could hinder her from going with a joyful Heart, and
certainty of Faith, toward the Holy Places, into which that truly-divine blood
had purchased her the Privilege to enter. Nor indeed could St. Augustine, who
had not (when she dislodged out of the Body, to be with Christ) any just cause
of fear, conceive (nine years after her admittance to the fruition of her
happiness) any necessity of requiring on her Behalf; that God would forgive her
Sins, that he would not enter into Judgment with her, that he would glorify his
Mercy above his Judgment, and, in a word, do what was already done. And indeed
he immediately acknowledges as much; ingenuously saying, Et, credo, jam
feceris, quod te rogo; sed voluntaria oris mei approba, Domine, etc. And I
believe, thou have already done what I entreat thee to do; but yet approve, O
Lord, this Prayer, which so willingly I make.

Thus we see (by his own Confession) what Office St. Augustine undertook to
render his Mother; amounting to no more, then a demand, purely arbitrary of
what had been accomplished before, and which, for that reason, was not to be
demanded. But what moved him, after so long time, to make such earnest, and
particular requests for his Mother, who had always, from her Infancy, been an
Example of a rare, and constant Virtue; and who had been enflamed with so great
Zeal for Piety, that she had gained to the Lord her whole House; not to say
ought of his Father, who had been a man of a turbulent Humor, and so little
inclined to Godliness, that he could not be won to embrace Christianity, till
toward his last days? Not to make any mention of him, I say; but only
occasionally, and by the way, with this little Expression, which shows, that he
thought him in Happiness, May she be in peace with her Husband; was Patricius
more assured in the Possession of Peace, and did he stand less in need of the
Suffrages of his Son; then Monica, who had ever excelled him in good
Endowments, and had been the Instrument of his Conversion to God? I answer,
that St. Augustine, who has given such a particular account of the different
Dispositions of his Parents, could not have fallen into so great an Error, as
to imagine his Prayers more necessary for his Mother, then for his Father; who,
having been less recommendable, should seem to stand in greatest need thereof;
and that he was induced to make particular Addresses for his Mother, was not
(as might be imagined) out of any compliance with the general Custom of the
Church of his Time, which being of equal Obligation toward all) would as well
have obliged him to speak of his Father, as to make mention of his Mother; but
in obedience to the command, which his Mother had, expiring, laid upon him,
and the desire he had to submit to her last Will, whereof he would rather be an
Executour, then a Censour. This desire, I say, prevailing with him, above all
other Considerations, he not only thought it a kind of pleasure to weep for
her, the night after her Departure, but nine years after, engaging himself to
Write the History thereof, and to give an account of her last Words. Which the
more fully to satisfy, he gave way to a tenderness so great, as if he
represented her to himself in some danger, that he might accordingly address to
God the same Supplications, as might be made for those, who were still engaged
in the Combats of this Life; though he confessed withal, they had already been
accomplished. Then calling to mind the last Command he had received from her,
that was long before dead (not questioning, whether it were then seasonable to
do what he did) he conformed himself thereto, as before, and at last required
his Readers to undertake (in what time, or place soever) the execution thereof.
With a design therefore to give an account of his Prayer, viz. that the Lord
would vouchsafe to accept the voluntary Words, or Offerings, of his mouth; he
adds, Namque illa, imminente die, etc. For she, whom the day of her Death drew
near, desired not, that her Body might be sumptuously adorned, or enbalmed with
Spices, and Odours; nor desired she any curious, or choice Monument, or cared
she to be conveyed into her Native Country. These things she recommended not
to us; but only desired to be remembered at thy Altar, etc. Let nothing
separate her from thy Protection; Let not the Lion, and Dragon, either by
force, or fraud interpose himself between thee, and her. For she will not
answer, that she has no Sin, lest she be convinced, and overcome by that
crafty Accuser; but she will answer, that her sins are forgiven by him, to whom
no Creature can repay what he laid out for us, whilst himself owed nothing.
Let her therefore rest in pe^cewith her Husband, etc. And inspire, O Lord, my
God, inspire thy servants, my Brethren; thy Children, my Lords (whom with Heart
and Tongue, and Pen I serve) that whosoever reads these Confessions, may, at
thy Altar, remember thy servant Monica, with Patricius her Husband, through
whom thou broughtest me into the world, though in what sort I know not. Let
them with a Pious Affection remember those, who were my Parents in this
transitory life, and who were my Brethren in respect of thee, who art our
common Father in the Catholic Church our Mother, and who are to be my
Fellow-Citizens in the eternal Jerusalem; for which the Pilgrimage of thy
People does groan from their Birth unto her Death; that what she made her last
desire to me, may be more abundantly performed to her, through the Prayers of
many, as well by means of these my Confessions, as particular Prayers.

I have hitherto alleged the Words of St. Augustine, which justify, in the
first Place, That the only Motive, which had in the year 398. prevailed with
him to make Prayers for his Mother, Dead nine years before, and from that time
(according to his own Presuppositions) in Happiness, was only the Injunction
she had, at her Death, laid upon him to remember her.

Secondly, That these Prayers (by his own Confession) neither were, nor could
be of any necessity, or benefit to her; for whom they were, or might be made:
since she had reason to answer the Accuser, That her Debts were discharged, and
accordingly she had nothing to fear, as to the Consequences thereof. For, who
can be separated from the Protection of God, but by Sin, which alone (according
to the Saying of the Prophet Esaias) does properly make a separation between man,
and his God; causing him to hide his face, and not to hear, that he might
protect? But can Sin (which has no longer being, as soon as it is once
expiated, and discharged) any way prejudice him, who has been once delivered
from it? Or, is any man able to conceive, that what is not, is, or may be cause
of any thing: since that to be Cause does not only imply Being; but, in some
manner, both Being, and Activity? Who is so much liable to the interposition of
the Lion, and Dragon, to endure the open Ravage of his Violences, and the
secret mischief of his Ambushes, as he, who (like an undischarged Debtour) is
dragged before the dreadful Tribunal of God's avenging Justice? Can Debts (of
what nature soever they are) be Legally exacted of those, who are (by the
Acquittance of the Creditour) absolutely discharged? Are they, in fine, to fear
any Unhappiness, whose 1 Pet. ii. 24.
Sins our Lord bore in his own Body upon the Tree, and Colos. ii. 14.
blotted out the Handwriting that was against them?

Thirdly, That the Church of Rome (in whose Communion there is not any one,
that prays for St. Monica, whom the said Church has taken out of their Rank,
for whose benefit she designs her Suffrages, to raise her into the Sphere of
See the Martyrologies of May 4.
Glorious Spirits, whose Intercession she begs; however she may make a great
stir about the Example of St. Augustine) does not only not satisfy the
Entreaty of that Great man any more, then the Protestants, whom she accuses, as
desertours of the ancient Tradition: but conceives it neither just, nor
rational, to satisfy it. And, as she does not think her self guilty of any
breach of Duty in forbearing to pray for St. Monica; because she accounts her
to be in Bliss, and (as such) not in a capacity to receive the assistance of
the Living in their Prayers; nor that they should (according to the desire of
St. Augustine) expect inspirations from God, such as might incline them to
demand things already done, and undertake what she conceives neither rational,
nor feasible: so the Protestants (who in this particular are the more willing
to follow his Sentiment, the more consonant they find it to the Word of God,
and to Reason) cannot (whatever the Church of Rome may say to insinuate the
contrary) be persuaded, they err in not-acknowledging any Object of Religious
Adoration (however it may be conceived) other then Romans ix. 6.
God alone, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, blessed for ever, according as the
Church of Rome, her self, expresses it in the first of her Commandments, Deuteronomy.
vi. 13. Mat. iv. 10.
One only God shall thou adore; nor any Advocate properly so called, other
then him, who is proposed to all Christians by St. John, as a 1 John ii. 2.
propitiation for the sins of all the World. For, as they have learned of St.
Paul, that 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6.
there is one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all; whence Avitus, Archbishop of Vienna inferred, Epist.
2.
That if our Savior was not, according to his Humane Nature, taken into the
Unity of Person, passed into the Nature of Divinity, he could not only not
have cancelled, by any Intercession, the Obligation of mankind, but also had
himself born the Forfeiture of his Father's Handwriting against us. They
religiously stand to the Protestation made by the Primitive Christians
concerning their Martyrs, viz. Apud Eusebium, lib. 4. cap. 15.
We adore him, who is the Son of God, but we love (according as it is required
of us) the Martyrs, as Disciples, and Imitatours of our Lord, and Savior: and
to that of St. Augustine, Advers. Faust. lib. 2. cap. 21.
We honor the Martyrs by a Worship of Dilection, and Society; by which the
Holy men of God are in this life also honored. Whence they conclude, That
(according to the common Sentiment of the purest part of Antiquity) there
cannot be done to the Citizens of the Jerusalem, that is on high, any Honor,
but what may be called a civil Honor, or of Society, Whether they are actually
received into that blessed Habitation, or are in their way thereto; that they
have been, and ever shall be, entertained there, immediately upon their
departure out of this World, and that the honorable Solemnities, which
accompany their Bodies, when they are deposited in the Earth, never had any
Ceremony, which served not to demonstrate the assurance, and joy, which the
surviving had conceived of their happy Condition.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Sentiment of the Protestants confirmed by the Eloges
anciently bestowed on the Faithful departed.
THe same thing may be said of the Eloges, wherewith the worthy Persons of
Antiquity have honored the Memory of those, for whom the Custom would have
Prayers made. Eusebius, De vita, lib. 3. cap. 45.
speaking of the Death of Helene, who died on the eighteenth of August, about
the year 330. says, (...), etc. She was called to a better Lot, etc. So that
those, who had a right Sentiment, justly conceived, that that thrice-happy
(Lady) should not die; (but to say the Truth) expect the Exchange, and
Translation of a Terrestrial life into a Celestial. Her Soul therefore returned
to the Principle thereof, being received into an incorruptible, and Angelical
Essence near her Savior. And of Constantine, who (preparing himself for Death)
protested of himself, that (...).
he was making haste, and that he would no longer delay his departure toward
his God, he affirms, that on Sunday, May 22. th 337. being Whit sunday, Cap. 64.
(...), etc. He was gathered to God, leaving to Mortals what was of the same
Nature with them; and, as for himself, uniting to God whatever his Soul had,
that was Intellectual, and beloved of God. Then, representing the common Belief
of all the Subjects of the Empire concerning his Beatitude, he adds, (...),
etc. Having framed a figure of Heaven, in a draught, in colors, they painted
him above the Celestial Vaults resting in an heavenly Mansion, etc. Cap. 73.
(...), etc. They graved his Effigies upon Medals, having on one side the
Pourtraiture of the Blessed (Emperor) with his ^ead veiled, and on the
Reverse, the same, mounted on a Chariot, drawn by four Horses, as if he drove
it, raised into the Seat by an hand reached forth to him from heaven on the
right side: which Description might as well relate to the carrying up of Elias,
rather then to the Apotheoses of the Heathens; which Constantine, upon his
embracing of Christian Religion, had absolutely renounced.

Saint Athanasius, who observes, that St. Anthony had seen the Monk Ammonius
(...), raised from the Earth, and the great joy of those, that came to meet
him; affirms; that on the seventeenth of January 358. (...) As having seen
friends coming toward him, and filled with joy because of them, he fainted.
The same St. Athanasius (making a Relation of the wicked attempt of Magnentius
upon the Life of Constans, who was murdered on the eighteenth of January, 350.
and numbering that Prince among the Martyrs) has these remarkable Words, Apol.
ad Constant.
(...), That to the Blessed (Man) proved the occasion of his Martyrdom.

St. Gregory Nazianzene represents in Celestial Glory Constantius; who, after
he had, through misapprehension, persecuted the Orthodox, died on the third of
November, 361. Orat. 3.
(...), etc. I know, that he is above our Reprehension; having obtained a place
with God, and possession of the Inheritance of the Glory, which is there, and
transported to such a distance from us, as the Translation from one Kingdom to
another amounts unto. The same St. Gregory says of his Brother, Caesarius, who
died on the 25.th of February, about the year 369. Orat. 10.
(...), etc. He receives the Rewards of his new-created Soul, which the Spirit
had reformed by Water. And of his Sister, Gorgonia, who died not long after,
viz. on the ninth of December, 372. Orat. 11.
(...), etc. The things, which are now present to thee, are much more precious,
then those, which are seen; The noise of those, which make a Feast, the Quires
of the Angels, the Order of Heaven, the contemplation of Glory, and, more then
all this, the Irradiation of the Trinity, which is above all things, and of all
things the most pure, and most perfect. And ^f St. Athanasius, who died May the
second, 371. Orat. 21. (...).
That thou would he pleased to look on us from on high. Of Gregory, his
Father, who died the year following, (...) Make known unto us in what place of
Glory thou art, and the light, which encompasseth thee. Of his dear Friend, St.
Basil, who died January the first, 378. (...), He is now in Heaven.

St. Gregory Nyssenus, of St. Ephraim, who died on the 28th of the same Month
of January, (...), etc. He expired in the quiet Haven of the Eternal Kingdom,
and is kindly received into it: But where otherwise may it be conjectured, that
his Soul has been deposited, if not (as indeed it is manifest) in the
Celestial Tabernacles, where are the Batallions of Angels, a Populace of
Patriarchs, Quires of Prophets, the Thrones of the Apostles, the Joy of the
Martyrs, the Exultation of Saints, the Splendor of the Doctors, the Assembly
of the Firstborn, the perfect Noise of those, that are a Feasting? To those
good things, in which the Angels desire to rest themselves, that they may see
them, into that sacred place, the most blessed in all kinds, and most holy soul
of our Blessed, and worthy-to-be-celebrated Father is passed. Of the great
Meletius, Archbishop of Antioch, who died on the twelfth of February, 381.
before he could have enjoyed the Communion of Rome; (...), etc. No longer, as
through a Glass, and obscurely; but face to face, he prays to God. Of
Pulcheria, Daughter to the Emperor THEODOSIUS; (...) She was transferred from
one Kingdom to another. Of Flavilla, first- Wife to the same Prince, who died
in the year 385. (...) Her conversation is in the Royal Palaces of Heaven.

St. Ambrose, of his Brother, Satyrus; who dyed September the seventeenth, 383.
De istius Beatitudine dubitare nequaquam debemus, etc. We ought not to doubt of
his Beatitude. Of the Emperor VALENTINIAN the Second, two Months after his
Assassination, which happened on Saturday, Whitsun-Eve, May the fifteenth, 382.
before that Prince had received Baptism; Ille etiam talis, ut ei nihil
timeatis, etc. He is now in such a condition, that you need not fear what may
happen to him, as before, etc. I ask, whether there be any Sentiment after
death, or not? If there be, he lives; or rather, because he lives, he is
already in possession of Eternal Life, etc. That he was so soon snatched from
us, we are to grieve; that he is passed into a better Estate, it should be our
comfort, etc. Thou look on us, Holy Soul, from an high place, as casting thy
sight on things, that are below, etc. Now, borrowing light from the Sun of
Righteousness, thou enjoyest a clear day, etc. His going hence was most noble,
as a Flight into Heaven, etc. What thou have sown upon Earth, reap it there,
etc. The stain of Sin being done off, he, whom his Faith washed, his Prayer
consecrated, is gone up cleansed into Heaven, etc. joined with his Brother
(Gratian) he enjoyes the pleasures of eternal Life, etc. Of the Emperor
THEODOSIUS, who dyed January the seventeenth, 395. Regnum non deposuit, sed
mutavit, etc. He has not laid by, but exchanged the Royal Dignity: being
admitted, by the Prerogative of Piety, into the Tabernacles of Christ, into
that Jerusalem, which is above; where being now placed, he says, Psalm. xlviii.
8.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the LORD of Hosts, etc.
Having gone through a doubtful combat, Theodosius, of famous Memory, does now
enjoy perpetual Light, and a Tranquillity of long continuance, and has the
self-satisfaction of what he did in his ^ly, in the Fruits of divine
remuneration, etc. He has deserved admittance into the Society of the Saints,
etc. His abode is in light, etc. He is over-joyed to be in the Assemblies of
the Saints, etc. There he now embraces Gratian, etc. Who enjoyes the rest of
his Soul, etc. Being pious, he has passed from the obscurity of this World to
eternal Light, etc. Now does he know, that he reigns; since that he is in the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and considers his Temple, etc. Constantinople, thou
art evidently happy, who receivest a Guest of Paradise, and shall entertain in
the narrow Inn of a Sepulcher, an Inhabitant of that City, which is on high,
etc. And of Ascholius, Archbishop of Thessalonica, who dyed about the year
385. Est Superorum incola, possessor civitatis aeternae, illius Jerusalem,
quae in caelo est, videt illis facie ad faciem, etc. He is an Inhabitant of the
places which are above, a Possessour of the Eternal City, of that Jerusalem,
which is in Heaven, there he sees face to face.

St. Hierome, of Blaesilla, who died in the year 382. Epist. 25.
Postquam, sarcina carnis abjecta, etc. Having laid down its burden of Flesh,
the Soul is fled back to her Author; after a long Pilgrimage, she is ascended
into her ancient possession, etc. Me-thought, then (when her Coffin was making
ready) she cried from Heaven, I know not those Garments, that Covering is not
mine, etc. Blaesilla now follows Jesus, she is now in the society of the holy
Angels, etc. She is passed from Darkness to Light, etc. She lives with Christ
in the Heavens, etc. Of Lea, who died March the two and twentieth, 384. Epist.
24.
Universorum gaudiis prosequenda, etc. She is to be attended with the joy of
all, who, having trod Satan under foot, has received the Crown of Security,
etc. For a short trouble, she now enjoyes eternal Beatitude; she is received
into the Quires of Angels, she is cherished in the Bosom of Abraham, etc. she
follows Christ, and says, Psalm. xlviii. 8.
All the things, which we have heard of, the same we have also seen in the City
of our God, etc. Of Nepotianus, a Priest of Altinum, who died in the year 397.
Epist. 3.
Scimus Nepotianum nostrum esse cum Christo, and Sanctorum mixtum Choris, etc.
Corpus terra suscepit, anima Christo reddita est, etc. We know that our
(Friend) Nepotianus is with Christ, and among the Quires of the Saints, etc.
The Earth received his Body, his Soul was restored to Christ, etc. And of
Paulina, the Wife of Pammachius, departed this life in the year 393. Epist. 26.
Illa (Blaesilla) cum sorore Paulina dulci somno fruitur; tu, duarum medius,
levius ad Christum subvolabis, etc. Blaesilla, with her Sister Paulina, rests
in a quiet sleep; thou, being between both, shall have a more easy flight to
Christ, etc. Of Paula, the Mother of Blaesilla, and Paulina, departed in
Beth-lehem, on the twenty eighth of January, 404. Epist. 27.
Fides, and opera tua, Christo te sociant; praesens quod postulas, facilius
impetrabis, etc. Thy Faith, and Works associate thee to Christ; being present
(O Paula) thou shall more easily obtain what thou desire, etc.

Aspices angustum praecisa rupe Sepulchrum?
Hospitium Paulae coelestia regna tenentis, etc.
See thou a Rock to a narrow Coffin hewn?
It Is Paula's Mansion, who to Heaven is flown.
Of Lucinus, departed about the year 410. Epist. 29.
Obsecro te, etc. I beseech thee, Theodorus, that thou would bewail thy
Lucinius as a Brother; yet so, as to rejoice withal, that he reigns with
Christ, etc. Confident, and Conqueror, he looks from on high, etc. Of Fabiola,
departed in the year 401. Epist. 30.
Deposita tandem sarcina, levior volavit ad Caelum, etc. Having laid down her
burden, she is fled with more ease toward heaven.

Saint Chrysostom of Berenice, and Prosdoce, who were drowned during the
Persecution; (...) Moreover, these were with the Soldiers of Christ, the
heavenly Angels. Of Pelagia, who had cast her self down Headlong; (...), etc.
She ran, not toward the top of a mountain, but toward the highest heaven,
etc. The threatening of the Judge, etc. pressed her to fly with greater haste
toward heaven, etc. She went out of her Chamber, out of the Woman's Closet,
into another Chamber, that is to say, heaven, etc. Which is as much, as he
could have said, and what he had said in substance, of the greatest Martyrs,
St. Ignatius of Antioch, St. Romanus, St. Julian, St. Juventinus, St. Maximus,
and others, whose Elogies he writ.

The same St. Chrysostom says also of Philogonius, Archbishop of Antioch,
deceased the twentieth of December, about the year 322. (...), etc. Ascending
into heaven, he has no need of the Praises of men; since he is gone to a
greater, and more happy portion, etc. He is transferred to the Society of
Angels, etc. Of Eustathius, who had held the same See, and died about the year
359. upon the sixteenth of July, (...) Transferred to heaven, he is gone
toward Jesus, whom he had desired; and almost in the same Terms of Meletius,
his Ordinary, (...) He is gone toward Jesus, whom he had desired.

St. Augustine, of Verecundus, who had entertained him, and all his Company, at
his Countrey-House, Confess. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Retribues illi, Domine, in resurrectione Justorum; quia jam ipsam sortem
retribuisti ei, etc. O Lord, thou shall reward him in the Resurrection of the
Just; because thou have already cast that Lot upon him And of Nebridius, who
was come out of Africa into Italy, to live with him; Nunc ille vivit in sinu
Abrahae, etc. Now he lives in Abraham' s Bosom (whatsoever it be, that is
understood by that Bosom,) There my Nobridius lives, that dear Friend of mine,
and thy adopted Son, O Lord, who had once been a Bond-slave, but was after
freed. There he lives; for what other place can be fit for such a Soul? In
that place he lives, whereof he was wont to ask me, miserable, and
unexperienced man, so many Questions. Now he no longer lays his Ear to my
Mouth; but applies his spiritual mouth to thy Spring, and drinks Wisdom after
the rate of his greedy Thirst, happy to all Eternity.

Paulinus, of Rusina, the Wife of Alethius; Habes jam in Christo magnum tui
pignus, etc. Thou have already in Christ a great pledge of thy self, an earnest
Suffr age, thy. Wife, who prepares as much favor for thee in the Heavenly
Places, as thou furnishest her with abundance from those upon Earth, etc. She
abounds, by the supplies of thy Wealth, being clad in a Golden Vesture, and
clothed all over with variety, viz. precious light, etc.

Paulinus, the African, of St. Ambrose; Ubi corpus Domini accepit, etc. After
be had received the The Sacrament of his Body.
Body of our Lord, he gave up the Ghost, taking along with him a good
provision, that his Soul, being more refreshed by the strength of that Viand,
should be now rejoicing in the Society of Angels, and Elias, whose Life he
lived here.

Sulpicius Severus, of St. Martin, who died on Sunday, November the eleventh,
400. Spiritum coelo reddidit, etc. He resigned his Spirit to Heaven, etc. There
was an holy rejoicing at his Glory, etc. The Heavenly Company, singing Hymns,
accompanies the Body of the Blessed man to the place of his Enterment, etc.
Martin has the Acclamations of divine Psalms; Martin is honored with
Ecclesiastical Hymns, etc. Martin is entertained with joy in Abraham' s Bosom;
Martin, who had been here poor; and beggarly, enters Rich into Heaven, etc.
And, it is to be noted, by the way, that that Great Man, a little before he
gave up the Ghost, had answered those, who would have had him to lie on his
side, Sinite me, Fratres, coelum potius respicere, quam terram, ut suo jam
itinere, iturus ad Dominum, Spiritus dirigatur. Suffer me, Brethren, rather to
look up toward Heaven, then down upon the ground; that my Spirit, which is now
taking its journey to God, may be directed in its way.

Palladius writes of St. Chrysostom, who dyed November the seventh, 407.
(...), Passing hence to Christ, etc.

Ennodius, Bishop of Pavia, of Epiphanius, his Praedecessour, deceased January
the twenty first, 496. Cum beatissimus cerneret Pontifex, etc. The blessed
Prelate, seeing, etc. that he was ready to fly to the pure brightness of
Heaven, etc. assured of his perfection, he added, My heart is confirmed in the
Lord, etc. So, as that heavenly Soul, resounding with Hymns, and Songs, even at
the point of Death, returned to her Lord, etc. He, whose departure we bewail
upon Earth, is in possession of the high places with God, etc. And of Anthony,
the Hermit of Valtelina, afterward a Monk in the Monastery of Lerina, deceased
December the twenty eighth, 488. Mundi istius sarcinam deponens, etc. Laying
down the burden of this World, and having overcome the Ambushes laid by the
craft of the old Serpent, he has exchanged our day, and the light of this
present World, for that, which is perpetual.

If the Harmony of all these Testimonies, which have been produced, suffice not
to satisfy, and persuade the most-prepossessed Spirits, that the most eminent,
and best-informed Antiquity (reforming the Opinion, which the Sibylline
Writing, falsely so called, had introduced among Christians, has unanimously
embraced, and constantly taught the Protestants the Sentiment, which they, with
one accord, follow, concerning the State of the Faithful departed in Jesus
Christ; it were no hard matter for them to make a more ample Production of
Instances; since that, in a manner, all we have left, of the Lives of Persons,
who have made profession of Piety, assures us, that all, without any
distinction; Martyrs, Confessors, Prelates, Religious Persons, Laics, etc.
even to the Catechumens, whom an invincible necessity deprived of the Baptism,
they had earnestly desired, were, upon their dissolution translated to Heaven,
where they have been, and still are in Rest, Happiness, and Glory, expecting
the Resurrection of the Bodies, they have deposited in Earth. And as we might
justly rely on the grave Remonstrance, which Saint Hierome made above one
thousand, two hundred, and seventy years ago, even in Rome it self, to Paula,
excessively lamenting the death of her Daughter Blaesilla; speaking of himself,
and of all Christians in general; Epist. 25.
Nos, quorum exitum Angelorum turba comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurrit,
gravamur magis, si diutius in isto mortis Tabernaculo habitamus, etc. In Jesu
mortem gaudia prosequuntur, etc. We, whose Departure the Assemblies of Angels
accompany, whom Christ comes to meet, are more grieved, that we dwell any
longer in this Tabernacle of Death, etc. Joys attend the death, which is in
Jesus, etc. So might we, with good reason, summon those, who hold the contrary,
to let us know, what they have of greater Consequence, then the unanimous
Consent of Eusebius's, Athanasius's, Gregory's, Ambrose's, Hierome's,
Chrysostom's, etc. and might induce them not to embrace it, and force us to
change our Opinion.

CHAP. XXXIX. The same Sentiment further confirmed from Sepulchral Inscriptions.
BUt though we should be willing (out of a Design to gratify our Adversaries)
not to bring into any account at all the Depositions of all these Great
Persons, and make a voluntary loss of their Writings, and Judgments, yet would
the Epigrams, and Inscriptions of ancient Monuments, which Rome, and her
Correspondents, preserve for us, be enough to keep us from falling into so
great a weakness, as the renouncing of our present Opinion, concerning the
State of the Faithful departed. Nay, though all the Doctors of the Church
were silent, and their Testimonies cast out of all respect, the Stones (as long
as they shall remain) will not cease publishing, and that very loudly, the
truth of the persuasion maintained by us. Let us then consult those half
consumed Epitaphs, See the Book, entitled Roma Subterranea.
which the Providence of God has made to triumph over so many ruins, and make
our advantage of the hardness of Marbles, which have hitherto stood out against
the injury of Times, to confound the insensibility of those, who seem desirous
injuriously to smother a most evident Truth. Let us propose it to their own
Consciences, whether it be not a very strong presumption against them, that not
any one of those Ancient Inscriptions, whereof they are the Preservers, and
Admirers, can, without violence, be applied to their Sentiment, and that all of
them presuppose ours, which yet they charge (I know not upon what account) with
Novelty. Which to make so much the more manifest, I shall begin with the most
simple, which I shall reduce into Classes, alleging of every one some
Instance; then conclude with those, which, being of greater length, make a
clearer discovery of the Design of their Authors. The Book, entitled Roma
Subterranea, in as much as it contains a Description of the Vaults, and
Cemiteries, dug under ground in, and about, that City, furnishes us with
about ninety Examples of Epitaphs, which say simply, In Pace, etc. In Peace, as
that of Proclus, Interred under the eighth Consulship of Honorius, that is to
say, in the year 409. that of Hilara, deceased under the Consulship of Opilio,
that is to say, in the year 453. those of Crescentina, Honoraius, Pelagia,
Ulpius Festus, Quartina, etc.

Others had (...), a Place of Rest. As that of Ammonius, and of Eutyches; Locus
GerontI Presbyteri, etc. The Place of Gerontius the Priest, deceased the
seventeenth of June, under the Consulship of Avitus; that is to say, in the
year 456. Hic habet sedem Leo Presbyter, etc. The Priest Leo has his Seat here.

Others, which in some sort savor of the Style of the Heavens. As Domus
aeterna Ex. and Tyres in Pace, etc. The eternal house of Ex. and Tire in peace:
and that of Valeriana in like manner.

Others had only this word Quiescit, etc. He rests. As that of Victoria, that
of Pancratius the Bishop, deceased in the year 493. and that of Alix, the
Daughter of Pipin, Interred at St. Arnoul-de-Mets.

Or Requiescit, which signifies the same thing. As that of Gordianus, Interred
the ninth of September, under the Consulship of Symmachus; that is to say, in
the year 485. That of Aemiliana, Interred the eleventh of October, under the
Consulship of Probinus, viz, in the year 489. That of Pelagius the First,
deceased the fourth of March, 558. That of Augustine, Archbishop of
Canterbury, deceased the twenty fifth of May, 604. That of Boniface the Fourth,
deceased the eighth of May, 614. That of Theodore, who died in the year 619.
That of Theobald, Bishop of Ostia. That of Roderick last King of the
West-Goths, in Spain, who died on Sunday the eleventh of November, 714. That of
Alcuin, deceased the nineteenth of May 804. That of Baronius ad. ann. D. 817.
Paragr. 8.
Bernard King of Italy, deceased April the 17th. 871. and Interred at Milan,
that of the Abbot Vintila, deceased at Leon, the three and twentieth of
December, in the year 928.

Others, Quievit, etc. He is at rest. As that of Susanna deceased the seven and
twentieth of July, under the Consulship of Caesarius, and Atticus, in the year
397. Or Requievit: as that of Leo the Neop^yte, deceased the four and twentieth
of June, under the Consulship of Philippus, and Sallea, in the year 348. and
that of Leontius, the Spanyard, deceased the four and twentieth of June, 510.

Others, Depositus, etc. He is left as a Pledge, etc. As those of Macedonia,
and Fortunula.

Others, Quiescet in pace, etc. He shall rest in Peace. As that of Marinus,
deceased the thirtieth of November, under the Consulship of Arbaethio, and
Lollianus, in the year 355. Others, Requiescet in pace; which signifies the
same thing: as that of Felix. Others, Requievit in pace, etc. He is at rest in
peace: as that of Litorius, deceased at Talabriga, or Talavera della Reina, the
four and twentieth of June, in the year of the Era 548, or 510 of Christ. That
of Primus, deceased at Evora, the thirteenth of March, according to the Era
582. or 544 of Christ. That of Paulina, deceased the eighteenth of November,
under the Consulship of Datianus, and Cerealis, in the year 318. That of Andrew
of Cajeta, deceased the nineteenth of October, 585. That of Ermengarda,
deceased the twentieth of March, 852.

Others, Quiescit in pace, etc. He rests in peace. As those of Donatus,
Principalis, Januarius, Gabinia, Cutinus, Jobinus; and that of Celerinus,
deceased under the seventh Consulship of Valentinian with Avienus, in the year
450. That of Paulus, deceased the twelfth of March, in the year of the Era
582. which comes to the year of our Savior 544. The Acrostick of the Epitaph
of Florentinus, Abbot of Saint Croix d'Arles, deceased the twelfth of April,
553.

Others, Requiescit in pace; which is the same: as that of Tarreses, under the
fourth Consulship of Theodosius, in the year 411. That of Praetextatus, the
eleventh of October, under the Consulship of Festus, in the year 472. That of
Paula, under the Consulship of Venantius, in the year 508. That of Processus,
the twenty fifth of May, under the Consulship of Probus, in the year 513. That
of Petronius, under the Consulship of Probinus, in the year 489. That of
Sabinus, under the Consulship of Symmachus, and Boethius, in the year 522. That
of Romulus, the twelfth of September, under the Consulship of Lampadius, and
Orestes, in the year 530. That of Thaumasta, December the twelfth, Indict. 11.
two years after, viz. 532. That of Dausdet, the seventeenth of April, after the
Consulship of Paulinus, in the year 535. That of Fausta, Wife of Cassius,
Bishop of Narni, deceased the thirtieth of June, 558. That of Concordia,
deceased the thirteenth of September, Indiction 4. in the fourth year of
Mauricius; that is to say, in the year 586.

Others, Depositus in pace: He is deposited, or, Left as a Pledge in peace. As
that of Susanna, under the Consulship of Bassus, and Philippus, in the year
408. That of Albina, deceased the thirteenth of October, under the Consulship
of Taurus, and Felix, in the year 428. That of Timothea, the first of November,
under the Consulship of Avitus, in the year 456. That of Petronia, October the
fifth, under the Consulship of Festus, in the year 472. That of Exuperantia,
under the Consulate of Festus the Younger, in the year 490. That of Boethius,
October 25th. 557. Those of Simplicius, Venerianus, Paulus, Innocentius,
Viventius, Honorius, Quintianus, Alypia, Abundantius, etc. Others, Positus in
pace; Laid in peace: as that of Bonifacius.

Others, Defunctus in pace, etc. He is deceased in peace: as those of ^lara,
and Antiochianus.

Others, Decessit in pace, etc. He is departed in peace: as those of Doxius,
and Victorius.

Others, Dormit in pace, etc. He sleeps in peace: as that of Felicitas, and
her Son; those of Sabbatius, Heraclius, Respectus.

Others, Requiescit in somno pacis, etc. Heresteth in the sleep of Peace: as
that of Mala, deceased June the tenth, under the Consulship of Aetius, in the
year 432.

Others, (...) Jacet in pace, etc. He is laid in peace: as that of Matrona,
deceased May the fourteenth, under the Consulship of Herculanus, in the year
452. That of Hygeia, etc.

Others, Requiescit in Domino, etc. He rests in the Lord: as that of
Gerontius the Priest, deceased under the Consulship of Avitus, and cited by
Cardinal Baronius, under the year 456.. 1.

Others, Recessit in pace, etc. He is retired in peace: as that of Alexandria,
deceased the twenty third of December, in the year of the Era 503. concurrent
with the year of our Lord 465. That of Paula, deceased January the seventeenth,
in the year of the Era 582. concurrent with the year of our Lord 544. and that
of Gregory, deceased the fourth of February following. That of Julian, Bishop
of Euora, deceased the first of December, in the year of the Era 604. or the
566 of our Savior.

Others, Requievit in pace Domini, etc. He is at rest in the peace of the Lord:
as that of Severus the Priest of Badajox, deceased October the twenty second,
in the year of the Era 622. or 584 of Christ. And that of a certain Inhabitant
of Elvas, deceased February the eighteenth, in the year of the Era 582. or of
Christ 544.

Others, Quietem accepit in Deo Patre nostro, and Christo ejus, etc. He has
taken his rest in God our Father, and his Christ: as that of Florentinus, cited
by ^asius upon the Dialogues of Severus Sulpicius.

Others, Requiescit, deposita in pace, etc. She rests, laid up as a pledge in
peace: as that of Dativa, and Basilia.

Others, (...) He goes before in peace: as that of Receptus.

Others, Been requiescit in pace, etc. He rests well in peace: as that of
Pelagius, and another Anonymous one, to the same sense, Been requiescit.

Come we now to others, expressing somewhat of a more particular form, and
humor; as, Locus Sallii Pontii Jovini in Christo, etc. The place of Sallius
Pontius Jovinus in Christ. Hic pax quiescit Caucaridis, etc. Here rests the
peace of Caucaris. And this other, Expect at refrigeria, He looks for
refreshments, etc. Again, Spiritus in bono: The spirit is in the enjoyment of
good. Redempta Polyxene: Polyxena redeemed. (...) Leo victorious in peace.
(...) Here lies Paulina, in the place of the Blessed, etc. Deo semper unite
Luci cum pace: Lucius, who art ever united to God with peace.

There are some also, which contain Wishes: as, for instance, Optatus in pace
requiescat; May Optatus rest in peace. Refrigerii tibi donum potitus, etc. May
the favor of refreshment be communicated to thee, etc. Regina, vivas in Domino
Jesu, etc. Regina, may thou live in the Lord Jesus.

Nay there were some contained Imprecations. Among others this, Male pereat,
insepultus jaceat, non resurgat, cum Juda partem habeat; si quis sepulchrum hoc
violaverit, etc. May he come to an ill-end, may be lie unburied, may he never
rise again, may he have his portion with Judas; whoever shall violate this
Sepulcher.

But, from these Wishes, cannot rationally be inferred either the delay, or
total privation of their Felicity, on whose behalf they were conceived; and the
refreshment, in expectation whereof the Ancients thought them to be, did not
signify their consolation in, or after the Pains of Purgatory, which the
present Church of Rome imagines; as if he, who said of his Friend, Expectat
refrigeria, etc. He expects refreshments, had meant, that he was in hopes to
obtain some diminution, or, happily, the absolute cessation of the Torments he
endured, with some allusion to those, who, feeling the excessive Heat of Fire,
wish, and hope for the respirations of a cooling, and temperate Air. On the
contrary, (according to the Roman Liturgy, which indefinitely, and without any
exception, demands, for the Faithful departed, locum refrigerii, etc. a place
of refreshment; expressly alluding to the Words of St. Peter, who called the
Last day, Act. iii. 19, 21.
The times of refreshing, and of the restitution of all things:) on the
contrary, I say, the Person, so wishing, considered his Frien^, as aspiring to
the plenary enjoyment of that happy State, whereof he expected the absolute
accomplishment on the day of the general Resurrection, at the end of the World;
though he were already, by way of advance, possessed of the Earnest thereof,
according to the Saying of the Author of the Book of Wisdom, who affirms,
that, Sap. iv. 7.
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest: where
the Latin Version has it, in refrigerio, etc. in a place of refreshment.
Which shows, that the Interpreter had found in his Copy, not (...), (as the
Text has it) but (...), or (...) so that, in the Discourses of the Ancients,
the begging of refreshments for their departed Friends could not signify any
other thing, then what is expressed in the Liturgy attributed to Saint James,
in these words, (...) Do thou cause them to rest there, Psa cxvi. 9.
in the Land of the living, in Luc. xxiii. 42.
thy Kingdom, in the Ezekiel. xxviii. 13.
Delights of Paradise, in the Luc. xvi. 22, 23.
Bosoms of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, our Holy Fathers, Is. xxxv. li. 11.
where trouble, and sorrow, and Lamentation have no place. Which indeed is no
more, then is required in the Liturgy, which goes under the name of Saint Mark,
and more at large in that, which is attributed to Saint Clement, and those of
Saint Basil, and Saint Chrysostom; all which concur in the demand of the
Celestial Beatitude, which they design by the several Expressions used in the
Scripture to represent it, and suppose, that God has communicated it (...),
even there, where the departed Person, whose Memory is celebrated, has been
already placed. And in this sense is it confirmed by Tertullian, the most
ancient of the Latins; who, speaking of Prayer for the dead, does, in the
fourth Chapter De testimonio animae, call eternal Beatitude a refreshment; and
says, Affirmamus expectare diem judicii, proque meritis, aut crucia^ui
destinari, aut refrigerio, utrique sempiterno, etc. We affirm, that the Soul
expects the day of Judgment, and that, according to her Works, she is destined
either to Torment, or to Refreshment; both which are eternal. Which had made so
deep an Impression upon some men's spirits; that, about the year 960.
Hildegarius, Bishop of Limoges, Founder of the Abbey of St. Peter, protested,
that the Motive of his Founding it was, Ut pius, and clementissimus Deus, in
Die Judicii, refrigerium praestare dignetur, etc. That God, out of his
compassion, and clemency, would be pleased to give (to his own Soul, and those
of his Friends) refreshment, at the day of Judgment.

Some conceive, that the Epitaphs, which run thus, In pace, etc. Quiescit in
pace, etc. Depositus in pace, etc. Dormit in pace, etc. do not signify, that
the Departed Person is in absolute possession of that sovereign Peace, which is
that of God; but simply, that he departed in the Peace of the Church. For my
part, I am willing to believe; that those, who gave order for such
Inscriptions, intended thereby to comprehend the Peace of the Church,
remembering, that, as to be grafted into the Body of the visible Church is
naturally an external mark of the Believer's admission into the society of the
Saints, whose Names are written in Heaven; so the participation of her Peace is
many times a Pledge of the Peace of God. But it is impossible, it should be the
intention of the Authors of those an^ient Epitaphs, to speak of the Peace of
the Church; and to insinuate, that the Faithful departed were not (when God
called them out of this world) excommunicated. And that for these reasons:

First, These very Forms are indifferently used upon the Tombs of Martyrs,
little Children, and Persons newly-baptized: who, every one knows, could not
have deserved the Censures of the Church; but were, without dispute, passed
from the troubles of this life into the rest of Heaven, which only may be
denoted by the name of Peace, inscribed upon their Monuments.

Secondly, It may be said, that neither being possessed of the Peace of the
Church is an infallible assurance of the participation of that of God, out of
which are excluded Hypocrites, whom the Church must of necessity entertain in
her Communion, as not knowing their interior; nor does the privation of the
Church's peace necessarily infer the denial of that of God; it being possible,
that many good people (through Error in matter of Fact) may be treated in the
society of the Faithful otherwise, then they should; as, for Example, a
Meletius, whom the Church of Rome never honored with her Communion, though now
she acknowledges, by the Celebration she annually makes of his Memory, that he
was most worthy of it, and a Person precious in the sight of God. Whence it
follows; that the Faithful departed should not carry hence with them a truly
persuasive Testimony of the Piety, in which they ended their days; if the
surviving, saying only They died in Peace, thought it enough to attribute to
them an advantage, many times common to those, who have, through their own
fault, been deprived of the Grace of God to their Dying-day.

Thirdly, Because the Ancients have, by several Forms, expressed their
Sentiment, and declared, that, when they assigned Peace to their deceased
Brethren, they specifically limited themselves to the peace of God; which only
is able to make them happy. Thus (not to mention the Inscription of the Tombs
of Severus of Badajox, and the Inhabitant of Elvas, which has expressly Pacem
Domini, The peace of the Lord) the Epitaph of Junius Bassus, cited by Cardinal
Baronius, says, that Neophytus iit ad Deum VIII. Calend. September. Eusebio and
Hypatio Coss. etc. Being newly-converted to the Faith, he went to God on the
eighth of the Calends of September, Eusebius and Hypatius being Consuls: that
is to say, August the twenty fifth, 359. That of Eusebia, Copied by Father
Sirmond, in his Notes upon Sidonius, runs thus, (...), etc. (...). Here lies
Eusebia, who is in peace, etc. under the eighth Consulship of Honorius, and the
first of Constantine, in the year 409. That of Gaudentia, thus; Gabina
Gaudentia, etc. perpetua quiescit in pace, etc. Gabina Gaudentia rests in
perpetual peace. That of Timothea, thus; Timothea in pace D. Kal. Nov. Cons. D.
N. Aviti, etc. Timothea has been deposited in the peace of the Lord, Nov. 1.
Avitus our Lord being Consul, in the year 456. That of Marius, thus; Satis
vixit; dum vitam pro Christo cum signo consumpsit, in pace tandem quievit, etc.
He has lived long enough; since he has spent his life for Christ, with the
Sign (of Faith) and is at length deposed in peace. That of Placidus, thus;
Tandem in Caelo quiescit: He is at length rested in Heaven. To the same sense
was that of Alexander the Martyr, burnt at Rome on the tenth of July, for the
Testimony of Christ. Alexander mortuus non est; sed vivit super Astra, and
corpus in hoc Tumulo quiescit. Vitam explevit cum Antonino Imp. quiubi multum
beneficii antevenire praevideret, pro gratia o'dium reddit; genua enim
flectens, vero Deo sacrificaturus, ad supplicia ducitur. O tempora infausta,
quibus inter sacra, and vota, ne in cavernis quidem salvari possimus* Quid
miserius vita; sed quid miserius in Morte, cum ab Amicis, and Parentibus,
sepeliri nequeamus. Tandem in Coelo corruscat; parum vixit, iv. x. tem........
Alexander is not dead; but lives above the Stars, and his Body rests in this
Tomb. He ended his life with the Emperor Antoninus; who, foreseeing that much
good was to happen to him, returns him Hatred instead of Favor. For, when he
had bent his Knees, to sacrifice to the true God, he is led to punishment. O
unhappy times, wherein, among sacred Exercises, and Devotions, we cannot be
safe, not even in Caverns! What more miserable, then Life? but is there any
thing more miserable in Death, then that we cannot be buried by our Friends,
and Kindred? At length he shines in heaven; he has lived but a short time,
etc. That of Mala; Requiescit in somno pacis, etc. accepta apud Deum, etc. She
rests in a sleep of peace, etc. received near God. That of Marius Innocentius;
In pace Deidormit, etc. He sleeps in the Peace of the Lord. That of Paulina;
(...) She lies in the place of the Blessed. That of Florentius; Requiem accepit
in Deo Patre nostro, and Christo ejus, etc. He is at rest in God our Father,
and his Christ. That of Lucius; Deo Sancto unite cum pace, etc. Thou united to
the Holy God with peace. That of Leo; (...) He is Victoriour. That of Receptus;
(...) He goes before in peace. That of Jovinus; Locus Sallii Pontii Jovini in
Christo, etc. The place of Sallius Pontius Jovinus in Christ.

Having thus heard the Judgment of Pious Antiquity concerning the State of the
Faithful departed, and learned of it, that they go to God, that they are, and
go before, in peace; that they are, and sleep, in the peace of the Lord; that
they are received to the Lord, and united to him with peace; that they are in
the place of the Blessed; that they rest in eternal peace, and in heaven, as
Conquerours; which is confirmed by the Figures of Crowns, Palms, and the Dove
bringing to Noe the Olive Branch, the Symbol of the peace of God, graved upon
most of the ancient Tombs; who can, without renouncing common sense, and
opposing the Testimony of his own eyes, which read these words, and see these
Symbolical Pourtraitures upon the Monuments, where words are wanting, imagine,
that the Epitaphs, whereby the Deceased are said to be in peace, etc. in peace,
signify only, that they died not under Excommunication; and not, that they
are (as Combatants retired out of the Field) happy, and triumphant in
Celestical Glory?

CHAP. XL. The same deduced from larger Epitaphs.
WE have not any Epitaph in Verse of more Ancient Date, then the Papacy of
Damasus, by whose Hand, the first we have were written; but we may confidently
affirm, that even those, and almost all, that have been composed from the year
384. in which that Prelate ended his Life, to the year 900. constantly
presuppose the Beatitude, and Glory of those, to whose Memory they were
Dedicated. Thus that of Irene, Sister to the said Pope;

"Quum sibi eam raperet melior tunc Regia Coeli,
"Non timui mortem, Coelos quod libera adiret;
"Sed dolui (fateor) consortia perdere vitae, etc.
Now, that (...) a better place she is snatched, her death
I grieve not, since to heaven she is freely gone;
But that I Have lost her conversation,
Is my regret. --
That of Projecta, deceased the thirtieth of December, under the Consulship of
Merobaudes, and Saturninus, in the year 383.

-- "Ex oculis Flori Genitoris abivit,
"Aetheream cupiens Coeli conscendere lucem, etc.
-- S^^ vanished from her Father's sight,
Greedy to go to heavens ethereal Light.
That of Tigris, Deacon of the Roman Church;

-- "Quaeris Plebs sancta redemptum
"Levitam? subito rapuit sibi Regia Coeli, etc.
"Nunc Paradisus habet, sumpsit qui ex host Trophaea, etc.
-- Do you the redeemed Levite seek?
Heaven's Court has snatched him hence. --
Who Tropheys from the Enemy did wrest,
Of heaven is now possessed.
A manner of speaking used by Pope Damasus in the Epitaph of his sister Irene,
and of the Saints, Martyrs; of whom he says, "Sublimes animas rapuit sibi Regia
Coeli, etc.
"To heaven's Court high souls are carried hence.
And the conclusion of the whole Epigram is, He, who took Tropheys from the
Enemy,
In Paradise enjoyes felicity.


That of Tigris, the Priest:

"Sedibus in propriis men's pura, and membra, quiescunt:
"Ista jacent Tumulo; gaudet at illa Polo, etc.
"Promeruit superas laetior ire domos, etc.
His Mind, and Members, several seats contain:
In Heaven that; these in the Grave remain.
That of Marcellina, Sister of St. Ambrose:

-- "Te pia Virgo, supernum
"Accipit Imperium, placidaeque ad munera vitae,
"Aeternum Christus pretium tibi destinat Aulae, etc.
-- "Te, Virgo, tuus transvexit ad aethera Sponsus, etc.
To blessed Life, and a Superual Throne,
The just reward of thy Devotion,
Does Christ receive thee, Virgin, etc.
Virgin, to Heaven thy Spouse does thee transport.
That of Probus, Prefect of the Praetorium;

"Eximii resolutus in aetheris aequore, tutum
"Curris iter, -- etc.
"Nunc propior Christo, Sanctorum sede potitus,
"Luce nova frueris, Lux tibi Christus adest, etc.
-- "Renovatus habes perpetuam requiem,
"Candida fuscatus nulla velamina culpa,
"Et novus insuetis incola luminibus, etc.
"Vivit in aeternum Paradisi sede Beatus,
"Qui nova decedens muneris aetherii
"Vestimenta tulit; quo demigrante, Belial
"Cessit, and ingemuit hic nihil esse suum, etc.
"Dilectae gremio raptus in astra Probae, etc.
"Vivit, and astra tenet, -- etc.
Dissolved thou safely runst, the etherial Plain.
Near Christ thou of a blessed Seat possessed;
Christ being thy light, thou a new light enjoy'st, etc.
Thou now renewed perpetual rest do gain,
Thy snowy Robes of guilt admit no stain,
And of an unaocustom'd place thou art
A new Inhabitant -- etc.
He ever-happy lives in Paradise,
Who carries hence Robes first, had from the Skies:
At his departure Belial complies,
And grieves to find in him there is nothing his, etc.
In his loved Proba's Bosom he is received, etc.
Possessed of Heaven he lives. --
That of Pope SIRICIUS, deceased the 22th. of February, in the year 398. "Nunc
requiem sentit, coelestia regna potitus, etc.
"Now, got to Heaven, he does his rest enjoy.


That of Celsus, a young Lad, a Spaniard, deceased about the year 394. and
celebrated by Paulinus, since Bishop of Nola:

"Laetor obisse brevi functum mortalia saec'lo,
"Ut cito divinas perfrueretur opes, etc.
"Placidam Deus aethere Christus
"Arcessens merito sumpsit honor animam, etc.
"Spiritus Angelico vectus abit gremio, etc.
-- "Superno in lumine Celsum
"Credit vivorum lacte, favisque, frui, etc.
Glad, that he is soon discharged hence, I am,
That sooner he Riches divine might claim, etc.
Christ has his peaceful Soul to Heaven received,
With its deserved honor. --
To Angels Bosoms his spirit is conveyed, etc.
Celsus in light above, doubt not (though dead)
With living Milk, and Honey-combs, is fed.
That of Clarus, deceased the 8th of November, about the year 402.

"Libera corporeo men's carcere gauder in astris,
"Pura, probatorum sedem sortita piorum, etc.
-- "Spiritus aethere gaudet,
"Discipulumque pari sociat super astra Magistro, etc.
"Emeritus superis Spiritus involitas:
"Sive Patrum sinibus recubas, Dominive sub ara
"Conderis, aut sacro pasceris in nemore;
"Qualibet in regione Poli si^^s, aut Paradisi,
"Clare, sub aeterna pace quietus agis, etc.
Among the Just his Habitation is,
Of Body freed, possessed of Heavenly bliss, etc.
-- His Soul to Heaven is flown,
The Scholar to the Master equal grown, etc.
Thou a discharged Spirit to Heaven fly'st,
And whether thou i the Patriarch' s Bosom lie:
Or under the Lord' s Altar art detained,
Or an abode i the Sacred Grove have gained;
What part, or place of Paradise thou'st got,
Eternal Peace, and Rest, is Clarus lot.
That of Paula, deceased in the year 404.

"Aspicis angustum praecisa rupe Sepulchrum,
"Hospitium Paulae, coelestia regna tenentis, etc.
See thou a Rock into a Coffin hewn,
It Is Paula' s Mansion, who to Heaven is flown.
That of Concordius of Arles, deceased about the same time.

"Integer, ^tque que pius, vitaque, and corpore purus,
"Aeterno, hic positus, vivit Concordius aevo, etc.
"Hunc cito, sideream raptum Omnipotentis in Aulam,
"Et Matter bland (...) and Fratres in funere quaerunt, etc.
Here, Pious, Good, of Life, and Body pure,
Co^dius of Eternity lies sure, etc.
Him, snatched to the Almighty's starry Hall,
A Mother kind, and Brethren, do bewail.
That of Pope BONIFACE the First, deceased the 25th of October, 423.

-- "Membraque clausit,
"Certus, in adventu glorificanda Dei, etc.
"Quis te, Sancte Parens, cum Christo nesciat esse? etc.
-- His Members he did lay,
Assured of Glory on the last great day, etc.
Who doubts thy being with Christ, Great Man? --
That of Pope CELESTINE, gathered to the rest of the LORD, April the 6th, 432.

-- "Vitam migravit in illam,
"Debita quae Sanctis aeternos reddit honores, etc.
-- "Men's, nescia mortis,
"Vivit, and aspectu fruitur been conscia Christi, etc.
-- He to that life is gone,
Where blessed Saints eternal Honors crown, etc.
-- The Mind, immortal, lives
And, guiltless, Christ contemplates --
That of St. Hilary of Arles, departed this world to a better Life, May the
5th, 449.

"Hic carnis spolium liquit, ad astra volans, etc.
-- "Nec mirum post mortem tua limina, Christ,
"Angelicasque domos intravit, and aurea regna,
"Divitias, Paradise, tuas, fragrantia semper
"Gramina, nitentes divinis floribus hortos,
"Subjectasque videt nubes, and sidera coeli, etc.
To Heaven flown, his Fleshy Robe lies here, etc.
-- Nor is it much, if, after Death,
To Angels Mansions he, admittance has,
And of the Golden Kingdoms is possessed,
And with thy Wealth, O Paradise, is blessed,
Where ever-fragrant Verdures he may tread,
And Gardens with divinest Flowers or'espread,
And Clouds, and Stars beneath him, etc. --
That of the Abbot ABRAHAM, deceased the 15th of June, about the year 480. in
Auvergne:

"Jam te circumstant Paradisi millia sacri;
"Abraham jam te, comperegrinus, habet;
"Jam patriam ingrederis, sede, qua decidit Adam;
"Jam potes ad fontem fluminis ire tui, etc.
Thousands of Paradise now round thee are;
With Abraham, thy Fellow-traveller,
Thou art, possessed of that, whence Adam fell;
Thou may of thine own Streams go to the Well.
That, which Ennodius the Deacon, and afterward Bishop of Pavia, made in
Honor of Bonus:

"Exemplum terris linquens, ad sidera raptus, etc.
-- The World he leaves,
Taught by's Example; him the Sky receives.
That of Abundantius, composed by the same Ennodius: -- "Non sentit damna
Sepulchri, etc.
-- "Feels not the Losses of the Grave.


That of Rustica, writ by the same Hand: "Purior aethereas graderis sine carne
per arces, etc.
Disrobed of flesh, thou walk'st the ethereal Towers.


That of Melissa, due to the same Author: "De vita ad vitam transitus iste
placet, etc.
From life to life to pass is my delight.


That, whereby he celebrated the Memory of Victor, Bishop of Novara: "Spiritus
aetherea congaudet lucidus arce, etc.
His lightsom Soul sports in the Starry Vault.


That, which he has left in Honor of Euphemia:

-- "Men's niveis quam been juncta choris? etc.
How well her mind suits with the snowy Quires
Of Blessed Spirits? --
That of Atolus of Rheims, Contemporary with Saint Remy:

"Proprium censum coelum transvexit in altum,
"In quo suscepit, quod miserendo dedit, etc.
-- "Praerutilum detinet ipse Polum.
Heavens Treasure he to Heaven has reassign'd,
Where what he here in pity gave does find, etc.
-- Of Heaven he is possessed.
That of the Consul BOETHIUS, Beheaded in the year 524. by the command of
Thierry, King of the Ostrogoths:

-- "Probitas me vexit ad auras, etc.
"Ecce! Boethus adest in coelo magnus -- etc.
-- My piety to Heaven me brought, etc.
Behold, in Heaven the great Boethius is, etc.
That of Petronius:

"Corpus humo, animam Christo, Petroni, dedisti:
"Nam justae mentes foventur luce celesti,
"Sidereasque colunt seeds, mundoque fruuntur, etc.
-- Thy Body earth does find,
Thy Soul, Petronius, the have to Christ assigned:
Just minds celestial Light surrounds, the Sky
Their Seat; they, only, what is pure, enjoy.
That of Liberius, Prefect of that Part of the Gauls now called Languedoc,
under Theodorick, King of the Ostrogoths:

-- "Cum membra recedunt,
"Nescit fama mori, lucida vita manet, etc.
-- Thy Limbs may rot,
Thy Fame remains, a brighter Life's thy lot.
That of Pope FELIX the Fourth, deceased February the 29th 528.

"Certa fides justis coelestia regna patere,
"Antistes Felix quae modo laetus habet, etc.
Felix in Heaven has felicity;
Whose Courts unto the Just ever openly.
That of Florentinus, Abbot of Saint Croix d'Arles, deceased April the 25th,
Indict. 1. in the 12th year after the Consulship of Basilius; that is to say in
the year 553.

"Fulgida regna petens, coelesti sort vocatus,
"Lucis and aeternae penetrans fastigia laetus,
"Optimus, atque pius, nunc Florentinus in isto
"Resplendot Tumulo, etc.
-- "Hinc celsa Poli capiens jam praemia felix,
"Sanctorum socius fruitur cum laud coronam, etc.
Good Florentinus, famed for Piety,
Called hence by a celestial Lot, does hy,
Joyful, to the Palace of eternal Light,
Shining even in his Tomb --
Heaven's high rewards he, happy, does obtain,
And with the Saints an equal Crown does gain.
That of Pope PELAGIUS the First, deceased March the 2d, 559.

"Vivit in arce Poli, coelesti luce beatus, etc.
-- In the Starry Towers,
Blessed with celestial light, he spends his hours.
That of St. Germain of Paris, deceased the 28th of March, 576.

"Carne tenet Tumulum, mentis honor Polum, etc.
"Jure triumphali considet arce Poli, etc.
The Tomb with Flesh he fills, the Heaven his Mind
Adorns, etc.
He sits in Heaven by a Triumphal right.
That of Chlodobert, the Son of King Chilpericus, and Fredegonda:

"Non fleat ullus amor, quem modo cingit honor, etc.
"Perpetui regni se favet arce frui, etc.
Whom Honor now surrounds, no Love bewail, etc.
He Joys, possessed of the eternal Throne.
That of Dagobert, Brother of Chlodobert:

"Rapte Polis, etc. Lux tenet alta Throno, etc.
To Heaven snatched, etc. an Heavenly light detains
Him on the Throne. --
That of Andrew of Caieta, deceased in the year 585.

"Pande tuas, Paradise, fores, sedemque beatam,
"Andreae meritum suscipe Pontificis, etc.
"Quae meditata fides, and credita semper, inhaesit;
"Haec te usque ad coelos, and super astra, tulit, etc.
For Andrew's Merit opened Heaven prepare
A blessed Seat --
The constant Faith, which ever was in thee,
Has raised thee above Heaven's sublimity.
That of Gregory, Bishop of Langres, deceased January the 4th, about the year
540.

-- "Post Tumulos implet honor Polos, etc.
"Nunc super Astra manet, etc.
Death once overcome, he fills the Heaven with praise, etc.
His Mansion is above the Stars. --
That of Tetricus, Son and Successor of Gregory, deceased about the year 570.

-- "Dignus in Astris
"Mentis honor nites. --
-- Thou, by an exc'llent mind.
Among the Stars to shine a place do find.
That of Evemerus, Bishop of Nantes, deceased about the year 550.

"Aeternum locum, missus ad Astra, tenet, etc.
"Felix ille abiit, etc.
Sent to the Skies, his everlasting Seat, etc.
Blessed man, he is gone --
That of the two Ruricius's, Bishops of Limoges, Grandfather, and Grandchilde;
the former deceased about the year 500; the later, about the year 550. "Inter
Apostolicos credimus esse Choros, etc.
Among the Apostles we believe they are.


That of Chronopius, Bishops of Perigueux, deceased about the year 540.

-- "Tua Coelis stat sine labe domus, etc.
"Nunc tibi, pro meritis, est sine fine dies, etc.
Thy House in Heaven stands, etc.
For thy good Works an endless day's thy lot.
That of Chalacterius, or Cales, Bishop of Chartres, deceased the eighth of
October, about the year 570.

"Abreptus terris, justus ad Astra redis, etc.
"Ad Paradisiacas Epulas te cive reducto,
"Unde gemit mundus, gaudet honor Polus, etc.
Snatched from the Earth, thou do to Heaven retire, etc.
While thou at heavenly Feasts art entertained,
The Earth bewails what Heaven hence has gained.
Where, by what makes the Farth bewail, must needs be understood the
Translation of that Prelate into Glory.

That of Esocius, Bishop of Limoges, deceased about the year 580.

"Non decet hunc igitur vacuis deflere lamentis;
"Post tenebras mundi, quem tenet aula Poli, etc.
Who this world darkness left to heaven's Court's gone,
Needs not our fruitless Lamentation.
That of Victorinus, Abbot of Agaunum, or St. Maurice de Chablais, Contemporary
with Esocius:

"Nunc fruitur vultu, quem cupiebat amor, etc.
The Face, which was the Object of his Love,
H'as now the Bliss to see --
That of Hilarious the Priest, "Corpore qui terras, and tenet Astra Fide, etc.
Whose Body Earth, whose Faith the Sky contains.


That of Servilio:

-- "Coelis gaudia vera tenet, etc.
"Raptus ab Orb quidem, laetus ad Astra redit, etc.
He Is filled in Heaven with certain Joys --
Snatched hence, he, joyful, to the Stars returns.
That of Praesidius: "Inter Angelicos fulget honor Choros, etc.
Mong Quires of Angels he in honor shines, etc.


That of Aegidius: "Nulli flendus erit, quem Paradisus habet, etc.
Whom Heaven enjoys, no man needs lament, etc.


That of Basilius: "Patriam Coeli, dulcis Amice, tenes, etc.
Of heaven thy Country, Friend, thou art possessed.


That of Avolus: "Gaudia Lucis habet. --
"Felix, post Tumulos, possidet ille Polos, etc.
"Luce perene fruens, felix cui mortua mors est, etc.
H enjoys the Joys of Light. --
To Heaven after death he, blessed, is transferred, etc.
-- How happy he,
Who, blessed with light, over Death has Victory.


That of Euphrasia, the Wife of Namatius, Bishop of Vienna, deceased the
seventeenth of November, about the year 560. "Inclyta Sydereo radias Euphrasia
regno;
"Nec mihi flenda manes, nec tibi laeta places:
"Terrae terra dedit; sed Spiritus Astra recepit:
"Pars jacet haec Tumulo; pars tenet illa Polum, etc.
Thou now, Euphrasia, shin'st in Heaven bright;
My grief no longer, nor thy own delight:
Earth went to Earth; the Stars her spirit have:
This part's in Heaven; the other in the Grave.


That of Vilithura, the Wife of Dagulph: -- "Quae larga dedit haec, modo plena
metit, etc.
What freely given was she fully reaps.


That of Queen Theodechilda, the Daughter of Thierry, King of Mets, Son to the
Great Clodoveus: "Felix, cui meritis stat sine fine, dies, etc.
Happy, whose Works eternal day attends.


That of Gelesventha, second Wife of King Chilpericus the First: "Non hunc
flere decet, quam Paradisus habet, etc.
Twere ill the Blessed in heaven to lament, etc.


That of Eoladius of Nevers, deceased about the year 570. "Adventum gaudens
sustinet hic Domini, etc.
He, glad, expects the coming of the Lord.


That of Pope Gregory the First, deceased the 4th of March, 604.

"Spiritus Astra petit, etc. --
"Mercedem operum jam sine fine tenes, etc.
His spirit to Heaven flies, etc.
Thou of thy Works have now thy endless Meed.
That of Vincent, Abbot, of Leon, deceased the eleventh of March, according to
the Julian Period 668. or 630 after Christ, "Sua sacratenet anima coeleste; His
sacred Soul is in an heavenly Mansion, etc. "Raptus ad aetherias subito
pervenit ad Leg. oras.
auras, etc.
Snatched hence, thou soon to the heavenly parts art fled.


That of Pope Boniface the Fifth, deceased the 25th. of October, 625. "Ad magni
culmen honoris abit, etc.
He Is gone of honor to the accomplishment. --


That of Pope Honorius, deceased the twelfth of October, 638.

"Aeternae luis, (Christo dignante) perennes,
"Cum Patribus sanctis, posside, jamque domos.
Thou, who to' the holy Sires have taken thy flight,
Enjoy (through Christ) the eternal Seats of Light.
That of Pope Benedict II. deceased the seventh of May, 685.

"Percipe salvati praemia celsa gregis etc.
The high rewards of those are saved receive.
That of Ceadwalla, King of the West Saxons, deceased the twentieth of April,
689. Indict. 2.

-- "Mente superna tenet.
"Commutasse magis sceptrorum Insignia credas,
"Quem regnum Chrsti promeruisse vides, etc.
-- His spirit in heaven soars.
Who to Christ's Throne is raised, may be said,
But an exchange of Scepters to have made.
That of Theodore of Canterbury, deceased the 19th. of September, 690.

"Alma novae scandens felix consortia vitae,
"Civibus Angelicis junctus in arce Poli, etc,
Advanced to a society of Bliss.
With Angel-Citizens h'in heaven is.
That of Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, deceased October the 12th. 709. --
"Gaudens coelestia regna petivit, etc.
Rejoicing he to heaven's gone. --


That of Bid, rsinamed Venerable, deceased May 26th. being Ascension-Day;
which argues his death to have happened in the year 735.

"Juni septenis viduatus carne Kalendis,
"Angligena Angelicam commeruit Patriam, etc.
May's twenty sixth, of flesh uncloathed, Bid
Among Angels went to have a heavenly meed.
That of Richard, King of England, deceased February the 7th. 750. -- "Regnum
tenet ipse Polorum, etc.
Of heaven's Kingdom he is possessed. --


That of Fulrad, Abbot of St. Denis, deceased in the year, 784.

"Credimus idcirco Coelo societur ut illis, etc.
-- In heaven we
Believe him blessed with The Fathers.
their society.
That of Meginarius, his Successor: "Post mortem melius vivit in arce Poli,
etc.
Death past, he lives in heaven a better life.


That of Arichis, Duke of Beneventum, deceased the six and twentieth of August,
787. -- "Te pro meritis nunc Paradisus habet, etc.
For thy good Works heaven is thy reward.


That of Tilpin, Archbishop of Rheims, deceased the second of September, 789.
"Mortua quando fuit, mors sibi vita manner, etc.
When Death is dead, Life his Portion is.


That of Pope Adrian the First deceased, the 26th of December, 795.

-- "Mors janua vitae,
"Sed melioris, erat --
Death was the entrance of a better Life.
That of Peter, Bishop of Pavia, deceased about the same time;

"Admistus gaudet caetibus Angelicis, etc.
-- "Retinent te gaudia Coeli, etc.
Rejoicing among Angels, he --
Heaven's joys thy entertainment are.
That of Hildegard, first Wife of Charle-maign, deceased in the year 783. April
the thirtieth. "Pro dignis factis sacra regna tenes --
Thy worthy acts the sacred Kingdom gained.


That of Fastrada, second Wife of the same Prince, deceased in the year 794.
"Modo Coelesti nobilior Thalamo, etc.
A heavenly bed makes her more Noble. --


That of Count Gerald, deceased in the year 799. "Sideribus animam dedit --
He rendered his Soul to heaven --


That of Hildegard, Daughter by his first Wife: "Tu nimium felix, gaudia longa
petis, etc.
Thou, ever-happy, to long Joys do go.


That of Charle-maign himself, deceased on Saturday, the eighth of January, 814.

-- "Meruit fervida saec'li
"Aetherei, etc. --
Aequora transire, and placidum conscendere portum, etc.
That of Adelbard, Abbot of St. Peter of Corbie, deceased the second of
January, 822. -- "Paradisi jure colonis, etc.
Inhabitant of Pardise --


That of Ermengard, Wife to the Emperor Lotharius, deceased the twentieth of
March, being Good Friday, in the year 852.

"Linquens regna soli, penetravit regna Polorum,
"Cum Christo, and sanctis, gaudia vera tenens, etc.
Leaving Earth's Crowns, to those of Heaven she is gone,
With Christ, and's Saints in exultation.
That of Lewis the Debonnaire, who died on Sunday, the twentieth of June, 840.
"In pacis metas colligit hunc pietas, etc.
Him Piety brings into the land of Peace.


That of Dreux, Bishop of Mets, deceased the eighth of November, 857. "Spiritus
in requie, laetus, ovat Abrahae, etc.
The joyful spirit exults in Abra'm's Rest.


That of the Emperor Lewis [the Second, deceased the thirteenth of August, 875.

-- "Gaudet
"Spiritus in Coelis, Corporis extat honos, etc.
-- The Body's honor is
Apparent, but the spirit's in heave'nly bliss.
That of the Emperor Carolus Calvus, deceased the sixth of October, 877. --
"Spiritum reddidit ille Deo, etc.
-- He to God his Spirit returned.


That of Ansegisus, Archbishop of Sens, deceased the twenty fifth of November,
883. -- "Spiritus Astra tenet, etc.
-- Of heaven his Spirit's possessed.


That of John Scotus, dead the same year:

-- " Christi conscendere regnum
"Quo meruit, sancti regnat per saecula cuncti, etc.
He to ascend Christ's Kingdom did obtain.
Where all the Saints eternally do reign.
That of Pope John the Eighth, deceased the fifteenth of December, the year
before:

"Et nunc coelicolas cernit super Astra Phalanges, etc.
-- Above the Skies
Now he the heavenly Batallions spies.
That of Ermengard, Daughter of Lewis, King of Germany, deceased the three and
twentieth of December, about the same time:

"Bis denos octo vitae compleverat annos,
"Migrans ad sponsum Virgo beata suum, etc.
Twice eighteen years this Maid had lived complete,
When happy she went hence her Spouse to meet.
That of Bruno, Archbishop of Cullen, deceased the eleventh of October, 969.
"Iam frueris Domino --
Thou now enjoy'st the Lord.


That of Notger, Abbot of St. Gal, deceased the sixth of April, 981.

"Idibus octonis hic carne solutus Aprilis,
"Coelis invehitur, -- etc.
Having laid down his fleshy burden, on
The sixth of April, he to heaven is gone.
That of Gonzales, cited by Prudentio de Sandoval, Bishop of Pampeluna, to the
year of the Julian Period 1030. or of Christ 992. "A qui reposa y en la gloria
goza, etc.
Here rests, and glorious happiness enjoys.


That of Donna Sancia:

"Dio fin glorioso a esta vida,
"Par a gozar de la aeterna, etc.
That she might gain eternal life in Bliss,
She gave a glorious Period unto this.
That of Sancia, Countess of Castile:

"Bis vinctum Comitem e carcere adduxit,
"Coelicas seeds, beata, quae possidet, etc.
She out of Prison twice her Count relieved,
To heavenly Seats who, happy, now is received.
That of Count Fernand, of Gonzalva: "Belliger invictus ductus ad Astra fuit,
etc.
To heaven the undaunted Soldier was conveyed.


And Sebastian of Salamanca, speaking of Ordonio the First, places him in
Heaven; saying, Felix stat in Coelo, etc. Laetatur cum sanctis Angelis in
Coelestibus regnis, etc. He is happy in heaven, etc. He rejoices with the
Angels in the Kingdom of heaven.

I acknowledge, that the Opinion of Purgatory crept in among the Latins, about
the end of the sixth Age, having, by little and little, gained credit, many
were easily induced to compose Epitaphs containing certain Wishes, and Prayers,
for the Dead. Yet did not their scrupulous manner of proceeding hinder any,
that would, from attributing to them the possession of Celestial glory,
immediately upon their departure out of this life. Thus the Epitaph of Pope
Stephen the Sixth, deceased the one and twentieth of May, 891. has these
express Terms; "Aethera scandit spiritus almus ovans, etc.
His mild Spirit ascends heaven triumphing.


That of the Kings, Conrade the First, Otho the First and Second, and
Zuentibold, of Adalberon Bishop of Mets, of Count Hugh, and his Wife, of the
Countess Eve and her Sons, of Arnoul, and Rembal, of Oudri Archbishop of
Rheims, of Beatrix, and Warin, Abbot of Saint Arnoul de Mets, express that
their Souls -- "In Coelis aeterna pace fruuntur, etc.
-- In heaven enjoy eternal Peace.


That of Reynold, Abbot of S. Cyprian in Poictiers, deceased in the year 1100.
-- "Rainaldi pars promptior Astra petivit, etc.
Reynold's more willing part to heaven is gone.


That of the Nun Benedicta: -- "Spiritus Astra tenet, etc.
-- Of heaven her Spirit's possessed.


That of Ranulphus the Priest, her Contemporary:

"Protinus ad Superos, carne solutus, abis, etc.
"Spiritus, ecce! tuus gaudens fuper Astra perennat, etc.
Flesh once laid by, to heaven thou straight do go, etc.
Thy Spirit above eternal Joy attends.
Again; "Dans animam Coelo, reddidit ossa solo, etc.
To heaven thy soul, to earth thy bones return.


That of King Philip the First, deceased in the year 1108.

"Augusti ternis conscendit in aeth'ra Kalendis, etc.
He on the That is, on the thirtieth day of July.
third of the Calends
Of August, unto heaven ascends.
That of Reynold de Martigni, Archbishop of Rheims, deceased in the year 1137.

"Hunc duodena dies Februi praeeu^do Kalendas,
"Destituit mundo, substituitque Polo, etc.
On That is the same with the twelfth day before the Kalends of February.
January's one and twentieth day,
He left the world, and went to heaven to stay.
That of Gerald, first Abbot of Selue-Majour in Bourdelois, deceased in the
year 1094. the sixth of April.

"En! felix anima Coeli laetatur in Aula, etc.
"Coelorum civis dormiit in Domino, etc.
-- "Liber Coelos spiritus obtinuit, etc.
"Spiritus Abbatis vindicat Astra sibi, etc.
-- "Spiritus alta tenet, etc.
His blissfull soul in Heaven rejoicing is, etc.
Heaven's Citizen rests in the Lord, etc.
His unconfined spirit in Heaven is fixed, etc.
The Abbot's soul does challenge heaven, -- etc.
-- His spirit is on high.
That of Berenger, Archdeacon of St. Maurice's of Angers, deceased the sixth
of January, 1088. "In Jano patuit tibi Janua vitae, etc.
In Janus Month, Life's Gate received thee.


And again; -- "Coelos anima, corpore ditat humum, etc.
His Body Earth, his Soul does Heaven enrich.


That of the Empress Agnes, deceased the 14th of December, 1077. Die XIV.
Mensis Decembris, animam, bonis operibus foecundam, Lateranis, Salvatori suo,
atque omnium bonorum Authori reddidit: and hic, quinta die Mensis Januarii,
expectans spem Beatae Resurrectionis, and adventum Magni Dei, membra carnis
commendavit in pace, Amen. Upon the fourteenth of December, at Lateran, she
returned to her Savior, and God the Author of all good things, her soul,
fruitful in good Works: and, on the fifth of January, she recommended to this
place her fleshly Members, expecting the hope of a blessed Resurrection, and
the coming of the Great God, Amen.

That of Bruno, first General of the Carthusians, deceased the sixth of
October, 1101. "Ossa manent Tumulo, Spiritus Astra petit, etc.
Earth has his bones, to heaven his spirit flies.


That of Geoffrey, Bishop of Amiens, deceased the eighth of November, 1118. --
"Hic jacet. Astra petens, etc.
Here, going to Heaven, he lies.


That of Peter of Placentia, Cardinal; "Terra suum Corpus, Animamque recepit
Olympus.
The Earth his body, Heaven his soul received.


That of Burohard, Archbishop of Vienna, deceased about the year 1035. August
the twenty ninth:

"Cum quo perpetuo pace viget placida, etc.
-- "Sanctus Spiritus Astra petit, etc.
"Curribus ignicomis ad Superos gereris, -- etc.
With The Lord.
him he lives in undisturbed peace, etc.
His Holy Spirit to Heaven flies, -- etc.
In fiery Chariots to Heaven you are conveyed.
That of Alberic, Archbishop of Bourges, deceased in the year, 1140. -- "Modo
major in arce Polorum, etc.
-- In Heaven he greater is.


That of Peter Leo, in the year 1144.

"Junius in Mundo fulgebat, Sole secundo,
"Separat hunc nobis cum Polus, atque Lapis, etc.
June's second day shone bright, when joyless we
Lost him between Earth, and Felicity.
That of Peter, Bishop of Poictiers, deceased in the year 1115. unjustly
reduced by Cardinal Baronius, to the year 1130.

"Nunc dives, liber, stabilis, sua praemia, Christum,
"Astra, petit, sequitur, possidet, iste Petrus, etc.
"Promovit, privavit eum, profugumque recepit,
"Papa, Comes, Christus, ordine, sede, Polo, etc.
This Peter, rich, freed, firm, rewards, Christ, Heaven,
Now seeks, pursues, possesses, freely given, etc.
A Pope, Count, Christ, him raised, deprived, with love
Received, to Prelacy, of's See, above.
That of Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, Assassinated the nine and twentieth
of July, 1170.

-- "Ab Orb
"Pellitur, and fructus incipit esse Poli, etc.
Forced hence, in Heaven he begins to grow.
That of Stephen, Bishop of Meaux, deceased the 12th of January, 1187.

-- "Liber vivit, terra divisus, and Astris;
"Quae dederat Coelum, Terraque, solvit eis, etc.
He freely lives, 'tween Heaven, and Earth, bestowed;
And paid what unto Heaven, and Earth, he owed.
That of Robert, Archbishop of Vienna, deceased in the year 1195. June the
seven and twentieth. "Junius aethereis mensis te reddidit oris, etc.
Thee to thy Heavenly Country June has brought.


That of Mauricius, Bishop of Paris, deceased the eleventh of September, 1196.

"Migrat Parisii Pater ad patriam Paradisi,
"Mauricius, etc.
Father of Paris, Mauricius, is hence
To Paradise transferred --
That of Humbert, Archbishop of Vienna, deceased the twentieth of November,
1125.

-- "Spiritus aeth'ra
"Praesulis Umberti petit, etc.
The Prelat Umbert's Soul to Heaven is gone.
That of Raoul, Bishop of Arras, deceased in the year 1220.

-- "Coeli Civis, meritorum pondere vivis, etc.
The weight of thy Good Works do thee sustain,
Thou Citizen of Heaven. --
That of Peter of Doway, Archbishop of Sens, deceased the twelfth of June,
1222. "Qui Spei certae suberat, modo cernit aperte, etc.
Who, what he surely hoped, now clearly sees.


That of Hervey, Bishop of Troyes, deceased July the second, 1223. -- "Reddo
Polo Spiritum, and ossa Solo, etc.
My soul to heaven, my bones to earth I leave.


That of Bernard of Suilli, Bishop of Auxerre, deceased the sixth of January,
1246. -- "Meruit Christo se reddere Mundum, etc.
He, undefiled, returns to Christ. --


That of Philip, Archbishop of Bourges, deceased the sixth of January, 1260.

-- "Sacrata sede sedentis
"Philippi Bituris ossa beata jacent, etc.
Of Philip, Prelate of the sacred See,
The blessed Bones at rest in Bourges be.
That of Reinold of Corbeil, Bishop of Paris, deceased the seventh of June,
1268. "Fatali ad Superos sort vocatus, obit, etc.
Called by the fatal Lot to heaven, he goes.


That of Guermond de la Boissiere, Bishop of Noyon, deceased in the year 1272.
-- "Cum Christo scandit in Astra, etc.
-- With Christ he heaven ascends.


That of William de Chanac, Bishop of Paris, deceased the third of May, 1348.
-- "Transivit ad atria lucis, etc.
He to the Courts of Light is gone. --


That of William de Boisratier, Archbishop of Bourges, deceased the nineteenth
of July, 1421. "Carne subactus, homo sidera mente rapit, etc.
Who, weak in Flesh, in Spirit the Stars transcends.


That of John Des Charliers, surnamed Gerson, Chancellor of the University of
Paris, deceased the twelfth of July, 1424. -- "Petit Superos -- etc.
He goes to them above. --


That of Peter de Fontenay, Bishop of Nevers, deceased the third of June, 1499.
-- "Pius aethereo spiritus axe viget, etc.
His pious Soul lives in the Skies. --


That of Peter Carre, deceased after the year 1509. January the fifth: "Men's
fruitur Coelis -- etc.
His mind does heaven enjoy.


It would have been no hard matter to have produced many Epitaphs more to the
same Effect; but the precedent may suffice, to force the most prepossessed with
their own Apprehensions, to acknowledge, that even those, who lived since the
Opinion of Purgatory became more common, have, upon occasions, by their using
the Expression of the more Ancient, discovered, that they followed their
Sentiment, and were fully persuaded, that as to those, who died in the
Profession of Christianity, and had not lead a wicked Life without Repentance,
their Glory, and Felicity, was not any way retarded; but that, immediately upon
their departure, they are ascended to heaven, above the Stars, above the Skies,
in the Courts of Light and Glory, in Abraham's Bosom, in Eternal Peace, in
Paradise, etc. which is as much, as could be said of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and the most eminent Confessors. So that, as
to this particular, there is no Distinction to be made of either
Ecclesiastics, or Laics; Males, or Females; Kings, Princes, Lords, or private
Persons. Which Consideration should, me thinks, have some influence on their
spirits, who, prepossessed with the contrary Sentiment, and carried away with
the Torrent of the common Error, imagine, that an immediate admission to
Beatitude is to be restrained only to those Persons, whose Names (by reason of
the great reputation of their Sanctity) are put into the Martyrologies of the
Church of Rome, and whose Spirits are by those of her Communion invocated, as
Patrons of the Living. For the Epitaphs! of the Prefect Probus, of the Consul
Boethius, of Queen Gelesventha, of the Kings Ceadwalla, Zuentibold, Conrad,
Otho, Father and Son, and Philip the First, who never passed in their time for
Saints, and such as were Exemplary for Mortification, and extraordinary Piety,
justify, that the conceptions, according to which, some at present would have
Christian People directed, either were not then framed, or seemed not such, as
deserved great credit. Upon which account it is, I should wish, that the
maintainers of the Opinion now in vogue would vouchsafe to take the business
earnestly into their thoughts, and afford us but one Example, sufficient to
satisfy us, that, during the first six Centuries of Christianity, any one had
embraced it with so much resolution, as that he durst express his persuasion in
the Inscription of the Tombs of his deceased Friends. For though we are not to
live by Examples, but by Laws; nor obliged absolutely to depend on the
Authority, and Actions, of any man whatsoever: yet had we such, as were
Ancient, we neither might, nor would refuse to entertain them with the esteem
due thereto; though it were only to divert us from speaking so
disadvantageously in respect of those, who follow them, that we equally deny
them both Truth, and Antiquity: not seeing any reason inducing us to grant,
that the first Ages were imbued with a Belief, whereof there appears not any
Track in the Monuments they have left us; as also supposing (as there seems
reason to do) that it is impossible, to persuade men, guided by common sense,
that the Christians of Antiquity should conspire in the same imaginations with
those, who live in the Communion of the Modern Church of Rome, and not any one
among them (upon any occasion whatsoever) vouchsafe to make the least discovery
of what he thought.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Prayers contained in the Epitaphs of the Faithful, whom the
Surviving presupposed already received into Glory.
ALthough the Prayer, which is daily made at the Celebration of the Mass for
the Faithful departed, cannot any way be accommodated to the Opinion of
Purgatory, which the present Church of Rome numbers among the Articles of her
Faith; Though there be not any ground to attribute to the State of the Souls,
which they pretend confined in a place of extreme Torment, the Name of Sleep;
much less to attribute to the conflict of those Souls, condemned by the
absolute rigor of Heaven's Justice, to the incomprehensible sufferance of that
Torment, which is inflicted on them by way of Punishment for the sins they have
committed, meriting, and incurring by those Transgressions the displeasure of
the God of Glory, the Title of Sleeping a Sleep of Peace; Though the doleful
resenting so great Pain, as that of an Infernal Fire, cannot, in those, that
are to endure it, consist with any kind of Sleeping, nor suffer them to be in
Peace, while they are overwhelmed by the wrath of the Living God, and by the
weight of his Hand, into which, St. Paul tells us, Heb. x. 31.
it is a fearful thing to fall; In a word, though from all what has been
hitherto represented, it necessarily results; that (according to the constant
Belief of Antiquity for six Ages) the eternal Glory, and Felicity, of the
Faithful Apoc. xiv. 13.
dying in the Lord, is not at all deferred after the moment of their departure:
Yet, since the Christians, who now live in the Communion of the Church of Rome,
might think, that the Prayers, which are found in certain Epitaphs, express
something not dissonant from the Sentiment she maintains, it lies upon us, in
order to their undeceiving,

First, To make a report of the said Epitaphs;

Secondly, To make it appear, that there neither follows, nor can follow any
thing from them; in as much as those very Epitaphs expressly presupposed the
admission of those, to whose Memory they were dedicated, into Life, and
celestical Glory. And

Thirdly, To make enquiry into the Motives, which might have induced the
Authors of those Epitaphs to insert into them Prayers for their departed
Friends, and to place their Tombs near those of the Martyrs, who had sealed
with their Blood the Truth of Christianity.

The most ancient Epitaph we find, containing a mixture of Wishes, and
Prayers, is that, which St. Gregory Nazianzene writ in Honor of St. Basil,
deceased the twelfth of January, in the year 378. where we read these Words,
concerning that Great Prelate gathered to his Fathers, (...) God give him
Happiness: as if he had not been in the actual possession thereof; and as if
St. Gregory had not expressly required of him before, that he would appear for
the World, and offer gifts to God, and that in consequence of his being in
Heaven, as he had desired. Again; That he had quitted his Episcopal See, as
Christ would have it, that he might become one among the Inhabitants of Heaven.
It seems then he believed him in Heaven, and possessed of the Glory, and
Happiness of Heaven, as soon as he had, at his departure out of this World,
quitted his Episcopal See; and yet he desires, that God would give him
Happiness; meaning, that he would confirm, and improve the gift he had already
made him: which has nothing common with the Hypotheses, maintained at this day
by the Church of Rome.

In the year 395. deceased the Prefect PROBUS, and his Epitaph, which loudly
published, that he was in the Plains of Heaven, seated among the Saints,
possessed of perpetual Rest, that he lived crowned with bliss in the
Everlasting Mansions of Paradise, concludes with this Prayer,

"Hunc tu, Christ, Choris jungas Coelestibus, oro;
"Te canat, and placidum jugiter aspiciat:
"Quique tuo semper dilectus pendet ab ore,
"Auxilium soboli, conjugioque, ferat.
Joined with Celestial Quires, O Christ, may he
Thy praises sing, thy constant favor see:
Who^, ever-lov'd, did ever on thee depend,
May he to's Race, and Widow, some help lend.
Shall we say he was in Heaven, and yet not joined with the Celestical Quires?
That he was in any danger to see his Savior incensed, and that he could be
possessed of Paradise without Happiness? If not, it must needs be, that the
Author of his Epitaph prayed, that he might enjoy it without any diminution,
and be eternally in the Favor, and Peace of his Savior, in the Society of the
rest of the Blessed Saints; which has nothing common with what is now desired
by the Church of Rome.

We have such another Desire made in the Epitaph of Pope BENEDICT.

"Hic Benedictus adest merito sub rupe Sepulchri;
"Quem tenet Angelicus Chorus in arce Poli:
"Aurea saec'la cui pateant sine fine per aevum,
"Sort beatifica scandat ut aetheria, etc.
Here Benedict, justly, beneath this Stone
Is placed; whom Angels in the Heavens enthrone:
To whom be golden Ages without end,
That he the Skies may, ever-bless'd, ascend.
For, who sees not, that he, who is enthroned by Angels in Heaven, must, of
necessity, be there; and stood not in need of ascending thither; nor that any
golden Ages should be desired for him? But in as much, as he was to ascend
thither in his Body after the general Resurrection, the Author of the Epitaph
makes a Wish to that purpose, and requires, that the Happiness, which he was
then possessed of, as to his Spirit, might be ever continued to him, that he
might be eternally filled with Joy, as well in body, as soul: thereby
discovering, that he reflected not, in the least, on the Purgatery held by the
Church of Rome; which none of her Followers ever yet placed in Heaven; or any
way thought on the delay of Benedict's Felicity, whom he esteemed already
received into the Society of the Angels.

The same account is to be given of the Epitaph of Marinian, Archbishop of
Ravenna, deceased in the year 601. where we find these words: "Ipsius in locis
sit tibi certa quies, etc.
May thou with God assured rest obtain.


As also of that of Venerable Bede, deceased in the year 735.

"Dona, Christ, animam in Coelis gaudere per aevum, etc.
"Daque illum Sophiae inebriari font. --
Christ, grant his soul in heaven eternal joy, etc.
And him inebriate with Wisdom's spring:
For it does not thence follow, either that he was, at the hour of his death
deprived of the Joy of Heaven; or that Wisdom had not filled him with the
Effects of her Virtue; or, lastly, that those, who are once entered into the Joy
of Heaven, could ever forfeit it, or be deprived of the communication of
eternal Wisdom; but that the Surviving thought they might rationally demand for
their deceased Friends the perpetuity of their Happiness, though they certainly
knew it could never be taken from them.

That of Pope ADRIAN the First, writ either by Charle-maign, or, in his Name,
by Alcuin, notwithstanding he had presupposed, that his Death was the entrance
of a better Life, yet forbore not to make these Wishes for him;

"Cum Christo teneas regna beata Poli, etc.
"Quique legis Versus devoto pectore supplex,
"Amborum mitis dic miserere Deus:
"Haec tua nunc requies teneat, charissime, membra;
"Cum sanctis Anima gaudeat alma Dei.
"Ultima quippe tuas donec Tuba clamet in aures,
Principe cum Petro Surge videre Deum;
"Auditurus eris vocem (scio) Judicis almam,
Intra nunc Domini gaudia magna tui.
"Tum memor esto tui Nati -- etc.
May thou with Christ a blessed Seat obtain, etc.
Who humbly readst this Verse with pious heart,
May God his mercy, say, to Adrian, and Charles.
both impart:
May here the precious body find it is Rest;
May the fair soul rejoice among the blessed.
Since, when the latest Trump shall summon thee,
God, and the great Saint Peter for to see;
I know thou wilt hear the Judge's gentle voice,
Of thy Lord enter into the great Joys.
Remember then thy Son. --
Now, as the demand he made for Adrian, that he might obtain a blessed seat
with Christ in Heaven, did not signify, that he was not yet admitted into the
Possession of that better Life, whereof his death was the entrance: so the
Invitation to implore for him the Mercy of God was no argument, that he had not
obtained it; since that even then he exhorted his Soul to rejoice with the
Saints of God, and showed, that he thought it not tormented in a Fire, such as
were likely to deprive it of all Joy; but that it was in Bliss, reigning in the
Company of the Saints, of the Apostle St. Peter, and our Savior; a felicity,
whereto nothing could be added by desire, but the perpetuity of it: which yet
is so much the more certain, in as much, as it is grounded on the unchangeable
counsel of Romans xi. 29.
God, whose Gifts, and Calling, are without repentance.

That of Charle-maign, of whom the Author, viz. Agobard, Archbishop of Lions,
said; That he had been admitted to the aetherial Plains; and consequently, that
he was entered into Glory: yet recommends it to the Reader's Devotion to pray
for him; using these Words,

"Astriferam CAROLI teneat, dic, spiritus Arcem, etc.
-- Wish, that Charles' s Soul
May be possessed of the Starry Pole.
That of Pope Sergius II. deceased April the 12th, 847.

-- "Pro tanto tundamus pectora pugnis,
"Pastore amisso, vivat ut axe Poli, etc.
So great a Pastor lost, We are to grieve
With beaten Breasts, that he in Heaven may live.
That of Ermengard, Wife to the Emperor Lotharius, deceased on Friday, March
the 20th, 852. and immediately introduced (as the Author of it observes) into
the Kingdom of Heaven; where she was abundantly filled with the Joy of Christ,
etc.

"Hanc, rogo te, Lector, commenda rite Tonanti,
"Assiduis precibus, Christus eam ut habeat:
"Cum quo congaudens vivat feliciter ipsa,
"Angelicis semper mista beata Choris, etc.
Reader, employ thy daily Prayers, I crave,
That Christ with him may Ermengarda have:
With whom in lasting Joys she may remain,
A Saint to live amongst the Heavenly Train.
Whereupon the Author, to give us a more particular Account of his intention,
adds;

"Has ego Rabanus confeci Versibus Odas,
"Ex obitu maestus, ex requie and gratulans, etc.
I, Rabanus, this into Verse have dressed,
Grieved at her Loss, but glad she is at Rest.
Whence it follows; that all he entreated the Reader to desire, was, not
properly the happiness; but the continuance, and eternity of the happiness of
that Princess, already glorified with Christ in Heaven. Whereto may be added;
that, as Reason requires, that the Gratulations, whereby we express the good
Wishes we have for our Friends, be grounded, not on the imagination of their
future-good; but on the advantage they have to be in actual possession of it:
so the Author of this Epitaph had had no great reason to congratulate the Rest
of the Empress Ermengard, if she had not been admitted into it.

To the same Predicament may be reduced that of the Emperor CHARLES the Bald,
which, after the Author had observed, that he returned his Soul to God, that
is to say, died so piously, that Pope JOHN the Eighth said, he was in Paradise
with the Angels, concludes in these Terms;

"Deus excelsus dignetur jungere Turmis,
"Sanctorumque choris consociare piis, etc.
May the high God to the Saints holy Quires
Join him --
That of Pope STEPHEN the Sixth, whom the Author had represented as
Triumphantly ascending to Heaven, inviting all, that should read it, to desire
pardon for him; saying,

-- Dicite, Fratres,
Arbiter Omnipotens da veniam Stephano, etc.
The Almighty Judge's grace, Brethren, implore
For Stephen --
And that of Benedict the Fourth, deceased in the year 907. following the same
Track, has these words, which denote the excessive Charity of the deceased:
Mercatus coelum cuncta sua tribuit, etc.
To purchase Heaven all he had he gave:


And adds immediately this Advertisement,

"Inspector Tumuli compuncto dicito cord,
"Cum Christo regnes (O Benedicte) Deo, etc.
Who see this Tomb, say with a contrite Heart,
"May thou, O Benedict, with Christ have part.
Which Words proceeded not from the Author, out of any design he had to
insinuate, that Benedict (when he uttered them) had not yet obtained his part,
or reigned with God; for what can be imagined more absurd, then that God
should refuse to crown Charity, the greatest of his Gifts, and suspend the
Effect of his Promises toward those, who have (as is supposed of Pope
Benedict) most conscientiously exercised it: But his intention was to discover,
that he thought it, not only lawful, but necessary; that the Faithful
surviving should continually desire of God the ratification of the Gifts he had
already bestowed on those he had taken to himself. According to this Principle,
which seems to have been common to all Antiquity, may be understood in a good
sense the Inscription of Amatus's Tomb; which runs thus, Pro anima Amati
poenitentis hic sepulti Domini misericordiam deprecari digneris, etc. Vouchsafe
to implore the Mercy of the Lord for the Soul of penitent Amatus here buried.

But when the Opinion of Purgatory (by the Monks management of the Business)
had a little more prepossessed the minds of People, the use of Prayers in
Epitaphs became much more frequent, then it had been before. And, as it were
easy to produce Centuries of Instances to that purpose; (as of John, Bishop of
Nepete, deceased October the 31th, in the year 770. of Paul, Archdeacon of
Pavia, deceased in the year 774. of Alcuin, deceased May the 19th, 804. of
Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims, deceased December the 21st, 882. of Boson, King
of Provence, deceased January the 11th, 887. of Fulk, Archbishop of Rheims,
deceased June the 17th, 899. of Pope John IX. deceased September the 23d, the
same year; of Pope Anastasius, 111. deceased in the year 912. of Pope John
XIII. deceased September the 6th, 972. of Pope Benedict VII. deceased July the
10th, 984. of Pope John XV. deceased May the 7th, 996. of Gebhard, Bishop of
Constantia, deceased August the 27th, the same year; of Pope Sylvester II.
deceased May the 12th, 1003. of John, surnamed Capanarius, deceased October the
12th, 1004. of Pope John XIX. deceased August the 31. 1009. of Pope Sergius IV.
deceased May the 13th, 1013. of Pope John XX. deceased November the 8th, 1033.
of Teresa, Sister of Alphonsus v. King of Leow, deceased June the 9th, 1047. of
Geffrey, Count of Arles, deceased about the year 1052. of Stephen Cardinal,
deceased in the year 1061. of Peter Damiani, Bishop of Ostia, deceased February
the 23d, 1072. of Adam, a Monk of St. Victor's, deceased in the year 1153:) So
some might conceive themselves obliged to believe, that all the Prayers we read
in such Epitaphs were intended only to this end, viz. to deliver the Souls of
the departed out of the pretended Purgatory; and I am ready to acknowledge, that
the intention of the Authors many times was, or might be such: most having,
especially from the year 900. either embraced, or countenanced that new Tenet;
some, upon account of the profit accrewing thereby; some, upon account of the
profit accrewing thereby; some, because it seemed likely to keep men's
Consciences in aw, and divert Sinners from their wicked course of Life: but
this cannot be either said, or imagined of all. For, with what countenance
could they have numbered among the Malefactors racked upon the infernal Engines
of Purgatory for their Sins, either Gebhard, whom the Author of his Life
observes to have been conveyed to Heaven by the Hands of Angels, and, at the
time of his Enterment, to have wrought Miracles, which demonstrated his being
glorified by God in Heaven? Or Peter Damiani, whom in like manner the Author
of his Life affirms to have died on the 23d of February, being the Festival day
of St. Peter at Antioch, to the end, that the celestical Court might receive
into the Mansions of the Blessed the Disciple of Peter the same day, on which
Peter had deserved to be placed in the Pastoral See? And, indeed, we find, that
the former was Canonized by the Church of Rome: and the latter is one of the
most eminent among her Saints, to whom she addresses her Prayers, and thinks it
were injurious to them to pray for them. After the same manner is to be
understood the Epitaph of Peter Leo, which says, that Heaven, and Earth,
divided him at his death: whence it follows that his Spirit reigned in Glory,
as his Body rested in the Grave; which notwithstanding, the Author of the
Epitaph forbore not to cry out for him, -- "Dei gratia parcat ei.
May God him Pardon grant.


We have abundance of such Passages in the Poems of Baldric, who, after he had
been some time Abbot of Bourgueil, was advanced to the Episcopal See of Dol, in
Britany, and co^ued in it from the 25th of December, 1107. to the 21st of
January, 1131. about which time the Belief of Purgatory seems to have been
received over all the West. Yet is it hard to conceive, that he made any great
account of it himself; since that, numbering among the Patrones, who were to be
invocated, many of those, for whom he put up his Prayers according to the
ancient Custom, which excepted neither Patriarchs, nor Prophets, nor Apostles,
nor Martyrs, he shows, that his meaning was, to desire of God, not the
cessation of their Pains, but the confirmation of their Glory: which the Church
of Rome cannot deny, but she practiced a long time; the acknowledgment made of
it by De praedest. cap. 34.
Hincmare, and Extra. de Missarum celebr. c. cum Martha.
Innocent the Third, assuring us on her behalf, that in the ancient Missals was
this Prayer for one of the greatest, and most eminent Popes, viz. LEO the
First, deceased April the 11th, 461. Annue (quaesumus) Domine, ut animae Beati
Leonis haec prosit oblatio. Grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that this Oblation
may benefit the Soul of Blessed LEO. From which Prayer three things necessarily
follow, all which are extremely contrary to what the said Church teaches at
this day.

The First, That she prayed, and presented Oblations for him, whom she
acknowledged to be in Bliss, and accordingly glorified for all Eternity with
God.

The Second, That the Oblation she then made; and does still daily make, in the
Mass, neither is, nor can be a Propitiatory Sacrifice, properly so called; but
a simple Sacrifice of Praise, as it is expressly qualifyed by the Words of the
Canon, by which she consecrates, and presents it to God.

The Third, That neither her Prayer, nor her Oblation, could (according to her
own Sentiment) be of any benefit to Pope Leo, in order to his delivery out of
Pain; since she acknowledged him exempted from it, and in Happiness; but to
obtain for him what he was most assured of, viz. the Ratification, and
Confirmation of his Glory to its full accomplishment Luc. xiv. 14.
at the Resurrection of the Just.

But moved, as it should seem, at the apprehension of these three Consequences,
which might have forced those of her Communion, not only to confess (with St.
De fide, ad Petrum, cap. 16.
Fulgentius) that the Eucharist is no more, then a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine,
consecrated to serve as a Memorial of the Body, and Blood, of Jesus Christ, our
Hebr. ix. 26, 28. and x. 10.
true Sacrifice, offered up (according to the particular Observation of the
Apostle) ONCE upon the Cross; but also to stop up the Mine of her most certain
Revenue, by renouncing the Imagination of her Purgatory; the Church of Rome
has raced that ancient Prayer out of her Missal; and yet, as if she had been
ashamed wholly to take it way, she has put in another Prayer instead of it,
which discovers some remainder of her former Sentiment. The Words of it are
these; Sancti Leonis Confessoris tui, atque Pontificis, annua solennitas nos
tibi reddat acceptos; ut, per haec Piae placationis Officia, illum beata
retributio comitetur, and nobis gratiae tuae dona conciliet: that is to say,
May the annual Solennity of Leo thy Confessor, and Pope, render us acceptable
to thee; that, by these Offices of pious pacification, a blessed reward may
attend him, and confer the Gifts of thy Grace upon us. Where we find,

First, That St. Leo; for whom (...) ancient. Prayer was before made, is, in
the new, constituted an Intercessour for those, who celebrate his Memory.

Secondly, That the Solennity, and Service of his Festival are called Offices
of pious pacification, not only to show, that they are acceptable to God,
looking on them with a propitious Eye; but also to insinuate a pretense of
offering therein a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God: and yet where in the same
Prayer, the Church of Rome desires for Leo, that a blessed reward may attend
him, she in some sort expresses the sense of her precedent Prayer, and shows to
what end Antiquity was induced to Pray for the Faithful departed in the Lord,
viz. to desire the perpetual continuance of their Bliss; and not to obtain
their entrance thereinto, and much less to deliver them out of any Torments, as
is at this day imagined.

But however the Case stand, Baldric, praying even for those of his Friends,
whom he believed to be in Happiness, discovers, that he was of the same Opinion
with the Church of Rome, when she prayed for Pope LEO the Great. As for
instance in the Epitaph of Natalis, Abbot of Saint Nicholas of Angiers,
deceased about the year 1097. after he had addressed this Discourse to St.
Nicholas,

-- "Tuum Deus accersivit alumnum,
"Cui dedit aeternum solenni funere somnum, etc.
-- Thy Disciple hence
The Lord has called to Eternal rest.
And in another Epitaph; -- "Defunctus sacris Ecclesiam.
hanc ossibus ornat, etc.
This Church his sacred bones adorn:


Signifying, that he believed Natalis glorified in Heaven: He concludes his
Epitaphs with these Words;

"Hic modo Natalis pro carne jacet cineratus,
"Cui noceat nullus pro carnis sorde reatus:
Natalis here, dissolved to Ashes, lies,
Against whom no guilt, or stain of flesh arise.
In like manner, in the following Epitaph, recommending him to the Protection
of Saint Nicholas, he says to him;

-- "Servi nunc memor esto tui,
"Christo commenda, quem Mundo Christus ademit.
"Huncque Patrocinii jure tuere tui:
-- Now mindful of thy servant be,
Whom Christ took hence, to Christ him recommend,
And him with thy Protection still attend:
Presupposing, not that he was in any danger, but that he stood in need of
Saint Nicholas, to be made fully assured of the perpetual enjoyment of his
Felicity. A Conception false indeed in it self, but yet was passed from hand to
hand for many Ages before, and might have been confirmed by millions of
Examples.

In those of Reynold, Archbishop of Rheims, deceased the one and twentieth of
January, 1137. after he had ranked him among the Souls Salvandae, that were to
be saved, and made this Wish; "Dispenset veniam cunctipotens animae, etc.
Pardon thy Soul he, whom all things obey;
he takes him for an Intercessour, as he in requital Prays for him; saying,
"Oramus pro te; pro nobis, quaesumus, ora, etc.
We pray for thee, thou us thy Prayers afford.


And elsewhere he lays it down as certain, that the one and twentieth of
January, the day of his Decease, "Destituit Mundo, substituitque Polo,
Snatched him from hence, to place him in the Sky;
which cannot stand without his being received into Heaven.

In those of Howel, Bishop of Man's, deceased in the year 1129. and of the Abbot
Joel, having said,

-- "Morte pari modico Deus attigit ambos,
"Ut sint translati, Sidera magna Poli, etc.
In equal death God did them both conjoyn,
Translated hence in Heaven, great Stars, to shine:
A Discourse representing them already possessed of Celestial Glory; and and
particularly of the former; -- "Coram Sancto Vota vovent Tumulo, etc.
Before his Tomb their Vows The People of Man's.
they pour:


Whence it follows, that they took him for their Patron, and must of necessity
think him in Happiness: Yet does he, nevertheless, pray for him; saying,
"Praesulis obtineat Spiritus Astra Poli, etc.
May Heaven the Prelate's Soul obtain: --
as if (contrary to his precedent Protestations) he had thought him at a great
distance from it.

In those of Audebert, Abbot of Bourg-dieux, and Archbishop of Bourges,
deceased in the year 1098. he is very liberal of his Wishes; as, "Communem
Patrem communi tangite voto,
"Ut det Pastori sedem super aethera vestro:


Again; "Audeberte, vale, sit pax tibi, luxque perennis:


Again;

"In Domino requiem Spiritus inveniat, etc.
"Omnipotens animam Pontificis foveat, etc.
To the common Father your joint Vows address,
That he your Pastor bring to happiness, etc.
Audebert, be well, Eternal peace, and light,
Thy Portion be --
May's Soul in God find rest. --
Kindly may God the Prelate's soul receive.
Who, hearing him talk after this rate, would not say, that he were out of
Heaven, deprived of light, peace, and rest? But look upon the Reverse of the
Medal, and you shall find, he looks on him, as his Patron, already possessed
of Heaven, saying,

"Tu Pater a Superis saepe revise tuos, etc.
"Vadis, te Christo per idonea signa vocante,
"Et velut emerito tibi praemia digna parante:
"Omni momento, nostri, Patron, memento,
"Et succurre gregi, mortali morte redempto.
Again;

"Nunc quoque cum Christo nos saepe revisat ab alto.
Thou, Father, from on high revisit thine, etc.
-- By Christ hence,
As a discharged Champion, thou art
Of great rewards called to receive thy Part;
O Patron, ever-mindfull of us be,
And those relieve, whom mortal death set free.
With Christ from Heaven often revisit us.
What could he have said more to St. Peter, or St. Paul, according to the
Theology of that Time?

In that of William, Bishop of Engoulesm, having invited those of his Diocese
to worship his Body, he advises them to pray for him;

-- " Artus venerare Paternos,
"Dic quoque, Transcendat Gulielmi Spiritus Astra.
Thy Father's body having worshipped, pray,
That William's soul to Heaven may find the way.
What could have been more ridiculous, then to have persuaded People to the
Veneration of a Body, whose Spirit should, at the same time, have been in a
place of Pain, and deprived of Glory?

In that of Gerald of Orleans, he says;

-- "Datur hic sua portio Terrae,
"Spiritus in tenues vivens elabitur auras,
"Cui tamen e rebus lutulentis si quid inhaesit,
"Expediat totum clemens miseratio Christi,
"His Precibus Lector (Amen adjiciendo) faveto.
-- Here Earth has had her share,
The Spirit lives dissolved to subtle Air,
Which yet, if stained with ought terrestrial,
May Christ, in his great Mercy, pardon all,
T advance these Prayers, Reader, Amen let fall.
Since then he conceived, that, at the fall of the Body, when it became the
portion of the Earth, the Spirit lived, and was escaped, who sees not, that he
believed it to be in some other place, then that of a grievous punishment, and
that the Prayer, he afterward makes, tends rather to assure the Expiation of
his Offenses, then to implore it for him, in as much as the Mercy of God is not
communicated after death, but to those, who obtained it, while they lived?

In that of Durand, Bishop of Cler-mont, deceased the nineteenth of November,
1095. during the time of the Council, or Croisado for the Conquest of the Holy
Sepulcher was published, he exhorts the People of Auvergn to worship him, and
thereby declares him to be in Happiness; saying,

"Arvernus sanctos cineres reverenter habeto,
"Atque Patrocinio tutior esto suo.
Worship his sacred ashes, Cler-mont, and
Thou shall in his protection safer stand.
In those of Gerald, Abbot of Selue Majour, in Bourdelois, he is yet more
excessive, as has been observed in the precedent Chapter. And though the
Prayers he makes in the Epitaphs of his other Friends; as Reynold, Clear, Guy,
Raoul, Clerembant, William of Mont-soreau, Berenger, Archdeacon of Angers,
Froden of Angers, Peter, Dean of Dol, Reinould, Canon of Poictiers, Geoffrey of
Rheims, Alexander of Tours, Eriland, Peter Prior, Eudes, Abbot of St. John
d'Angely, Raoul, Archdeacon of Poictiers, Chevalier Bouchard, Chevalier
Rahier, the Countess Osanna, Guy Tourangeau, William, Abbot of Bourgueil, and
Herard of Loudun; though, I say, those Prayers might presuppose the Belief of
Purgatory, yet, since they are consistent with the other Presuppositions, and
that Baldric made the like for Persons, whom he believed crowned with Glory in
Heaven; it cannot be safely concluded, that he ever intended to apply any one
of them to the common Opinion current in his Time, and which the Church of Rome
maintains at this day. The same is to be said of those, who, after him, and, to
this present, have declared, and do declare (according to the Custom of the
Church of Rome, and even in her Communion) that the Persons, whose Memory they
have celebrated by their Verses, and Sepulchral Inscriptions, are in Happiness,
and possessed of celestial Glory. For though they do not openly impugn the
Opinion of Purgatory, as the Protestants do, and though they use such
Expressions, as might seem to maintain it, yet do they not oblige themselves to
maintain it in Effect: and (without any injury done them) it may be taken for
certain, that they believed no more of it, then the Reverend Peter Chastellain,
Bishop of Mascon, who, having on the three and twentieth of May, 1547. advanced
into Glory the great King Francis, and scandalized the College of Sorbonne,
which looked on his Discourse, as a Piece of Lutheranism, flatly contradicting
the common Opinion of Purgatory, and demanded of him either the formal
Retractation, or Explication of it, thought it satisfaction enough, to give the
Complainers (and that in the presence of King Henry the Second, and all his
Court) a Jest, instead of an Apology for his Funeral-Oration, and, to stop
their Mouths, tell them, that he denied not, he had been there, but that it was
only See Thuanus, Hist. lib. 3.
to take a Glass of Wine, as he passed by, which Discourse was to them an
absolute Put-off, and caused them to be laughed at wherever they came.

CHAP. XLII. Of the true Motives, which the Ancients had to Pray for the
Blessed Saints in Heaven.
BUt not further to mention Baldric, or the Bishop of Mascon, it will be
demanded, what Motive inclined those, who, since the year 500. are found to
have made Prayers for the Dead, to do so. And here I am willing to acknowleg,
that there was no more noise of the Opinion, which had so much distracted the
Spirits of Christians of the Second, and Third Age, deceived by the Pretended
Sibylline Writing, and presupposing that all Souls, without exception,
descended to Hell, were there confined, till the Resurrection of their Bodies,
and exposed not only to the temptations, but also to the violences of Evil
Spirits; which to prove, Justine Martyr alleged, to Trypho the Jew, the
pretended raising of Samuel by the Witch of En-dor. For, though the most
ancient Prayers (as, for Instance, those, which St. Augustine made for his
Mother) seem to have been drawn up by that Precedent; and that the Libera, if
it be applied to the Departed, rather then to the Faithful in Agonies, and
preparing themselves for death, requires we should think they were; yet had
they, even from the Time of Tertullian, seventy years, or thereabouts, after
the first coming abroad of the Sibylline Writing so called, begun to exempt the
Martyrs from the necessity of descending into Hell; and so, by little and
little, the minds of the Christians struggling with, and overcoming the
Imposture, that first Hypothesis was cast out of doors, yet so, as that it was
done without a rejection of the Forms, which those, who maintained it, had
introduced into the Public Service of the Church. And thence comes it, that
St. Ambrose prays for his Brother Satyrus; saying, Tibi nunc, omnipotens Deus,
innoxiam commendo animam, etc. Now, O Almighty God, I recommend unto thee his
innocent soul. And for Valentinian the Second, and Gratian, in these words, Hic
adhuc intercessionem, etc. Should I still make Intercession here for him, to
whom I dare promise a reward? Put into my hands the sacred Mysteries; let us
with a devout affection demand rest for him; give me the celestial Sacraments;
let us attend his religious soul with our Oblations. Psa. cxxxiv. 2.
Lift up your hands with me in the Sanctuary, O ye People; to the end, at
least, that by this Present we may recompense his merits, etc. No night shall
go over my head; but that I will make you some present of my prayers; in all my
Visitations I shall remember you, etc. And for the Great Theodosius; Praesumo
de Domino etc. I so far presume of the Lord, that he will Psalm. v. 2.
hear the voice of my cry, wherewith I attend thy pious soul, etc. Psalm. cxvi.
7.
Grant perfect rest unto thy servant Theodosius, even that rest, which thou
have prepared for thy Saints. May his soul return thither, whence it descended,
where he cannot feel the 2 Cor. xv. 55.
sting of death, where he may be satisfied, that this death is the end not of
Nature, but of sin, etc.

From which Prayers it is to be observed, by the way,

First, That this Holy Prelate, expressing that he considered not his prayers
for Valentinian, who died a Catechumen, but a Person very Religious, and truly
inclined to Piety, as an Office, whereof he stood in need; but as a simple
Effect of his good Wishes, manifestly discovers, that not any one of the
Faithful, departed in the Lord, stands in any necessity of the suffrages of
the surviving; and accordingly, that the Protestants, who believe, that, in
matter of Religion, nothing should be attempted without the express order of
God himself, speaking in his Word, cannot be accounted criminals for their
declining an act, which is not (even in their Judgment, who practiced it) of
any necessity, or any way beneficial to those, for whom the voluntary devotion,
or Will Worship of men designs it.

Secondly, That St. Ambrose, who calls the Eucharist, celebrated in memory of
Valentinian, and, upon his occasion, a Present, which he makes his Friend, and
by which he requites him, could not have believed it to be either the Body of
the Son of God, or the Offering-up of that Body, or, in general, a Propitiatory
Sacrifice properly so called. For who could (without an impious Absurdity)
imagine, that the real Body of our Savior should be so much at our disposal,
as that we might make Presents of it to our Friends? etc. that the Proper
Oblation of the same Body, being infinitely more precious, then we, or any
thing, that can proceed from us, is, or could be a supplement, which we adjoyn
to our Prayers for our Friends; and that this kind of Present is as the meanest
kindness we can do them, so as that we might say, with St. Ambrose, that, at
least, by that Present we requite them? It seems then he pretended not to do
what the Church of Rome thinks to do at this day in the Masses of Requiem. For
she professes to present the Oblation she makes therein, whatever it may be,
not to the deceased, for whom she prays; but only to God, for, or on the
behalf of the deceased. She conceives also, that her Host, which she believes
to be properly, and really the Body of the Son of God, surpasses in value, not
only our Prayers; but what ever is most excellent, either in Earth, or in
Heaven, among the Angels, and Spirits of the glorified Saints. And though she,
who cannot endure the Protestants, because they are unwilling to submit their
Consciences to any other Rule, then that of Faith, contained in the Sacred
Scriptures, has born in her Bosom, and suffered unreproved those inconsiderate
Children, who have had the boldness to write that the solemn Sacrifice might be
offered to Creatures; As when the Author of the great Chronicle of the
Low Countries thrust in this into his History, that, on the 27th of October,
1467. Charles, last Duke of Burgundy, who conquered the People about Liege,
Ecclesiae Lovaniensis universo Clero commisit, omnipotenti Deo, suaeque sanctae
Genitrici offerre suo nomine sacrificium, etc. gave express Order to all the
Clergy of the Church of Lovain, to offer unto Almighty God, and to his most
Holy Mother, the solemn Sacrifice in his name; never considering, either that
the Oblation of the solemn Sacrifice is (by the confession of all) the act of
Latria, and sovereign adoration, due to God alone, as being the most proper
Object, and most worthy of it; nor that the most Holy Mother of our Lord,
though blessed (according to the saying of the Angel) among Women, never ceased
being a Creature, and that she is such now in Heaven as much, as she was before
she was crowned with Glory; or that to address to her, either separately, or
jointly with God Almighty, the solemn Sacrifice, is to serve her with the
service of Latria, and to transfer to the Creature the Glory of the Creator:
Or when Jovianus Pontanus, (a Great Person otherwise) Counselor, and
Secretary of State to Ferdinand of Arragon King of Naples, feigned, Hist. Neap.
lib. 2. page 581.
that St. Michael, the Archangel, appearing to Laurence, Bishop of Sipontum in
Apulia, had entertained him with this horrid, and necessarily-false Discourse,
concerning the Grot of the Mountain Garganus, now called Mont di S. Angelo;
Michael ego sum, qui, hoc excavato saxo, hac antro, hoc habitaculo, his assidue
manantibus stillis abluturus sum, ac deleturus meam ad aram confugientium
mortalium errata, etc. I am Michael, who, having hollowed this Rock, this Cave,
this Habitation, shall, by these perpetually falling drops, wash away, and take
off the sins of those, who have recourse to my Altar: as, if ever any one of
the blessed Angels of Light, of whom St. Augustine sometime said to the
Heathens, In Psalm. xcvi.
Utinam and vos illos colere velletis, facile enim ab ipsis disceretis non
illos colere, etc. I wish you would also attempt to serve them, (as sometime
did St. Apoc. xix. 10. and xxii. 8.
John) for you might learn of them not to serve them; as if, I say, it had been
a thing becoming any of the Angels to importune men for Temples, and Altars,
or, at least, to erect them to themselves; or, lastly, to attribute to
themselves the honor of washing away, and blotting out the sins of men; or, as
if any other, then the Son of God Hebr. i. 3.
had purged our sins, and that Heb. ix. 26.
by the sacrifice of himself appearing now once for to put away sin, Hebr. x.
10. xii. 14.
sanctifying those, who are his, through the offering of his Body once for all,
having offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, and by that offering for ever
perfected them, that are sanctified: Upon which account St. John says, that he
is the Propitiation for our sins, and that his blood cleanses us from all ^n;
yet this very Church of Rome, I say, who has, in those of her Communion,
forborne to take any notice of the wicked, and scandalous Expressions we have
even now refuted, made no difficulty, after St. Augustine, to declare those
guilty of sacrilege, who should presume to sacrifice to any of the Saints; nor,
in imitation of him, to affirm, that it is a less sin to return drunk from the
Memorials (or, Sepulchers) of the Martyrs, then to sacrifice to them fasting.
But considering, with the whole ancient Church in her Liturgies, the things
distributed in the Eucharist no otherwise, then as gifts, and presents, which
God gives us, and which he creates, and daily leaves to our disposal, though by
their consecration we hold, with the Holy Fathers, that they become Religious
Sacraments, Figures, Images, Signs, and Similitudes of the Body and Blood of
Christ, nay, that very Body, and Blood in a Sacramental way, no man ought to
think they absolutely cease to be what they were (according to the condition of
their nature) before the Consecration, viz. aliments of refection, created for
our use, and left to our discretion, to be communicated to those, who are with
us, whether effectually, or in outward appearance, in the Communion of the
Church. Upon this account St. Ambrose might say, that he made a Present of it
to Valentinian, a Catechumen indeed, as to outward appearance, but in effect
one of the Faithful, in as much, as he had made a Vow to receive Baptism; much
after the same manner, as at this day the Church of Rome, in the distribution
of the Bread, which she calls Holy, reserves (even for the absent, that are in
Communion with her, whom the Persons, that offer it, are willing to honor)
their portion, as a kind of Honourary Present.

Thirdly, I entreat the Reader to observe, that St. Ambrose, who had said of
the Great Theodosius, that he had attained salvation through his humility, in
imitation of David, that his soul was returned into her rest, etc. that she had
made haste to enter into the City of Jerusalem, into true glory, in the Kingdom
of the blessed, in the enjoyment of perpetual light, rejoicing in the fruits of
the reward for the things he had done in his body, does not, when he concludes
his Discourse with this Wish, Grant thy servant perfect rest, that rest, which
thou have prepared for thy Saints, any way insinuate (to the prejudice of what
he had said before) that the Soul of that Prince was then (when he spoke) in
expectation of her rest; for he adds immediately after, that he remains in
light, and is glorified in the Assemblies of the Saints, in the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus, enjoying the society of Gratian his Brother-in-law, of Flaccilla
his Daughter, and of the great Constantine: but he desires, on his behalf, not
absolutely rest, since he was possessed of it, as to his Soul, but the perfect
rest, the possession whereof he could not arrive to in Body, and Soul, till
after the Resurrection, and in comparison to which, what he was then possessed
of could not be accounted other, then imperfect, and, as it were, half; since
he enjoyed it, but in one of the parts of his Person, the other being to remain
under the power of Death, till the Last day, at which time it was to be
rejoyned to the other, that they might be jointly received into Glory.

Into this Doctrine, which, in the main, presupposes the Hypothesis of the
Protestants, concerning the Beatitude of the Faithful, as to their souls, from
the Moment of their Body's dissolution, we find a little rubbish shuffled;
which the Protestants do not conceive any one should force them to take upon
their account.

In the first place, according to the then Custom, but without any Command, or
Promise of God, and without the Example of the Apostolic Church, (the only
means able to Authorize his Action) St. Ambrose prays for him, whom he
acknowledged in Bliss, in the Kingdom of God; a kind of Office, which he
himself, in his Funeral Oration for Valentinian; had declared purely Arbitrary,
and proceeding from the Will Worship, whereof St. Paul had, about three hundred
and thirty years before, expressly advertized the Colossians, and by them the
whole Church through all Ages, to beware:

And secondly, where he prays, that the Soul of Theodosius might return into
the rest, whence it had descended, he not only makes a superfluous Wish, and
consequently ill-grounded, according to his own confession; since that Soul was
already gotten into the place, where he wished it: But he shows further, that
he had a little Tincture of Origene's Venom, whose Imagination it was, that the
souls, having sinned in Heaven, and being forced to depart thence, were
descended, guilty of Crimes, and, as such, had been disposed into Bodies. An
Opinion, which was condemned in the year 399. by the unanimous consent of the
whole Church; which constantly maintains, even to this day, and that every
where, that all Souls are produced by God, at the very instant of their
infusion into the Bodies they are to animate; and that, for as much as they
were not at all, before they were united to their Bodies, they could not either
be, or sin, in Heaven, or, consequently, descend thence; as St. Ambrose
presupposed: that, which is not absolutely, neither having (before it is) any
Being, nor pre-existing, nor capable of either Action, or Motion from one place
to another, or of any Passion any way conceivable by us.

But as to the main point, it is manifest, that St. Ambrose, and all the Church
of his Time, had absolutely rejected the first Hypothesis, derived from the
pretended Sibylline Writing, maintaining, that all Souls, without exception,
descend into Hell, after their departure out of the Bodies, wherewith they
(every one, as to its own particular) constituted humane Persons; and that that
other Branch of Error, which had prepossessed the Spirit of Justine Martyr,
and his Contemporaries, whereby they imagined, that the Souls of the greatest
Saints, during their pretended detention in Hell, were, in some sort, subject
to the power of Evil Spirits, and upon that account, stood in need of being
relieved by the Prayers of the Living, imploring on their behalf the Protection
of God, and his good Angels, was no longer held, it being the persuasion even
of those, who continued to make the same Prayers, as they, who had been of that
Belief, that the true Christians, departing out of the Body, were with the
Lord, in an eternal rest, and absolute safety. In so much, that these, who
recommended the Dead to God, grounded not their so doing on either of these two
Motives, St. Ambrose telling us plainly concerning Valentinian the Second.
Requiescamus (inquit Cant. vil. 11.
anima pia) in Castellis, ostendens illic esse quietem tutiorem, quae septo
Coelestis refugii munita, atque vallata, non exagitatur soecularium incursibus
Bestiarum, etc. Let us rest (says the Faithful soul) in Towers, showing that
there (where she is received) there is a more assured Repose, which being
encompassed, and fortified with the Enclosure of celestial refuge, is not
disturbed by the Incursions of the Beasts of this World; that is to say, Evil
Spirits, and Wicked Men. And concerning Theodosius; Lapsum sentire non poterit,
in illa requie constitutits, etc. Being seated in that Rest, he cannot be
subject to fall from it.

And Paulinus, not long before the Death of St. Ambrose, to Pammachius,
concerning his Wife Paulina, deceased in the year 396. Satis docuit Rex
Propheta, etc. The Royal Prophet has sufficiently 2 Samuel xii. 13.
taught us how far we should be troubled at the departure of our Friends, and
Kindred, to wit, so, as rather to think of our Journey after them, then of that,
which they are already come to the end of. It is indeed an Expression of Piety
to be cast down at the taking away hence of Just men; but it is also an Holy
thing, to be raised up into Gladness upon the Romans xii. 12.
Hope, and Faith of God's Promises, and to say to him, that it is in trouble,
Psalm. xliii. 1, 5.
Why art thou sad? Be it so, that Piety bewail for a time, yet is it necessary,
that Faith should always be joyful.

Upon this Ground was it, that all those, who, for the space of six hundred
years, made it their Business to write the Lives of the Faithful, accounted
them among the Blessed; not admitting any adjournment of their Peace, and
Felicity, after their death. In so much as Gregory, Archbishop of Tours,
deceased the seventeenth of November, 592. about which time Pope GREGORY, first
of that Name, was designing the first-draught of Purgatory, should not have
spoken of those Virtuous Persons, whose memory he celebrated, in other Terms,
then those, who had preceeded him: saying of Gregory, Bishop of Langres; of
Nicetius, Bishop of Lions; of Porcianus, Ursus, and Caluppa, Religious Men;
Migravit ad Dominum, etc. He is gone hence to the Lord: of Gullus, Bishop of
Cler-mont; of Nicetius, Bishop of Trier; and of Lupicinus; Spiritum, coelo
intentum, proemisit ad Dominum, etc. He sent before (his Body) to the Lord his
Soul, employed in Thoughts of Heaven: of Friard; Christus animam suscepit in
Coelo, etc. Christ has received his soul into Heaven: of Martius, Ad Coronam
commigravit, etc. He is gone hence to receive a Crown: of Venantius; Vitam
percepturus aeternam, emicuit saeculo, etc. He is hurried hence to receive
eternal Life: of Leobord; Manifestum est, eum ab Angelis susceptum, etc. It is
manifest, he has been entertained by Angels. In a word, the great number of
those, who admire the Novelties, that have crept into the Opinion of Purgatory,
has been no hindrance, but that the Authors of Lives, who have written since
the year 600. have spoken, and believed of their Dead consonantly to what had
been done by the most Ancient.

If therefore, even in the Time of St. Ambrose, the Opinion of the Millenaries
was so lost to credit, that St. Hierome, who, out of respect toward the Great
Persons, that had followed it, forbore to express his Thoughts thereof, and to
number it among Heresies, thought it a great Tenderness toward it, to assign
it a place among the dreaming Imaginations of misinformed Spirits; it is not
to be conceived, that after the year 500. descending still, it should have
regained any Partisans, and that there should have been any man, whose Prayers
for his deceased Friends proceeded from that Motive, so, as that he thought
himself obliged to wish them their part in the First Resurrection, which no man
then understood in the sense, wherein Tertullian, and those of his Time, had
conceived it. But indeed, many, even till after the year 600. relying on that
Hypothesis, partly extracted out of the pretended Oracles of the Counterfeit
Sibyl, that All Souls should pass through the last Conflagration of the World,
demanded, on the Behalf of their departed Friends two things. One, that they
might pass through that great Conflagration, as through a Purgative Fire, not
to be prejudiced thereby, no more, then the Gold melted in the Crucible.
Another, that they might have their part with all the Saints in the
Resurrection to Glory. Upon this persuasion, Kindasvind, King of the
West-Goths, in Spain, who reigned between the year 642. and 649. had caused
these Verses to be written on the Tomb of his Wife Reciberga;

-- Ego te (Conjux) quia vincere fata nequivi,
Funere perfunctam, Sanctis commendo tuendam;
Ut, cum Flamma vorax veniet comburere Terras,
Coetibus ipsorum merito sociata resurgas.
Since death, on my desires, would not thee spare,
Of thee departed may the Saints take care;
That thou, with them, may rise again that day,
When of the Fire the Earth shall be the prey.
The First of these Demands has lost much of that Consideration with those,
who have embraced the New Opinion of Purgatory, which seemed to require the
Example of the most Ancient, and the Exercise of the same Prayers, as they had
made use of. For, though they make mention of the Last day's Fire, and are
absolutely silent concerning Purgatory, yet do not those in the Western-Church,
who pray for the Dead, hardly fasten their thought on any thing, but their
deliverance out of the pretended place of Pain, and their disposal into rest;
and I am to learn, whether there be any, who think of the Resurrection, to
which alone relate, even to this day, both the Texts, and Prayers usually read
in the Office of the Dead. Besides, it be thought shameful, to pray (as in the
Times of St. Chrysostom, Prudentius, and St. Augustine) for the Damned; not
out of any hope to attain their absolute deliverance, but only some
alleviation of the Pai^s they suffer in Hell. And the Legends of Fa^tonilla,
and Trajan, rescued out of eternal Damnation by the Prayers of St. Thecla, and
Gregory the Great, are somewhat offensive to the Learned even of the Roman
Communion, who are not a little troubled to excuse Orat. de his, qui in Fide
dormierunt.
John Damascene, as to that particular. To be short, not one of the Doctors
before the year 590. proposed to himself any such thing, as either the
confinement of the Dead in Purgatory, or Prayer for their deliverance out of it.

CHAP. XLIII. The Obscurity, and Uncertainty of the Opinion of Purgatory.
GREGORY the Great, the first of all those, of whom we have remaining among us
any Monuments to this purpose, having in the year 593. begun to fasten
together, in his Dial. lib. 4. cap. 40.
Dialogues, and Sermons, the Discourses he had heard, and which he recommends
to us, with this notable Observation, that they were Novelties, not heard of
before, since he brings in Peter, his Deacon, putting this Question to him,
Quid hoc est, quaeso te, quod, in his extremis temporibus, tammulta de animabus
clarescunt, quae ante latuerunt, etc. What means it, I beseech you, that in
these Last Times, there are discovered, concerning souls, so many things which
were hidden before? The Leaven so spread it self since, that in the Time of
Hist. Angl. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Beda, viz. one hundred and twenty years after St. Gregory, some numbered cold
and temperate Purgatories, as well, as hot ones; which was further heightened by
Visions, and Prodigious Relations, as if the confidence of Feigning should, as
it grew Elder, grow also stronger. But, though there were no other reason to
quarrel at this Opinion, then the Novelty of it, as such, as had not appeared,
in the West, before the end of the sixth Age, and could never obtain
Naturalization in the East, and South, where it is yet unknown to the Vulgar,
and discarded by the Learned; and the irresolution, wherewith its Principal,
and first Promoter, Pope Gregory, spoke, whether of the place of Hell, or the
activity of Infernal Fire upon the Spirits, which (according to his
Imagination) are tormented therein: yet they clearly justify, that he Treated
not the Question of the State of the dead; but as it were, by conjecture, and
upon the Imaginations of Persons so apt to be misinformed, as that there
needed only some common Report, and the affirmation of a confident Dreamer, to
persuade them to any thing. I know well enough, that Cardinal Bellarmine, to
derive the Business somewhat higher, cites St. Augustine; who, being in some
difficulty about the Explication of those Words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. v. 15.
He shall be saved, yet so, as by Fire, had, about the year 410. made use of
these Words, which manifestly discover how far he was unresolved in the Case:
De Fide, and Operibus, cap. 16.
Sive in hac vita tantum ista homines patiuntur, sive etiam post hanc vitam
talia quaedam Judicia subsequuntur, non abhorret (quantum arbitror) a ratione
veritatis iste intellectus hujus Sententiae: veruntamen etiamsi est alius, qui
mihi non occurrit, eligendus, non cogimur dicere injustis, etc. Salvi eritis,
etc. Whether it be in this Life only, that men suffer such things (that is to
say, doleful Regrets for the things of this World, which they have carnally
loved) or, that, after this Life, some such Judgments follow, this way of
understanding the place of the Apostle, is not (in my Judgment) repugnant to
the reason of Truth: yet, if we must pitch upon another sense, which is not
obvious to me, we are not forced to say to the unjust, etc. You shall be saved.
Continuing still in the same posture, about the year 419. he writ to his Friend
Laurence, Enchirid. cap. 69.
Tale aliquid, etc. That some such thing may happen, even after this Life, is
not incredible; and whether it be really so, may be questioned, and it may be
either found true, or remain concealed; to wit, whether some of the Faithful,
according as they have more, or less, loved perishable Goods, may be sooner, or
later saved, through a Purgatory Fire. And note, that having not any thing more
certain to answer, he kept to the same Terms in resolving the first Question
proposed to him by Dulcitius. Nay, in the year 424. which was the seventh
before his death, publishing his Books Of the City of God, he harped on the
same Doctrine, saying, Lib. 21. cap. 26. See also, to the same purpose, cap.
26, and 24. in Psalm. 37. de Genesi, adv. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Post istius sane corporis mortem, etc. But as for the time between the bodily
death, and Last Judgment, if any one say, that the Spirits of the Dead are, all
that while, tried in such a Fire, as they do not any way feel, who were not
subject to the same Inclinations, and Affections in this Life, that their Wood,
Straw, and Stubble might be consumed; but that others, who carry hence such
Buildings, do only here, or both here and there, or here so, as not there,
pass through the purging Fire of a Transitory Tribulation, which burns the
things of this World, though Venial in respect of Damnation, I reprove him not;
for that it is possible, he is in the right.

But the Proceeding of the present Church of Rome, who triumphs so much upon
these Passages, whereby she pretends to draw St. Augustine to her side, is so
much the more unjust toward him; the more she presumes on the Testimony of a
Witness, who does not only not say any thing as to what she would have him,
but absolutely destroys it, in as much, as he speaks of a Fire, which some feel
even in this Life, and others after it. Whence it follows, that his Imagination
reached no further, then a Metaphorical, and Intentional Fire, which may be
felt, even during the Life of this Body; whereas the Roman Church supposes a
real, and material one, which burns not the living, but torments the spirits of
the Departed.

Secondly, That he is not confident of his having found out the true sense of
St. Paul's Words: but, ingenuously, confesses; that they may be understood in
some other, to him absolutely unknown.

Thirdly, That, treading, as it were, upon Thorns, he is not over-ready to give
us any thing for certain; but entertains us with a simple Conjecture; which
might be brought to Question, whether it were so, or not: which also he but
slightly advances; as finding it not contributary to ought Impious, yet without
imposing any necessity to admit it, and which, in fine, he lets pass under a
Whether, an It may be, a Peradventure: so that, not presuming himself to
approve it, all the kindness he has for it, is expressed in his telling us,
that he does not disallow it.

Fourthly, That the very thing, which he proposes so doubtfully, may be
adjusted to the Opinion, which the most Ancient had had of the general
Conflagration of the Universe at the end of the World: whose Imagination it
was, that it should serve as a general Lustration, through which the Spirits of
the Saints, even that of the Blessed Virgin, were to pass, and who reflected on
nothing less, then the Purgatory, proposed to us at this day.

Fifthly, That, though he should assure us, that that certain Fire of Grief,
whereof he speaks, shall be a material Fire, that it shall burn the Spirits of
men, and that the Torment, which they shall endure thereby, shall afflict them
from their departure out of the Bodies, they had cast off: yet should not his
assurance be of greater weight to the Protestants, then to the Church of Rome,
which submits not to his Authority; but only in what she finds consistent with
her own Opinions, land confidently rejects what she quarrels at. For, if she
think it just to dissent from him, when he teaches De Trin. lib. 1. cap. 8.
that In the Deity there are three Substances, that Lib. 3. cap. 8 and lib. 4.
cap. 1.
The Angels are corporeal, that Enchirid. 46.
The sins of the Fathers make the Children liable to punishment, that The souls
(of all the Departed) are (between the day of their departure out of this
World, and that of the Last Judgment) Ibid. cap. 109 ad Qu. 2. Dulcitii.
shut up in secret Receptacles, that the Prayers made for them are beneficial
to them, to the end, that either the Remission may be full, or that their
Damnation be more tolerable, and that those Prayers, made on the behalf of the
Damned, are a kind of consolation to the ^iving; all which things the said
Holy Prelate positively affirms: why should she take it ill, that (after her
Example) we should refuse absolutely to depend on his Authority. especially in
a subject, wherein he does not pretend any, in as much, as it is his own
acknowledgment, that he was not resolved, what he should should hold? What
greater Necessity is there, that we should determine for the Affirmative, when
he, himself, makes it a Question, Whether there be after this life a Purgatory
for the Spirits of the Deceased; then, when he doubts, Whether the Sun, Moon,
and Stars belong to the society of the blessed Spirits in Heaven? Though we had
read no other Lecture of Modesly, then the reservedness, which prevailed with
him to forbear resolving ought upon these two Questions, do we not deserve
commendation for having (in imitation of him) kept the Scales in our Hands,
rather, then Blame, which we must never expect to avoid, if, without pregnant
Proof, we affirmed what he proposed only Problematically, and without any
decision. If it may, with any color, be pretended, that the Bent of his
inclination was the Affirmative of a Purgatory of some kind, or other, and
that it should be a Pattern for us to do the like, why should not his
confidence in denying the De Civit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 9.
Antipodes force us by a like Negative, to dispute against our own Experience,
whose Testimony, for these 150. years, assures us he was mistaken? Were it not
much better, that those, who would make use of his Name, in a Cause he never
maintained, should behave themselves according to his Moderation, and protest
with him, Ad Qu. 2. Dulcitii.
I would, if it might be; or, rather I will, if it may be, be overcome by the
Truth, which is not openly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, in as much as
that, which is repugnant to them, cannot in any sort, be either called, or
accounted Truth. I therefore entreat them, in the fear of God, to take it into
their serious Consideration,

First, Whether it be possible, their Belief, such as they propose it to us,
can be the same with that of St. Augustine, who, never (for ought we could ever
learn) determined in the Affirmative of any Purgatory; much less of that, which
the Monastical Revelations have furnished us with, in despite of the most
Venerable Antiquity; but has expressly declared, by his Sermons, that he
acquiesced in the common Sentiment of the Church of his Time, which held, that
those, whom God calls to himself, are Translated, at their Death, either into
the actual enjoyment of their Felicity, or confined in the Place of their
eternal Punishment. To this Effect does he express himself to his Church, upon
the eleventh Chapter of St. John. In Joann. Tract. 49.
Receptus est Pauper, receptus est Dives: sed ille in sinu Abrahae; ille, etc.
The Poor man was received, the Rich man was received: but the former into
Abraham' s Bosom; the later where he should be thirsty, and not find a drop of
Water: the souls of all men therefore (that I may hence take occasion to
instruct your Charity) all souls have, after their departure out of this World,
their several Retreats: the Good are in Bliss, the Wicked in Torments, etc. The
rest, which is given immediately after Death, whoever is worthy of it, receives
it immediately, when he Dies. And upon the First of St. John, Tract. 10.
Ille, qui vixit, and mortuus est, etc. He, who has lived, is also dead, his
Soul is transported into other places, his Body is disposed into the Ground;
whether those words, (viz. those of his Last Will) be put in execution, or not,
it does not concern him; he does, he endures quite another thing, he either
rejoices in Abraham' s Bosom, or in eternal Fire prays for a little Water. I
know Cardinal Bellarmine either thought, or pretended to think, that all could
be deduced from those Words, was, that the Souls of the Faithful are,
immediately after their Departure out of this World, gathered into rest, in as
much as assured of their eternal Salvation, and that thence they derive great
Joy; but that to some it is not given without the admixture of Temporal Pains.
But I maintain, that his Commentary is a formal corruption of the Text, to
which he applies it; in as much as S. Augustine gives us to observe therein, as
things immediately opposite, the Good, and the Wicked, the Joy of the former in
Abraham's Bosom, and the Torments of the later in eternal Fire: so that, as the
Torment of these is an absolute Privation of Joy, and Rest; so the Joy, and
Rest of the other is necessarily an absolute exemption from Torment. Besides, I
do not see how long any can number among those, who rejoice, and are in Bliss,
the Spirits of such, as are supposed to suffer more, then could be suffered in
this Life; and much less, how the Believer, dead in the Lord, receives (when he
dies) his Rest, and Joy, if he be then confined to Places of Punishment; and
upon that very account is not in his Rest. To salve then so strange a
Conception, we must say, that to Be in rest signifies, not to be in rest, and
to rejoice may be taken in the same sense, as to be tormented. But whom will
they persuade to this, unless those, who have suffered such a dislocation of
Understanding, as has made them incapable of either discerning, or disallowing
any distorsion of words?

Secondly, I earnestly entreat those, who are in Communion with the Church of
Rome, to tell me conscientiously, whether they think it possible, that St.
Augustine held their Purgatory for an Article of Faith, when he is so far from
making a certain acknowledgment of any, that he leaves it to every one (after
his Example) to put it to the Question, Whether there be any, or no. Will they
say, he was so weakly instructed, that he was ignorant, that Tenent (if so be
it were such, as they would have it) made, or ought to make part of the
Catholic Doctrine, or that the Catholic Doctrine is duly professed, when
those, who are called to teach it, openly declare they doubt thereof? It must
then needs follow, that Purgatory was not known to the Christians of that Age,
and therefore much less to those, who had been Disciples of the Apostles.

CHAP. XLIV. That the Proofs, produced by Cardinal Bellarmine for Purgatory,
are Weak, and Defective.
CArdinal Bellarmine, who has undertaken to prove the contrary, cannot acquit
himself, without being forced to shameful shifts, and calling to his
Assistance such Witnesses, as depose only on the behalf of Prayer for the
Dead; as if that Prayer, which St. Epiphanius assures us to have been made, in
his Time, for all the Saints, without exception, never either had, or could
have had any other Ground, then the Purgatory held by the Church of Rome. He
cites, to this purpose, Councels, almost all Latin, viz. the Third of
Carthage, Assembled the first of September, 397. and the Fourth, held the sixth
of November, 398. the Third of Orleans, celebrated the three and twentieth of
June, 533. the First of Braga, convocated the first of May, 563. the
Collection, compiled, at the same Time, by Martin, Bishop of Dumium, and
afterward Archbishop of Braga; the First Council of Chaalons upon the Saone,
Assembled in the year 650. and that, which the Greeks held in the Trullum of
Constantinople, in the year 691. Nay, he makes account to put us off also with
some Councels, Assembled by the Popes, for the maintaing of Abuses as well in
Doctrine, as Discipline; as that of Lateran, under Innocent the Third, in the
year 1215. that of Florence, under Eugenius the Fourth, in the year 1439. and
that of Trent; under Pius the Fourth: as if the Authority of these last should
have any other Effect, then to provoke the just disgust of the Protestants.
Besides, to strengthen the Dose, he makes no small Stir with two Counterfeit
Pieces, advanced by shameless Impostours, under the Names of the Sixth Council
of Rome, under Symmachus; and of that of Worms, held, I know not when, nor by
whom. Nay, to give us an Essay of his own Abilities, in such a Case, after he
had cited the sixty ninth Canon of the Collection made by Martin of Braga,
instead of the sixty eighth, he falsely pretends, that he took it out of the
Synods of the Greeks; never considering, that in that Collection we have nine
Canons of the First Council of Toledo, and two out of the third and fourth of
Carthage, with thirteen others, which are not to be found in any of the
Councels now extant, either Greek, or Latin, and that the sixty eighth, which
he places in the sixty ninth rank, is of that Number.

Next he cites the Liturgies, which go under the Names of St. James, St. Basil,
St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, etc. and furnish us (as do also the Councels)
only with Prayer for the dead, which not only has nothing common with the
Purgatory held by the Church of Rome; but presupposes what is directly
contrary; as assuring us, that those, for whom it is made, are not in Torment,
but in Rest, and Peace.

Thence he passes to the Greek Fathers, and, upon the first start, alleges unto
us (as taking it from St. Clemens Romanus, St. Denis the Areopagite, and St.
Athanasius of Alexandria) the Constitutions, forged under the Name of the said
St. Clement, about two hundred years after his Martyrdom; the Hierarchy,
composed above four hundred years after the death of the said St. Denis; and
the Answers to the Questions of Antiochus, written by Athanasius of Antioch,
who was later, then him of Alexandria, by four hundred years. Then he produces
St. Gregory Nazianzene, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Chrysostom, and
Theophylact, Archbishop of Bulgaria, who lived after the year 1000. and,
following the steps of those, who had preceded him, tells us only of Prayer
for the dead.

As for the Latins, he produces Tertullian, St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, St.
Hierome, St. Paulinus of Nola, St. Augustine, Gregory the Great, Isidore of
Sevil, Victor, Bishop, not of Utica (as many conceive) but of Ucetia, and
Bernard; not one of whom Treats of any thing, but Prayer. Which I observe, not
to deny, that St. Gregory, and those of the Latins, who lived after him, might
take the Opinion of Purgatory, whereof St. Gregory may be called the Father, or
Godfather, for a Motive of their Prayers for the dead; but to advertise, that
no such thing can be said of such, as were more ancient, who founded their
Prayers on other Motives; to wit, those, which have been represented already;
whereof there is not any one compatible with Purgatory; such as it is at this
day imagined to be.

CHAP. XLV. That the Testimonies, produced by Jodocus Coccius for the Opinion
of Purgatory, are also defective.
THere is somewhat, much of the same Nature, to be observed in that great
Collection, which Jodocus Coccius, Canon of Juliers, (rather out of a
scrupulous, then judicious diligence) makes of all manner of Pieces, good and
bad. For he cites us (among the Liturgies, named by Cardinal Bellarmine) those,
which are attributed to St. Peter, St. Mark, and St. Matthew, those of Milan,
of the Mozarabes, Goths, and Armenians; as also the Councels of Arles, Vaison,
and Valentia, which speak only of Praying, and Offering for the dead; and for
that very Reason say nothing, as to the Business of Purgatory, which is not
necessarily deduced thence. Coming to the Greek Fathers, he produces, out of a
notoriously-counterfeit Piece of St. Clemens Romanus, certain Words, extracted
out of the Rule of St. Benedict, which was written four hundred and fifty years
after the blessed Death of St. Clement, and, after all, amounting to nothing,
in as much as they mention only Prayer for the dead. He cites Hermas, an
Apocryphal Author, one, who expressly telling us, that he speaks of Persons,
that are in a Condition of repenting, or remaining Impenitent, clearly shows,
that he says nothing competible to the Souls, which the Church of Rome pretends
to be so confined in her Purgatory; that they cannot merit there, much less be
converted to God. He takes for good the Testimony of Origene, who believed not
any Pains eternal, and that of St. Gregory Nyssenus, who was lightly led away
into that Error. He summons in also Ephraim, Deacon of E^a, Diadochus, Bishop
or Photice, Maximus, and Oecumenius, who speak of no other Fire, then that of
the last Conflagration; Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais in Cyrenaica, who Treats
of the Pains inflicted by Devils, and consequently of those of the damned;
Procopius of Gaza, who proposing to us a Purgative Fire, which the Seraphim
brings from Heaven to Earth, to sanctify as well the Ministers of the Church,
as the sinners, for whom they pray, clearly discovers, he never thought on the
Romish Purgatory, which does not sanctify any one, and which cannot be in
Heaven, for this very Reason, that it is placed in Hell. Germanus, Patriarch of
Constantinople, who speaks of the Efficacy of our Savior's Passion to deliver
out of Limbus those, whom Antiquity believed to have been there confined in
expectation of his coming, as also of the Purgatory of those, who die daily,
says nothing to his purpose. He makes great ostentation of a Fragment unjustly
attributed to Theodoret, which is not to be found any where in his Works; of
Gennadius Scholarius, drawn into the Church of Rome's Party by the Caresses,
and kindnesses of Pope Eugenius the Fourth; and of Zagazabo, an Abyssine
Bishop, whom the Portuguez, deceitful Interpreters of his Sentiments, made to
say what they pleased, directly contrary to the common Belief of his
Contrymen. He further brings in the Depositions of that Impostour, who had
in the year 1595. taken upon him the Name of Gabriel Patriarch of the Cofti,
and who has been since acknowledged by the Doctors of the Church of Rome to
be what he was; as also those of Hypatius, Archbishop of the Black-Russians,
who (to comply with the King of Poland, Father of the last-deceased) had
submitted to the Church of Rome, and in consequence thereof had made such a
profession of Faith, as she desired he should. In a word, he shuffles together
all he met with, of one, I know not what, Eusebius of Alexandria, unknown to
Antiquity, of Eusebius of Caesarea, of the Arabian Canons, of Timothy of
Alexandria, of St. Epiphanius, of Palladius, of John surnamed Cassian, of
Justine, Justinian, and Leo the Wise, Emperors, of John surnamed Climacus, of
Gregory the Priest, of Leontius, of Sophronius, of Damascene, of Anastasius, of
Simeon Metaphrastes, of Constantine surnamed Manasses, of Nicetas, of Nicholas
Cabasilas, of Athanasius of Constantinople, of Nicephorus Gregoras, of the
Greeks deputed to the Council of Basil, of those, who reside at Venice, and of
Jeremy, Patriarch of Constantinople; not omitting any of the Authors alleged
by Cardinal Bellarmine, and never minding, whether from any one of the
Testimonies, he draws from this long Catalogue of Witnesses, any thing more can
be gathered, then Prayer for the dead.

Then turning to the Latin Fathers, and bringing in all those, whom Cardinal
Bellarmine had cited, he produces, over and above, Arnobius, who simply says,
that the Church prays for all, both living, and dead; and Zeno of Verona,
blaming the Widows, who, by their lamentations, interrupt the prayers, whereby
the Souls of their deceased Husbands are recommended to God; and shows even in
that, that he thought they no way deserved those lamentations, which yet were
but the just, and necessary Effects of the compassion of the living, if they
presupposed, with any certainty, of their departed Friends, that they burn in
an Infernal Fire. Besides all this, he shuffles in the Depositions of
Lactantius, of Hilarious the Deacon, of Eucherius of Lions, of Caesarius of
Arles, and of Boethius, who speaks of the Conflagration of the World at the
Last day; of Prudentius, who speaks of the Hell of the damned; of Philip the
Priest, who Treats Of the Absolution, and Remission of Sins, which shall be
solemnly given to every Believer at the Last day; of St. Hilary of Poictiers,
who discourses Of the Tribulations of this Life; of Bacchiarius, who, to
confute those, who made any difficulty to allow the peace of the Church to
their Brethren, that were fallen, alleges the care which Resfa, Readiness
Concuhine, had taken of the bodies of his children, hanged upon occasion of the
Gibeonites; and that of Judas Maccabaeus for those of his Army, who, after
their Death, had been found seized of the prey, taken in the Temple of Jamnia;
of Primasius, and Faustus, Religious Men of the Monastery of St. Maurus, who
are pleased to approve Prayers and Offerings for the dead: and, to give us good
measure, when we are to be cheated, he cites us a Writing lately Fathered on
Pope Sixtus the Third; an Homily of the Lord's Supper, stuffed with passages
out of St. Hilary, St. Hierome, St. Augustine, St. Prosper, Isidore of Sevil,
Bid, and Alcuin, and consequently unjustly attributed to Saint Eloy, deceased
the first of December, 663. before the birth of Bid, who was more ancient by
Fifty years, then Alcuin; the Commentary, which Sedulius, not (as he thinks)
the ancient, who writ the Opus Paschale, but another, of the same Nation,
dressed up since the year 700. out of the Writings, and abundance of other
Authors of later date, whom I forbear to bring into the Account, out of a
consideration, that, in regard they lived since St. Gregory, and have had a
great Veneration for the Writings, and Authority of that Renowned Prelate, it
may be they might have some Thoughts of the Purgatory, whereof he was the first
Founder, when they writ what is alleged out of them, though they contain not
any formal mention thereof. So that, to make good the Protestant Cause against
the Church of Rome, it is sufficient, if I maintain,

First, That she has nothing expressly affirmed on the behalf of her Purgatory
among the Latins, before Gregory the First.

Secondly, That that only reflection may give the more simple, light enough to
comprehend, that that Point of Doctrine, being so new, that it was not known
for the space of six Ages together even among the Doctors of the Western
Church, who have not, neither any one of them in particular, nor all together,
anything determinate, to induce the reception of it, and justify that they had
received it, can by no means be an Article of Faith.

Thirdly, That such, as allege unto us the Greeks, who never believed, nor can
to this day believe, what is proposed to them, concerning it, by the Church of
Rome, deal very unhandsomly, and are more worthy reproach, then refutation,
which their Supposition does not deserve:

And lastly, That Coccius, who has made no difficulty to bring in, as
Witnesses, the Greeks sojourning at Venice, and Jeremy, Patriarch of
Constantinople; who, in those very Places, which he cites, deny what he
pretends to prove, did not any way consider, what he ought, either his own
Cause, or the sincerity of a good Conscience, which in the Business of Religion
cannot advance any thing either false, or superfluous, much less ought, that is
repugnant to what it has undertaken to prove.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Reasons, which might have moved the Ancients to Interr
their departed Friends in the Churches, consecrated to the Memory of the Saints.
ALl this thus presupposed, as it may well be, in as much as the necessary
result from it is, that that* Part of Antiquity, which prayed for the dead, had
not any thought of either the Purgatory, where the Church of Rome teaches, that
they burn, or their deliverance out of that grievous Pain; but intended only
to desire of God, that he would be pleased to pardon their Sins at the day of
his Son's Last coming, deliver them from the general Conflagration of the
World, and give their Bodies a glorious Resurrection; it remains to discover,
what may have been their intention, who have ordered their Friends to be Buried
near the Martyrs, or, at least, in the places, and Edifices dedicated, since
the peace of the Church, to their Memory. To proceed in a more certain order,
and take things at their proper Sources, I observe,

First, That the Christians (no more, then the Jews) had not, at the beginning,
any common Cemiteries, or Churchyards, but that every one made choice of such
place for his Sepulcher, as he thought fit, and, that it was thus, the most
ancient Monuments yet remaining among us give sufficient Testimony.

Secondly, That according to the Politics of the Jews, and Romans, Sepulchers
were not within Cities, Paul. Sent: lib. 2. Tit. 22. Cod. Theod. lib. 9. Tit.
17. cap. 6.
but only near, and about them.

Thirdly, That as among the Jews, and Heathens, there were certain particular
Places of Sepulture for those of the same Family; so the resentments of
Christian Fraternity, whereby all the Saints make up Ephesians. ii. 19.
the Family of God, and are Romans xii. 5.
Members one of another, prevailed so far upon the Spirits of the Faithful,
that they begat in them (as far as the Extremities of those Times permitted) a
desire, that their Bodies might be deposited near those of their Brethren, who
had before 2 Timothy iv. 7.
fought the good Fight of Faith, and Hebr. iii. 6.
held fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

Fourthly, That the Church, during the rigor of the Persecutions, having been
forced to Assemble to serve God before day, and to seek the safety of her
Children in the silence of the Night, and the Solitudes of Cemiteries, Places
not only of no great show, but such as were (if the Situation permitted it)
for the most part, under Ground, as the Catatumbs about Rome, and could not
(upon that account) give any Jealousy to the Pagans, the Faithful, who were
there daily animated to Constancy by the Instruction of their Pastors, and the
sight of the Tombs, which they considered as so many Trophies of their
Brethren; seeing the Mystical Table purposely placed toward that part, where
their bodies rested, as it were, to make unto them a literal Application of the
Words of St. John, who affirms, that Apoc. vi. 9.
he saw under the Altar the Souls of them, that were slain for the Word of God,
and for the Testimony, which they held, derived from all these Considerations
that noble desire of remaining conjoined with the Saints of God in Life, and
Death, and, when the time should come, depose their own Bodies, as it were,
into the Bosom of those Friends; whose Examples they had followed, in all the
course of their Lives.

Fifthy, That after the Conquest of Paganism, under the Reign of Constantine
the Great, Constantius, his Son, who, at the time he was most violent against
the Orthodox, bethought him of making the first Transportations of Saints
bodies, in as much, as upon the first of June, 356. he transferred to
Constantinople the body of St. Timothy, which he had taken out of Ephesus, and
the third of March following caused to be brought. from Patras, the bodies of
St. Andrew, and St. Luke; Constantius, I say, raised in all those, that came
after him, such a desire to attempt the like Translations, that there can
hardly be named any one of the ancient Martyrs, and Confessors, whose body
has not been dug out of the Earth, and torn in Pieces, to be distributed
into many several places. In imitation of Princes, private Persons began to
exercise that Piece of Will Worship: those, who wanted Authority to countenance
their Actions, taking the liberty to make use of Violence, and commit Robberies
(not to speak of the Adulterations, and Impostures, which, in less, then thirty
years were come to that Excess, that on the six and twentieth of February, 386.
it was thought necessary to repress it by an Express Law, to this Effect, Cod.
Theod. lib. 9. Tit. 57. cap. 7.
Humanum corpus nemo ad alterum locum transferat; nemo Martyrem distrahat; nemo
mercetur, etc. Let no man translate any man's body from one place to another;
let no man sell; no man set to a Price any Martyr. But, since that time, the
Disease growing too violent for the Remedy, what had been accounted an In the
year 398. St. Augustine, in his Book of the Work of Monks, (ca. 28.) complains
of certain Wandering Persons, who boasted, that they had in their possession
Martyrs, either Entire, or in Pieces. In the year 440. Theodoret, (De curandis
Graecorum affectibus, lib. 9.) makes it his boast, that every one strived to
have some part thereof. And, in the year 587. Gregory of Tours (lib. 9. cap.
6.) speaks of the notorious Impostour, who bragged, that he had a whole
Bag-full of Relics.
Execrable attempt became an Act of Religion, and there wanted not an Emulation
among those, that practiced it, who should be most criminal; and whereas, at
the beginning, People thought it enough to consider the Monuments of Martyrs,
and Confessors, only as the glorious marks of their Christian Profession,
with such a respect, as admitted not the violation of their bodies, they came
in time to exercise that rudeness upon them, as is done on a Prey, exposed to
the covetousness of the first, that lays hands on it; every one endeavored to
keep his share, their very bones were cut to Pieces, and, instead of honoring
their Memory, and celebrating their Virtues by a pious imitation thereof, they
turned their Veneration toward the Repositories, into which they were
disposed. If, on the one side, Antiquity, reduced to those Extremities, as to
keep its Assemblies in Cemeteries, thought it a glory to place the
Eucharistical Table under their Tombs, to teach every one of her children, that
they belonged, both living, and dead, to that Great Savior, who has commanded
us to show forth his death till his coming again: Posterity, on the other,
which had the opportunity to build as many Temples, as they pleased, and where
they pleased, has suffered their Liberty to degenerate into Superstition;
imagining, that no Altar was to be erected, but it must be made a Repository of
Relics, and the disorder (as it were by an universal Deluge) spread it self
so suddenly over all, that the General Council of all Africa, Assembled at
Carthage on the thirteenth of September, 401. was forced to make Provision
against it by this remarkable Decree: Placuit, ut Altaria, quae passim, etc. It
has been thought fit, that the Altars, which are erected up and down the
Fields, and Highways, as Memorials of the Martyrs, wherein there are not any
Body, or Relics of the Martyrs interred, be (if possible) demolished by the
Bishops, under whose Jurisdictions those Places are. But if, by reason of
popular Tumults, it be not in their power to do so, yet let the People be
admonished, not to frequent such Places; so as that those, who understand
things aright, be not out of any Superstition obliged thereto: that, by no
means, there be not any Memory of the Martyrs accepted with appearance of
approbation; but only there, where, by an unquestioned Origin, it is found
there are some Body, or Relics, or the beginning of some Habitation, or
Possession, or Passion; and that the Altars, which are any where erected upon
the Dreams, and vain, as it were, Revelations of any men whatsoever, be wholly
disallowed.

Christian Religion had not been Authorized yet an hundred years by the Laws of
the Emperors; but Dreams, and Resveries, falsely called Revelations, had taken
such Root therein, that the Fields, and Highways were the shameful Witnesses
of it, and the Bishops, justly filled with indignation to see their People in
the Fetters of Superstition, and not daring to promise themselves the success
to overcome it, opposed it but faintly, with an If possible, as well imagining,
that the Spirits of men, once Infatuated with its Prejudications, become easily
Furious, and maintain, by Tumult, and Violence, what cannot be colored with
any Reason, nor give satisfaction to understanding Persons. They therefore
thought it much to have admonished the Faithful of the Imposture, and
protested against it, referring the event to the Providence of God, who by a
just Judgment has delivered the Perverse to be Infatuated by their own
Councels. In Effect, the Evil was incomparably much stronger then the Remedies,
and it is not to be thought strange, if, even to this day, in all those Places,
where the ancient Custom has kept its Credit, men pray, by the Merits of the
Saint, whose Relics are under the Altar, and desire, ever to be assisted by
the Merits of those, whose Relics they there with a pious love Emb race.

Sixthly, That the Children of those first Christians, who (during the Tempests
of Persecution) had had their Nocturnal-Assemblies in the Cemeteries, where the
Exigency of the Season forced them to make use of Lights, when the Peace of the
Church, then beginning to Triumph over the Fury of Paganism, put them into a
Condition to build Temples, and to transferr into them the Bodies of Martyrs,
were desirous, not as their Predecessors, to have their bodies deposited in
the Cemeteries, common as well to Martyrs, as the rest of the Faithful, in
Testimony of the Profession they had continued, even to the last Gasp; but that
they might be placed near those of the Martyrs, as if (contrary to the Custom
of the Primitive Church, which meddled not in the least with the bodies of the
Saints once Interred (after they had committed a new kind of Violence on their
Relics, the glory of accompanying them in their last Repository, and taking
place near them, should have so possessed any one, as to beget in his mind,
out of a carnal Affectation, sinister Designs, and Jealousy, or, as if those,
who were Interred in the Fabrics, particularly Consecrated to their Memory,
had had a nearer communion with them, then other Christians, who had had their
Burial in the common Cemeteries whence their bodies had been taken up. This
ridiculously-ambitious kind of Superstition, becoming, immediately upon its
first Eruption, importunate, the Emperors, who thought it Scandalous, and
likely to beget Trouble, and Disturbance, had conceived it might have been
banished the Church by their Law of the nine and twentieth of July, 381.
expressing as much in Terminis. Ne alicujus fallax, and arguta solertia, ab
hujus se praecepti intention subducat, atque Apostolorum, vel Martyrum sedem
humandis corporibus aestimat esse concessam, ab his quoque it a, ut a reliquo
civitatis, noverint, se atque intelligant esse submotos, etc. To the end that
the deceitfulness, and unfeigned subtilty of any one may not decline the
intention of his command, and as imagining that the abode of the Apostles, or
Martyrs, is allowed for the Interment of bodies; let them know, and understand,
that they are debarred thence in like manner, as from the rest of the City.
Hence it appears, that the meaning of those Christian Princes was, that no Body
should be Interred, either in Constantinople, or in the Churches of the
Apostles, and Martyrs. But their Regulation, though rational in it self,
proving ineffectual, through the joint Designs of the Prelates, and the People,
who made it their Business, to the utmost to oppose it, rather heightened, then
abated their Passion: so that, as since that time, under pretense of Religion,
People lighted a great number of Wax-Candles, even while the Sun shined, and
maintained they had reason so to do, in as much as they lighted them, not (as
sometime under Persecution) to chase away darkness, but to express signs of
Joy; every one, as much as in his power lay, concerning himself, in that
magnificence, and, according to his Ability, contributing thereto: so every one
took an Humor to slight the common Cemeteries, and to dispute who should have
the nearest places to the Martyrs in their own Churches, purchasing (according
to the present Expression, even at this day) the entrance of the Holy Land with
Sums of Money.

But, though the common Rate of People was easily drawn into this Design, and
promoted it with extraordinary earnestness, yet the more modest declined it,
and, demeaning themselves according to the Example, and Practice of their
Ancestors, contained themselves, through a commendable reservedness, within
the Terms of the Pristine simplicity. Among these is Pope Damasus, of whom we
have certain Verses, concluding an Inscription, which he had put on the
Frontispiece of Saint Laurence's Church called, upon this occasion, In Damaso,
to distinguish it from another Church, dedicated to the Memory of the same
Saint, and and called, In Lucina, because of Lucina, a Roman Lady, who had
first taken upon her the Care of gathering together, and burying the remainders
of the Body of that Glorious Martyr; He says thus,

Append. Inscript Antiq. page 1172. n. 11. and apud Baron. A. D. 384 Sect. 35.
Hic volui (fateor) Damasus, mea condere Membra,
Sed cineres timui Sanctos vexare Piorum.
-- I must confess,
I here would fai^ my Body lay in Dust,
Were It not to offend the Ashes of the Just.
And these Figurative Words deserve to be so much the more particularly
considered, in as much as any one may judge, that so great a Person could not be
Ignorant, that the Relics of Saint Laurence could be no less destitute of
Sentiment then of Life; but Poetically borrowing the Metaphorical Expressions,
as well of the Heathen, who were wont to make the same Wish for their deceased
Friends, May the earth ly light upon thee, May thy Bones gently rest; as of the
Prophets, as Esaias, who introduces Esa. xiv. 9.
Hell moved from beneath, because of the King of Babylon, to meet him at his
coming, and to stir up the Dead for him, and to raise up from their Thrones all
the Kings of Nations, to insult at his Misery, he considered his Relics, as
if they had been animated with the same Spirit, as had made use of them to the
glory of God, during the course of his life, and intended only to signify
thus much; that, if they had been capable of Resentment, they might have
suffered, through the nearness of his Body to them, the shame, and
dissatisfaction, which happen to generous Persons, who, being unequally
matched, desire, and endeavor to free themselves out of the slavery of an
importunate and dishonorable Society.

CHAP. XLVII. The Sentiments of Saint Ambrose, and Paulinus, concerning the
Burial of the Faithful in Churches, Examined.
BUt all the rest of the Prelates were not so scrupulous [as Pope Damasius] on
the contrary, Saint Ambrose, carried away the rest by Custom, as by the
violence of an impetuous Torrent, had not only caused his Brother Satyrus,
deceased the seventeenth of September, 383. to be buried near St. Victor,
Martyr, but made his Tomb famous with this Epitaph,

Uranio Satyro, Supremum frater honorem,
Martyris ad laevam detulit Ambrosius;
Haec meriti merces, ut sacri sanguinis humor
Finitimus penetrans adluat exuvias.
Here, on the Martyr's left, Ambrose bestows
Here, on the Martyr's left, Ambrose bestows
Last Honors on his Brother Satyrus;
That Is sacred Blood (merit's reward it is)
May piercing drench the neighboring Carkases.
In like manner, commendation is given to his Sister Marcellina, deceased the
seventeenth of July, about the year 398. or 99. for that she had chosen the
place of her Burial near her Brethren in sacred Ground; for her Epitaph runs
thus;

Marcellina, tuos cum vita resolveret artus,
Sprevisti Patriis corpus sociare Sepulchris.
Cum pia fraterni superas consortia somni,
Sanctorumque cupis chara requiescere terra, etc.
Nor would thou be, when death thy Limbs disjoined,
To thy forefather's Sepulchers confined,
Out of a hope to enjoy thy Brother's rest,
And to remain'ith Region of the Blessed.
Saint Paulinus, then indeed only a Priest, but afterward Bishop of Nola,
showing, that he had conceived an Imagination suitable to that of St. Ambrose,
writ concerning Celsus, a young man, deceased at Complutum, or Alcada de
Henarez, in Spain, about the year 393.

-- Complutensi mandavimus urbe propinquis
Conjunctum tumuli foedere Martyribus,
Ut de vicino Sanctorum sanguine ducat,
Quo nostras illo purget in igne animas, etc.
-- In Complutum he is disposed
Among the Martyrs, in a Tomb enclosed,
That from the adjacent blood of the Saints he may
Derive what can our Souls purge in that day.
viz. that of the Conflagration of the Universe.

Of these Epitaphs the result is, that, as the Prophet 2 Kings xiii. 21.
Elizeus was heretofore so assisted by the Almighty power of the God of Glory,
that a dead Carkase, cast by those that carried it into his Grave, without any
other Design, then that to rid themselves of a trouble, which might have
retarded their Flight, recovered Life, as soon as it had touched his bones; so,
according to the Opinion, as well of St. Ambrose, as Paulinus, the Bodies of
Martyrs were endued with a certain Virtue, such as Sanctified, and Purged the
Things, that were placed near them. We cannot at this day affirm, whether St.
Ambrose did, or did not change his Opinion; but we are obliged to observe by
the way what there is in it, that is inconvenient, nay indeed unmaintainable,
since that it presupposed, that from the body of St. Victor, beheaded at Milan,
the eighth of May, 303. under Maximian, and from that time, shut up in a Tomb,
the Blood should, eighty years after, issue out in such quantity, as to
penetrate the Ground all about, and moisten the body of Satyrus, though
enclosed also in his Grave, and communicate its Virtue to him. But, if beheaded
Bodies must necessarily be Bloodless, and, if that Blood be naturally fixed
into a consistency, as soon as it is issued out of the Veins, what possibility
was there in the Supposition, which St. Ambrose made of that, which Saint
Victor had spilt eighty years before, representing it only liquid, but
streaming in such quantity, as might penetrate the adjacent Ground? And, if it
be pretended, he grounded it on the Conception of some Miracle, whence did he
derive it, unless from his own voluntary Devotion, or Will Worship, which
inclined him to believe, as actually existent, what he thought possible to the
power of God?

Besides this inconvenience, whereto the Opinion of St. Paulinus, writing the
Epitaph of Celsus, lies open, and that the more expressly, the more likely it
is, he conceived, or pretended to conceive, that, from the Bodies of Justus,
and Pastor, who had their Throats cut, and consequently lost all their Blood,
at Complutum, on the sixth of August, 303. that is to say, ninety years at
least, before the Death of Celsus, the Body of that young man should derive
Blood, that purges souls; as if, of any other blood, then that of the Jo. i. 29.
Lamb of God, 1 Cor. i. 30.
who of God has been made unto us Sanctification, and Redemption, and has
Hebr. i. 3.
himself purged our Sins, it could be truly, and in good sense, said, that it
takes away the Sin of the World, and 1 Jo. i. 7.
cleanses us from Sin; those Imaginations, which, taken rigorously, would be
found Diametrically opposite to the Doctrine of Faith, do stand so much in need
of a candid Reader, who must do his Judgment some violence, to draw them into a
good sense, that without the Byas, which a forced Interpretation may give them,
it were impossible to deducc thence, I will not say, any thing good, but any
thing excusable.

About nine years after, the same Paulinus, writing the Epitaph of Clarus,
Disciple of St. Martin, and a Priest of Tours, deceased the eighth of November,
401. in as much as his Body was to be Interred at the foot of the Altar, takes
a new Fancy, and says.

Sancta sub aeternis Altaribus ossa quiescunt,
Ut, dum nostra Pio referuntur munera Christo,
Divinae e sacris animae jungantur odores, etc.
His sacred Bones now undisturbed lie,
Under Eternal Altars, that, when we
To Christ our Presents offer, his Soul may
Be joined to th'odours Sacred things convey.
He pretended (as you see) that the placing of the Body of the Faithful Person
departed, near the Altar, would be of such advantage to the Soul, that some
increase of Grace might accrue to her thereby: and all this, with much
sincerity, and good meaning, which is wont to open a spacious Gap to those,
that consult it. But upon what grounded? What place of Holy Scripture can be
produced to Authorize the Advice thereof? Accordingly, the same Paulinus, to
let us know that he found not himself any way satisfied with either of those
two Presuppositions, with much confidence, and asseveration, acknowledged, that
he was yet to be advised therein in the year 419. wherein two fresh Accidents,
to wit, the Interrment of Flora's Son, and that of Cynegius, a young man, who
had, at his Death, required, that his Body might be Buried in the Church of
Saint Felix of Nola, had reduced him to confess his Perplexity. For, though he
had commended the Affection as well of the deceased, as of their Mothers, yet,
as it were, acknowledging he knew not why, and that he was not very well
assured of what he did; he desires to be informed by St. Augustine, asking him;
Utrum profit cuiquam post mortem, quod corpus ejus apud Sancti alicujus
memoriam sepeliatur, etc. Whether it be beneficial to any one after Death, that
his Body be buried in the Memorial of some Saint? which signifies no less, in
Effect, then to be reduced to the same Predicament, as St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
Denis the pretended Areopagite, and Athanasius of Antioch, who before, and
after Paulinus, made this Question, Of what benefit to the Dead were the
Prayers made by the surviving for them?

CHAP. XLVIII. The Sentiment of St. Augustine, concerning the Burial of the
Faithful in Churches enquired into.
SAint Augustine, in his Treatise, De cura pro mortuis, to give greater
satisfaction to his Paulinus, mentioned in the precedent Chapter.
Brother, lays down, that the Care, which is taken of the dead Body, the manner
of Sepulture, and the Funeral Solemnities, are rather Alleviations of the grief
of the Living, then of Cap. 2. ex lib. 1. De Civit. Dei, cap. 12.
any assistance, or benefit to the Dead.

Secondly, That the Cap. 3.
care taken of the Funeral, and the choice of the place for Burial, are Effects
of the Piety of the surviving toward the Dead.

Thirdly, That the Cap. 4, 5.
advantage, which may be drawn from the Interrment of the deceased Person in
the Church of some Saint, can be no other, then that of recommending him more
commodiously, and affectionately to the Saint, as to a kind of Patron; that
that Office might be done to the deceased Party, though his Body were not
present in the same place, and that the Sepulture of it in the same place, is
to no other end, then to excite a desire, and affection to pray for him.

Fourthly, That Cap. 10.
what is said of the Visions of Souls is to be understood in the same manner,
as we do the Dreams we have of those, who are yet alive, and think not in the
least of what the Imagination of the such as are asleep attribute to them, Cap.
11.
as when Evodius, afterward Bishop of Uzalis, dreamed, that St. Augustine
showed him the sense of a Passage in Cicero's Rhetoric; and when Cap. 12.
Curmas Curialis dreamed of the death of Curmas the Lock-Smith, and imagined,
that he saw St. Augustine, and the Priests of his City, exhorting him to
receive Baptism.

Fifthly, That the Cap. 13.
Souls of the Departed neither know, nor concern themselves about what is done
here; that if they did, St. Monica, his Mother, would often discourse with him,
and God himself would not have said of his children, whom he calls hence,
before he exercises his Judgments on those which remain, that he calls them,
Lest they might see Evil.

Sixthly, That the Cap. 15.
Souls Departed may know somewhat that concerns the Living, either from the
report of such as Die, or from that of Angels, or by Revelation from God.

Seventhly, That the persuasion, which we have of the assistance given by the
Martyrs to those, who implore it, may be taken in the same sense, as that,
which the Living have of assisting the Dead by their Prayers, though they know
not any thing in particular of their Condition, and only desire of God for
them, and on their behalf, Grace, and Rest: Or that of the assistances, which
the Living think they receive from them, there may be made the same Judgment,
as of the Opinion, which the People of Nola had of the Apparition of St. Felix,
during the time they were besieged by the Barbarians, or Cap. 18.
of the Promise, which John the Monk made, to show himself the Night following
to a certain Woman, who thought she really saw him, though he stirred not from
the place, where he was.

Eighthly, That we must not be overy-ready, upon the clamours of Evil Spirits,
complaining, that they are tormented by the Martyrs, to infer, that the Martyrs
have in Effect tormented them, since that in the Church of the Saints,
Gervasius, and Protasius, they said as much of St. Ambrose then living, who yet
never attributed to himself any thing of what they imputed to him.

Ninthly, That in fine, Cap. 18.
what may be thought of the Sepulture bestowed on the Departed, is, that it is
an Office of Humanity toward them, and not any assistance, and that Prayers,
and Oblations may be beneficial to them, if by the Life they led before, they
were in a capacity of receiving the benefit thereof.

From this Abridgment of the aforesaid Treatise of St. Augustine it is
manifest, that that Great Man, who had been Disciple to St. Ambrose, and
continued even to his Death, an intimate Friend to St. Paulinus, held nothing
of the Hypotheses, which those two famous Prelates had advanced, with a kind
of Emulation, and which the later had afterward tacitly disacknowledged, as
such, as whereof he himself was not satisfied. But, though his Conceptions are
much more Rational, and less Subject to Contradiction, yet does it not hinder,
but they have this palpable Default, that he lays down as a thing confessed,
what he might justly have disputed, and what would be at this day actually
denied him by the Protestants; to wit, That he was assured, that there accrues
a benefit to the Dead from the Prayers, and Offerings, made for them by the
Living; and that the Living, have a sufficient ground to dedicate to the Dead
those two Offices, and to suppose (upon Authority of the Custom, which has
introduced the Exercise thereof into the Church) that they effectually relieve
them.

Julian, Archbishop of Toledo, who, in the Preface of his Prognostic to
Idalius, Bishop of Barcelona, ingenuously De his optima^ solutionem, vel
definitione^, sensus brevitate, non valentes attingere.
confesses, that neither of them thought himself able to resolve the
Difficulties arising from the consideration of the State of the Dead, chose
rather to follow the Track of St. Augustine, then of his Master St. Ambrose,
and that not without reason.

CHAP. XLIX. The Sentiment of Maximus Tyrius, concerning the Interment of the
Faithful Departed, in Churches, Considered.
BUt, notwithstanding the Authority of that great Luminary of Africa, which was
not received every where, Maximus, who held the Sea of (...), in the year 465.
and on the eighteenth of November, the same (...), was present at the Council
of Rome, under Pope Hilarus, discovers (...) Presupposition beyond that of St.
Ambrose, and Paulinus, writing; Ideo a Majoribus provisum est, ut Sanctorum
corporibus nostra corpora sociemus; ut, dum illos Tartarus metuit, nos poena
non tangat, dum illos Christus illuminat, nobis tenebrarum caligo diffugiat:
cum sanctis ergo Martyribus quiescentes evadimus Inferni tenebras, eorum
propriis meritis, attamen consocii sanctitate, etc. For this Reason have our
Ancestors made provision, that we should join our Bodies to those of the
Saints; to the end, that while Hell stands in fear of them, no Pain might come
near us; that while Christ illuminates them, the obscurity of darkness may fly
away from us: resting therefore with the Holy Martyrs, we escape the darkness
of Hell, through their Merits indeed, yet as their companions in Sanctity. From
which words it is manifest;

First, That maintaining, as Tertullian did, the first Hypothesis of the
pretended Sibylline Writing, he conceived, that all the Souls of the Faithful,
those only of Martyrs excepted, descended into Hell, where, by the Merit of
the Saints, with whom their Bodies were Interred, they remain without any
Torment till the day of Resurrection.

Secondly, That (according to the Sentiment of St. Ambrose, and Paulinus) he
thought, that, from the Bodies of Saints, there issues a certain Virtue, which
preserves, and exempts from Torment the Faithful Interred near them. Which
Prejudications we are so much the more strictly obliged to oppose, in as much
as even those, who have followed them (as Paulinus) were ashamed thereof,
confessing, that, in effect, they were never satisfied thereof. Besides, the
Church of Rome her self, Teaching at this day, that Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap.
13, and 14.
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by his Passion upon the Cross has merited
justification for us, and, on our behalf, satisfied God the Father, who, for
his sake, forgives, with the Guilt, the eternal Pains of Hell, to lay down,
after Maximus, that, by the Merit of the Saints, we escape the darkness of
^ell, which stands in fear of them, were to lay down the Contradictory
Affirmative of the Negative, which God himself writ with the Hand of St. Peter,
saying, Acts iv. 12.
There is no salvation in any other; for there is no other Name under Heaven
given among men, whereby we must be saved, and on the contrary, to maintain,
There is salvation in some other; f^^ there are other names under Heaven,
whereby we must be saved, to wit, those of the Martyrs.

CHAP. L. A Reflection on certain Followers of the Sentiment of the foresaid
Maximus.
I Am willing to Believe, that Maximus was so desirous to comply with the
Custom of his Predecessors, that he took not the Leisure to consider what
might be the consequence thereof. Others have Imitated him in that Particular,
relying on the Example of their Ancestors, without examining the just weight
of its Authority, as Theodimus, a Spanish Subdeacon, upon whose Tomb are to be
read these Words, addressed to St. Andrew, Tuis adjutus auxiliis, disruptis
vinculis Inferni, hinc resurgere caro misera possit, and in die examinationis,
calcatis facinorosis peccatis, gaudia divina percipiat, te interprecante,
Martyr Andrea, etc. O Martyr Andrew, assisted by thy help, having broken in
pieces the Chains of Hell, may his wretched body be raised hence, and (...) the
day of Examination, his deadly sins being trod under foot, may he take
possession of divine glory, through the intermediation of thy Prayers. And
Kindasvind, King of the West-Goths, in the Epitaph of his Wife Reciverga.

-- Ego te (conjux) quia vincere fata nequivi,
Funere perfunctam Sanctis commendo tuendam;
Ut cum flamma vorax veniet comburere terras,
Coetibus ipsorum merito sociata, resurgas, etc.
Since death on my desires would not thee spare,
Of thee departed may the Saints take care;
That thou with them may rise again that day,
When of the fire the earth shall be the prey.
And Paul the Deacon, in the Epitaph of Arichis, Duke of Beneventum,

Profit huic sacro membra dedisse lari, etc.
May't be to's good his body to have laid
Within this sacred place.
And Dungalus, who in the year 826. objected to Claudius, Bishop of Turin, the
beforementioned Epitaph of Satyrus, acquiescing in the Sentiment, which St.
Ambrose seems to have been of, concerning the sanctification of his Brother's
body, by its nearness to that of the Martyr Victor, and the affluence of his
blood, and clearly justifying, that that Hypothesis (though inconvenient, and
unmaintainable in it self, and notwithstanding that it had been disavowed 36.
years after by Paulinus, and refuted by St. Augustine) had not yet lost its
credit 540. years after; the name and memory of St. Ambrose acquiring it such
Sectatours, as took it from his good meaning without any examination, and by a
kind of implicit submission, which ought not at this day be any hinderance, but
that the Lovers of Truth should open their eyes to her light, to follow her
with their hearts, and confess with their mouths, that it sometimes happens
even to the greatest men, to speak with less caution, then was consistent with
their reputation, whether they were transported by heat of dispute, or that
their spirits were charmed by their partiality to the matter they treated, as
it should seem St. Ambrose was prepossessed in this particular, and St. Gregory
Nazianzene in his first Invective against Julian, when he says, That the Souls
of Martyrs, and their bodies considered severally, and every drop of their
blood, and the least Signs of their passion chase away evil spirits, and heal
diseased persons; and St. Basil, cited by Pope Adrian in his Treatise for
Images, when upon the 115. Psalm he maintains, that whoever touches the bones
of a Martyr derives some participation of sanctity, by the grace residing in
the body of the said Martyr; and St. Chrysostom, when in the 26th Homily on
the second Epistle to the Corinthians, he says, that the bones of Saints allay,
and torment evil Spirits, and unbind those, that are bound in those unhappy
fetters; and St. Hierome, when he maintains to Vigilantius, that, if the Lamb
be every where, they therefore (the Saints) who are with the Lamb, are to be
believed to be also every where; and St. Gregory of Rome, chap. 21st. of the
third Book of his Dialogues, that the dead bones of the Saints live in the many
miracles wrought by them; and chap. 14th. of the twelfth of his Morals upon
Job, That it is not to be believed, that those, who, within them, see the
clearness of Almighty God, should be ignorant of any thing without them; and
chap. 33d. of the fourth of his Dialogues, that there is nothing, which they
know not, who know him, that knows all things. For there is not any one of
these kinds of speaking but is chargeable with inconvenience and falsity, if
understood according to its literal sense, and without acknowledging what there
may be in them of abuse and hyperbole. For,

1. The virtue of Sanctifying and healing Diseases, without any application of
Remedies operating naturally, as also that of driving away, and tormenting evil
Spirits, does not properly, and of it self, belong to any but to God alone, and
is not a quality, that any nature, in it self corporeal, can be affected with.

2. It is absolutely impossible, the Spirit of any Saint can be every where, as
St. Hierome seems to affirm, whose discourse therefore is to be explicated with
the help of the same moderation, as is used by him, when he speaks of evil
spirits, who wandering all over the World, and that with an extraordinary
swiftness, are present every where, to insinuate, that some as well as others
are every where, not in the same moment, but in passing successively from one
place to another, and in different moments: which yet (according to the
judgment of St. Augustine in his Book, De cur a pro mortuis, chap. 16th.)
cannot be absolutely affirmed; the Miracles attributed to the Saints (it being
granted they are true) being happily done either by Angels, or by the immediate
operation of God's power, so as that there is no necessity to suppose, that the
Spirits, which God has taken to himself, actually leaving their heavenly
mansions, should walk up and down on earth.

3. What St. Gregory of Rome said, that the bones of Martyrs live, taken
literally, would imply a palpable contradiction, which we should endeavor to
take away, saying, that (according to the sense of that great Pope) the virtue,
which he thought produced its effects in the presence of the Saints bones, and
when they are touched by men, though it be not in them, but in God alone, is to
them, instead of a kind of life.

4. What he says, that those, who know God, who knows all things, do also know
all things, and that having his light within them, they are not ignorant of any
thing without, does so much the more stand in need of moderation, that, without
it, it is absolutely false, in the judgment even of the Vasquez, disp. 50.
capp. 4, 5.
Doctors of the Church of Rome, who make it their business, to refute their
conceit, who think the Essence of God a Mirror, wherein all things are seen.

It must therefore be, that all expressions of this nature are to be born with,
upon the account of their intention, who have used them, rather then rigorously
examined, or taken as the natural signification of the Terms, whereof they
consist, might seem to require, and that we should be content to say of any
such what St. De Gratia Christi, c. 49.
Augustine conceived ought to be said of the expression of St. Ambrose,
affirming that Zacharias, and Elizabeth, either had been, or might have been
without sin; either that was said according to some probable manner, but such
as had not passed examination, or if the Author meant it so, he has retracted
his Sentiment by bringing it to a more rigorous trial. But however, whether we
are, or are not inclined to this candor, we shall be still obliged to confess,
how hard it is to warrant those imaginations and discourses, which, being
destitute of the authority of God speaking in his word, have no other ground,
then the probabilities, which by the beauty of their outward appearance have
dazzled the greatest Wits, of which number, not any one but has made it appear,
how slightly he was informed of the state of the Faithful departed in the
Lord, since they have all of them expressed themselves with so much
inconvenience, both in their ratiocinations, and words, that to reconcile them
to a sound sense, they must be half-^estroyed.

CHAP. LI. Of the Lessons of Scripture contained in the Missal, and Breviary,
in what regards the Office of the Dead.
IF ever Antiquity had been either imbued with the belief of Purgatory, which
the Church of Rome accounts at this day among the Articles of her Faith, or had
found any track of it in the holy Scriptures, there would have been some remark
to insinuate as much, First, In the Public Service, especially in the Office
of the second day of November, devoted 650. years after to the commemoration of
the d^rted. Secondly, In the Mass of the Dead; Thirdly, In the Office of the
Dead, which is said by all, that are in communion with the Church of Rome, on
the first day, not being a Festival, of every month, the time of Easter only
excepted, and on every Monday, not appointed otherwise, of the Advent, and
Lent, except Monday in the Passion-week. Let us then cast our eye on all the
Lessons extracted out of the holy Scriptures, and, in the fear of his Name, who
is the Author of them, consider, whether there be any thing therein, that may,
in the least, countenance so strange an Opinion.

Upon the second of November, after the singing of the second and third Verses
of the sixty fifth Psalm, according to the Hebrews, or sixty four, according to
the Greeks, where there is not a word concerning either the Dead, or their
state, or the custom of praying for them, or the need, it is pretended, they
stand in to get out of their pains; there is read the twelfth Chapter of the
second of Maccabees, from the forty third verse to the end, a title which the
ancient Church never considered, and which See chapp. 24, 25, 31.
amounts to nothing at all in order to the proof, as well of the first
Hypotheses, upon which the Christians of the second Age grounded the custom of
praying for the Dead, as of Purgatory, which came into credit four hundred
years after. Then is sung the fourth Verse of the Or twenty second, according
to the Greeks and Latins.
twenty third Psalm, where the Prophet, relying on the paternal care of God,
his Shepherd, rejoices in the assurance of his Protection; and the second,
third, and fourth Verses of the XLII. Psalm, Or XLI. according to the Greeks.
where he makes protestation of his Zeal, and the desire he had to be highly
sensible of the consolations of his God, which no way induces, either that the
Dead do ever stand in need of the Prayers of the Living, or that those Prayers
are any way beneficial to them. From thence they pass to the twenty fifth,
twenty sixth, twenty seventh, twenty eighth, and twenty ninth Verses of the
fifth Chapter of St. John, at the head whereof some Body, I know not who, has,
I know not how, nor when, thrust in, of his own head, these words, In illo
tempore dixit Jesus Discipulis.
Then Jesus said to his Disciples; where it is to be noted, that that place of
the Gospel, teaching only, that the Son of God has been appointed Judge of
men, and that he will raise them all up again by his power, does not any way
prove, that those, who Die, in any manner whatsoever, are ever to hope for any
benefit from the Prayers of the surviving; s^^ce it does not follow, The dead
shall be called out of their Graves by the voice of the Son of God, to rise
again, and receive their Judgment; Therefore, They are in a place of Torments,
we must pray for them after their death, and the Prayers made for them will
contribute to their deliverance out of Pain.

In the Mass for the Dead there are recited, in the first place, the words of
the second Book of Maccabees, which make so much the less for their Design, who
read them, by how much they contain a corrupt Interpretation of the Fact of
Judas ^accabaeus, and suppose Hypotheses, which they themselves grant not at
this day.

Secondly, There is read, from the thirteenth Verse of the fourth Chapter of
the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, to the end of the Chapter; where the
Apostle, forbidding Lamentations for the Dead, Treats, as well of the
Certainty, as Order, of their Resurrection; the Presupposition whereof does not
in ^e, either that the Faithful depart this Life, to go into a place of
Torments, or, that there is any necessity of Bewailing them, or Praying for
them after their Death; the consequence being not good, He shall rise up in
Glory, therefore, He is in a place of Pains, and must be delivered thence by
Prayers.

Thirdly, There is read the Text of Saint John with the addition of these three
words, In diebus illis, which are not in his Text.
There is read the thirteenth Verse of the fourteenth Chapter of the Apocalypse,
where the Spirit of God, advertising St. John by a voice from Heaven, that,
from henceforth those, who die in the Lord, are blessed, and rest from their
Labors, demolishes the very Foundation, as well of Prayer for the Faithful
departed, as of Purgatory, where it is pretended they suffer the temporal
Punishment due to their Sins. For, if they are Blessed, and, upon that account,
in possession of what might be desired on their behalf, they stand in no
further need, that any thing should be desired for them; And again, if they are
Blessed, and rest from their Labors from henceforth, they are from henceforth
exempted from Pain; it being impossible, that, to be Blessed, and to rest,
should signify to be Tormented, and on the contrary, that to endure the
burning of an infernal Fire, should be to rest from one's labor, and enjoy the
Bliss consequent thereto.

Fourthly, There is read from the one and fiftieth Verse of the fifteenth
Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, to the fifty seventh,
inclusively, expressing the Assurance, which the Apostle gives the Church, of
her Blessed Resurrection, whereby Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, and
every Believer clothed with Immortality; and every one knows, that, from this
Proposition, he shall rise again in Incorruption, the Law of Ratiocination will
never suffer this Inference to be drawn; Therefore he is tormented, and stands
in need of being prayed for, before he rises again.

Fifthly, There is read the fourth Verse of the three and twentieth Psalm, and
the second, third, and fourth of the Two and fourtieth, which only represent
the State of the Faithful Person, during the course of this Life, and not,
that which is to follow, upon his departure hence.

Sixthly, There is read out of the eleventh Chapter of St. John, from the one
and twentieth Verse, to the seven and twentieth inclusively; where the Son of
God, calling himself the Resurrection, and the Life, testifies, that he, who
believes in him, shall live, and shall never die; which to a Person, that has
but the least use of Reason, will never give any ground to Infer, that he, who
shall live, and shall never die, shall for a certain time, after the
dissolution of his Body, be confined to a place of Torment, where he shall
stand extremely in need of the Prayers of the surviving.

Seventhly, There is read out of the 6th Chapter of At the beginning of the
fifty third Verse, these words, though not of the Text, are put in, In illo
tempore dixit Jesus, Discipulis suis.
St. John, the three and fiftieth, and four and fiftieth Verses, where the Son
of God, recommending the Eating of his Flesh, and the Drinking of his Blood,
promises him, who shall eat, and drink thereof, that he shall have eternal
Life, and shall be raised up again at the Last day.

Eighthly, Immediately after, there are read, the second time, as well the same
Words, as the precedent, beginning from the one and fiftieth Verse, which has,
I know not how, made shift to gather this Preface; In illo tempore dixit Jesus
Discipulis suis, and turbis Judaeorum, etc. Then Jesus said to his Disoiples,
and to the multitude of the Jews; upon which I have further to observe, that
there is not the least necessity of concluding, from the Promise made by the
Son of God, that those, who participate of his Flesh, and of his Blood, should,
after Death, be destined to endure the Punishment of a Subterranean Fire, and,
therein tormented, expect to be relieved by the Prayers of their surviving
Brethren.

Ninethly, There are read, with the same Preface, which yet is not to be found
in any Part of the Chapter, the 21, 22, 23, and 24th Verses of the fifth
Chapter of St. John, where our Savior, in as much as he affirms (by Virtue of
the power of Judging, which he received of his Father) that he, who believes in
him, has eternal life, and shall not come into Judgment, but shall pass, or
rather (as the Greek, the Syriaok, and the Latin Version, recommended by the
Council of Trent, have it) is passed from Death to Life, in as much, I say, as
our Savior obliges the Believer, to be certainly persuaded, that he shall not,
after this Life, be liable to any Pains whatsoever for his Sins, since they are
things absolutely incompatible, that, being passed from Death, he should have
eternal Life (as the inviolable Promise of his Savior expresses) and, that he
should be to endure, for ever so short a space of time, the Torments of Death
and Hell, as the present Church of Rome supposes: that he shall not come into
Judgment, as the Gospel expressly declares; and that he shall come to Judgment,
to be therein condemned for a time, according to what the Church of Rome
teaches those of her Communion.

Tenthly, and Lastly, With a In illo tempore dixit Jesus Discipulis suis.
Preface, taken up, I know not whence, there are read the thirty seventh, the
thirty eighth, the thirty ninth, and the fourtieth Verses of the sixth Chapter
of St. John, where our Savior, promising to raise up, at the Last day, those,
who believe in him, gives them such comfort, by the assurance of their final
felicity, as might raise them out of all fear, that between the Moment of their
Death, and the day of Judgment, they should suffer any Punishment, and be
sensible of any need they should stand in, of the Suffrages of the Living. In
fine, there are read (as on the second of November, and with the same Preface)
the twenty fifth, the twenty sixth, the twenty seventh, the twenty eighth, and
the twenty ninth Verses of the fifth Chapter of Saint John, which we have
already observed, to make nothing to the Business, either of Purgatory, or
Prayer for the Dead. On the Contrary, from all these Lessons, it is necessarily
manifest;

First, That the Church of Rome, who at the present make use of them, as
inducements to the Living, to take care of the Dead, has not happily any thing
more Answerable to her Intentions, and makes a silent Confession, that her
Service for the Departed, and the Belief of her Purgatory, have not any
Foundation in the Word of God, are the voluntary Devotions of men, intruding
into those things, which they have not seen; and for that Reason, branded with
the Censure of the Holy Spirit, speaking by the mouth of St. Paul, 2 Coloss.
xviii. 22, 23.

Secondly, That the Primitive Church, who had introduced into her Liturgy the
Commemoration of the Faithful Departed, many Ages before any of her children
had conceived the least thought of Purgatory, which is at this day maintained
by Superstition, and Interest, had no other Design in it, then, by all these
Lessons, which Treat of the general ^ejurrection of the Saints, to comfort the
Faithful cast down at the death of their Brethren, setting before their eyes
so many Certificates of the future Resurrection of him, whose Memory they
celebrated, and inclining every one of them, by the Meditation of so many
celestial Documents, to the expectation of that last deliverance, wherein their
Lord, making them to triumph over Death, shall cloth them with incorruption,
and crown their heads with eternal Glory.

If then the set Form of the Mass for the Dead cannot afford us any Text of
Holy Scripture, which may serve, either for the confirmation of the Doctrine of
Purgatory, or the insinuation of the Custom of praving for the dead, we are not
to promise our selves, that the Office of the Dead, contained in the Breviary,
should furnish us with any thing more express. In this later, we meet with
several Lessons out of the Book of ^ob; the First taken out of the seventh
Chapter, from the sixteenth Verse, to the end; the Second, out of the tenth
Chapter, from the first Verse, to the seventh; inclusively; the Third, out of
the same Chapter, from the eighth Verse to the twelfth; the Fourth, out of the
thirteenth Chapter, from the twenty second Verse, to the twenty eighth; the
Fifth, out of the fourteenth Chapter, from the first Verse to the sixth; the
Sixth Lesson, out of the same Chapter, from the thirteenth Verse, to the
eighteenth; the Seventh, out of the seventeenth Chapter, from the first Verse
to the third, and from the eleventh, to the fifteenth Verse; the Eighth, out of
the nineteenth Chapter, from the twentieth Verse, to the twenty seventh; and
the Ninth, out of the tenth Chapter, from the eighteenth Verse to the two and
twentieth. We find there also the seventh, and eighth Verses of the seventh
Chapter; and every where we have certain bewailings of that great Example of
Patience, groaning under the Scourge of God, and forced to Lamentations under
the greatness of his Chastisements; but who, from the cries and complaints of a
man alive, forcing their way from the Bottom of his Heart, through the violence
of his Anguish, and the Dread he was in of the Judgment of God, will conclude,
either that there is Purgatory, or any necessity of Prayer for the dead? Must
the Expressions, used by afflicted Persons reduced to bemoan themselves in this
Life, serve for a Precedent to the separated Souls, which are supposed not
simply to pass through, but to be melted again, after a certain manner, in the
Fire appointed to purge them? Were it granted, that some Blessed Soul, crushed,
after its departure out of the Body, under the Hand of the great Judge, might
make to her self some certain Application of the grievances of Job, shall the
Church of Rome take upon her, without falling into the inconvenience of making
her self ridiculous, to attribute unto it the Lessons she has extracted out of
his Discourses, which cannot suit, but with the Condition of a man languishing
in this World? For example, what he says in the First, Job, Chap. vii. 16.
My days are vanity, etc. Verse 19.
How long will thou not let me alone, till I swallow down my spittle? etc.
Verse 21.
Now shall I sleep in the dust, etc. In the Second, Cap x. 1.
My Soul is weary of my life, etc. In the Third, Verse 9.
Thou have made me as Clay, and will thou bring me into dust again? Verse 11.
Thou have clothed me with skin, and flesh, etc. In the Fourth, Cap. xiii. 28.
I am to be consumed as a thing, that is rotten, and as a Garment, that is
Moth-eaten. In the Fifth, Cap. xiv. 1.
Man, that is born of a woman, is of few days. In the Sixth, Verse. 14.
If a man die, shall he live again? In the Seventh, Cap. xvii. 1.
My days are extinct, the Graves are ready for me; In the Eighth, Cap. xix^ 20.
My bone cleaves to my skin, and to my flesh; hardly am I escaped with the
skin of my Teeth. And in the Ninth, Cap. x. 20.
Are not my days few? cease then, etc. These complaints proceed not from a
Spirit destitute of Body, but may well fall from a diseased Person, suffering,
as well in Body, as Spirit, who makes account to die without any respite, and
who considers with horror, that his languishing life is, as it were, swallowed
up in a Gulf of misery. It is to be considered also, that there are some
Passages, which discover so much disorder, that Job, being come to himself,
after he had been reproved, not only by Job 33, 34, 35, 38.
Elihu, but by God himself, condemned them, acknowledging, that xlii. 3, 6.
he spoke what he knew not, abhorred himself, and repented in dust and ashes.
For who could endure, in the second Lesson, the bitter reproaches against God,
Job 8. 3. Numquid bonum tibi videtur, si calu^ is m^, and opprimas me, opus
manuum tuarum, ^consilium impiorum adjuves?
Is it good unto thee, that thou should oppress me, that thou should
despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked? And
in the Seventh, Non peccavi and amaritudinibus moratur oculus ^eus
I have not sinned, and my eye is fastened on bitterness. To speak sincerely,
could the Church of Rome, who holds as a thing Bellarm. De Pargat. lib. 2. cap.
2.
decided by the Scripture, and the Fathers, that the Souls of the Faithful are
Impeccable from the moment of their departure out of the Bodies they animated,
without extravagance, mold her Devotions on those slips of Discourse, which God
himself has charged with Sin? She has therefore made an Extract of these Nine
Lessons, taken out of the Book of Job, not to serve for a Draught of the
doleful state of the Souls, which she pretends condemned into her Purgatory,
but to instruct every one of those, whom she exhorts to relieve them with their
Suffrages, that, to be well disposed to render them that office, he should view
himself in the example of Job, religiously imitate his Virtues, and Faith, and
be always careful to avoid his miscarriages.

Upon the same account has she inserted into the Office of the Dead abundance
of Psalms, containing not only Lessons of Penance, as the 6. 32, 38, 51, 102,
130, and 143. called upon that occasion the seven Penitential Psalms; but also
of Prayer, as the 5, 7, 25, 42, 67, 120, 123. of Praise, as the 65, 121, 126,
127, 128, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 146, 148, 149, 150. of Thanksgiving, as the
23, 27, 40, 63, 116, 124, 129, 136. the Canticles of Ezechias, and Zacharies of
Blessing, and Exhortations, as the 41, 122, 125, 131. the first verse of the
95th Psalm, and the 8th Verse of the 113th. For who could ever be persuaded,
that the Protestations, which we make in the presence of God, of our
mortification, and the Prayers, whereby we beg his Protection and Favor
toward our selves, and the Praises, whereby we celebrate the glory of his
sacred Majesty, and the Thanks we give him for the benefits, which he daily
communicates to us, and the Benedictions, which we pour out with joy, being to
publish the welfare as well of the whole State of his Church, as of the
Members, whereof it consists, and the Exhortations, whereby we encourage them
to well doing, should rationally be looked on as Suffrages, whereby we relieve
our departed Brethren, and afford them our assistance to deliver them out of
the pretended Purgatory? And yet these are in a m^^ner all the materials, which
have been shuffled into the composure of all that piece of Worship, which goes
under the name of The Office of the Dead, though they have not any relation to
their state, and do no more induce a necessity of praying for them, or
believing a Purgatory, that should purify them, as is pretended, then they do
that of making boast of our own praises, a vanity (even though we were tempted
thereto) Christian moderation would not suffer us to be guilty of. Nor can it
be said with any more reason, that the words of the Psalms, which are recited
in the said Office, are to be considered as Prosopopoeias, whereby the
Faithful deceased are represented speaking of their condition after death: I.
In as much, as the whole Contexture of every Psalm requires, that the words of
it be applied to those, who live in the flesh, so as that it were a manifest
abuse to wrest them to any other sense. II. For that it was never allowed any
one to cast into the divine Worship Fictions, whereby men of quick Imaginations
might presume to become the mouths of their Brethren departed, not having, to
that end, either order from them, or calling from God. And lastly, for that,
though it were left to any man's discretion, to make, after his own fancy,
representations of those, whom God has called to himself, yet should not any
one take the liberty to do it, e're he were well informed, and satisfied
whether they might pass for true and certain, especially seeing that when they
should be urged out of a design to infer thence the necessity of praying for
them, they would prove so much the more unmaintainable, for as much as in the
same Office, where it is pretended they are employed, to that end there are
those Texts alleged, which absolutely destroy the use thereof. For instance,
that of the 14th Chapter of the Apocalypse, Verse 13. where the holy Spirit
declares, Blessed are those, that die in the Lord; for what rational inducement
is there, either to desire bliss absolutely for those, who are already
possessed thereof, or the cessation of torments for those, who do not only not
suffer any, but are not subject to suffer any, in as much as from henceforth
they are blessed, and in rest? That of the sixth Chapter of St. John, and the
thirty seventh Verse, where the Son of God attests, that he will in no wise
cast out him, that comes to him; and that of the eleventh Chapter, and the
five and twentieth, and six and twentieth Verses, where, calling himself the
Resurrection and the Life, he promises life, and exemption from eternal death,
to whosoever believes in him. For if he does not cast out any of the Faithful;
if, on the contrary, he saves them all from death, and puts them into
possession of life; the surviving believers, who (to express their belief of
his words) insert them into their public Form of Service, do thereby confess,
that they are obliged to give him thanks for them, and not to make Requests,
which presuppose, that they enjoy not the effect of his promise. Thus is there
not any Lesson in the Service of the Church of Rome, which effectually induces,
or has so much as the appearance of inducing, any thing of what those of her
Communion at this day pretend to.

CHAP. LII. Of the Prayers contained in the Missal, and Breviary used by the
Church of Rome; and that Purgatory cannot be necessarily inferred from any one
of them.
FOr as much as in the Book, entitled Ordo Romanus, there is not any mention
made of the Dead; that in the Canon of the Mass, which is inserted into it, the
Memento is not to be found; and that in the other Ritual Books of the Latins,
there is not any Lesson, obliging to the belief of Purgatory, screwed up, since
the year 1439. by the Councels of Florence, and Trent, into an Article of
Faith: the Church of Rome, who has at this day, in favor of Prayer for the
Dead, but one only Lesson, to wit that of the second of Maccabees, a Book held
by her self to be Apocryphal, till after the year 590. the Church of Rome, I
say, is forced to confess, that it must have been inserted so much the later
into her Missals, and Breviaries, though upon no other account then this, that
the Greeks use it not in their Office even to this day, and that from her whole
service it necessarily results, that she met not, in the holy Scriptures, with
any foundation of the opinion either of Purgatory, which she maintains, or of
the custom, which she practices in praying for the Dead, upon Motives unknown
to Primitive Antiquity. It remains therefore, that we see what can be gathered,
of any consequence, from the Prayers, which we read in the public Forms of
Service, of her prescription.

We have, in the first place, such as desire of God, that the sins of the
Prayers for Remission of the sins of the Deceased.
deceased Person may be pardoned: as, for instance, this, Fidelium Deus omnium
conditor, and Redemptor, animabus famulorum famularumque tuarum remissionem
cunctorum tribue peccatorum, ut indulgentiam, quam semper optaverunt, piis
supplicationibus consequantur, etc. O God, Creator and Redeemer of all the
Faithful, grant unto the Souls of thy Servants of the one and the other Sex,
the remission of all their sins, that by pious Supplications they may obtain
the indulgence they have ever desired. And this, We beseech thee, O Lord, that
this Supplication of ours may be beneficial to the Souls of thy Servants of
both Sexes, entreating thee, that thou would cleanse them of all their sins,
and make them partakers of thy Redemption. And this, We beseech thee, O
Almighty God, that the Soul of thy Servant, purged by these Sacrifices, may
obtain admission to indulgence, and eternal remedy. And this, Vouchsafe, O
Lord, we beseech thee, that the Soul of thy Servant, and the Souls of thy
Servants of both Sexes, the Anniversarie-day of whose Interment we now
commemorate, being purged by these Sacrifices, may be received as well into
indulgence, as eternal rest. And this, O God, who have commanded that we should
honor our Father and Mother, be pleased out of thy mercy, to have compassion
on the Souls of my Father and Mother, and pardon their sins, and make me to
live with them in the joy of eternal light. And this, We beseech thee, O Lord,
be merciful unto the Soul of thy Servant, and being freed from the contagion
of Mortality, restore her to the portion of eternal salvation. And this, We
beseech thee, O Lord, that by these Sacrifices, without which no man is
guiltless, the Soul of thy Servant may be cleansed from all sins, that by these
offices of pious placation, she may obtain eternal mercy. And this, O God, in
whose mercy the Souls of the faithful are at rest, be graciously pleased to
pardon the sins of thy Servants of both Sexes, wherever resting in Christ,
that, being freed from all their sins, they may rejoice with thee world without
end. And this, O merciful God, receive this Host offered for the Souls of thy
Servants of both Sexes, wherever resting in Christ, that, delivered by this
super-excellent Sacrifice out of the Chains of dreadful death, they may obtain
eternal life. And this, O God, whose property it is ever to have mercy, and to
forgive, be favorable unto the Souls of thy Servants of both Sexes, and pardon
all their sins, that, being loosed from the Chains of Death, they may obtain
passage into life. And this, Free, O Lord, we beseech thee, the Souls of thy
Servants of both Sexes from all the bands of sin, that, being raised up among
thy Saints and Elect, they may live again in the glory of the Resurrection. And
this, O Almighty and everlasting God, who rulest as well over the living as the
dead, and show mercy unto all those, whom thy foreknowledge sees will be
thine in faith and good works, we humbly beseech thee, that those, for whom we
have appointed to pour out our Prayers, and whom either this world does still
detain in the flesh, or the next has already received uncloathed of the body,
may through the greatness of thy clemency be made worthy to obtain the
forgiveness of all their sins, and joy everlasting. And this, O Almighty and
most merciful God, we humbly beseech thee, that the Sacraments, which we have
received, may purify us, and grant, that this thy Sacrament be not unto us an
obligation to punishment, but a comfortable intercession for pardon; that it be
the cleansing of crimes; that it be the strength of the fainting; that it be a
Bulwark against the dangers of the World; that it be the remission of all the
sins of the faithful living, and dead, through Jesus Christ.

It might seem, at the first sight, that all these Prayers in general, and
every one in particular, upon this very account, that they speak of the
forgiveness of sins for those, who are departed this life, do presuppose, if
not a Purgatory, such as the Church of Rome has imagined, and described it
some Ages since, at least, a certain necessity incumbent on the deceased, to
make satisfaction to the justice of God after their death. But we must
necessarily infer the contrary. For (not to take notice that to punish an evil
doer is not to purge him) if, according to the tenor of the Prayers contained
in the Mass of the Dead, God forgives the sin of the deceased, he does not
require he should be punished for it* if he loose the Chains, he suffers him
not to be still bound thereby; if he exercises toward him his mercy through
Jesus Christ, he does not execute against him the rigor of his Justice, such,
as it is conceived, is felt by the Souls, which they pretend are to pass
through the fire of Purgatory. Whence it follows, that the design of those
prayers, which desire of God the effect of his mercy in the remission of their
sins, whom he has called hence, never was, nor could be to procure their
deliverance out of the torment, which they are imagined at this day to suffer;
and whoever would find the true meaning thereof, is to reflect on the
persuasions of those, who were the first Authors thereof; for they held, that
all those, of whom they made a Commemoration, were (in as much as they were
Apoc. xiv. 13.
dead in the Lord) gathered by him into Luc. xvi. 22.
Abraham's Bosom, where they rested in a sleep of peace, as it is expressly set
down in the Memento. So that no man well-informed prayed for them, as for
wretched Criminals, and such as are deprived of the felicity, which God has
prepared for his Saints, but as for Champions already triumphant and glorious.
And yet (out of a consideration, that the perpetuity of the bliss, into which
every one presupposed them introduced, proceeded from the continuation of the
mercy, according to which God had at first bestowed it, and that it
comprehended in it self the ratification of the pardon once granted to the
deceased, in pursuance whereof they were entered into, and continued in the
possession of celestial peace and joy) the surviving thought fit to desire on
their behalf mercy, and remission of sins, not absolutely, as if they were
still under the weight of God's wrath; but upon a certain account, to wit, in
as much as it is necessary, that even in Heaven the mercy of God should be
perpetually communicated to those, whom it had already visited, incessantly
assuring them of the free gift he had made them, first of his grace, and
afterward, of his glory, as believing that those, who enjoy so great a
happiness, are nevertheless, to expect a more solemn sentence of Remission, and
Absolution, in that great Day, whereof we are all obliged, both for our selves,
and on the behalf of our Brethren living upon Earth, and reigning in Heaven, to
desire the blessed coming.

In this sense, indeed, the Ancients never made any difficulty, to desire, on
the behalf of the Blessed in Heaven, the Pardon they had already obtained, in
as much as they were to obtain it again, after a more glorious manner at the
Day of Judgment; whereto are particularly referred many of their Prayers: As
for instance, that which we have already cited, wherein they desire, that their
Souls, Prayers for the Absolution of the departed at the day of Judgment.
freed from all the Bands of sin, may be raised up again among the Saints in
the Glory of the Resurrection. And again, thus; Non intres, etc. Psalm. cxliii.
2.
Enter not into Judgment with tthy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight, shall no
man be justified, unless thou grantest him the remission of all his sins. We
beseech therefore, that the Sentence of thy Judgment may not lie heavy on him,
whom the sincere supplication of Christian Faith recommends, but grant, that
he, who, while he lived, was signed with the Sign of the blessed Trinity, may,
by the assistance of thy Grace, avoid the Judgment of Vengeance. Again, Oremus,
Fratres charissimi, etc. Let us pray, dear Brethren, for the spirit of our
Brother, whom the Lord God has been pleased to deliver out of the snares of
this world, whose body is this day put into the Ground, that the Lord would,
out of his goodness, vouchsafe to place him in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, that, when the day of Judgment comes, he may be placed among the Saints
and Elect, raised up again on the right hand. And this, taken out of the
Ceremonial, Deus, cui omnia vivunt, etc. O God, to whom all things live; and to
whom our bodies, though they die, perish not, but are changed for the better,
we humbly beseech thee, that thou command, that the soul of thy servant N. be
carried into the bosom of the Patriarch Abraham, by the hands of thy holy
Angels, to be raised up again, the last day of the great Judgment, that what
imperfections soever it has, through the deceit of the Devil, contracted, thou
out of thy goodness and compassion may mercifully wash away.

To the same end are referred also the following Prosopopoeias, wherein the
Soul of every deceased Person is represented with motions of fear suitable to
such, as it might have had, during the couse of this Life: As, for instance,
Libera me, Domine, etc. O Lord, deliver me from eternal death, in that
dreadful day, when Joel iii. 16.
the heavens, and the earth shall be shaken, when thou shall come to Judge the
World by Fire; I am become trembling, and fear, till the discussion, and wrath
to come shall be over. That day is a day of wrath, calamity, and misery, a
great day, and very bitter, when thou shall come. Again, this; Domine, quando
veneris, etc. O Lord, where shall I hide my self from the countenance of thy
wrath, when thou come to Judge the Earth? For I have sinned extremely, during
my life; I am frightened at the things I have committed, and blush before thee;
when thou come to Judge, do not condemn me. And this, Memento mei, Deus, etc.
O God, have me in remembrance, because Job vii. 7, 8.
my life is but wind, let the eye of him that has seen me, see me no more,
Psalm. cxxx. (...).
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord; Psalm. xxvii. 7.
Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice. And this, Hei mihi! etc. Woe unto me, O
Lord, for I have sinned overmuch in my life! What shall I do, Wretch that I am?
Whither shall I fly, if not unto my God? Have compassion on me, when thou
shall come at the Last day; Psalm. vi. 3.
My soul is sore vexed, but do thou, Lord, deliver it, be merciful, etc. And
this, Legem pone, etc. Psalm. cxix. 33.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. xxvii. 11.
and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies; Psalm. xxvii. 12, 13.
Deliver me not into the will of mine enemies, for false Witnesses are risen up
against me, and iniquity has belyed it self, yet I believe to see the goodness
of the Lord, in the land of the living. And this, Peccantem me quotidie, etc.
Sinnning daily, and not repenting, the fear of death distracts me, in regard
Eccl. xli. 7.
There is no redemption in Hell, Psalm.
O God, be merciful unto me, and save me; Psalm.
O God, save me, for thy Name sake, and deliver me in thy Power. And this
other, Domine, secundum actum meum noli me judicare, etc. O Lord, Judge me not
according to what I have done, I have done nothing in thy presence worthy it; I
therefore beseech thy Majesty, to do away mine iniquity; Psalm. li. 1, 2.
O Lord, wash me from my injustice more, and more, and cleanse me from my sin.
And this other, Sitivit anima mea, etc. Psalm. xlii. 2.
My soul thirsts for God, when shall I come, and appear before the Lord?
Psalm. lxxiv. 19.
Deliver not the soul of thy Turtle-dove unto the multitude, forget not the
Congregation of thy poor for ever. Our Father, etc. And Lastly this, Libera me,
Domine, etc. O Lord, Psalm. cvii. 16.
who have broken the Gates of Brass, and visited Hell, and given light, that
they might see thee, to those, who were in the Torments of darkness, crying,
and saying, Thou ar^ come, O our Redeemer, deliver me out of the ways of Hell.
For there is not any Body so weakly instructed, as not easily to comprehend,
that the Authors of these Complaints, and Lamentations, meant them rather for
the advantage, and edification of the living, by putting them in mind of the
fear, and trembling, wherein they should be in the presence of their Lord, then
to represent the State of the Dead, which they have been forced to express
after their Fancy as such as had some resemblance with that of poor
Wayfaring-men, who yet walk in the Flesh, because they had not any manifest
knowledge thereof, but only Conjectures, and presumptions, and those many
times, not very conformable to the Rule of Faith, and the Sentiments of the
purest Antiquity: Since it is absolutely impossible, that he, who makes a
Prayer for his Soul, should be any other thing, then that Soul, for which he
Prays, and that the Wish he makes, that God would teach him the way of his
Statutes, (which is only in this Life) and the Confession of sinning daily,
and the Prayer, to be delivered out of the ways of Hell, should suit with any
but Travelers, who walk yet in the Flesh, struggling, as they go, with their
own imperfections, and the Infernal Powers, and by continued endeavors tending
to their rest, whereof the separated Souls of the Faithful departed, who have
finished their course in Faith, and Hope, must necessarily be possessed, from
the very moment of their separation.

The same moderation is required, to find out the true sense of the Prayers,
which seem to presuppose a certain deliverance out of Infernal pains, wherein
the deceased are ready to be tormented, as when we read in the Missal; Domine
Jesu Christ, etc. O Lord Jesus Christ, King of Glory, deliver the Souls of all
the Faithful departed out of the power of Hell, and out of the bottomless
Lake; deliver them out of the mouth of the Lion; Let not Hell swallow them up;
let them not fall into the obscure places of darkness; but let the
Standard Bearer, St. Michael, bring them into that holy light, which thou did
sometime promise to Abraham, and to his Seed. We offer unto thee, O Lord,
^oasts and Prayers for them, receive the same for those Souls, whom we this day
commemorate, grant them, O Lord, to pass from Death to an holy life. And in the
Office of the Dead, A porta inferni erus, Domine, animas eorum, requiescant in
pace, Amen, etc. O Lord, deliver their Souls from the Gate of Hell, may they
rest in peace, Amen. For though, upon the first glance, these words seem to
revive the Hypothesis, which Justin Martyr had drawn up out of the Quagmire of
the counterfeit Sibyl, imagining, that the Soul of the greatest Saints were,
afer their departure out of the body, sent to Hell, and were subject to the
power of evil Spirits; yet must they necessarily have another signification,
and only induce, that God alone preserves those, whom he calls, so as that
they fall not into the power of Hell, but are, by the Ministry of his holy
Angels, introduced into celestial light, and that they are delivered, not as
escaping out of some Torment, which they had for some time endured, but as
avoiding the necessity of enduring it. And whereas it is said, that the Hoasts,
mentioned in those Prayers, are offered to Jesus Christ, it necessarily
induces, that they neither are, nor can be Jesus Christ himself, as the Church
of Rome imagines at this day, but Gifts presented to God by his people, as an
expression of their gratitude. And since, what is said, without any exception,
viz. That they are offered for the Souls of all the departed, whose
commemoration is celebrated, it demonstratively proves, that they are, and were
(according to the intention of the Ancients) offered for the blessed then
sleeping a sleep of Peace, in as much as the Commemoration made in the Church
comprehends all. Which is further confirmed in that St. Epist. xxxiv. xxxvii.
Cyprian expressly observes, that that of his time always offered Sacrifices for
the Martyrs, of whose glory she neither made, nor could make any question; that
St. Confess. lib. ix. c. 13.
Augustine both offered, and caused to be offered the like for his Mother, of
whose bliss he thought himself so confident, that he said to God, I believe,
that thou have already done it; and that Saint Ambrose, comforting Faustinus,
afflicted at the death of his Sister, gave him this advice, Lib. 2. Epist. 8.
Non tam deplorandam, etc. I think she ought not to be so much lamented, as
attended with Prayers; I conceive we ought not to condole at thy Tears, but
rather by Oblations recommend her soul to the Lord, etc. What should oblige us
to sigh for the dead, when the reconciliation of the World has been already
made with God the Father by the Lord Jesus? For from all this, and particularly
from Faustinus's affirmation, that he was Verum forte asseras certum te de
meritis ejus, de fide.
confident of the Works and Faith of his Sister, for whom St. Ambrose exhorted
him to make Prayers, and Oblations, it necessarily results, that those
Oblations were not properly Propitiations, but Thanksgivings for, and
Acknowledgments of the Propitiation made by Jesus Christ on the Cross, and, as
the Forms used by the Church of Rome express it, In Canone, Qui^ibi afferunt
hoc Sacrificium Laudis, etc. placatus accipias, etc. Praestae, ut hoc
Sacrificium Laudis, quod oculis Majestatis tuae indignus obtuli, etc. pro anima
famuli tui, pro qua offerimus hoc Sacrificium Laudis, etc. pro quibus tibi
offerimus hoc Sacrificium Laudis.
Sacrifices of Praise. So that, if they were sometimes called Hostiae
placationis, Hoasts of appeasment, and if it be said, that the Souls are per
hujus virtutem Sacramenti a peccatis omnibus expiatae, expiated from all sin by
the virtue of this Sacrament, which it is desired should be to him, who
participates thereof, ablutio scelerum, etc. the washing away of his offenses,
presupposing that it is celebrated by the Faithful pro redemptione animarum
suarum, etc. for the redemption of their souls; this is to be understood
rationally, and in the same sense, as when St. Peter teaches us concerning
Baptism, that it saves us, and Antiquity says, that it washes away sins, in as
much as it is the sacred Sign, and the Pledge of the washing away, which was
made thereof once by the only blood of Jesus Christ spilt on the Cross. For,
according to the Sentiment of the primitive Christians, the Sacraments received
by the Faithful crimina omnia detergunt, etc. do away all offenses, in as much
as they are Memorials of the blood of Christ, by the aspersion whereof men's
Heb. ix. 14.
Consciences are purged from dead works to serve the living God, and are said
to be Pet. iii. 21.
offered for their salvation, not to be purchased, but already purchased by the
price of the same blood, and for the Redemption of their Souls already
accomplished in the death of the Son of God, but whereof the Application is
continually made in the preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of the
Sacraments, to all those, who embrace it through Faith.

There are also other Prayers desiring the Deceased may be received into Bliss.
Prayers, wherein is desired, for the Faithful departed, the felicity, which
they have hoped, and wished for, during the course of their life, as appears by
these following Forms; Vitam aeternam habere mereantur in coelis, etc. In tuae
redemptionis part numerentur, etc. May they obtain eternal life in Heaven,
etc. May they be numbered in the part of thy Redemption, etc. O Lord give them
eternal rest, and let everlasting light shine upon them, etc. P^^^^im in the
Region of Peace, and Light, and grant him the Fellowship of thy Saints, etc.
Grant him admittance into the society of eternal bliss, etc. To those, on whom
thou did bestow the Merit, or Honor, of Christian Faith, give also the
Reward, etc. that, through thy Compassion, they may receive the bliss of
eternal light, etc. Make them partakers of thy Redemption, let them be added to
the number of thy Saints, etc. Let them have their reward in the Life to come,
etc. Let them be conveyed into the Habitations, which thou have prepared for
the Blessed: let them have the perpetual enjoyment of their Society, etc.
Command, that they have eternal joys in the Region of the Living, etc. Grant
them the Habitation of refreshment, blessed rest, and the clearest light, etc.
Vouchsafe to associate them to thy Saints, etc. May they receive eternal rest,
etc. Grant them eternal joy in the Region of the living, etc. May he obtain
eternal rest, and light, etc. Restore them to the Portion of eternal salvation,
etc. We beseech thee, O Lord, that be may come into the Fellowship of Eternal
light, etc. That they may rejoice with thee, World without end, etc. May they
obtain passage into life, etc. That they may obtain eternal joys.

Though it might seem, that those, for whom these Prayers are made, were
considered, as deprived of Peace, Light, Joy, Bliss, Rest, the Society of the
Saints in Glory, and the Eternal Reward promised their good Works, and that, to
facilitate their entrance into the possession of future happiness, some had
conceived, and inserted the foregoing Prayers into the Service of the Churches;
yet that it never was the intention of those, who drew the first draught
thereof, to insinuate, that the dead were actually excluded the things demanded
for them, is manifest, in as much, as the Memento was made only in favor of
those, who rest in a sleep of Peace, and, consequently, are already in Peace
and Joy with the Lord. For the surviving Believers thought it became them to
speak of the Beatitude of their Brethren deceased before them with a kind of
hesitation, as if it were delayed, and that not without some color, for as
much the good things, prepared by the Lord for those, who love him, consist in
things, which 1 Cor. ii. 9.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of Man,
and that they had not any evident knowledge thereof, and could not frame to
themselves any Idea suitable to the state, whereto those are advanced, who
enjoy them, they represented it after their manner, with some conformity, and
proportion to that, wherein they had left this World; and as they have been for
the most part forced thereto by the Imaginations, wherewith the counterfeit
Sibyl had dazzled their minds, so from the same hand is it also come, that among
those, who, some time after, took the courage to disclaim them, some did it not
so resolutely, as they should have done, but thought it enough to compare their
departed Brethren, translated into the rest of God, to Epiphan.
Travelers, who want somewhat of completing their Journey. Others,
considering, that the enjoyment of the good things, which follow this life, and
the exemption from the evils, which sinners are to expect, are for all
eternity, and that the continuance of that enjoyment to those, who are once
entered thereinto, does so far depend on the goodness and favor of God ever
faithful in his promises, and whose Romans xi. 29.
Gifts are without Repentance; that in this very regard, that he continually
conserves them, he seems to make a new distrib^on thereof every moment, and by
the perpetual influence of his benediction on those, whom he has received into
glory, to assure them more and more of their possession thereof: others, I say,
out of such, or the like Considerations, were persuaded, that there was no
inconvenience in demanding, for the departed, what they already had, their own
reason telling them, that the Author of so good a gift ceases not to give it,
in continuing, and conserving it to those, whom he had once made partakers
thereof. For as those, on whom he here below bestows abundance of temporal
goods, are not less obliged to beg of him every day their Matthew. vi. 11.
daily Bread, then if (as he sometime did to the Israelites in the Desert) he
dealt them only one day's Provision at a time; the plenty, which they had so
liberally received from his hand, though such as might suffice for their whole
life, and that with so much certainty in appearance, as nothing could reduce
them to want, no way hindering, but that they should acknowledge their indigence,
and natural insufficiency, and have a constant recourse to his Grace, to desire
(as the most unworthy) that he would give them their Bread, for as much as
though they have enough lying by them, yet is it their evident concernment,
that he, who has given them, should every day renew his Donation, in
conserving them, and sanctifying them to their use: So the Saints, who in the
other life are possessed of Celestial goods, are (by the necessity of the same
reason) obliged to make perpetual acknowledgments, notwithstanding that the
immutability of the Counsel, according to which he bestows them for ever, and
the nature of those very goods, not subject to perish, and decay, seems not any
way to hinder, but that they should, every one for himself, and the surviving
upon Earth for them all, desire the conservation and continuance of them,
though that be so much the more certain, and infallible, in as much as it is
grounded on the unchangeable Decree of Jam. i. 17.
the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
In this sense it might be thought, that Heb. xiii. 8.
Jesus, the Head and finisher of our Faith, who was yesterday, is to day, and
shall be the same for ever, though he were confident of the issue of his
combats, and was so much the more certain, that nothing could prevail against
him, that he Isa. lix. 16.
sustained himself by his own Power yet forbore not to recommend himself to his
Father, and to desire of him the Joh. xvii. 5.
glory he was possessed of, and had had with him before the World was: and
consequently, that the ancient Church neither made, nor ought to have made any
difficulty to pray for all the blessed, whose State she knew to be
unchangeable, and whose Felicity unalterable; and accordingly is it, that, as
she does in general make a Commemoration of all those, who sleep the Sleep of
Peace; so has she particularly comprehended in her Prayers the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, without any regard to the inconvenience, which
some have alleged since, that Augustine.
to pray for a Martyr, is to be injurious to him. Nay, the Church of Rome her
self, to show that she could not recede from the Sentiment of Primitive
Antiquity, as we have above represented it, has not ceased, nor does, to this
day, cease to make this Prayer, contained in her Missal; Deus, cui soli
cognitus est numerus Electorum in superna felicitate locandus, tribue,
quaesumus, ut univer sorum, quos Oratione I think it should be commendandos.
commendatos suscepimus, and omnium fidelium vivorum, atque mortuorum nomina
beatae praedestinationis liber adscripta retineat, per Dominum, etc. O God, to
whom alone is known the number of the Elect, who are to be placed above in
Felicity, we beseech thee to grant, that the Book of blessed Predestination may
retain written the name of all those, whom we have taken upon us to recommend
in our Prayers, as also those of all the Faithful, both dead, and living,
through our Lord, etc. I seriously ask, whether it be possible any thing should
be Apoc. xxi. 27.
blotted out of the Book of Life, which is God himself, Isa. xlvi. 10.
whose Counsel shall stand eternally? And since there is no danger should make
us fear, that 2 Timothy ii. 13.
God will deny himself, and that the Book of his Predestination should not
retain the Names, which his Hand has written in it, to desire of him, that it
might retain them, is it not to pray him to do what it is absolutely impossible
but he should, and (after the Example of the Ancient Christians) to make a
Prayer for the Blessed, that they might be blessed, not indeed, as if they were
to pass from misery to the possession of Bliss; but in persisting (as it must
of necessity be) in the enjoyment of the Bliss, which has been once for all
communicated to them?

Lastly, The Ancients, considering that the Felicity, which the Faithful enjoy
from the instant of their departure, is not that absolute Fullness of Glory,
wherewith they expect to be Crowned at Luc. xiv. 14.
the Resurrection of the Just, and that they might justly desire of God the
accomplishment of what is expected (according to the Word of his Grace) as well
for themselves, as for others, since it is a signification of the Matthew. vi. 10.
coming of his Kingdom; that we are all taught by the Lord himself, earnestly
to desire, and hasten it, as much as may be, by our Wishes.

Secondly, That the Motion Romans viii. 19, etc.
of all the Creation, groaning, and traveling till such time, as it is
delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God, is expressed to us by St. Paul, as a great and violent desire
inclining the Creatures to expect the manifestation of the Sons of God, and
incites us so much the more, by how much we, who have the first fruits of the
Spirit, are all together waiting for the Redemption of our Body.

Thirdly, That in that Noble desire is shown the principal Effect of the
Sympathy, which ought to be beween all the Saints, Members of the same mystical
Body, and Members one of another (for if the Holy Spirit, to rejoice the
spirits of the Just in Glory, and Apoc. vi. 10.
crying with a loud voice, that the Lord would judge, and revenge their Blood
on them, that dwell on the Earth, proposes to them, as the principal Subject of
their Joy, the approaching accomplishment of their Fellow Servants, and
Brethren, yet engaged against the Militia of Satan, and the world, here below,
why should not these Champions, who are still sweating, and out of breath in
the Field, where they are all covered with Blood, and Dust, have their courage
heigthned, by reflecting on their advantages, who had gone before them; that,
as they aspire to those White Robes of Glory, wherein their Brethren are for a
little Season to rest above, and further consider, as the highest point of
their pretension, that admirable perfection, which the first shall not attain
without the last, one and the same day (to wit, that of the General
Resurrection, and the Last Judgment) being appointed to make an eternal
assurance of the full Perfection of their Glory? The Ancients, I say, upon
these Considerations, might, and, after their Example, the Faithful still may,
and do, continually desire, and beg it, as well for themselves, as for all
those, who before them, Acts xiii. 36.
had served their generations by the will of God, and happily 2 Timothy iv. 7.
finished their course in this life.

Fourthly, It may be observed, that, in this kind of Prayer, they seem to
follow the Example of the Apostle, praying for Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy i. 18.
that the Lord would grant, that he might find mercy with the Lord in that
day, in which 2 Thessalonians. i. 10.
he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them,
that believe. For whatever may be presupposed concerning the State of
Onesiphorus, and whether it be said, that that good Person was, or was not
discharged, as to the necessities of this life, when the Wish, set down in the
Second Epistle to Timothy, was made for him, it will make no difference in the
main, and it will still be certain, that the good, expressed by St. Paul's
Prayer, has not been hitherto accomplished in any one; that it is of no less
importance at this day to Onesiphorus, then when St. Paul prayed for him; that
St. Paul, and Onesiphorus, and all the Saints, who are with God, wait for, as
much as we do, who Romans viii. 24.
are saved by Hope only, the Day of the Lord, and the Mercy, which
Onesiphorus, and all the rest of the Elect shall find, when that day comes;
and that he, who prays his Friend may obtain what cannot be conferred on him,
till many Ages after his Introduction into celestial Beatitude, seems
necessarily to pray for one, that is Blessed, if not effectually, when he
conceived his Prayer, at least, for one considered, as such, when he shall see
the Effect thereof: so that whensover a man undertakes to pray for him, whether
while he is alive, or after his death, or both before, and after his death, he
still makes the same Prayer for him, which not only does not, but cannot change
its nature in the revolution of Ages, since that its foundation still
unchangeably subsists, and that it is impossible it shall have its Effect in
any, but a Person, that has been already a long time in Glory with God, and
who stands in need, not of Beatitude, in it self, which he is already possessed
of, but the last Perfection of it, and, as it may be expressed in vulgar Terms,
the Over-weight, which is necessarily to be added thereunto.

Thus the Fathers (not without some Ground) conceived they had pertinent
Reasons to pray for those. whom they thought gathered into the eternal Rest of
God; nay, some (out of a Motive of extraordinary compassion) took the liberty
to pray, and advised others to make Prayers, and give Alms for the Damned; yet
so, as that, (for ought we know) it has not happened, that, for the space of
six hundred years together, any one of them laid it down as a Tenent of
Catholic Faith, That the Souls of those, who ended their Lives in the
Profession of that Faith, were reduced, immediately upon their departure, to
endure any temporal Punishment for their sins, and to make full satisfaction to
the Justice of God, before they took possession of their Bliss. The Ancient
Liturgies are so far from teaching any such thing, that they have formally
expressed the contrary, and, even to this day, the Form of Prayer for the
Recommendation of Persons in Agony, expressly presupposes, that their Souls, at
their departure out of the Bodies, are to be carried by the Angels into
Abraham's Bosom, a Mansion of Rest, and Felicity, and not of Torment. For after
the Litanies, whereby the Mercy of God is implored, they say to the sick
Person; Proficiscere, anima Christiana, de hoc Mundo, etc. Depart out of this
World, O Christian Soul, in the Name of God, the Father Almighty, who has
created thee; in the Name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who has suffered
for thee; in the Name of the Holy Ghost, which is shed into thee, etc. May thy
place be this day in Peace, and thy habitation in Holy Sion, through the same
Christ our Lord. Amen. To this Wish there is added a Prayer, which demands for
the sick Person the Remission of his sins, the Renewing of whatever there was
corrupt in him, and his reconciliation with God: and then this Discourse is
addressed to him, Commendo te, etc. I recommend thee, most dear Brother, to God
Almighty, and commit thee to him; whose creature thou art, that when, by the
interposition of death, thou shall have cancelled the Obligation of humanity,
thou may return to thy Author, who has formed thee out of the slime of the
Earth. May therefore a bright Assembly of Angels meet thy soul at its departure
out of the body, etc. May the embraces of the Patriarchs confine thee to the
Bosom of a blissfull rest, etc. May thou be delivered from Viz. that of the
Agony.
Torment by Christ, who was crucified for thee; may thou be delivered from
eternal death by Christ, who vouchsafed to die for the; May Christ the Son of
the living God place thee in the ever-pleasant verdures of his Paradise, and
may that true Shepherd own thee among his Sheep; May he forgive thee all thy
sins, and place thee in the portion of his Elect on his right hand; May thou,
face to face, see thy Redeemer, and being ever present behold with thy blessed
eyes the most manifest truth. Being then placed among the Quires of the
blessed; may thou enjoy the sweetness of divine contemplation, world without
end. Amen. After such a Discourse, there is made this Prayer; Suscipe, Domine,
servum tuum, etc. O Lord, Receive thy servant into the place, where he is to
hope salvation from thy mercy, Amen. O Lord, deliver the soul of thy servant
from all dangers of Hell, and from the snares of Torments, and from all
Tribulations. Amen. Then, having made a recital of the Deliverances of Enoch,
and Elias, of Noe, Abraham, Joab, Isaac, Lot, Moses, Daniel, and his three
Companions, David, Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, they conclude with these words:
And, as thou have delivered from three most grievous Torments the most blessed
Virgin, and Martyr, Thecla; in like manner, may thou be pleased to deliver
the soul of this this thy servant, and grant, that he may rejoice with thee in
the enjoyment of celestial goods. Amen. At last, follow two Prayers; whereof
the former begins with these words: Commendamus animam Famuli tui, etc. O Lord,
we recommend unto thee the soul of thy servant, and we humbly beseech thee, O
Jesus Christ, Savior of the World, that thou would not refuse to place in
the bosoms of thy Patriarchs her, for whose sake thou mercifully did descend
upon Earth. In the later it is said, Be mindful of him, O Lord, in the glory
of thy brightness; let the Heavens be open to him; let the Angels rejoice with
him. Lord, receive thy Servant into thy Kingdom; Let St. Michael, the
Archangel of God, and General of the Celestial Militia, entertain him; let the
holy Angels of God meet him, and carry him into the Heavenly Jerusalem, etc.
Loosed from the Chains of flesh, may he be received into the glory of the
celestial Kingdom, etc. If, after all these Prayers, the Agony continue, there
are at several times read the one hundred and sixth, and one hundred and
eighteenth Psalms, according to the Greeks, and Latins, that is, the one
hundred and seventh, and one hundred and nineteenth, according to the Hebrews,
who are therein followed by the Protestants; and, when the Soul is departed,
they say, Afford your assistance, O ye Saints of God, meet him, O ye Angels of
the Lord, receiving his Soul, and presenting it to the most high. May Christ,
who has called thee, entertain thee, and may the Angels conduct thee into the
Bosom of Abraham, etc. O Lord, give him eternal rest, and let everlasting light
shine upon him; Lord, deliver his Soul from the Gate of Hell, let him rest in
peace.

In the Mass for the sick, who are in Agony, besides two Lessons out of the
Scripture, whereof the former comprehends from the sixth Verse of the five and
fiftieth Chapter of Isaiah, to the twelfth, with these words fastened in the
beginning by I know not whom, In diebus illis locutus est Esaias Propheta
dicens, and at the end, Ait Dominus omnipotens; and the later consists of the
twentieth, twenty first, and twenty second Verses of the sixteenth Chapter of
St. John, with these words added at the beginning, In illo tempore dixit Jesus
Discipulis suis. We have several Texts alleged, containing Thanksgiving to God
for his deliverances, as the second, sixth, and seventh Verses of the
eighteenth Psalm, according to the Hebrews, the fourth of the fifty seventh,
with Confessions of sins, and Implorations of his mercy, and assistance, as the
second Verse of the fifty seventh Psalm, the first and second of the one
hundred and thirtieth, the eighth and ninth of the seventy ninth, the first of
the fifty first, and the two and twentieth of the five and twentieth, and, in
conclusion, three Prayers, in the first whereof we read these words, Grant him,
O Lord, thy grace, that his Soul, at the hour of its departure out of the body,
may be represented without the blemish of any sin, by the hands of the holy
Angels, to thee, who art the proper bestower thereof, through our Lord, etc.
The second is closed with this conclusion, not much unlike the former, That,
received by the Angels, he may arrive at the Kingdom of thy glory, through our
Lord. And the third is laid down in these Terms, O Lord, we give thee thanks
for thy manifold kindnesses, wherewith thou art wont to satisfy the Souls of
those, who put their trust in thee; we, now confident of thy compassion, do
humbly beseech thee, that thou would vouchsafe to show mercy on thy Servant,
lest, at the hour of his departure out of the body, the enemy, prevail against
him, but that he may be thought worthy to pass to life, through our Lord.

If the Latin Church had from the beginning been imbued with this Sentiment,
that the Souls of the Faithful are, for the most part, at their departure out
of the Body, confined to a place of Torment, where they perfect the expiation
of their sins, through what misfortune is it come to pass, that she so far
forgot her self, as not to have expressed any such thing in all their Service,
and that her Encouragements, and Remonstrances to those, that lie at the point
of death, who are (as it is at this day presupposed) in so great a necessity to
prepare themselves for it, and the Wishes, and Prayers, which she makes, and
appoints to be made, as well for them, as for the Dead, whom a Superstitious
persuasion imagines already set upon, and invaded by Infernal flames in
Purgatory, do not only not contain any remark thereof, but formally teach the
contrary? And that they do so, we are only to instance out of what has been
newly alleged, what they say of all without exception, viz. that, after death,
they have their place in Holy Sion, that the Angels come to meet them; that
they convey them into the Kingdom of Glory, into the bosom of a blessed Rest,
into the bosom of Abraham, into the pleasant Verdures of Paradise, that they
might with the Quires of the Blessed contemplate Truth with their blessed eyes,
and enjoy the sweetness of divine contemplation eternally; that the Lord places
them in the Portion of the Elect, in the place where they hoped for salvation,
opens the heavens to them, gives them an eternal Rest, and makes them pass into
life; which Expressions are such, as that the Protestants could not (according
to the Hypotheses of their Belief) either say, or think any thing beyond them.
Shall we imagine her unfortunately seized by a Vertigo so extraordinary, as
that she would be guilty of such an Extravagance in favor of the Adversaries
of her Sentiment, so far as to furnish them with all the Expressions capable to
ruin it, and that she should be so unnatural, and cruel toward those of her
children, whom death snatched away daily from her, as not to vouchsafe to let
them know, by the last word, that she had a Resentment of their Trouble, or
that it was her desire to procure their Deliverance out of it by her Prayers,
and to fortify others, whom she saw to fall into the like, by communicating to
them her Advertisements, and Remonstrances, and representing to them on the one
side the necessity, which the Justice of God imposed on them, as is pretended,
to pass through the Fire, and, on the other, the Hope, which his Promise gave
them to be preserved therein by his care till such time, as his Goodness should
grant them a glorious deliverance out of it? Nay, though we should be inclined
to excuse in her so shameful a want of compassion, and memory, could we free
her from Prevarication, charging her, that, instead of stirring up in her
children the care of preparing themselves for Death, and the temporal Pains,
which (according to the Opinion of Purgatory) were to follow upon it, she has
treacherously permitted, that (to be rid of it with more ease) they should run
into erroneous persuasions, and presume to promise themselves, upon the very
start out of this Life, a passage into Abraham's Bosom, and the Paradise of
God; or rather, that she was resolved to lay them asleep her self, by
deceitful Expressions, in the Bosom of a prejudicial Security, which smothers
the apprehension they should have conceived of the Severity of that great Judge,
who intends to examine them with all rigor? And though we should endeavor to
reconcile these kinds of Expressions, which mutually destroy one the other,
would it be in our power to persuade any, that those, who, after they have said
of the Dead, that they are, immediately upon their departure, carried by the
Angels into the Bosom of the Patriarchs, hold withal, that they are
beforehand sent into a place of Torments, speak more rationally, then those,
who durst affirm, that the King lodges near himself in his Palace, the
Malefactors, whom he keeps in restraint, in the most loathsome Dungeons, and
holes of his Prisons?

And that no man may imagine that this Wish, May Christ, who was crucified for
thee, deliver thee out of Torment, has any relation to the Torment of the
pretended Purgatory, we need only to observe, that it is made for a sick
Person, overwhelmed with the Torment of the last Agony, immediately preceding
his Death. To which may be added, that, though it were understood of the
Torments, which wicked Spirits are to expect after Death, Reason would force us
to avow, that the Believer, recommended to the Grace of God, is exempted from
them after Death, in the same manner, as he is delivered from eternal Death,
from the dangers of Hell, and from the snares of his Torments, which he never
felt, nor ever shall feel, for as much as Christ, crucified, and dead for him,
preserves, and frees him from them. And as to the Prayers, which the Church of
Rome makes, and appoints to be made, for the Dead, desiring, that God would
pardon their Sins, deliver them from the Gates of Hell, and from the Last
Judgment, and put them into the possession of eternal Bliss, they cannot
(according to the intention of Antiquity) be taken in any other sense, then
what we have already alleged; nay, this very Circumstance, that the Modern
Greeks, and others, who deny Purgatory no less, then the Protestants, do daily
make those Prayers, irrefutably proves, that Purgatory cannot necessarily be
inferred from them.

CHAP. LIII. The Sentiment of the Modern Greeks, concerning the State of the
Dead.
FOr as much as the Church of Rome, and those of her Communion, are not any way
satisfied with the Sentiment of the Greeks at this day, who so join with her in
the Custom of Praying for the Dead, that they join with the Protestants against
her, in denying Purgatory; and that, upon that account, she censures them, as
Desertours of the Faith delivered by the Holy Fathers, whom she pretends to be
of her side, and reproaches them with a shameful breach of the Promise they
had made on Friday, the sixth of July, 1274. at the Council of Lions, and on
Monday, the sixth of July, 1439. at that of Florence, to embrace her Belief; we
are to consider these two things distinctly: First, What Ground she may have to
complain of their inconstancy; and, Secondly, In what Opinion they have
continued to the present.

The Latins, who had taken Constantinople by assault, on Monday the twelfth of
April, 1204. having been driven thence by Michael Palaeologus, on Wednesday the
twelfth of July, 1261. This Prince, to settle himself in his Possession,
against the attempts, as well of the Turks, as the Emperor Baldwin de
Courtenay, (who was then in League with Charles of Anjou, King of the two
Sicilies, the Republique of Venice, and Theobald, King of Navarr, and Count of
Champagne, to whom he had promised the fourth part of the lost State, in case
he might recover it) took (what according to the advice of his despair seemed
best) a resolution to cast himself into the arms of Pope Gregory the Tenth, and
to grant him any thing he should desire. For perceiving that Baldwin, his
Competitour, had in the year 1267. affianced; and in the year 1273. Married his
only Son Philip to Beatrix, the Daughter of Charles; that Charles, not
thinking it enough that his Son-in-Law had taken the Imperial Crown, had also
raised a powerful Army to carry on his Design; and that the Council of Lions,
Convocated by Pope Gregory, to meet on the first of May, 1274. threatened him
with no less, then absolute ruin; he hastened to conjure, and lay it by the
only means he had left him, sending to him, in whose hands it lay, to prevent
the Storm. The Pope, flattered by a great Confidence of establishing his Power
in the East, immediately dispatched thither Hierome d' Ascoli, Reimond
Beranger, Bonagratia of Saint John's in Perficeto, and Bonaventure de Mugello,
Franciscan Friars, who entered into conference with the Greek Emperor, got from
him what they desired, and caused him to write concerning the State of the Dead
in these Terms; (...), etc. If those, who are truly penitent, depart hence in
Charity, before they have, by Works worthy Repentance, made satisfaction for
that, wherein they have sinned, and failed; the souls of such are, after death,
purged by the Pains of Purgatory, according to what Brother Brother John of
Constantinople, a Franciscan, Poenitentiary to Gregory the Tenth.
John has declared unto us. And to mitigate those Pains, the Congregation of
the Faithful surviving is beneficial, I mean, the sacred Celebration of
Services, Prayers, and Alms, and other works of Piety, which are ordinarily
performed by the Faithful for others of the Faithful, according to the
Ordinance of the Church.

These Letters, which tended only to gain the Affection of the Pope, and
traverse the Designs of the King of Sicily, had struck the Patriarch Joseph so
to the Heart, that, after he had boldly protested against them, he withdrew,
choosing rather, to continue the rest of his days a private Person, then to
enjoy the Prelacy, with the remorse, and shame of having countenanced, by his
consent, an Agreement, which he thought concluded by Counsels, carried on by
worldly Designs, and Interests; and indeed, the greatest part of the East,
conspiring in the same Sentiment, had such a detestation for the Peace with
Rome, that there was a necessity of employing force, to smother the
dissatisfactions of those, who were scandalized thereat. John, surnamed Bec,
High Chancellor of the Empire, had been imprisoned, and roughly dealt with
upon that Occasion; but not long after, either weary of suffering, or Cajolled,
and drawn in by a Promise of the Patriarchate, joining with his Prince, he
came, with some other Greek Prelates, to the Council of Lions, where he made
his first entrance on the 24th of June, and while the Emperor lived, helped
him to keep in his Countrymen, extremely exasperated, to see themselves forced
to a Profession, which they approved not of.

Michael, dying toward the end of the year 1285. after he had eluded all the
Storms of the King of Sicily, Andronicus his Son, and Successor, who had, with
much impatience, born with the violence done to the common Sentiment of his
Nation, not only restored it to its former Liberty, as soon as he was gotten
into the Throne, but re-established the Patriarch Joseph, put Bec, who had
taken his Place, into such a Fright, that he was forced to withdraw secretly,
fearing he should be torn in Pieces by the People, and proceeded with so much
the more confidence in all this change, in as much as the Sicilian Vespers,
advised by his Father, and sung by the tumultuous People on Easter Day, the
twenty ninth of March, 1282. had set Sicily, and Arragon against the Pope, and
France. Besides, Philip de Courtenay, and Baldwin his Father, being come near
the End of their unfortunate Lives, had no further thoughts of revenge against
him; that Charles the First, King of Sicily, dying of Grief, the seventh of
January, 1285. left Charles the Second his Son, a Prisoner to the Sicilians,
and Arragonois, who kept him from the two and twentieth of June, 1284. to the
twenty ninth of October, 1288. So as that he had not, during that time, any
means, either to help himself, or prejudice others; and that none, that had
Relation to the Latins, was in any capacity to disturb the East.

Michael thought to have done much for himself, by his submission to, and
taking from the Church of Rome the Model of his Belief, and (by his Compliance
with her) disarming the Princes combined against his Dignity; but from that
Counsel, suggested by the Prudence of this World, he reaped only shame, and
misfortune, as well during his Life, as after his Death. For both his
Ecclesiastical, and Secular Subjects conspired together to put the affront upon
him, frustrate his Intentions, and confidently to subvert the Design of his
Treaty by a formal Opposition, and so unanimous a Rejection of the Expedient
which he had taken to settle his Peace, that his Cruelty against the most
resolute, and the setting up of a new Patriarch, who took the Catechism of his
Belief from the Court, prevailed nothing upon spirits, so much the more
exasperated, the more sensible they were of the violence done them. Pope Martin
the Fourth, taking it heinously that he was fallen off, in as much as he bore
with some of his Subjects, who were contrary to his Opinion, Eberardi
Ratisbonensis Chron.
in the first year of his sitting in the Chair, upon the day of the Dedication
of Saint Peter's Church, falling on the eighteenth of November, 1281.
pronounced him, in Orvieto, Excommunicated, as a favourer of the Ancient
Schism, and Heresy of the Greeks. And after his Death, which happened at the
beginning of the fourteenth Indiction, 1285. near Selybria, the public
Aversion was so violent against his Memory, that his own Son was forced to
leave it exposed to a kind of Infamy, Lib. 5.
Nicephorus Gregoras having left us his remarkable Account of him; (...), etc.
The Emperor Andronicus, his Son, who was present, not only honored not his
Father with the Sepulture ordinarily bestowed on Kings, but vouchsafed him not
that, which was fit for Smiths, and Pioners: He only ordered, that a small
number of men, having carried him away in the Night, some distance from the
Camp, should cast a quantity of Earth upon him, out of a fear, lest the Royal
Body might be torn in pieces by the wild Beasts.

Thus have we a great Prince, for having forced the Consciences of his People,
reduced to the burial of a Dog, and find the Church of Rome, who would have
made her advantage of his Despair, to spread her Authority into the East,
become, through this kind of proceeding, so odious, that the Ostentation of
her Power did only stir up the contradiction of those minds, which she was in
hope to enslave, and animated them in a resolution, not to receed in the least
from their former Sentiment.

About 150. years after, the Empire of the East falling under the Power of the
Turks, who had taken away from it, on the one side, all Natolia, except
Trebisonda, where there was kept up a little Empire apart; and, on the other,
such a part of Thrace, that Constantinople was, as it were, blocked up between
both, Johannes Palaeologus, descended from Michael, was (though much against
his Humor) forced to call to mind the Advertisement of his Father Manuel, who
had not left him any other Hope of recovery in the Land, then what was to be
procured by the Assistances of the Latins; Which to obtain (contrary to the
Advice of Sultan Amurath, who knew, that in the Concord of the Christians
consisted the only means to oppose his Tyranny) he took a resolution in the
year 1430. to make his Addresses to the West, and (after the Example of his
Father, who had in Person solicited Italy, France, England, and other
Kingdoms) sent several Embassies to Martin, and Eugenius the Fourth, to desire
the calling of a Council, to consist of the Prelates of both the Greek, and
Latin Churches, and, by means of the Council, to engage the Latin Church in
the defense of the Greek. We do not find how far Martin bestirred himself to
do any thing in that Cause; but God having taken him out of this World the one
and twentieth of February, 1431. and Eugenius the Fourth being chosen in his
stead, on the third of March following, the Jealousy he took at the Council,
which had been appointed to meet at Basil, by that of Sienna, in the year 1424.
and began on Thursday, the nineteenth of July, 1431. and the high, and violent
Procedures of it toward the Greeks in Florence ruined the success of what ever
he had undertaken. He had ever since the twelfth of March appointed Julian,
Cardinal of St. Angelo, to preside at the Council of Basil; eight Months
after, seized with an apprehension, that that Assembly would offer to diminish
his Power, he repealed the Commission of his Legate, and (under pretense of
gratifying the Greeks) appointed the eighteenth of December, for the Prelates
to separate, and summoned another Council at Boulogne la Grass, for the year
1433. Now, that of Basil, thinking the affront indigestible, and to be
revenged, resolving to question him, put him into such a fright, that he
thought himself obliged to grant what it would have, to issue out his Bull of
the fifteenth of December 1433. to repeal three others, contrary thereto, given
the twenty seventh of July, and the thirteenth of September before, and to join
with the Cardinal of St. Angelo, four other Legates, to wit, Nicholas, Cardinal
of Saint Croix, John, Archbishop of Tarentum, Peter, Bishop of Padua, and
Lewis, Abbot of Saint Justina of Padua, who were admitted the six and twentieth
of April, 1434.

From the fifteenth of October, and the eleventh of November, 1433. the Greeks,
answering to the Summons of the Council, who had Deputed to them Anthony,
Bishop of Tuy in Galicia, and B. Albert de Crespes, Master in Theology, had
sent on their behalf Demetrius Palaeologus, Proto-vestiary, Isidore, Abbot of
St. Demetrius, and Johannes Lascaris, surnamed Disypatus, to Treat of the
Conditions of the Interview of both Parties; and the Pope, for his Part, had,
toward the end of the same year, offered by Christopher Garathon, one of his
Secretaries, to send his Legates into the East, to prosecute the affair of the
Reunion. But, when he saw him returned, and understood that the Council, who
was not of his Opinion, and had reduced him to quit it, and by a second
Deputation, sent Brother John de Raguse, a Domiuican, afterward Bishop of
Argos, Henry Menger, Canon of Constance, and Simon Freron, Canon of Orleans,
who, as to his particular, had Order to pass through Rome, to aquaint the Court
with the occasion of his Message, instead of being satisfied with this
submission, which seemed absolutely to secure his Interest, he conceived a
greater jealousy thereof, and taking it very ill, that (as he thought) the
Council should think to get the glory of the Reconciliation with the Greeks, he
so far prevailed with them by his solicitations, and the sums of Money he paid
them out of his own Purse, which was better furnished, then that of the
Council, that they broke their Word with the Deputies, suffered the House,
where John de Raguse, the chiefest among them, was lodged, to be set upon by a
Party of Cross-bowsiers, who attempted to force it, and openly took their
resolution to go to Ferrara, where the Pope was in Person, and was drawing
together all his Partisans. It were impossible to avoid being importunate to
the Reader, if we should trouble our selves to give a particular Relation of
all the complaints reciprocally made by the Pope, and Cauncel. It shall
therefore suffice to observe, that the Council, defeated of their Hope, saw
another convened, as it were, in defiance of it, at Ferrara, where the Greeks,
to the number of about twenty Metropolitanes, and a dozen others of their
Clergy, made their appearance, with their Emperor, at the Pope's Charges,
upon the fourth, and eighth of March, 1438. sojourned there, without any thing
done, till Wednesday the fourth of June, at which time were begun some private
Conferences, upon the Questions of Purgatory, and the State of Souls after
their departure out of the Body, yet so, as that on the Part of the Greeks,
till Thursday the seventeenth of July, there passed no other decision, save
that the Souls of the Saints enjoy, immediately after Death, the perfect
felicity competent to them, though they expect, upon the completing of their
Persons, a more full perfection. After two Months delay, laying aside that
kind of Dispute, when the General Sessions of the new Council began, they were
taken up in debating concerning the Addition made by the Latins to the Creed,
and the manner of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, which they pretend to be,
not from the Father, and the Son, but from the Father by the Son. About this,
there passed at Ferrara, from that time, to the eighth of January, 1439.
sixteen Sessions, and the Plague having made the place not only incommodious,
but also dangerous, the Pope resolved to leave it, transferred the Assembly to
Florence, on the eleventh, defrayed the charges of the Greeks, by paying
nineteen thousand Florens for the Garrison of Constantinople; and, on the
nineteenth following, departed with the Greeks, who made their entrance into
Florence on Friday the fourteenth, and Sunday the sixteenth of February, began
their Sessions on Thursday the twenty sixth of the same Month, and continued
them to no purpose, till the seventeenth of March. Two days after, the
Emperor, weary of Disputing, and seized with an apprehension of his own
danger, pressed his People to capitulate with the Latins, addressing himself
to them in these pitiful Terms; (...), etc. Time is spent to no purpose, and
we have done nothing, as to the furtherance of our Affair; remember our House,
what hazard it runs amongst the wicked. If any thing happen, alas! how heavy
will it fall upon us? I hold the Persecution will be more intolerable, then
that of Diocletian, and Maximian; wherefore let us lay aside Discourses, and
Debates, and find out some Mean, so to pass into the same Sentiment. Mark, and
Anthony, Archbishops of Ephesus, and Heraclea, notwithstanding those
Deplorations, making some difficulty to comply, were by him forbidden to come
into the two following Congregations; and, the rest yielding, the Pope was not
awanting to take his advantage, and to extort from those poor People a forced
Acquiescence; the Patriarch Joseph having, upon the thirtieth of March, being
Monday, in the Passion-Week, given them this sad account of the Pope's
Pleasure; (...) That we should resolve to do of two things one, either find
out by Easter (falling that year on the fifth of April) the means of an Union
(with him) or take some course to return into our Country. And
notwithstanding, that Isidore, and Bessarion, Archbishops of Russia, and
Nicaea, who had engaged in the Party of the Latins, and given their Hands,
saying; (...). It is more expedient for us to unite in body, and soul, then to
go hence without having done any thing; for it is no hard matter to be gone,
but how we should go, or to what place, or when, I know not: Dositheus, Bishop
of Monembasia, cried out immediately, (...). What would you? that our departure
hence may be defrayed by the Pope, would you have us betray our Doctrine? I
will die rather, then ever Latinize. The Archbishop of Heraclea added, that
the Ancient Fathers were for his Opinion; that of Ephesus, that the (...).
Latins were not only Schismatics, but also Heretics. And the Nobility, who
had an Aversion for the Agreement, so exasperated those of their Party, that
being met the first of April at the Patriarch's Lodgings, who was then so
indisposed, that, on the Saturday following, they were forced to administer the
Extreme Unction to him, as soon as the poor Patient had opened his Mouth, to
ask what they had to say, made him this short answer, by the Archbishop of
Heraclea, (...), etc. There are four things demanded of you; First, Whether you
are satisfied with the most clear and solid Demonstration, according to which,
we have shown you by the Scriptures, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father, and by the Son; if you are, so be it: if not, tell us what you doubt
of, and why you are not satisfied, that we may find out some remedy, and way,
clearly, and purely establish, that, in very truth, the same Procession is also
from the Son. Secondly, If you have any Note, that the Pope directly contrary
to what is practiced at this day, draws the Greeks to the Tribunal of the
Scriptures.
Proofs from the Holy Scriptures, maintaining the contrary to what we affirm,
Produce them. Thirdly, If you have any strong places out of the Scriptures,
proving that what you hold is better, and more holy, then our Doctrine.
Fourthly, If you will not stand to these things, let us meet together in an
Assembly; Let the Hierarch celebrate the Divine Service; Let us all, as well
Latins, as Greeks, take an Oath; Let the Truth be boldly discovered by the
Oath, and what shall appear most clear to the The Latins were the greater
number, by three to one.
Major part, be embraced by both sides: For among Christians an Oath is not
violated.

After this Overture, all that remained, was to press those poor People by
bitter Reproaches, and to make those, who had complied, instrumental to draw in
those, who were unwilling to do it. Accordingly, upon the fourteenth of April,
Bessarion made a long Speech in favor of the Sentiment of the Latins, and
George, surnamed Scholarius, afterward Patriarch, presented no less then three
Orations upon the same Subject. The Emperor, who, on Whitsunday, the twenty
fourth of May, was gone to the Pope, upon a Message he had received from him to
that purpose, when he heard him say, that the great Charges he had been at came
to (...), etc. (...), etc. (...).
nothing, that he squandered away his Money, and done all he thought
convenient, vindicating himself the best he could, replied, I am not the Master
of the Synod, and I will not be so Tyrannical, as to force my Synod to say any
thing. And, on the Wednesday following, the Greeks, being admitted to Audience,
understood that they were reduced to an impossibility, the Pope making this
Discourse to them; (...), etc. Which way soever I look, I see division before
mine eyes, and much wonder how division can be advantageous to you. If it be so,
how will the Western Princes take it? And what sadness shall we conceive
thereat? Besides, how will you return into your Country? As if he had said,
You must either come to our Opinion, and, upon that Condition, obtain the
conveniences of returning into your Country, or quit all hope of ever getting
thither, as being a thing not to be attempted, but with our Leave, and upon our
Charge. Whereupon all, Mark Archbishop of Ephesus only excepted, being at an
absolute loss of all courage, bethought themselves how they might be
dis-engaged upon the best Terms they could; and the Emperor, having, on
Tuesday the second of June, sent to the Pope by the Archbishop of Russia, to
know what assistance he would afford him, had this Answer brought him by three
Cardinals; (...), etc. First, as to the present, the most Holy Father makes
account to furnish you with what shall sufficiently defray your Charges, as
also to find you Galleys, that all your People, and the Church of the East,
may return to Constantinople. Secondly, To maintain constantly, at his own
Charge, three hundred Soldiers, for the safety of the City. Thirdly, To have
upon his account two Galleys, as a Guard unto it, and to keep a Watch near it.
Fourthly, To procure that the Devotion of Jerusalem be exercised at
Constantinople, and that the Galeasses, which go for the Veneration of the
enlivening Sepulcher come to Constantinople. Fifthly, To find (when the
Emperor should stand in need of Galleys for his assistance) twenty Galleys,
armed upon his own account, for the space of six Months, and, in case there
should be need only of ten, for a year. Sixthly, To endeavor, as in the
presence of Christ; that the Nations of Christendom may come in to his relief,
when he should be necessitated to have an Army by Land.

Thus the extreme necessity of that conjuncture having destroyed the
concernments of Religion by those of Policy, which seemed to smother, if not
the disagreements, at least the Disputes, that were between them, the Union of
the Latins and Greeks is concluded. And, as the Pope discovered what account
he made of the Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and the visitation and adoration of the
holy Sepulcher, when he spoke of discrediting them in favor of Constantinople,
and to transfer thither the most celebrious Devotions of the Latins, together
with the advantages accrewing to the places where they are exercised, depriving
Palaestina of the profits she had derived from them for the space of 350. years
together, and condemning, as fruitless, the Expeditions, which had raised them
to the greatest height: So the Greeks made it appear, that the fear of loosing
their temporal good, was able to persuade them to sell the liberty of their
Consciences, and that the only Argument, which induced them to comply with the
Sentiment of the Latins, was taken from Earth, and not from Heaven. So, that
if the Poet had reason to say of Daws, Pies, and Parrats, when brought to the
pronunciation of what words they heard, that the Belly had been their Master,
and had given them the ingenuity to imitate the words which nature had denied
them, the Church of Rome might well acknowledge, that the Greeks were overcome,
not by the force of her proofs, but by the sound of her fair promises, and that
her purse and credit had been the true bait, whereby they had been caught, and
that they had not been instructed in the Latin Opinions, but under the
direction of Fear and Despair, the most wretched Masters that ever were.

The Patriarch Joseph, who, during all these Intrigues, grew weaker and weaker,
had on Tuesday, June the ninth, the Eve of his departure out of this World,
signed the Profession, which he was desirous to make for the advantage of the
Church of Rome, and all remained to be done, was, that the Prelates, who had
accompanied him, should do the like. But the Pope, not willing to come to any
capitulation with them, but at discretion, gave them, on the sixteenth
following, a Paper, which might have startled the Emperor, if Julianus
Caesarinus, Cardinal of St. Angelo, had not appeased him by these words, Send
your (...).
Commander and us Letters, that the Galleys may be provided, but we desire you
to stay, and the Commander with you, till it shall have pleased God to bring
the business to some issue, that then he may return along with you with much
glory: We shall bear all your charges as far as Venice, and guard you to the
City [of Constantinople] let not your Majesty be troubled as to that
particular. After which, they trifled away the time, till the two and twentieth
of the month, and then the Pope sent by three Cardinals this Message, That he
would have all the privileges of his Church, and the prerogative of Appeals,
and would direct, and feed the whole Church of Christ, as the Shepherd of the
Sheep; and withal, the right and power to call a general Council, when there
should be any necessity, and that all the Patriarchs should submit to his will,
which put the Emperor (...).
out of all hope, and surprised him, so as that he made only this answer,
(...).
Give order for your departure, if you think good. Yet to prevent an absolute
rupture, the Pope entered into further conference with him, and entertained both
him, and his, upon Friday the six and twentieth following, with a Collation of
Sweetmeats and Wine, after which, and his retirement out of the place, those,
whom he had brought with him, unanimously writ these words, (...), etc. We
acknowledge, concerning the dignity of the Pope, that he is High Priest, and
Bishop, and Lieutenant, and Vicar of Christ, Pastor and Teacher of all
Christians, and that he directs and governs the Church of God, the privileges,
and rights of the Patriarchs of the East, being observed; that the Patriarch of
Constantinople is the second next the Pope; then he of Alexandria; after him
that of Antioch, then that of Jerusalem. They had resolved not to acknowledge
any thing further, and to break off rather, then be brought to it; but the Pope
delivered them out of all fear as to that, accepting (at least in appearance)
what they had written, though granting him only a primacy of Order over the
other Patriarchs, and absolutely quashing the dispute of his Predecessor Leo
the First against Anatolius, raised by the Council of Chalcedon (seconding in
that the first of Constantinople) to the second place.

This acceptance passed, there seemed to be nothing to do, but to sign and
publish the Concordate (or Agreement) between both parties; but there arises
yet new difficulties. For the Pope would have the Instrument drawn up in his
own name only, but was therein formally opposed by the Greeks, who after these
words, Eugenius Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, required, on Monday the
nine and twentieth of June, there should be added, with the consent of the most
serene Emperor, of the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the other Patriarchs.
He seemed also desirous to get inserted into it this Clause, That he would have
his privileges, according as the Holy Scripture defines, and the expressions
of the Saints; which the Emperor withstood, saying, If any one of the Saints
honor the Pope in a Letter, he might write to him, shall he take that for a
privilege? Yet the next day it was granted him, that he should have his
privileges, according to the Canons, the expressions of the Saints, the holy
Scripture, and the Acts of Synods; the Greeks, on the other side, having got
into the same Decree, that all the privileges of their Patriarchs should be
inviolably observed, the Latins made no small difficulty on the second of
July, to let pass the word All, which two days after they admitted. Upon the
fifth of the Month aforesaid, the Concordate was signed by The Latins were in
number 116.
the Pope, nine Cardinals, two Titulary Patriarchs, nine Archbishops, forty
nine Bishops, and forty six Abbots on the one part; and the The Greeks 30.
Emperor, seventeen Metropolitanes, five Deacons, one Archpriest, and six
Abbots and Religious Persons, on the other. On the sixth, it was publicly
read. Eight days after, the Pope, having desired the Greeks to proceed to the
Election of a Patriarch, that might come into the place of the Patriarch
Joseph, deceased twenty six days before, and that he, whom they should choose,
might receive the Imposition of his hands, was denied, as to both particulars,
and forced to suffer the Greeks to depart, forsaken by Bessarion, and Isidore,
Archbishops of Nicea, and Russia, and not long after Cardinals. The rest,
heightened by the Example, and Encouragements of Mark of Ephesus, who would not
by any means be drawn to subscribe, or consent to the Concordate; and withal
troubled in Conscience, that they had prostituted their Sentiment in the
business of Religion for Bread, prevented the disacknowledgment of the Body of
their Contrymen, as soon as they were got to Constantinople; declaring null
all they had done, and re-assuming their former Opinions with so much the
greater readiness, by how much they had only quitted them in outward show, and
to the regret of their whole Nation, which would have treated them very
harshly, for having been so persidious to them.

From which proceedings it necessarily follows; First, That, if the Church of
Rome has any reproach of Inconstancy, wherewith to charge those among the
Greeks, who (having received money from the Latins, to acknowledge what they
desired) have since broken the Promises they had made them, and disclaimed what
they had done; She has nothing to say against Mark, Archbishop of Ephesus,
who never approved the management of that Affair; nor yet against the others,
who had stayed in the East, without whose knowledge, and contrary to whose
intention, the Concordate of Florence was drawn up; as also that the said
Church has given them all great occasion to alienate themselves from Her,
inasmuch as, instead of proving to them that they were in an error, Her design
was to circumvent, and surprise them, and had so little regard, I will not say,
to the glory of God, to the Interest of his Truth, and to that of Sincerity,
and public Edification, but even to her own Reputation a^^ theirs, that she
thought it a business of greater concernment, to be defrayed the charges she
had been at with them; and, in requital of that little Temporal Assistance,
which she offered them, to draw them to an abjuration of the Belief, which they
had professed from Father to Son, before they were convinced in Conscience.
Will it ever be thought just, by the profusion of the things of this World, to
purchase Souls, called by the Gospel to the hope of a Celestial Inheritance?
And, if they prove more hard to be drawn in, then was imagined, will it be
thought a rational kind of proceeding, to frighten them by violences yet more
inhumane; and, by the fears and trials of those disgraces, which may occasion
the loss of the Body, and its advantages, boldly to thrust them upon the
Precipices of Damnation, as if it were ever left to our choice to force
Religion by Religion, to imprint the Sentiments thereof in the minds of men
with Iron Bars, and to promise our selves, that we may bring men to Salvation
by the shipwreck of good Conscience?

In the second place it is apparent, that neither the Greeks, nor Latins,
assembled at Florence, have, by their proceedings there, discovered, that they
were very confident of what they should believe concerning the state of Souls
after Death; the former having as to that point, quitted it without any
Dispute, and expressed their Union, with the others, in uncertain, and
indeterminate Terms, as we have shown Chap. 29.
before; and the Latter, who made account to bring over to them such, as were
of the contrary Opinion, contenting themselves with what they were pleased to
say, though well examined, it were such, as could not give them any just
satisfaction; and that the Formulary of their Concurrence consisted only in
three words of a double meaning.

Lastly, that the Church of Rome, who had first set afoot the Conferences, out
of a consideration of the Question of Purgatory, brought by her first upon the
Stage, has made it appear by the event, that her own persuasion of it was not
very great; forasmuch, as immediately after she, in a manner, shook off all
further thoughts of it; and, toward the end of the Assembly, thought it
concerned her more to dispute the Privileges of her Pope; thereby clearly
discovering, that it took up her thoughts more to plead for his Dignity, then
for the Salvation of the Greeks, and that her endeavor was to enslave them to
her self rather, then to convert them to God.

However it be, after their return into the East, there was no difficulty made
of taking the Concordate of Florence for a Tablature of their Sentiment: The It
was printed at Heidelberg, under the name of Nilus, in the year, 1608.
Oration, which Bessarion had made on their behalf at Ferrara, on Saturday,
june xiv. One Thousand Four Hundred Thirty Eight, is (as to what concerns them)
still in force; and though they prayed, even at that time, for their Dead, and
(presupposing, as the Church of Rome would have it, that some sins were venial,
and some Souls in the midst between Virtue and Vice) made it a question,
whether God, granting them the remission of their sins after this life, makes
use of any punishment; or, out of his Clemency, gives absolution to men, as
inclined to mercy by the Prayers of the Church: and whether (in case he does
make use of punishment) it consists in Purgation by Fire, and not rather in
restraint, obscurity, and grief; yet did they sufficiently determine themselves
in these words, We say that it stands more with the goodness of God not to
despise a small good, then to account worthy punishment a small sin, leaving it
to be inferred, that he freely pardoned it.

Immediately after, Mark of Ephesus, in his Manifesto, addressed To all
Christians, as well of the Continent, as the Islands, having made his
complaint, that some endeavors had been used to reduce his Contrymen into a
base Captivity, (...), etc.
and to bring them down to the Babylon of the Customs, and Opinions of the
Latins, proposes their Sentiment, concerning the Dead in these Terms; We
affirm, that neither the Saints obtain the Kingdom prepared for them, and the
ineffable good things, neither do Sinners fall into Hell, but both expect,
their own Lot; and that belongs to the time to come after the Resurrection, and
last Judgment.

But Gregorius Proto-Syncellus, who was for the Concordate, charges the said
Mark with contradicting, in that, not only the Fathers, as St. Chrysostom,
St. Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory of Rome, Damascene, and Maximus, but even
himself; for as much, as in one of his Sermons, in honor of Elias the Prophet,
he had maintained, that he enjoyed the clear Vision of God, and was in the
presence of his Majesty in the Heavens, with the Angels, and Saints, who have
put off the garment of the body. And, indeed, it is possible, that Mark, either
to discover the greater alienation from the Opinions of the Latins, or to show
himself to be of their number, among those of his Nation, who (as is expressed
in the Acts of Florence) hold, that the Saints departed are in, and enjoy
bliss, in their proper place, expecting the perfect Crown, which has been
promised them, may have said it; and that the more common Opinion of the Greeks
may have been from that time such, as the same Acts represent it, saying,
(...), etc. The Greeks conceive, that there may be a fire, and partial
punishment of Souls, and that the Souls of Sinners go to an obscure place, a
place of grief, and that they are afflicted, and punished in part, being
deprived of Divine Light; and that by Prayers, and the Services of the Priests,
and Alms, they are purged, or rather delivered out of that dark Place, and
Tribulation, and that they are freed; And the Greeks (contrary to the Italians
confess, that they are purged, not by fire, or the action of fire; but that
only Prayer, and Supplication, and Alms, have that effect. Accordingly the
Greeks living in Venice, in the year, 1560. declared their Sentiment in Terms,
much to that purpose, when they made answer to the Tenth of the Cardinal of
Guise's Questions, as has been already Chap. 19.
observed. And it is likely enough, that whoever (as they did) imagines to
himself Souls, which are neither good, nor bad, runs into a necessity of
feigning some such thing concerning the Treatment they are to receive, after
their departure out of the Body.

But there is not any thing can give us a more certain account of their
Opinion, then the In the Euchologie printed at Paris, in the year 1647. whereof
there are six; to wit, the common Form, from page 126. to p. 539. That of
Monks, from p. 544. to p. 547. That of Priests, p. 561. That of Seculars, p.
583. That of women, p. 588. That of Children, p. 592.
Forms of Service daily used by them at the Enterment of their Dead; for we
have in them (as in those of the Latins) Lessons out of the Scripture; as for
instance, the first Verse of the fifty first Psalm, all the ninety first; the
first part of the hundred and nineteenth, the twelfth, seventy second, and
seventy third Verses, to the hundred thirty third; and the hundred seventy
fifth, and hundred seventy sixth; the forty second of the twenty third Chapter
of St. Luke; out of the fifth of St. Matthew, from the third Verse, to the
tenth inclusively; out of the fourth of the first to the Thessalonians, from
the thirteenth Verse, to the seventeenth inclusively; the twenty fourth, and
thirtieth Verses of the fifth of S. John; the sixth Verse of the hundred and
twenty sixth Psalm; the seventh of the hundred and sixteenth; the fifteenth of
the hundred and third; the whole twenty third Psalm; the fifth Verse of the
sixty fifth; the twelfth and seventeenth Verses of the fifth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans; the seventeenth of the fifth of St. John; the first of
the twenty fourth Psalm; out of the fifteenth of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, from the beginning, to the eleventh Verse; the thirty fifth of the
sixth of S. John; the first Verse of Psalm the eighty fourth; the thirteenth of
the twenty fifth; the seventh Verse of the sixth to the Romans; the thirty
ninth of the sixth of St. John; the sixth of the fourteenth to the Romans:
which contain either Lessons of Piety, and Humility, for the Living; as the
places of the hundred and third, and hundred and nineteenth Psalms, and of the
fifth of St. Matthew: or Descriptions of the Goodness of God toward those,
that fear Him; as the twenty third, and ninety first Psalm: or Implorations of
His Mercy for the last Day; as the forty second of the twenty fourth of St.
Luke, and the first Verse of the fifty first Psalm: or Assurances of the
Beatitude, Immortality, and Glorious Resurrection of the Faithful; as all the
other places: among which, there is nothing alleged out of the second Book of
Maccabees, which the Church of Rome takes at this day for one of its principal
Grounds; nor yet out of any other of the Apocryphal Books. Whence it evidently
results, that those, who compiled the Office of the Greeks, and put into it
those Texts of Scripture, had not in that any apprehension, contrary to the
Sentiment of the Protestants.

There are also in the said Forms abundance of Prayers, stuffed with
Invocations to the Blessed Virgin, and to Martyrs, all which are irrefragable
marks of the alteration of the ancient Service, and insoluble Arguments of the
adulteration of belief among the Greeks, whose first Liturgies contained
Prayers for all the Saints, without any exception; and the Fathers held as a
Principle of Religion, that God alone was to be invocated, August. De vera
Religione, cap. 55.
that the worship of Persons departed is not to be accounted by us for
Religion; for as much as, if they lived piously, they are not for that to be so
looked on, as if they sought such Honors, but will, that he should be served
by us, by whom we being illuminated, they rejoice that we are made partakers of
their Dignity; that they are to be honored by way of imitation, and not adored
upon any religious account. In a word, that neither the Blessed Virgin, Mother
of our Savior, nor any of the Saints of either Sex can pretend to any part of
that religious homage, Saint Epiphanius, one of the most earnest maintainers of
Prayer for the Dead, has left to them, and the whole Church of these last
times, these remarkable Precepts; Haeres. 79. Sect. 4^ etc.
(...), etc. Indeed the Body of Mary was holy, but it was not God; the Virgin
was indeed a Virgin, and honored, but she was not given us to be adored; on
the contrary, she adored him, who was begotten of her, as to the flesh, etc. If
God will not have the Angels to be adored, how much rather will he not, that
she, who was born of Ann should be? etc. God came from Heaven, and the Word was
clad in flesh taken from the holy Virgin, but the Virgin is not adored, etc.
Let Mary be honored, but let the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit be adored; Let
no man adore Mary; though Mary be excellent, and holy, and honored, it is not
that she should be adored, etc. Let Mary be honored, but let the Lord be
adored.

But not to press any further this notorious defect, which we find at present
in the Service of the Greeks, we are to observe, that among them the Office of
the Dead is full of Prayers, whereby is desired (as in the Latin Service) the
mercy of God, the remission of the sins of the deceased, his absolution, his
blessed resurrection, his introduction into rest, into Abraham' s Bosom, into
the Mansion of the blessed, into refreshment, into Paradise, into the
Tabernacle of God, into his Kingdom, glory, light, to the right hand of the
great Judge, into the Society of the Saints and Angels; all which Expressions
(according to the Hypotheses of Antiquity) may be applied to the Spirits
already received into glory? Which is so much the more evident, for that the
particular Office, which concerns the Obsequies of Children, is full of these
Prayers, that God would number the deceased among the Children, to whom he has
promised his Kingdom, that he would place him among the just, who are
acceptable in his sight, that he would make him partaker of the good, things,
which are above this World, that he would let him enter into the joys of the
Saints, that in his holy Mountain he would gratify him with celestial goods,
that he would write his name in the Book of those, who shall be saved, that he
would make his face to shine upon him, that he would lodge him in Abraham' s
Bosom, that he would grant him the enjoyment of his Kingdom, etc. Yet were not
these Desires made without a presupposition of his Beatitude: as, First, when
it is said to him, He, who has taken thee from the Earth, and gives thee place
among his Saints, shew^ that thou (O truly blessed Child) art a Citizen of
Paradise. The Sword of Death falling on thee has cut thee off as a tender
Branch, (O blessed art thou, who have made no trial of worldly pleasures) but
behold Christ opening the Gates of Heaven to thee; numbering thee^ out of his
great goodness, among the Elect^ Secondly, When he is brought in making this
Discourse, Why do you bewail me, a Child translated out of the World? for I am
not a Subject to be bewailed. The joy of all the just is required for those
Children, who have not done works worthy Tears. Thirdly, When he acknowledges,
that Death is a freedom to Children, that they are thereby exempted from the
miseries of life, and that they are gone to rest, that they rejoice in Abraham'
s Bosom, in the divine Quires! of Blessed Children, and assuredly dance,
because their departure hence was a deliverance from the corruption, which
loves sin.

If then the Ritual of the Creeks be full of Prayers for the Children, whom
they unanimously acknowledge to be among the Blessed, what inconvenience can
there be to attribute to them, that they had the same apprehension for persons
of age, of whose felicity they no way doubted? But though reason should not
lead us to think so, yet does their formal confession obliges us to believe as
much: for there is not any deceased person, for whom they say not to God,
Eucholog. Page 531.
Mercifully receive the faithful person departed, who has holily quitted this
life, and is (O Lord) passed toward thee; and whose Funeral Solemnities they
do not conclude, saying to him three several times, Page 538.
Our Brother, worthy to be ever blessed, and always remembered, thy memory is
eternal. To every Monk, without any exception, they address these words, Page
554.
Brother, the way thou art in is that of bliss, for that a place of rest is
prepared for thee: adding to that purpose the sixteenth Verse of the one
hundred and sixteenth Psalm, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has
dealt kindly with thee; and a little after, Page 555.
He, who is taken hence, has passed through the ever-troubled Sea of Life, and
by Faith is arrived at his Port: conduct him, O Christ, with the Saints into
thy tranquillity, and ever-living pleasures. In like manner to every Priest,
Page 563^
Thou have piously signalized thy self in Faith, Charity, Hope, Gentleness,
Purity of life, and in the Sacerdotal dignity; and therefore (O Brother of
eternal memory) God, who is before all Ages, whom thou have served, will
himself dispose thy Spirit into a place full of light, and pleasure, where the
just are in rest, and will make thee obtain of Christ, at the day of Judgment,
pardon, and great mercy. And the deceased Person is introduced, using these
words, Page 573.
I am now at rest, and have found great favor, for that I have been
transferred from the corruption of life, glory be to thee, O Lord, etc. Page
574.
Thy divine Servant, Deified in his Transportation, by thy now-enlivening
Mystery is come toward thee. To every Woman departed, Detain not any longer, O
malicious Hell, the Souls of the Elect, in the condemnation of the
Transgression; for all, being now made assuredly conformable to Christ, instead
of Death, receive divine life. In a word, she is made to say the same words, as
had been attributed to the Priest, I am now at rest, etc.

All these Confessions, grounded on the Lessons of Scripture, which, for the
most part, contain assurances of the Love of God toward those, who serve him,
and promises of their future Beatitude, and glorious Resurrection,
demonstratively prove, that the first Compilers of the Greek Office, agreeing,
in what is most substantial, with the Protestants, believed, that whoever dies
in the Faith of the Lord does, from the moment of his Death, enjoy rest, and
glory in him, and with him. But, for as much, as from time to time, the purity
of belief, and worship, receiving adulteration among them, there rose up a sort
of people, apt to feign any thing, and to affirm for true all they had feigned,
and that from that source are derived abundance of things inconvenient, and
contradictory, which are, at this day, as so many Black-Patches in the face of
their Service, reason calls upon us, to direct our hand to the most remarkable,
and discover the Scars, and Imperfections, which lie under them.

For as much then as the Greek Fathers, taught by St. Paul, even in that very
place, which is copied in the Ritual, advertised the Christian People committed
to their charge, not to be sad for their Brethren departed, after the manner of
the Heathens, who are without hope; and St. Chrysostom threatened to
excommunicate, as impious, those, who took a glory in grieving upon such
occasions: it is impossible those should have been well informed in their duty,
and the Sentiments of their Forefathers, who, (making a Virtue of a Vice, and
stuffing the public Forms of Service with their Deplorations) have had the
boldness to introduce the Faithful deceased, pressing those, whom they left
behind them, to lamentations at their misfortune, that is to say, at what
(according to the Scriptures) neither is, nor can be. As for instance, when
they inserted, at the end of the common Formulary, this extravagant,
half-Heathenish Discourse, absolutely contradictory to the Exhortation of St.
Paul to the Thessalonians; Euchol. Page 537.
Brethren and Friends, Kindred and Acquaintance, now that you see me laid
without Voice, and without Breath, lament all over me; for yesterday I spoke
with you, and suddenly the dreadful hour of Death surprised me. But come ye
all, who are desirous of my Company, and kiss me with the last kiss: for I
shall have no further conversation with you, nor ever speak to you again. I am
going to the Judge, with whom there is no respect of persons, since the Servant
and the Master, the King and the common Soldier, the rich man and the beggar,
are to appear before him in an equal condition, and every one shall be either
glorified, or made ashamed by his works. But I entreat and conjure you all
without ceasing, to pray for me to Christ God, etc. And in the Office of the
Priest, Page 570.
My Brethren, Children, and Friends, I remember you before the Lord, forget me
not, when you pray, learn (I conjure, beseech, and require you) these things,
that they may serve you for a memorial, and bewail me night and day. Again, In
great compassion weep for me (O ye Lovers of Christ) and earnestly petition the
God of all, that he would grant me to rest with the Saints. And in that of the
Woman, Come Fathers, and behold how Beauty fades; come Mothers, and see how the
Flesh moulders away, and cry with Tears, Lord, grant, that, by thy Command, she
may rest, whom thou have taken hence. But as those carnal sallies of Spirit are
palpably contrary to the advice of the Apostle, and upon that account not to be
endured; so the absurdity thereof is so evident, that the Author of the Ritual
could not forbear expressing the dislike it might occasion, saying in the
Office of the Priest, Page 565.
O men, why do you so earnestly bewail me? Why do you give your selves this
vain trouble? He, who is transferred from Life, says to all, Death is become a
Rest to all.

Nor do I think it strange, the Formulary should swell with the Page 535, 536,
537, 575.
descriptions of the Miseries, and Vanity of this Life; for since the Prophet
has vouchsafed to give us a Draught thereof to the end, that, Psalm. xc. 12.
Learning to number our days, we might apply our hearts to Wisdom, we cannot be
too often touched with the sting of so necessary an Advertisement; yet is it
not expected from us, that to show our selves smitten, and humbled before God,
we should presume to act the Disconsolate, contrary to the Instruction of St.
Paul, and make such Discourses, as these, notoriously false, in respect of any
one of the Faithful. Page 575.
Alas! What a combat is the Soul, separated from the Body, engaged in? Alas!
How does she then lament, and there is not any Body has pity on her? Turning
her eyes to the Angels, she beseeches to no purpose; and reaching forth her
hands to men, no body relieves her. For, if there be any Combat in the Soul,
before its separation, as soon, as that is over, she is passed from the Combat
to the Triumph, since that (according to the Instruction of the Spirit) her
being with the Lord is upon this account, that she 2 Cor. v. 8.
absent from the body. Secondly, There is not, from thence forward, any Tears
to be shed for her, in as much as she is in Psalm. xvi. 11.
fullness of joy, and pleasures; and that his Goodness promises, to wipe away
all Tears from the eyes of those, who stand before his Throne. Thirdly, There
is no further necessity, she should call upon either Angels, or Men, in regard
she is in the blessed Society of Millions of Hebr. xii. 22, 23.
Angels, and in the Congregation, and Assembly of the Firstborn, who are
written in Heaven. And, should she stand in any need of Relief, she would
remember, that her Psalm. cxxiv. 8.
Help was, even during this Life, in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven, and
Earth; that he alone is our Refuge, Glory, and the Rock of our Srength; that we
are at all times to put our Trust in him; and that, if all the men in the World
should be put together into a balance? they would be found lighter, then Vanity
it self.

But (to excuse the frequent Prosopopoeias, which, in these Forms of Service,
represent separated Souls, as seized with horror, and reduced to deplorations,
and desires of Relief) it may be pretended, that these Descriptions made at
discretion are Instructions to the Living, as to what lies upon them to do. To
answer that, and whatever else may be alleged to extenuate their Offense, who
have shuffled those things into the Greek Service, it need only be said, that
we are to take for Lessons of our Duty, not Imaginations of what never, either
was, or will be; but the pure Will of God, our only Rule in Life, and Death:
and if it were lawful for us to use Fiction, it were but requisite we had the
Judgment, not to advance any thing absurd, and contrary to our Principles,
showing our selves in that more Prudent, then the Modern Greeks, who
(transported by I know not what Stupidity) do almost every where run against
their own Hypotheses. But to make it clear, by certain Examples. Their common
Principle is; That good Souls pass, at the very Instant of their separation,
into the possession of their Rest, the bad are immediately confined to Hell; of
those in a middle Condition, only the Salvation is deferred. Let us now hear,
what pretty Discourses they attribute to them: I beseech you all, and conjure
you, that, without ceasing, you pray for me unto Christ, God, to the end, that
I may not (according to my sins) be confined to place of Torment, but that he
would place me where is light of Life. The middle-conditioned Souls are they,
ever (according to them) at such a point, as, immediately after their departure
out of the Body, to be at the self-same time exempted from the Pains of
Restraint, Obscurity, or Grief (through which it is affirmed they are to pass)
and deprived of the Rest, which, after the Pains, they are to obtain, so as
that they are (for the least space of time imaginable) in a Neutral State,
which admits not the qualification of either Good or Bad, of either Light or
Darkness, Rest or Torment, and consequently, of either Joy or Grief, if not by
accident? And in Case that by the Place of Torment, where it is feigned, they
fear being confined, some may understand the Hell of the Damned; is it possible
they should ever be exposed thereto, since it is presupposed they are of a
middle Conditition, and upon that very account (as being chargeable only with
Venial Sins) neither do, nor can, deserve Eternal damnation? Be this therefore
one unmaintainable, and unimaginable Absurdity, which must needs press hard
upon our Forgers of Descriptions, according to the Dictates of their own
Fancies.

They make the deceased Priest further say Page 570.
Why, O man, do thou trouble thy self thus unseasonably? There is one only
hour, and all passes away; for in Hell there is no Repentance. There is no
Releasment in that place; there is the Worm, which never sleeps; there is the
darksom land, and the obscure matter, to which I am to be condemned, etc. Is
this Discourse attributible to a Faithful Person, that had had here in this
World the least taste of the Promise made by the Son of God, assuring us, that
whoever believes in him is in such manner, passed from death to life, as that,
though he be dead, yet shall he live through him; that he shall not come into
Condemnation; and that there is not indeed any for those, that are in him? Are
the Souls, imagined to be in a middle Condition, subject to the stingings of
the Worm, which never dies, and liable to Damnation? Which if it be supposed
they neither are, nor can, why should they be feigned to say so, and
necessarily Lie in saying so? This must then be a second Impertinence, and a
new Piece of Forgery, committed by the Corrupters of the Ritual, not only
against the Word of God, but also against their Sentiment, who (in the same
Ritual) inserted this Confession, which is both most true, and Diametrically
contrary to the Discourse before confuted; Lament not all you, who are departed
in the Faith, for as much as Christ has suffered the Cross, and was buried for
us in the Flesh, and has made all those, who call upon him, children of
Immortality. For this once laid down, does it signify less, then a total
Eclipse of understanding, and circumspection, to make the children of
Immortality (for whom the Savior of the World died, and who consequently
cannot perish) say, that they shall be Damned.

Nay, the Prayers of the Living for their departed Brethren would be still
chargeable with inconvenience, even though they were taken literally: For
instance, this, Euchol. page 573.
O Lord, as thou said unto Martha, Page 556.
I am the Resurrection, by the Effect accomplishing thy Word, and calling
Lazarus out of Hell; so also mercifully raise this thy servant out of Hell. For
besides that, it is a little too freely supposed, that our Lord's Friend was
confined in Hell from the moment of the Death of his Body, to that of his
Resurrection; it is also false, that our Savior raises out of Hell (whence the
Ritual confesses, that Jo. 11. 25.
none is delivered) any of his Servants. Whoever once enters there, never comes
out again, nor is there any raising up to be expected by him. But these words
may be maintained, if they meet with a favorable Interpretation, which might
admit Hell to signify, not the place of the Damned, in which sense it is
ordinarily taken, but the Grave, whence our Savior, who called forth Lazarus,
will; at the Last day, raise up the Bodies of all his Servants.

With the help of the same favorable way of Interpreting, it were possible, to
find a sense conformable to the apprehension of Antiquity, in those Prayers
whereby the Greeks do at this day, Beg the Remission of Sins for their Dead,
taking care to make them to relate to the Absolution which shall be solemnly
pronounced by the Great Judge at the last day, as may be deduced from this, that
most of them expressly mention it; among others, this, Page 573.
Vouchsafe, O Redeemer, that, when thou shall come with ineffable glory in the
Clouds, after a dreadful manner, to Judge the whole World, that thy Faithful
Servant, whom thou have taken from the Earth, may joyfully meet thee; which
words are Grounded on 1 Thessalonians. Chap. iv. Verse 17. In like manner this, Page
530.
Vouchsafe, O God, to be mindful of our Father, who is now at rest, and be
pleased to deliver him from the corruption of sin at the day of Judgment,
through the good odor of thy goodness, mercy, and love toward men. Again, O
Lord, from whom the Spirits of those, who serve thee, do come, and to whom they
return, we beseech thee, to cause to rest in a place of light, in the Region of
the Just, the Spirit of N. thy Servant, now lying in his Grave, and raise him
up at thy second, and dreadful coming, not to be condemned after the
Resurrection, but to be Absolved, for no man living, shall be justified in thy
sight. Again, Page 539.
Let not thy Servant, O Lord, be confounded at thy coming. Page 558.
When thou shall discover all things that are hidden, and shall (O Christ)
reprove our sins, spare him whom thou have taken hence, being mindful of his
Preaching. Again, Page 567.
Forgive, O Savior, the sins of him, who has been translated hence in Faith,
and vouchsafe to admit him to thy Kingdom; there, shall not any escape the
dreadful Tribunal of thy judgment; Kings, and Potentates, and the Hireling,
all shall appear together, and the dreadful Voice of the Judge shall call the
People that have sinned, to the condemnation of Hell, from which, O Christ,
deliver thy servant. Again, Page 568.
Out of thy mercy, O Christ, exempt from the Fire of Hell, and the dreadful
Sentence, thy Servant, whom thou have now taken hence in Faith; and let thy
Domestic praise thee, as God the merciful Redeemer, etc. Brethren, how
dreadful is the hour which sinners are to expect! O what fear is there! Then
the Fire of Hell devours, and the ravenous Serpent swallows; wherefore
(merciful Lord Christ) deliver him from the day of dreadful Gehenna. O how
great shall be the Joy of the Just, which they shall be possessed of, when the
Judge comes! for the Nuptial room is prepared, and Paradise, and the whole
Kingdom of Christ, into which (O Christ) receive thy Domestics to rejoice with
thy Saints eternally. Who (O Christ) shall bear the dreadful threatening of thy
coming? Then shall Heaven be rolled up together, as a Book, after a dreadful
manner, and the Stars will fall, the whole Creation shall be shaken with fear,
and then shall the light be changed. O Word, spare him who is translated hence.
Again, Page 571.
I beseech you all, who were of my acquaintance, and who love me, be mindful of
me at the Day of Judgment, that I may find mercy before the Dreadful Tribunal.
Again, Page 575.
Let us cry to the Immortal King, when thou shall come to make inquisition into
the secret things of men, spare thy Servant, whom thou have taken to thy self,
O Mankind-loving God. Again, I am dead, after that I have passed away my life
with security, and I lie without voice in the Grave, and now I expect the last
Trumpet to awake me, cries he, who is dead; but (my Friends,) pray unto Christ,
that he would number me among the Sheep on his right hand, etc. I have consumed
my life in great negligence, and being translated from it, I expect the
dreadful Tribunal, before which, O Jesu, preserve me free from condemnation,
cries thy Servant. Again, Page 584.
O Lord, who art the only King, entertain into the Celestial Kingdom thy
Faithful Servant, whom thou have now transferred hence, and, we beseech thee,
preserve him free from condemnation, at the hour, when all mortal men, being to
be judged, shall make their appearance before the Judge, etc. Disacknowledged
by my Brethren, and sequestered from my Friends, I cry in spirit, from the
noisomness of the Grave. Examine not my failings at the day of Judgment;
despise not my Tears, thou, who art the joy of Angels; but grant me rest, O
Lord, even me, whom, out of thy great mercy, thou have taken to thy self, etc.
Stuck fast in the Myriness of sin, and divested of good actions, I, who am a
prey to Worms, cry to thee in Spirit, cast me not behind thee, wretch that I
am, place me not at thy left hand, thou, who have framed me with thy Hands;
but, out of thy great mercy, grant him rest, whom thou have taken to thy self,
by thy Ordinance. Having now quitted my Kindred, and Country, I am come into a
strange way, and am as stinking rottenness in the Grave: Alas! none shall
afford me any assistance in that hour; but, O Lord, because of thy great mercy,
grant him rest, whom thou have taken to thy self by thy Ordinance. Again, Page
586.
O what an inquisition, and judgment are we to expect! what fear, and
trembling, in which (Brethren) the Elements themselves shall be moved, and the
creation shake! come now, and let us cast our selves at the feet of Christ,
that he may save the Soul he has transferred. An intolerable sire, and
external obscurity, and the Worm which never dies, is prepared for us sinners,
in the day of inevitable necessity; then spare thy Servant, whom thou have
transferred.

For as much then, as the Prayers for the remission of sins, made by the Greeks
under the names as well of the Surviving, praying for the Dead, as of the Dead,
putting up their Requests for themselves, are, for the most part, restrained to
the day of Judgment, we are so far from having any thing, that might oblige us
to take them in such a sense, as that they should insinuate, that the
Faithful, between the moment of their death, and that of the Last Judgment,
were reduced to the suffering of any pains, that the Hypotheses of Antiquity
seem clearly to exact the contrary. And the result thence is, that the Modern
Greeks (though great opposers of the Purgatory maintained by the Church of
Rome) have not kept within the Terms prescribed them by their Forefathers; but
have changed their Sentiments by the Introduction of Novelties, which none of
them would ever have imagined.

It will be demanded, whence they derived the persuasion that there were Souls
of a middle condition, which being, properly, neither good, nor bad, could not,
after their separation from the Body, enter into the possession of Paradise,
without having, for a certain time, lain drooping in I know not what place of
Sequestration, where they were to endure grief, terror, and the incommodity of
darkness, which, as is pretended, covered them; when nothing of all this,
either has, or could have any ground in Scripture, which does every where make
as immediate an opposition between Paradise and Hell, the good and the bad, the
Faithful and the Reprobate, the Children of God (redeemed Hebr. x. 14, 29.
and consecrated for ever by one only Oblation, and that once made with the
blood of the Covenant) and the children of the Devil, who have held as profane
that precious blood, as between life and death, light and darkness, the right
hand and the left of the great Judge; teaching us expressly, that all the
faithful Apoc. xiv. 13.
dying in the Lord, are blessed, rest from thenceforth, Joh. v. 24.
come not into condemnation, are passed from death to life, are, at their
departure out of the body, 2 Cor v. 8.
with the Lord; and that all the rest, without any exception, dying in Adam,
and Joh. iii. 18.
having not believed, are already condemned.

2. That Antiquity, having happily shaken of the strange imagination, which the
Fathers of the Second Age had swallowed out of the pretended Sibylline Writing,
insinuating to them, that the Spirits of all men, as well good, as bad,
necessarily descended into Hell, and were to be there detained under the power
of Devils, till the Resurrection of the Bodies they had animated, it thereupon
formally maintained, that, immediately Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 70.
upon the Death of the Faithful, are the Nuptials of the Spouse; that it
remains only for the surviving, Ad Hebr. Hom. 4.
to give thanks to God, that he has crowned him, who is departed from them,
and, having delivered him out of all fear, receives him to himself; that to all
the good In Matthew. Hom. 33.
Death is an assured Port, In Genesis Hom. 36.
a deliverance from the combat and bonds, a Transporation to better things; and
that, as soon as it happens Epiph. Haer. 59.
the Cabinets are sealed, and the time accomplished, and the combat at an end,
and the race run, and the Crowns bestowed, and all is manifestly brought to
perfection.

3. That the Ritual it self, as it were endeavoring to bring into discredit,
as well the distinction of the middle-conditioned Souls, as their pretended
banishment for a time into a dark place, indifferently affirms of all those,
who die in the Faith of Christ, men, and women, Ecclesiastics, those of
Religious Professions, and Laics, that they are gone to the Lord, that they
rest, that Hell detains them not, that they exchange Death for the divine life,
and are made the Children of immortality; absolutely denying all, that the
vulgar Opinion, temerariously, and without any reason shown, affirms of some,
and wholly destroying it by so formal a contradiction.

But we are not to imagine our selves reduced to a necessity of being
over-Critical in discovering the Origin of this error, since the
falsificatour as well of the Ritual, as of the Sentiment of those of his
Nation, has done it so palpably to our hands, that he has not made any
scruple to publish his own ignorance, even in things evident, and such as the
word of God, the best Antiquity, and Reason, assisted by both, teach so
clearly, that there can be only those, who are unwilling to learn of them,
that are not informed thereof. Take the draught he gives us of it with his own
hand, introducing the Priest, whose Funeral Obsequies are celebrated, making at
his death this Discourse, strange indeed, and more suitable with the Principles
of a Pagan without hope, then to those of a Christian illuminated by Faith.
Page 569.
Brethren, I am banished from my Brethren, I leave all my Friends, and go my
ways: yet I know not whither I am going, and am ignorant what condition I shall
be in there; God only, who calls me, knows: but make a commemoration of me
with the Ancients. Hallelujah. Whither do Souls now go? And after what manner
do they now converse together in that place? I would gladly understand that
Secret, but there is no body able to declare it to me, etc. None of those, that
are there, ever returned to life again, to give us an account in what manner
they behave themselves, who were sometime our Brethren, and Nephews, who are
gone before us to the Lord, etc. It is a bad way, that I go in, and I never
went it before, and that Region, where no body knows me, I have not any
account, or knowledge of. It is a horror to see those, who are carried away,
and he, who calls me, is worthy to be dreaded, he, who is Lord of Life and
Death, and who calls us away, when he pleases. Hallelujah. Removing out of one
Region into another, we stand in need of some Guids: what shall we do where we
go in a Region, in which we have no acquaintance?

Of the same strain are the Discourses in the Office of the Soul in Agony, for
she is made to speak, as one in the depth of despair, begging assistance of the
Blessed Virgin, of Angels, and of Men, and complaining, that she is forsaken of
all, that Page 737.
estranged from the Glory of God, she served unclean Devils, who, holding the
Schedules of her sins, and crying with vehemence, would impudently have her;
that she is Page 738.
alienated from God, and her Brethren; that a Cloud of Devils come pouring upon
her, and that the darkness of her own unclean actions cover her, commands her
Body to be cast into a Common-Sewer, that (as she is Page 739.
dragged into the places of dreadful punishments) the Dogs may eat her heart;
declares, that Page 740.
she is delivered up to the Devils, who carry her away by violence to the
bottom of Hell; that she knows all have forgotten her; that she shall remember
God no more, since that in Hell there is no memory of the Lord; that,
overwhelmed with darkness, she expects the Resurrection; that, examined by all
men, she shall be cast into the fire; that neither God, nor his Angels, nor his
Saints shall think of her; for which reason she calls upon the Virgin, Angels,
and Men, Earth, nay Hell it self, to which she is delivered to be bitterly
punished, to bewail her Misery.

What greater Impurity could the rage of a despairing Judas disgorge? shall we
say there could be any thing of Christianity, in the apprehensions of a sinner,
who (without any recourse to the Mercy of God, and the Merit, and Intercession
of his Savior) numbers himself among the damned, not vouchsafing to consider
the assurances, which the Scripture gives all men, testifying unto them, that
Christ is Ephesians. ii. 14.
our peace, and 1 Cor. i. 30.
redemption; that his blood cleanses us from all sin; that, 1 John i. 7, 9.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; Further, that Heb. vii. 25.
he is still living to make intercession for us; and, since he vouchsafes to
receive us among his Sheep, Joh. x. 28.
no man shall pluck us out of his hand, and 1 John v. 8.
the wicked one shall not touch us? When the same Divinely-inspired Scripture
has loudly published, that all the righteous, that is to say, those, who walk
before God, Esa. lvii. 1.
are taken away from the evil to come, that, being 2 Cor. v. 8. Phil. i. 23.
absent from the body, they are present with him; that, even here upon Earth,
Ephesians. ii. 19.
they are of the Household of God, and fellow-Citizens with the Saints; that
they Heb. iv. 16.
ought to go boldly to the Throne of Grace, where he himself gives them Ephesians.
ii. 18.
access by the Spirit of his Son; and that the Angels are now Heb. i. 14.
ministering Spirits, to minister to their Salvation: should we ever imagine so
brutish a stupidity, and so profane an excoecation in any of those, who have
any way contributed to the Greek Ritual, affirming (according to the Scripture)
that the Christian, who dies, does by death arrive at the Port, goes to the
Lord, rests, is translated from the corruption of life, exchanges death for
divine life, and is at his death in the way to bliss; as that he should presume
to say, that way is bad, and that he knows not whether he is going, knows no
body there, nor is known to any? Can the way to bliss be a bad way? Is he, who
knows he is going to God, in a condition to complain truly, that he knows not
whether he goes? Since he is retiring to his Father, and those of the same
Household with him, has he any cause to say, that he knows not any of those, to
whom he is retiring, and that they know not him? Being called, how can he
imagine, that he, who calls him, should be so far mistaken, as to take his
Child for a Stranger? And since he gives him access to himself by his own
Spirit, is there any reason it should be supposed, not only that he stands in
need of a Guide, but that he neither has, nor can find any? What occasion have
either the living, or the dying, to bemoan themselves, that not any one returns
from the Dead, to inform them of the state of the World to come; since the Son
of God himself gave us this advertisement, that it is of greater advantage to
us, to have Luc. xvi. 29, 31.
Moses, and the Prophets, that is to say, the holy Scriptures, then if one rose
from the Dead, to give us an account of their condition?

It were not happily much besides our Purpose, to desire those, who entertain us
with Stories of dark Prisons for those Souls, which they pretend to be of a
Middle-condition, to tell us, whether they hope to revive that ruined Party
among the Ancients, who, believing that Angels, and separated Souls, were clad
with a body subject (as ours) to be incommodated by Darkness, discovered, that
they apprehended not any distinction between immortal Substances, and
corporeal? As also whether (allowing them separated from all matter, and
assigning them for Torment, Obscurity, and Darkness, taken in their Proper, and
Primitive Signification), they think themselves better grounded in Reason, then
those, who are persuaded, that material Fire, whose activity can only exercise
it self on Bodies, is, and eternally shall be, the Instrument of Torment, as
well for Devils, as impious Souls? Turn which side they will, they shall not
free themselves from inconvenience. But, not to insist further hereupon, and
under pretense of putting them to yet a further loss, how to make good their
Tenet, to digress from our Principal Subject, we will keep close to it;
concluding from what has been deduced, that the common Opinion of the Modern
Greeks must necessarily be New, unknown to their Forefathers, who lived in the
Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Ages; contrary to the Word of God, and to
Reason; full of Inconveniences, and Suppositions, contradictory one to another;
and consequently, that it is with good Reason rejected, as well by those of the
Roman Communion, as by the Protestants, who can only, in this Particular,
allow them to have been circumspect, and well-advised, that they forbear
telling us determinately, where they think fit to place the Prison, to which
they condemn the Souls, which they call the Middle-conditioned; for what is not
at all, can neither be be defined, nor found any where.

CHAP. LIVE. The Conclusion of the whole Treatise.
WHereas then the Opinion of the Greeks is new, and inconsistent; whereas that
of the Church of Rome (upon this very Score, that it goes beyond the other) is
subject to more Inconveniences; and whereas all the Christians in the East, and
Southern Parts of the World agree with the Protestants, in the rejection of it,
as particular, new, and opposed by Scripture, Reason, the Antiquity of the
first Six Ages, and by the Formularies of the Latin Service, which (through an
extraordinary Happiness) has been more favorably Treated, then the Greek,
which is horridly disfigured by those busy Spirits, who have filled it with
their bold alterations; it were no better, then to elude the Evidence of Truth,
and wittingly to renounce common sense, to endeavor to make that, which is
particular, and impure (notwithstanding so many defaults) pass for Catholic.
The Patrons of Purgatory outvie one another in their attempts to prove it by
Texts of Scripture: as for Instance, these;

Genesis iii. 24. xv. 17. 1 Samuel ii. 6, 7, 8. Job ix. 26. and xiv. 13. Psalms
vi. 1. xlix. 16. lxvi. 12. lxxxvi. 123. Ecclesiastes xii. 16. Esaias iv. 4. ix.
17. Daniel vii. 10. Micah vii. 9. Zachary ix. 11. Malachy iii. 3. Matthew iii.
12. v. 22, 25, 26. xii. 32. Luke xii. 5, 48. xxiv. 42. Acts ii. 24. 1
Corinthians iii. 12, 13, 14, 15. xv. 29. 2 Corinthians v. 10. Philippians ii.
10. Hebrews iv. 4. xii. 7. 1 Peter iv. 17. Apocalypse v. 3, 13.
But one single Answer (pertinent even in the judgment of the Church of Rome
her self, who of any makes the greatest ostentation of the Anquity, and
Universality of her Faith) suffices to pull down all this Pile; to wit, this;
That the Application, which they make of these Texts, is so new, that it has
no Example in all the Tradition of the Fathers; and so singular, that, not
agreeing among themselves, the more Ingenuous (as John Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester, one of her Cardinals, nay, of her Martyrs) acknowledge, that Ad Art.
37. Aliquandiu Purgatorium incognitum.
Purgatory had for a long time been unknown: and Franciscus Sonnius, first
Bishop of Bosleduc, afterward of Antwerp, grants, that the places out of the
New Testament, and Saint Paul, about which the Church of Rome makes the
greatest stir, Demonst. ^^r se quidem non demonstra^t, etc. aliam apud
nonnullos Patres accipiunt interpretationem.
do not demonstrate it of themselves, and are by some of the Fathers otherwise
Interpreted.

The same thing may be said of what the same Church produces, or causes to be
produced, in defense of Prayer for the Dead, which is not found, either in the
Instructions, and Actions of the Saints under the Old Testament, or the
Institution of the Son of God, giving his Apostles, and, by them, the Church,
the perfect Form, and Model of Prayer, or yet in the Practice of the
Apostolical Church under the Gospel. For, if some, at this day (as with much
earnestness it is done) allege these Texts;

Genesis xxiv. 63. xlvii. 30. Leviticus v. 20. Ruth i. 8. 1 Samuel xxxi. 13. 2
Samuel i. 12. iii. 31. Esaias viii. 16. Luke xvi. 19. Romans xii. 13. 1
Corinthians xv. 19. 1 Timothy ii. 1. 2 Timothy i. 18. Hebrews v. 7. xiii. 16. 1
John v. 16.
Not omitting those taken out of Apocryphal Writers, as

Tobit iv. 18. Ecclesiasticus vii. 34. 2 Maccabees xii. 43, etc.
It may be Answered, That Antiquity, which, as we have shown, grounded its
Customs only on the not-written Tradition, has, by its Procedure, declared,
that it had not (no more then the Protestants at this, day) eyes to perceive,
in those Texts, the Doctrine, which some pretend to derive from them; it being
only Interest, which is vigilant upon all occasions, ready to make advantage
of all things, confident in feigning what is not, and ingenious in the
dressing-up of fond Imaginations, that has hitherto been capable of these fine
Discoveries. The same Church of Rome prides it not a little, in that the same
Antiquity has (no less, then the Modern Greeks) even from the first Ages
practiced, and recommended Prayers for the Dead; but she discovers not, that
while she condemns all the Hypotheses of that Antiquity, and admits not any one
of the Motives, which inclined it to that Devotion, she is, in Effect,
retreated further from its Belief, then the Protestants, who so forbear doing
what the Ancients did, as that they do all lies in their power, to excuse it,
and to show, that, as their Intention, and Worship have been free from the
Venom, which the Ignorant malice of later Ages has since scattered all over
the West; so the end they aim at is, not either to dishonor them, because of
the Weaknesses they have been subject to, or to make an odious discovery of
their shame, but only take the remarks of their Discircumspections, as so many
Advertisements to Posterity, never to forget it self through too much security,
and a blindly-excessive respect for the great Names, that have preceded it.
After Notice taken of the success, which attended the Impious presumption of
those Impostours, who (in the Second Age of Christianity, even while the Blood
of the Apostles was yet boiling, and the Memory of their Instructions, and
Examples more lively) carried on their wicked Designs upon the simplicity, and
sincerity of Apostolical-men; as also how charming those Delusions proved,
which incredibly dazzled many of those, whom the Mercy of God honored with the
Crown of Martyrdom, and whose precedent conversation had been looked on in the
Church, as a singular pattern of Piety, and Sanctity: after notice, I say,
taken of these things, it is an Obligation lies on every Christian at this day,
to bow down the head in humility, to implore, by continual addresses to Heaven,
the assistance of the Spirit of Grace, that, efficaciously insinuating it self
into their hearts, he may not only divert them from the like Trials, but fill
them with light, assurance, and joy, and, instead of arming themselves (like
Furies) with the Thunderbolts, and Whirl-winds of a false Zeal, which ever
inspires them with malice, and the utter ruin of those they think in an
error, that they would suffer themselves (as Children of Peace, Domestics of
the Esa. 9. 5.
Prince of Peace) to be won into thoughts of Compassion, and love for the
Salvation of those who perish, and not be afraid (after the Example of our
Savior, who came from Heaven, and Ephesians. 4. 9.
descended into the lower parts of the Earth, to seek for the Children of
wrath) to 1 Cor. 9. 22.
become (as his Apostle) all things to all men, that by all means he might save
some. When such a noble desire, shall once possess men's Spirits, inclining
them, not to endeavor the Conquest of their own glory, but to procure (as far
as lies in them) the Victory and Triumph of Truth, for the glory of God, it
will be impossible, but that cruel and murdering animosities (the ordinary,
but ever-fatall Consequences of Debates concerning Religion, which is thereby
ruined) must vanish, as so many infernal shades, chaced away by the amiable
rays of the Malac. 4. 2.
Sun of Righteousness, who brings life, and healing in his Wings: Nor ought we
(whatever some Earthly Souls may conceive of their own carnal, and violent
Counsels) hopeless, then that, in the extraordinary confusion of the last
times, some change for the better may happen. Heretofore the Church, soon after
the departure of the Apostles, had the misfortune, that Hermas, Papias, Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Theophilus of Antioch, St. Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, (in a word, all the most excellent Persons, of whom we have ought
left) led away by the extravagances and fantastic Imaginations of the
counterfeit Sibyll, believed themselves, and persuaded others, that the Souls
of all men were, from the departure out of the Body, detained in Hell, till the
Resurrection; that the just, rising again before the others, should reign with
Jesus Christ upon Earth, and live a thousand years in Jerusalem, made glorious,
and flowing with corporeal enjoyments, or at least, in the Terrestrial
Paradise; and that the Bodies of the greatest Saints, should pass through the
last conflagration of the World, as through a Refiner's Furnace. The Fathers of
the following Ages, happily shook off these unmaintainable conceits; but
finding Prayer for the Dead, in the public Service of the Church, they
extended it as well to the blessed, as the damned. The Church of Rome, who
approves not of praying for either of those two States, has at last brought
into credit her Purgatory, a thing not known before: why may we not hope it
from the goodness of God, that he will dispel this last Imagination, as he has
done the precedent, and every where establish his Truth in its full luster? Let
therefore those, who at the present, quarrel at the simplicity of the
Protestants, who neither maintain the Hypotheses of the Fathers, which the
Opinion of Purgatory has discredited, nor hold Purgatory, which is made up of
the rubbish of the precedent suppositions, for their discharge, consider, that
they have, on the one side, learnt from the instructions, as well of Scripture,
as of the Fathers, and all the ancient Liturgies, even that of the Church of
Rome, that her Purgatory has no sound foundation; and, on the other, that the
Church of Rome her self, has (by her example) given them the boldness to
recede from the practice of the Fathers, which she first relinquished. And as I
have made it my business (as much as lay in my power) to give an account of
their demeanor, searching into the true causes of the differences, that have
appeared in the Persuasions and Customs of the Christians, who have passed
through so long a revolution of Ages, and showing those who now live, how
deeply it concerns them to build on the firm and unmovable foundation of the
Scriptures, and avoid the Quicksands of humane apprehensions; so shall I be
the first to censure my self, if (contrary to my intention) I may have chanced
to be mistaken, and so far from being displeased with those who shall
charitably advertise me thereof, that I shall highly celebrate their good
Offices, and acknowledge upon all occasions, that, as 2 Cor: 13. 8.
we can, all of us, do nothing against the truth, so I shall never, as to my
own particular, presume to attempt any thing to its prejudice; but hold, with
St. Epist. 73.
Cyprian, that we must not err always, because we have sometimes erred, and
make it my chiefest address, to the Jam. 1. 17.
Father of Lights, from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift comes
down, that he would Psalm. 4. 6.
lift up the light of his countenance upon all his Children; give them the
grace to Psalm. 19. 12, 14.
understand their errors, and cleanse them from those which are yet secret,
and make the words of their mouth and meditations of their hearts acceptable in
his sight, and advantageo^is to their own, and their Neighbors salvation.

Amen.
A TABLE Of the Chapters.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. THat the most earnest Pursuers of Truth are (as others) subject to
Mistakes. Page 1 II. Instances of certain Misapprehensions of Justine Martyr. 2
III. The Writings, pretended to be Sibylline discovered, in several
particulars, to be Spurious, and Supposititious. 4 IV. The Judgment of
Antoninus Possevinus concerning the Writings, pretended to be Sibylline, taken
into Examination. 6 V. The Recommendation of the Sibylline Writings, attributed
by Clemens Alexandrinus to Saint Paul, brought to the Test. 9 VI. An account of
several instances of Dis-circumspection in Clemens Alexandrinus. 12 VII.
Reflections on several Suppositious Pieces, whereby many of the ancient
Christians have been imposed upon, and abused. 14 VIII. The different Opinions
of the Ancients concerning the Sibyls. 19 IX. The precautions of Rome, while
yet in Paganism, to prevent the reading of the Books, which she believed really
Sibylline. 23 X. The Motives, which he might have gone upon, who was the first
Projector of the Eight Books, which at this day go under the Name of the
Sibylline. 27 XI. A Discovery of the mistakes of the Emperor Constantine the
Great, concerning the Sibyl, and her Writings. 29 XII. The Sentiment of Cicero,
concerning the Acrostick attributed to the Sibyl, further cleared up. 32 XIII.
The Sentiment of Virgil, in his fourth Eclogue, examined, and cleared up; and
that it has no relation to the Writings pretendedly Sibylline, (which were
composed a long time after) made apparent. 34 XIV. Remarks on some less
considerable mistakes of the Emperor Constantine, in the Explication of
Virgil's fourth Eclogue. 40 XV. That it cannot be said that Virgil, in his
fourth Eclogue, disguised his own Sentiment. 45 XVI. That Apollodorus had no
knowledge of the Eight Books, which go under the name of the Sibylline. ibid.
XVII. That Pausanias has not writ any thing, which may give credit to the
Book, unjustly called the Sibylline. 47 XVIII. That the Prohibition, made to
read the Books, called the Sibylline, and that of Hystasphes, adds no Authority
thereto. 48 XIX. That the Letter, written by L. Domitius Aurelianus, to the
Senate, gives no credit to the Sibylline Writings. 50 XX. Other Discoveries,
showing the Supposititiousness of the Sibylline VVriting so called. 51 XXI.
That it cannot, with any likelihood of Truth, be maintained, that the Books,
called the Sibylline, were written by Divine inspiration. 55 XXII. The
Sentiment of Aristotle, concerning Enthusiasts, taken into consideration. 57
XXIII. That it was unadvisedly done by the Author of the Sibylline VVriting,
to put himself into the number of Enthusiasts. 59 XXIV. That the Fathers, who
were surprised by the pretended Sibylline VVritings, supposed the Author to
have been an Enthusiast. 60 XXV. The common Sentiment of the Fathers,
concerning Enthusiasts. 62 XXVI. Consequences following upon the common
Sentiment of the Fathers, concerning Enthusiasm. 70 XXVII. Certain
Dis-circumspections of the Fathers, concerning the VVriting, unjustly named the
Sibylline, considered. 72 XXVIII. That the conjecture of Cardinal Baronius,
concerning the correspondence between Virgil and Herod, is not maintainable. 73
XXIX. That the Opinion of Antonius Possevinus, concerning the Sibyls, and their
pretended VVritings, is not more rational, then that of Cardinal Baronius. 75
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. AN Enquiry about the time, when St. John writ his Revelation. 79 II.
The Sentiment of St. Epiphanius, concerning the time of the Apocalypse, refuted.
82 III. The Sentiment of the late Grotius, concerning the time of the
Apocalypse, refuted. 87 IV. A refutation of the Sentiment of Johannes Hentenius
of Macchlin, concerning the time of the Apocalypse. 89 V. A refutation of
Possevinus, concerning the time when the Sibylline Writing came first abroad.
93 VI. Of the time, when the Sibylline Books were written. 96 VII. A Conjecture
concerning the Author of the Sibylline Writings. 97 VIII. Diverse Extravagances
remarkable in the Sibylline Writings. 98 IX. The first principal Tenet of the
Sibylline Writing, concerning the pretended Descent into, and detention of all
Men's Souls in Hell, till the time of the Resurrection of their Bodies. 99 X.
The second Capital Tenet of the Sibylline VVriting so called, concerning the
Conflagration of the World at the last Day, which, the Author of it pretends,
is to serve for a Purgatory to the Souls, and Bodies of the Saints. 104 XI. The
third main Tenet proposed by the Sibylline VVriting, concerning the
re-attainment of a Terrestrial Paradise, which he imagines should be the place
of retirement, for some of the Saints after their Resurrection. 108 XII. The
fourth Capital Tenet proposed by the Sibylline VVriting, concerning the
Temporal Reign, which the Author thereof supposes must be established by our
Savior in Jerusalem, during the space of a thousand years before the last
Judgment. 111 XIII Inducements to pray for the Dead, arising from the
Hypotheses proposed in the pretended Sibylline Writing. 115 XIV. The Motives
proposed by Justin Martyr disallowed, and those, which St. Epiphanius had, to
pray for the Dead, taken into consideration. 117 XV. Of the Prayers made, and
the Alms given heretofore, by the Christians, for the damned, even those, whom
they acknowledged to be in that state. 118 XVI. The third and fourth Motives of
St. Epiphanius, taken into consideration. 122 XVII. St. Epiphanius's fifth
Motive considered. 123 XVIII. The sixth Motive of the same Epiphanius
considered. 124 XIX. The seventh Motive of the same Epiphanius, considered. 126
XX. The Motive upon which Dionysius, the pretended Areopagite, prayed for the
Dead, taken into consideration. 128 XXI. The Motives, which Tertullian had to
pray for the Dead, considered. 129 XXII. An enquiry made into the Sentiment of
Saint Ambrose. 130 XXIII. The time, when Prayers for the Dead were first
introduced into the Service of the Church. 132 XXIV. Whether the Prayers, made
by Christians for the Dead, be really grounded on the place in the second Book
of the Maccabees, and the Examples of the Jews, alleged to that purpose. 136
XXV. Whether it may be with any reason affirmed, that the Prayers, made by
Christians for the Dead, are justly grounded on the second Book of the
Maccabees. 144 XXVI. That diverse of the Fathers have expressed more respect to
the Book attributed to the Sibyll; then to the Apocalypse. 148 XXVII. That the
third Hypothesis, of the Sibylline Writing, so called, is; at this day,
abandoned by all Christians. 150 XXVIII. That the second Hypothesis, of the
Sibylline Writing, so called, made way for the late Opinion of Purgatory. 151
XXIX. Proofs of the novelty of the precedent Opinion of Purgatory. 155 XXX.
That the first Hypothesis, of the Sibylline Writing, so called, concerning the
detention of Souls in Hell, till the Resurrection, is generally disclaimed by
all Christians. 158 XXXI. That the passage of the twelfth Chapter of the second
Book of the Maccabees, has no relation, either to the Opinion of Purgatory, or
Service of the Churches. 161 XXXII. That the Primitive sense of the Prayers,
whereby the remission of sins was desired for the Dead, is not embraced by any.
163 XXXIII. The Censures pronounced by the Doctors of the Church of Rome,
against the Fathers, taken into examination. 165 XXXIV. The Uniformity of the
Sentiment of the Fathers, and that of the Protestants, concerning the State of
the faithful departed in the Lord. 168 XXXV. The Sentiment of the Protestants,
further proved by the description which the Fathers have made of Abraham's
bosom. 170 XXXVI. The same Sentiment further confirmed, by the Pomp and
Solemnities of ancient Enterments. 171 XXXVII. A particular confideration of
the Sentiment of St. Augustine, and his Prayers for his Mother. 174 XXXVIII.
The Sentiment of the Protestants further confirmed, by the Eloges anciently
bestowed on the faithful departed. 184 XXXIX. The same Sentiment further
confirmed from Sepulchral Inscriptions. 189 XL. The same deduced from larger
Epitaphs. 196 XLI. Of the Prayers contained in the Epitaphs of the faithful,
whom the surviving presupposed already received into glory. 212 XLII. Of the
true Motives which the Ancients had to pray for those whom they believed to be
in bliss. 222 XLIII. The Obscurity and uncertainty of the Opinion of Purgatory.
229 XLIV. That the proofs produced by Cardinal Bellarmine, for Purgatory, are
weak and defective. 233 XLV. That the Testimonies produced by Jodocus Coccius,
for the opinion of Purgatory, are also defective. 234 XLVI. Of the Reasons,
which might have moved the Ancients, to inter their departed friends in the
Churches, consecrated to the memory of the Saints. 237 XLVII. The Sentiment of
St. Ambrose, and Paulinus, concerning the burial of the faithful in Churches,
examined. 241 XLVIII. Enquiry made into the Sentiment of St. Augustine,
concerning the Burial of the faithful departed, in Churches. 244 XLIX. Enquiry
made into the Sentiment of Maximus Tyrius, concerning the Burial of the
faithful in Churches. 245 L. A reflection on certain followers of the Sentiment
of the said Maximus. 146 LI. Of the Lessons of holy Scripture, contained in the
Missal and Breviary, as to what relates to the Office of the Dead. 249 LII. Of
the Prayers contained in the Missal and Breviary, used by the Church of Rome;
and that Purgatory cannot be necessarily inferred from any one of them. 255
LIII. An account of the Sentiment of the Modern Greeks, concerning the State of
the Dead 268 LIVE. The conclusion of the whole Treatise. 290
FINIS.

