IRELANDS NATURAL HISTORY.

Being a true and ample Description of its Situation, Greatness, Shape, and
Nature* Of its Hills, Woods, Heaths, Bogs; Of its Fruitful Parts and
profitable Grounds, with the several ways of Manuring and Improving the same:

With its Heads or Promontories, Harbors, Roads and Bays; Of its Springs and
Fountains, Brooks, Rivers, Loghs; Of its Metalls, Mineralls, Freestone, Marble,
Sea-coal, Turf, and other things that are taken out of the ground.

And lastly, of the Nature and temperature of its Air and Season, and what
diseases it is free from, or subject unto. Conducing to the Advancement of
Navigation, Husbandry, and other profitable Arts and Professions.

Written by Gerard Boat, late Doctor of Physic to the State in Ireland.

And now Published by SAMUEL HARTLIB, Esquire For the Common Good of Ireland, and
more especially, for the benefit of the Adventurers and Planters therein.

Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily, 1657.

To His Excellency OLIVER CROMWELL, Captain General of the Commonwealths Army
in England, Scotland and Ireland, and Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.
AND To the Right Honorable CHARLES FLEETWOOD, Commander in Chief (under the
Lord General Cromwell) of all the Forces in IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
IT is a very great and signal Truth, that all the works of God are both
wonderful and precious, much sought out by all those that love him: and it is
the guilt of the wicked, that as they regard not the Lord, so they consider not
the Operation of his hands; for the Lord has revealed his Truth, even his
Godhead and his Eternal Power by his Works, Romans 1.20
that such as respect him not, in the Creation of the World, and in the ways
of his Providence, may be without excuse: Now it se^ms to me, that the end for
which God has not left himself without a Testimony in Nature, is not only,
that we should in our spirit glorify him as God and be thankful, Act. 14.1^
but that also our Outward Man should be made sensible of his goodness, and
partake of that supply of life, which by his appointment the Creature can yield
unto us, if happily we may feel after him and find him therein. Act. 17.27
So that such as respect him not in his ways of Nature, being careless to seek
them out, do make themselves also incapable of the blessings of Nature through
their ignorance and neglect of the good things which God has provided for them
thereby: for all things are Ours, things present and things to come; and
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is as well as of that which is
to come: for as by the act of Faith we are made capable of the good things of
the life to come, because by the truth of God, as it is the Object of our
Faith, they have a spiritual being and Subsistence in us* so by the act of
Reason rightly ordered we are made partakers of the benefit of this life,
because by the effect of Gods Wisdom and Power in Nature, as they are the
Objects of our Reasonable faculty, they have a bodily being and subsistence in
us: and as the Wisdom of God does many ways manifest it self, not only in
Spiritual, but also in Outward and Bodily things, so there are many parts of
Humane Learning* some whereof are subservient to the Private life of a single
man, some to the comforts and Public Use of a Society, and amongst all these
parts of Learning, which relate to a Society, I can conceive none more
profitable in Nature, than that of Husbandry. For whether we reflect upon the
first settlement of a Plantation, to prosper it, or upon the wealth of a Nation
that is planted, to increase it, this is the Head spring of all the native
Commerce and Trading which may be set afoot therein by any way whatsoever. Now
to advance Husbandry either in the production and perfection of earthly
benefits, or in the management thereof by way of Trading, I know nothing more
useful, than to have the knowledge of the Natural History of each Nation
advanced and perfected: For as it is evident, that except the benefits which
God by Nature has bestowed upon each Country be known, there can be no
Industry used toward the improvement and Husbandry thereof; so except
Husbandry be improved, the industry of Trading, whereof a Nation is capable,
can neither be advanced or profitably upheld.

There is a twofold body, and a twofold life in man, which God has created,
the one is Natural, the other Spiritual, and the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
15.46.
that the Spiritual is not first, but the Natural, and afterward that which
is Spiritual; as the Bodies and lives of men are ordered by God, so we must
conceive of the frames of their Societies, that the Natural is before that
which is Spiritual, and that in Gods aim it is a preparatory thereunto;
although in the use which men make thereof, this aim is not obtained: for
seeing in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom has not known God; 1 Cor. 1.
etc.
therefore God is pleased by another way which to the World does seem
foolishness, to manifest his Power and his Wisdom unto salvation, namely by
the Preaching of the Gospel in the name of Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and
although hitherto, since the death of Christ, the dispensation of wisdom has
not yet opened the conduit pipes of Natural Knowledge to cause the souls of men
flow forth and partake of the life of God therein, by reason of the prevalencie
of Sensual inclinations, and of the want of due reflection upon Christ, in
whom alone the perfect use of Nature is brought home to the glory of the
Father, by the Spirit, yet when the time of the Restoration of all things,
shall come from the presence of him, who will come shortly and will not tarry,
then the works of the Devil, whereby he has brought us, and the whole
Creation, under the bondage of Corruption, shall be destroyed, and when the
Nature and right use of the Creature by his means obscured, shall be revealed,
then also the properties and application of the Creature in the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, shall be subjected unto Grace.

These great and mighty Changes, which God is making in the Earth, do tend to
break the yokes of Vanity, and to weaken the Power, which has wreathed the
same upon the necks of the Nations, these Changes seem to me to presage the
near approaches of this Liberty, and the advancement of the ways of Learning,
whereby the Intellectual Cabinets of Nature are opened, and the effects thereof
discovered, more fully to us, than to former Ages, seem in like manner to
prepare a plainer Address unto the right use thereof for us than our
forefathers have had: which will be effectual to the manifestation of Gods
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, when the great promises shall be accomplished,
that the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, Isa. 11.9. He^^
8.11.
as the waters cover the sea, and that we shall be taught of God, from the
least to the greatest: and although the Father has reserved in his own hand
the times and seasons, wherein these promises are to be fulfilled, yet as by the
dawning of the day we can know that the Sun is near rising, so by the breaking
of yoakes and the breaking forth of the means of more perfect knowledge, both
in Natural and Spiritual things, we may see the drawing near of the promises,
which will in their own times Constitute the day of Salvation unto all the
Earth, wherein all flesh shall see the glory of the Lord together. Isa. 40 5.


The expectation of this day is the hope of Israel; and those that wait for the
Lord, and his appearance therein, shall find a plentious redemption; namely
such as having this hope purify themselves that they may be found in peace at
his appearing, and such as being solicitous to bestow their Talents in their
way and generation, to the advancement of his approaching Kingdom, shall
approve themselves as faithful servants to him in that day. Of this Number I
am persuaded your Honors are in these Nations as Leading Men; therefore I have
made bold thus to address my self unto you, and to inscribe this Work unto your
Names, that it may see the light under your joint patronage. God has made You
very eminent Instruments to set forward one part of the preparatives of his
great Work, the Breaking of our yokes, the other part, which is the Advancement
of Spiritual and Natural sanctified Knowledge, your Zeal, I am sure will carry
you to countenance by the ways which Providence shall open unto You. Therefore
I hope it will not be without acceptance, what in this kind (though but a mean
beginning) I have here offered. Your influence upon it, to set forward Learned
Endeavors of this Nature for a Public Good may be a blessing unto Posterity,
and your Relations of Eminent note, unto Ireland, to watch for the good thereof,
and to the Universities of Oxford and Dublin, to countenance all the Means of
profitable Learning, have encouraged me to make this Dedication; besides the
expressions of your Honors willingness, to favor me in my undertakings, which
I knew no way so well to resent, as by offering to your Generous Inclinations,
the Objects, which are worthy of being considered and set forward in order to a
common good. I looked also somewhat upon the hopeful appearance of Replanting
Ireland shortly, not only by the Adventurers, but happily by the calling in of
exiled Bohemians and other Protestants also, and happily by the invitation of
some well affected out of the Low Countries, which to advance are thoughts
suitable to your noble genius, and to further the setlement thereof, the
Natural History of that Country will not be unfit, but very subservient.
Thus beseeching the Lord to prosper all your undertakings to the glory of the
Kingdom of Christ, I take my leave, and rest unfeignedly

Your Honors most humble servant SAMUEL HARTLIB.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
SOme particulars there are concerning this following Work, of which I think it
sit you should be advertised: and for as much as I can tell you no more of them
than what was written to me by the Authors most Loving and Learned Brother,
give me leave in stead of mine own Words to present you with his said Letter on
that subject, being such as does follow.

Sir,
I Am very glad to understand by you, that my Brothers work of the Natural
History of Ireland, is not only not lost, as I greatly feared i^ was, and that
you have found it in perusing those books and papers of his, which he had left
behind him at London; but that you are a going to print it, and have already
contracted about it: by the doing whereof I am fully persuaded, that you will
gain both credit and contentment, and that those shall no ways be losers, who
will be at the charges of doing the same. For though I say it, the work is
excellent in it is kind, as not only full of truth and certainty, but written
with much judgment, order, and exactness; so as it is to be preferred before
most Natural Histories of particular Countries, and may well be equalled to
the very best, for as much as there is done of it. For to make it a complete
Natural History, there should be joined to that which my Brother has gone
through, two Books more, the one of all kind of Plants, and the other of all
sorts of living Creatures; which also might have been expected of him if God
had given him longer life. For he intended, as soon as he had published this
part, to have fallen also to the rest, if he had found that he had not lost his
labor on what was done already, and that it had met with a grateful
acceptance abroad, such as might have encouraged him to take further pains
about the perfecting of it: in which case he was resolved to have also joined a
Fourth book to those other Three, concerning the Natives of Ireland, and their
old Fashions, Laws, and Customs; as likewise the great pains taken by the
English, ever since the Conquest, for to civilize them, and to improve the
Country. You say you wonder, and others may justly concur with you in that
your wonderment, how a Country could be so accurately described by one, who
never was in it. For although my Brother has been in Ireland, and that he has
ended his days there, yet he had both begun and finished this First Book of
his Natural History of Ireland, some years before he went thither, or had any
thoughts of doing so: seeing that he begun to write that work in the beginning
of the year of our Lord 1645. and made an end of it long before the end of the
same year! whereas he went not to Ireland until the latter end of the year
1649. and dyed at Dublin within a very short while after he was arrived there,
viz. on the 9/19th of January 16 ^0/49. Now to answer that difficulty moved by
you, be pleased to know, that I being come from Dublin to London in the
beginning of May 1644. and having stayed there until the latter end of
October, great part of that conversation, which he and I had together during
those six months, was spent in reasoning about Ireland, and about all manner of
particulars concerning the Moral and Civil, but chiesly the Natural History
of the same: my Brother being very careful to inform himself of me, about all
things appertaining thereunto. For besides that his curiosity, which was very
great for to enrich his mind with all manner of laudable knowledge, was of it
self alone capable enough for to make him inquisitive in that kind; he was
there-besides led thereto by his own interest, having ventured great part of
his estate upon the escheated lands there, according to the several Acts made
by the King and Parliament in that behalf. And having set down in writing what
he had so heard of me, he conferred afterward about the same with several of
those Gentlemen, whom the bloody combustions of Ireland had driven away thence,
and made to resort to London; he being very well acquainted with them,
especially with Sir William Parsons, and Sir Richard Parsons, which two having
above all others a very perfect insight into that land, and into all matters'
belonging to the same, were wonderful well able to satisfy any of those
Questions, which from time to time he propounded unto them, either about those
things that he had already learned of me, or about such others, of which he
had forgot to speak to me, or on which I had not been able fully to inform him.
In this manner he brought that Work together, the which to accomplish yet
further, he sent to me still as much as he had finished, desiring me to review
it diligently, and to add, put out, or alter, what I should see cause: wherein
also, as in the first informations, I was not wanting to contribute what ever
was necessary, as far forth as my knowledge did reach unto, and according to
those Observations, unto which I had very studiously and with singular delight
applied my self during those eight years that I lived in that Island: whereunto
I had so much the more opportunity, because that as my constant abode was in
Dublin, so I made very many journeys into the Country, and by means thereof
saw great part of it, especially of the Provinces of Leinster and Ulster, and
by reason thereof also it would be an easy matter for me, to make-up those
parts of this work, which are still wanting. Thus I believe to have fully taken
away the forementioned Objection, and to have given you as perfect an account
about the grounds and the manner of the writing of this Natural History, as
was expected by you. And having nothing else to trouble you with all at the
present, I shall end these with my most hearty wishes, that notwithstanding any
discouragements, or any want of encouragement, you would still go on in that
most commendable purpose, of furthering as much as in you lies all manner of
real and profitable knowledge: the which indeed hitherto you have done so
largely on very many occasions, as must needs greatly redound to the general
good of Mankind, and make your memory precious to them in all future ages.

Your most affectionate and humble servant ARNOLD BOAT.
Paris 10/20 Aug.

IRELANDS NATVRALL HISTORY.
CHAP. I. Of the situation, shape, and greatness of Ireland: it is division into
Provinces and Counties: of the English Pale: the principal towns of that
Nation.
Sect. 1. Situation of Ireland.
IReland, by the Irish themselves called Erin, and by their neighbors the
Welsh Yverdon, lies in the North-west Ocean, having on the Westside no land
nearer than America, or the West-Indi^s, and thereof that part, which above
Nova francia and Canada running Northward, has of the English received the
name of New-Britain, but of other Nations before of Terra Laboratoris. The next
land over against it on the South is Galicia, one of the Kingdoms of Spain,
from which it lies divided some days sailing. Northwards it has the Scottish
Islands, by the Geographers called Hebrides or Hebudes; the principal of which
are Eust, Lewis, Sky, Ila, and Mula. On the East Side is Great-Brittain, and
all the three parts of it, to wit part of Scotland, the whole West coast of
England, and all Wales.

Sect. 2. Distance betwixt Ireland and several places upon the coast of
Great Britain.
The Sea, which parts Ireland from Great Britain, being of a very unequal
breadth, is more narrow in the North-end, less in the South-end, but broad in
the midst, as far as it washes the the English coast, being the full length
of the two Counties of Cumberland and Lancashire, opposite against which are
situated in Ireland the Counties of Down, Lowth, and Dublin. The Sea which is
enclosed betwixt these Counties, and compriseth in its middle the I Will of Man,
is well near of an equal and uniform breadth every where, not being in any
place much broader or much narrower, than it is betwixt the havens of Dublin
and Leverpoole, the distance betwixt which two is reckoned by the English
Pilots to be of forty leagues, or sixscore English miles. But Wales in two or
three places comes a great deal nearer to Ireland, and in some as near again.
For Holy-head, being the most Westerly corner of the Northerliest part of
Wales, called Anglesey, lies just half way between Dublin and Lerpoole or
Chester, being twenty Leagues, or three score miles, from Dublin, and ten or
twelve hours sail with a reasonable good wind; which distance is no greater,
than what the eye may very very well reach: for a man whose sight is but of an
ordinary goodness, may at any time in clea^ weather with ease discern the high
and mountainous coast of Wales from the top of the Dublin mountains. And about
the same distance, as is betwixt Dublin and Holy-head, is also betwixt St.
Davis-head, a Promontory of Pembrookshire (which shire is situated in the most
South-west part of Wales) and the Irish Promontory in the County of Wexford,
which the Natives call Cancarne, and the English Seamen Tuskard-point. Also
the Promontory of Carnarvan in Wales, called Brachipult-point, and lying
betwixt Holy-head and St. Davis, is well near at the same distance from the
next Irish shore, as either of those other Welsh Promontories. But between
Brachipult-point and Saint Davis-head the Sea does much enlarge it self
(although nothing so much as betwixt Ireland and England) making a great inlet
on the coast of Wales, the which here retireth it self a great way backwards:
whereas to the contrary the Irish shore, which lies opposite to it, extends
it self in an equal manner without any great Bays or inlets.

As for the North part, where Ireland and Scotland are neighbors, there this
Sea grows very narrow; insomuch as Galloway, a County in that part of
Scotland, is distant with its most westerlie shore from the Ardes (a little
country and demy-island so named in the most Northerlie part of the County of
Down in Ireland) not above five Leagues; which space the open boats, wherein
they ordinarily here do pass from the one kingdom into the other, use to sail
in three or four hours time: and Cantire, another Foreland on the West shore
of Scotland, more to the North than Galloway, is nearer yet unto Ireland: so
that in these two places the one Nation may perfectly be seen and discerned
out of the other at all times, whenever it is no very dark gloomie weather.

Sect. 3. Shape and bigness of Ireland.
The shape of this Island is long-waies square, but not fully: for to say
nothing of several corners and Forelands, which run out a great way into the
Sea, nor of diverse great Bays and Inlets, which the sea makes here and there,
in the three other parts of this Island; the fourth part, called Munster, does
greatly alter that figure; for in lieu of stretching it self first from the
North to the South, and then from the South to the West, it runs altogether
sloping from the North-east to the South-west; and there besides it stretches
it self much further into the Sea with its Western shores, than any other part
of Ireland on the same West Side.

As for the bigness thereof, questionless it is to be reckoned among the chief
Islands of the whole World; and of Europe the principalest of all, except only
Great Britain, the which is more than twice as big: for being as long again, as
it is broad, it is at the narrowest (which is just in the middle, where Dublin
is situated) no less than an hundred miles broad; seeing that Atlone, which
lies just half way betwixt the two Seas, is fifty miles distant from Dublin;
and in Vlster, where Ireland is at its broadest, it is in most places ten, or
twelve, and in some twenty miles broader. In the length, if from the middle of
the Northern coast one do go directly Southward, one shall find it to be about
two hundred miles. But if you shape your course more to the East, the length
will be found less by some miles, because the cost of Munster runs so
sloping, as we have said before: and to the contrary, if one measure the length
of Ireland more to the West, it will be found to be a great deal more than two
hundred miles. And if the measure were taken not through the inland-parts, as
now we have framed it, but all along the seashore, the length would amount to
a great deal more than what now we have declared (as well on the East as on the
West side) in regard of the inequality of the coast, and of the great Bays and
Fore-lands, which make it in most places very much run out to the seaward, or
into the landward: for which same reason the circuit of the whole Island, taken
along the shore, is by far greater, than otherwise the proportion of its
length and breadth would seem to require. The Miles here mentioned must be
understood not of the common English ones, three whereof make one League, or
Holland mile* but of the Irish, the which are about one fifth part bigger, so
as five Irish miles do amount to about six English.

Sect. 4. Division of Ireland into Provinces and Counties.
This Island is divided into four principal parts, called Provinces, viz.
Vlster, Leinster, Connaught, and Munster: of which the first and the last
extend themselves from the one sea to the other, Vlster in the North, and
Munster in the South. Leinster and Connaught, lying betwixt those two forenamed
Provinces, have the sea only on one side, Connaught on the West, and Leinster
on the East. To these four most Writers and Records add a fifth, called Mead;
but that is really a part of Leinster, and ordinarily now is held to be such.

Each of these Provinces is again divided into diverse Counties. Vlster has
eleven, whereof six on the seaside, viz. Fermanagh, Doneghall alias Tirconnel,
Colraine, Antrim, Down, Lowth; and five within the land, viz. Cavan, Monaghan,
Armahg, Nether-Tirone, and Upper-Tirone. Leinster comprehends likewise eleven
Counties, Dublin, Wickloe, and Wexford on the seaside, East-Meath, and
Catherlogh or Carlo within the land, but with a little nook reaching unto the
sea; West-Meath, Kildare, Kilkenny, Kings-county, Queenes-county, and Longford
altogether within the land. Munster is divided into six Counties, two within
the Land, viz. Tipperary and Limmerick; and the other four, Waterford, Cork,
Desmond, and Kerry, situated on the seaside, but stretching themselves a great
way into the land. In Connaught there be six Counties, viz. Clare alias Tomond,
Galloway, Majo, and Sleigo, situated on the Sea, and Roscomen, and Letcim
within the land

Sect. 5. Of the English Pale.
There is yet another division of Ireland, whereby the whole land is divided
into two parts, The English Pale, and the Land of the mere Irish. The English
Pale comprehends only four Counties, one whereof is in Vlster, viz. Louth,
and the other three in Leinster, to wit Mead, Dublin, and Kildare: the
original of which division is this. The English at the first conquest, under
the reign of Henry the second, having within a little time conquered great part
of Ireland, did afterward, in the space of not very many years, make
themselves masters of almost all the rest, having expelled the natives (called
the Wild Irish, because that in all manner of wildness they may be compared
with the most barbarous nations of the earth) into the desert woods and
mountains. But afterward being falln at ods among themselves, and making
several great wars the one upon the other, the Irish thereby got the
opportunity to recover now this, and then that part of the land; whereby, and
through the degenerating of a great many from time to time, who joining
themselves with the Irish, took upon them their wild fashions and their
language, the English in length of time came to be so much weakened, that at
last nothing remained to them of the whole Kingdom, worth the speaking of, but
the great Cities, and the forenamed four Counties; to whom the name of Pale was
given, because that the authority and government of the Kings of England, and
the English Colonies or Plantations, which before had been spread over the
whole Land, now were reduced to so small a compass, and as it were impaled
within the same. And although since the beginning of this present age, and
since King James his coming to the Crown of England, the whole Island was
reduced under the obedience and government of the English Laws, and
replenished with English and Scotch Colonies; nevertheless the name of English
Pale, which in the old signification was now out of season, remained in use,
and is so still, even since this last bloody rebellion, wherein the inhabitants
of almost all the Pale, although all of them of English descent, have conspired
with the Native Irish, for to shake off the Government of the Crown of England,
and utterly to extinguish the Reformed Religion, with all the professors
thereof, and quite to root them out of Ireland.

Sect. 6. Cities and chief Towns of Ireland.
This Island has in it several Cities, among which Dublin is the principal,
being the chief City of the whole Commonwealth, the Residence of the
Governor, the Counsel of State, all the Great Officers, the Exchequer,
Judges, and Courts of Justice; being also adorned with an University, the
only in all Ireland. It is situated in the Province of Leinster, about the
middle of the length of Ireland (as already has been mentioned) not far from
the Sea, an Inlet whereof makes a harbor for this City; which harbor,
although none of the best of Ireland, (whereof in the next chapter but one
shall be spoken more at large) is nevertheless frequented with more ships,
and has greater importation of all things, than any other Haven in the
Kingdom; by reason that all sorts of commodities are much more readily and in
greater plenty vented here than any where else, what in the City it self,
being great and populous, what into the country, for in the time of peace
almost all Leinster and and Vlster were wont to furnish themselves from Dublin
of all kinds of provisions and necessaries, such as were brought in out of
foreign Countries.

Next to Dublin is Galloway, the head-citie of the Province of Connaught, to
be reckoned, as well for bigness and faireness, as for riches; for the streets
are wide, and handsomely ordered, the houses for the most part built of free
stone; and the inhabitants much addicted to trafick, do greatly trade into
other countries, especially into Spain, from whence they used to fetch great
store of wines and other wa^es every year.

In the third place comes Waterford, situated in the province of Munster; and
in the fourth Limmerick, the head-city of the said Province, both towns of
trafick, situated on goodly havens, and of reasonable bigness and handsomness.

Cork, in the Province of Munster, and London-derrie, in the Province of
Vlster, are less than any of the formentioned, but otherwise handsome places,
well built, and very fitly situated for trafick and navigation, as standing
upon very good Havens.

As for the rest of the Towns, Drogheda, Kilkenny, and Bandonbridge are
passable and worthy of some regard both for bigness and handsomeness: But
Colrain, Knockfergus, Belfast, Dundalk, Wexford, Youghall, and Kinsale are of
small moment, the best of all these being hardly comparable to any of those
fair Market-townes, which are to be found in almost all parts of England. And
as for Cassel, Rosse, Lismore, Clonmell, and Kilmallock in Munster; Sleigo and
Atlone in Connaught; Molingar, Trim, Kels, Navan, Aboy, Nace, Carlo, Arklo,
and Wicklo in Leinster; Carlingford, Ardee, and Down in Vlster, all of them
walled Towns, they are scarce worth the mentioning, because there are few
Market Towns in England, even of the meanest, which are not as good or better,
than the best of them all. We could give a more perfect relation of this
particular: but because this serves little to our purpose, and properly does
not concern the Natural History, we have thought it best to touch it but
briefly.

CHAP. II. Of the principal Havens of Ireland.
Sect. 1. Waterford Haven.
THe Havens of Ireland are so many in number, and for the most part so fair and
large, that in this particular hardly any land in the whole World may be
compared with this, as will easily appear by the particular rehearsal thereof,
which we are now to make, first of the best and chiefest in this Chapter, and
of the others in the next. We shall begin with Waterford Haven, the which being
situated on the confines of Leinster and Munster, runs some seven or eight
miles into the land, not winding or crooked, nor with any great nookes or
inlets, but almost in a straight line, (extending in it self North and North by
West) and in most parts of an equal breadth, all the way deep and clear,
having no roks or sands, but only two or three little ones, which lying not
across nor in the midst, but by the sides, may be shunned very easily. Without
the Harbor it is eleven and twelve fathoms deep, in the mouth seven and more,
inwards six fathoms. Within the Easterly corner is a good road, in four or five
fathoms; and on the other or Westerly side, five or six miles from the mouth,
is another good road, very commodious as well for them who go forth, as those
that will sail upward to Waterford. Upon the East Side, about halfe-way the
length, lies a very strong Castle called Duncannon, which so commands this
Harbor, as no ships can go up or down against the will of those in the Fort,
without running extreme hazard.

This Haven in the end divides it self into two arms, both a great deal
inferior to the principal harbor in breath and depth, but yet such as are
capable of ships of a good big port, especially the left, which runs
Westward to the City of Waterford, whereof this whole Haven bears the Name,
being situated some four or five miles from that division, and a little below
the place where the river Shure falls into this Harbor. The right arm being
the mouth of the river Barrow, and extending it self straight along, goes up
to Ross, (a Town in former times famous for trade) the which is much about the
same distance from this division, as the division is from the mouth of the
Harbor.

Sect. 2. Carlingford Haven.
On the whole coast of Leinster there is not one fair large Harbor, so as the
next good Haven from Waterford Northwards is that of Carlingford; which two
Harbors, in sailing straight along the coast, are above an hundred mils
distant.

This Haven is some three or four miles long, and nigh of the same breath,
being every where very deep, so as the biggest ships may come there to an
anchor; and so environed with high land and mountains on all sides, that the
ships do lie defended off all winds; so that this would be one of the best
havens of the world, if it were not for the difficulty and the danger of the
entrance, the mouth being full of rocks, both blind ones and others, betwixt
which the passages are very narrow: whereby it comes that this Harbor is
very little frequented by any great ships, the rather because there is no
trafick at all, nor any good Town seated on this Haven. For the Town of
Carlingford, whose name it bears, is a very poor place, hardly worth the
speaking of. About eight miles from the mouth of the Harbor is the Nurie, a
fine little Town, until in this late bloody rebellion it was for the greatest
part destroyed by the Irish: by which Town passes a little river, called the
Nurie-water, which discharging it self into the Harbor some four or five miles
below the Nurie, is not portable but of very little barks and boats, and that
only when the Tide is in.

Sect. 3. Strangford-haven, and that of Knockfergus.
About thirty miles Northwards from Carlingford-haven is the Haven of
Strang-ford, the which in its entrance is almost as much encumbred with rocks
of both kinds, as that of Carlingford. It is some five or six miles long, and
bears North-westward, being the mouth of a great Lough, called Loch Cone; the
which being but two or three miles broad in the most places, but some fifteen
or sixteen long, does ebb and flow until the utmost ends of it: so that there
goes a very strong tide in this Harbor, which makes the same the unsafer,
especially in great storms and high winds, for which there is no great defense
here. On this Haven, and on the neighboring Lough, there lies never a good
Town, Strangford being more inconsiderable yet than Carlingford.

The next great Harbor upon this coast, and about twenty miles more to the
North, is that of Knocfergus, being a great wide Bay, the which in its mouth,
betwixt the Southern and the Northern point, is no less than ten or twelve
miles broad, growing narrower by degrees, the farther it goes into the land,
the which it does for the space of fifteen miles, as far as to the Town of
Belfast, where a little river called Lagon (not portable but of small boats)
falls into this Harbor. In this Bay is a reasonable good Road before the
Town of Knockfergus (seated about nine miles within the land,) where it is good
anchoring in three fathoms, and three and a half. On the North side of the
Bay, somewhat near the Sea, under a Castle called Mouse-hill, is a sand-bay,
where it is good anchoring for all sorts of ships, as well great as small ones,
for the North and North-west winds: but bad riding for the South-west.

Sect. 4. Sheeps haven, Lough Suillie, and Lough foil.
The three forementioned Havens of Carlingford, Strangford, Knockfergus, are
all in the Province of Vlster, on the East Side thereof. The said Province has
also three good Havens on its Northern coast, not very far distant the one from
the other, viz. Sheep haven, Lough Suillie, and Lough foil. Every one of these
is a Lough (which the very name of the second and third sufficiently
testifies) opening it self into the sea: of the which Sheeps haven and Lough
Suillie although they be fair large Harbors, as well as Lough foil, and that
Ships may ride there defended off all winds, Lough Suillie being also of
sufficient bigness to contain a thousand great vessels, yet are they very little
frequented, because there is not any trade nor trafick, nor any good town
placed upon or near them.

Lough foil is of a great bigness, at least twelve miles long, and in most
places five or six miles broad, being almost every where of an equal breadth,
except at the two ends, where it grows narrow, being of an Ovall figure. For
at the mouth, betwixt Magilions point and Greencastle, it is hardly a mile and
a half broad: and at the other end it is much narrower yet, running from thence
with a long arm some miles into the country, being liker to a broad River,
than to a Lough. Upon this Arm, three or four miles from the great Lough, is
the town of London-derrie, in a place where that Arm turns and windeth it
self in that manner, as it environeth the town on three sides. It is nothing
big, consisting only of two long streets, the which cut one another cross-wayes
in the midst; but it is very handsome, the streets being broad and well paved,
the houses some stories high, and built for the most of freestone, with a
handsome Church, Market place, and Key: and is enclosed with a thick and very
strong stone wall, being one of the principal fortresses of Ireland. It is but
few years old, having been built up from the ground by a company of London
Adventurers under the reign of King James. Before the mouth of this Lough lies
a great sand, called the Touns (upon which it burns greatly, when the wind
blows from the sea) but so as a fair broad and deep channel remains
betwixt the said Sand and the West Side of the land, where there is at all
times fourteen and fifteen fathoms of water, as in the mouth it self some eight
or ten. Entering into the Lough, there are very great Sands on the left hand,
from the one end to the other, which are some miles broad from off the land;
and of the right hand are some little sands or shelves here, lying close to the
land. Betwixt these runs a broad channel in most parts three and four
fathoms deep: and in that Arm, whereon Londonderry stands, it is deeper yet,
in some places no less than ten or twelve, and before the Town four and five
fathoms: so as this is one of the best and most commodious harbors of all the
Land.

Sect. 5. Kilbeg and Dungall Haven.
The Country of Tirconnell, the which takes up the whole West Side of the
Province of Ulster, runs a great way into the Sea with its Southern part, on
the South side of which Foreland there are two very Fair Havens, the one not
far from the other, viz. Kilbeg and Dungall-haven. Kilbeg is a fair round Bay,
where the greatest ships that go upon the seas, may at all times with their
full lading enter and come to an anchor; being distant about twelve miles from
Cape de Tellin, the outmost or most Western point of that forenamed Foreland of
Tirconnell. The entrance is very narrow, so as unto them who are coming to it,
there seems to be no opening there, until they are very near, but it is very
clean, as well in the mouth, as in the Bay it self, and nothing that can hurt
the ships either coming in or going forth, being entered, one may anchor where
one will, in five, six, seven, eight fathomes, or more.

Three or four miles to the South from Kilbeg is a Cape, called St. John's
point, and six or seven miles Eastward from the said Cape is Dungal-haven,
wide and deep enough, but in the entrance greatly encumbered with shelves,
sands, and rocks, so as great care and circumspection is requisite, to enter or
go forth safely. These two Havens have their names of villages seated on them,
which are very small and no ways considerable.

Sect. 6. Broad-haven, Akill-haven, and Galloway-haven.
The Province of Connaught, extending her self betwixt Vlster and Munster,
takes up the greatest part of the westside of Ireland, it has also some good
Ports, as namely Broad-haven: an other to the North of Akill head; and a third,
situated between the main, and the North and East side of Akill Island, in which
one may ride in seven and eight fathomes, and be defended off all winds;
although it be rather a Sound, than an enclosed Harbor: for the ships which
are come into it, need not to go forth the same way again, but sailing on
betwixt the Main and the Island, may at the South end of the I Will come again to
the open sea. These Havens are nothing famous, being very seldom resorted
unto by any great ships, except such as by tempests and foul weather, or some
other accident, are necessitated to shelter themselves in the same.

But the famousest Port of this Province is that of Galloway, being a very
great Bay, some miles broad, and many more long, having in the mouth three
Iland^, (named the Isles of Aran) the which lie North and South by the side one
of the other, there remaining three channels for to come out of the sea into
this Bay. One chanel runs betwixt the Land and the Northern Island, called
therefore North-sound: the second between the the same Northern Island and the
middlemost; which channel, being the most usual of the three, is commonly
styled St Gregory's sound: and the third between the Southernmost Island and the
main, named South sound: the channel betwixt the Southern and the middlemost
Island not being passable by reason of the sands and shelves, wherefore the
name of False-sound has been given to it.

The whole North-side of this Bay is very foul with sands and rocks, so as one
may not approach the shore in a great way: at the end of which sand, and in the
innermost part of the Bay, lies a little Island, called in English Mutton-Iland,
and by the Irish Enis Kerrigh, which has the same signification; at the East
side whereof one may anchor in five or six fathomes of water; but from thence
Northwards until the city of Galloway, which is the space of two or three
miles, none but little vessels and barks can go, the City standing not on the
Bay itself, but on a broad water like a river, the which not far above
Galloway coming out of a great Lake, called Lough Corbes, discharges it self
into the Bay a little above Mutton I Will.

Sect. 7. The Havens of Limmerick, Smerwick, Dingle-bay, Ventrie, and
Dingle-Icoush.
The next great Haven on the West side of Ireland, to the South of Galloway, is
that of Limmerick, which Haven divides the Province of Connaught from Munster,
being of a huge length, no less than fifty miles: for so far it is from the
mouth of the haven until the City of Limmerick, to whose walls great vessels
may go up, without meeting with any thing else in all that way, save a many
little Isles, but not any f^ul places, Rocks, or Sands. This Harbor is nothing
else but a great Lough (half way its length growing somewhat narrow, but
immediately enlarging it self again into a great breadth) whereinto the River
Shanon, (upon whose bank Limmerick is situated) discharges it self a little way
below the said City; although the English and the Irish both call it the Shanon
all the way until the Sea, as it were not a Lough into which the River
falls, but the River it self thus enlarged.

Coming out of this Harbor, the Land on the left hand shoots a huge way
Westwards into the Sea, on the side of which Fore-land, ten o^ twelve miles at
this side of the uttermost point (betwixt which and the Isles of Blaskes passes
the Sound of the same name) is the Haven of Smerwick, not very great, deep, but
clean, and well enclosed.

At the other side of this Fore-land, and to the North-east from the Blaskes,
is a fair and very large Bay called Dingle-bay, the which goes very many miles
into the land, having in it diverse good Havens, one whereof, called Ventry, is
four or five miles from the Sound of Blaskes Eastwards; and three or four miles
further is Dingle-Icoush, before the mouth of which Harbor, and at the
West Side of it, lies a rock, called the Crow, round about the which one may
sail without danger, it being always above water, but at spring tides, at
which time the Sea does overflow it.

Sect. 8. Maire, Bantrie, and Beer-haven.
Against the South-east corner of Dingle-bay lies a great Island, called
Valentia, betwixt which and the Main is a very fair and safe Road. And a little
way beyond that Island goes in another huge Bay, called Maire, which shoots
into the Land a great deal further than Dingle-bay: and somewhat further is a
third Bay, called Bantrie, which equalleth Maire both in breadth and length; in
both which, as well as in Dingle-bay, there be several good Harbors and Roads.

Maire has in the mouth some fifty or five-and-forty fathomes of water;
entering in further, there be six and twenty, twenty, and eighteen; afterward
you come to ten, and to six, and in the innermost parts to three and two
fathomes; being throughout very clean, and free from all kind of Rocks and
Sands, except in very few places.

As you enter into Bantrie, side-ward upon the left hand lies a reasonable big
I Will, called the Island of Beer-haven, betwixt which and the Main there goes in
a fair Sound, being a great musket shot broad; the which in its whole length,
from where it begins until the place where it ends at the further part of
the Island, being the space of some miles, se^veth for a very good and safe
port, wherefore also it bears the name of a Hav^n, being called Beer-haven. A
good way within the mouth^ly some Rocks in the midst of the chanel, the which
at high water are overflown, and you may sail of either side of them: and at
the other side of this Sound, where the same comes out into the Bantrie,
there ly two great Rocks just in the mouth, betwixt which the ships may pass,
as also betwixt the same and the land of either side. All the rest of this
Harbor or Sound is every where very clean and clear, and very good
anchor-ground, ten, twelve, and thirteen fathoms deep.

Sect. 9. Whiddie-haven and Langerf.
In the innermost of the Bantrie lies an Island about three miles long, called
Whiddie, betwixt which and the Main is a very fair wide Bay, (being the
uttermost end of the great Bay Bantrie) where you may every where come to an
anchor in three, four, five, or six fathomes, in as much or as little water as
you will, according as you have a mind to ride near the shore or further from
it, being every where clean ground. Ships may enter into this Bay or Sound in
two several places, at both ends of the Island. But the entrance at the
South-end is very dangerous, because that there betwixt the Island Whiddie and
the Main land it is in most places foul and Rockie: But in the other entrance,
at the Northern end of the Island, is both room and depth enough, it being much
broader than that at the South-end, and eight and nine fathomes deep; and there
is nothing that can do hurt, except only a row of Rocks a little musket shot
from the shore, the which being covered at high water, do not begin to appear
but at half ^bb.

Right against this Island, at the other side of Bantrie, is a Haven called
Langerf, in which is every where good anchoring and good ground; only at the
one side, on the right hand close to the mouth, ly some foul grounds, the which
fall dry at the ebb of a springtide.

From Beerhaven to the Northern corner of the Island Whiddie the Bantrie tends
East-North-East and North-East, eighteen or twenty miles in length. Over
against Beerhaven, in the midst of the fair water, it is deep forty, six and
thirty, and thirty fathoms; beyond the Island fifteen and sixteen; but further
in, approaching the I Will of Whiddie, it is again twenty and five and twenty
fathoms deep.

Sect. 10. Downams bay, Baltimore-bay and Baltimore-haven.
Next to the Bantrie, and only by a narrow neck of land divided from it, is
Downams bay, being great and wide (although no ways comparable to any of those
three already described) a very commodious Road to save ships in, and good
anchor ground every where.

The land to the East of this Bay shoots out very far to the Sea-ward; the
uttermost point thereof, called Messan-head, being the Southermost Cape of all
Ireland. For Cape de Clare, being about twenty miles further to the East, and
somewhat more Southerly, is not on the Main, but in an Island.

Beyond Messan-head is another Bay, far greater than any of those three
forenamed, but nothing like the same in shape, nor in the same manner running
with a long arm a huge way into the land, but rather approaching to the figure
of a half moon. In this Bay is Crook-haven, School-haven, and several other
great Havens, not only on the main land, but also in some of the Islands,
whereof there is a great number in this Bay. The most Easterly of all these
Islands is Baltimore, the which surpassing all the others in bigness, gives its
name unto the Bay.

That part of the Bay which lies betwixt this Island and the Main, having a
narrow entrance, but within of a great largenes, is a mavelous good Road,
where ships may come to an anchor on either side, and lie defended off all
winds. It is five and six fathoms deep on the sides, and six and 7. in the
midst. In the mouth of the Harbor, next to the East Side, lies a blind Rock;
and in the midst of it another Rock, which appears at low water. There is
nothing else that can do hurt. This Haven, being far the principallest of all
this Bay, has its name, as well as the Bay it self of the Island, being called
Baltimore-haven. To the North of that Island lies another ^land, called
Spain-Iland, where one may pass betwixt these two Islands to the West, and so
out of Baltimore-haven go into the Sea. But only with smaller vessels,
because half flood there is not above 12. or thiteen feet of water in all that
channel.

Sect. 11 Castle-haven, Rosse-haven, Clandore Haven with the Havens of Kinsale
and Cork.
Some miles beyond Baltimore-bay is Castle-haven, where ships may come to an
anchor in twelve fathoms of water, being of a reasonable bigness, and very
clear and clean, as well in the entrance as within.

Between Castle-haven and Kinsale are two other good Havens, to wit that of
Rosse, and of Clandore, in which there is water enough, and very clean ground.

The Haven of Kinsale is one of the famousest of all Ireland; ships may sail
into it, keeping in the midst of the channel, without any danger either
without or in the mouth of the Harbor, except a blind Rock close to the East
point. Within the haven, on the West Side, lies a great shelf, which shoots a
great way off from the land, but leaving a very large passage along by the side
of it, in which, as in all the rest of the Harbor, it is many fathomes deep.
This Haven for some miles goes in North-North-East, but afterward turns
Westward until the Kay of Kinsale, where ships may ride in eight or nine
fathoms of water, being defended off all Winds.

Ten or twelve miles to the East of Kinsale is Cork-haven, the which goes in
North-North-East, being within large and wide, running a great way into the
land: for the town of Cork, until whose Kay this Haven is very clean and deep,
is seated many miles from the Sea, and from the mouth of the Harbor.

CHAP. III. Of the lesser Havens, and the barred Havens of Ireland, also of the
Roads and Anchor-places upon the coast, and in the little Islands near the coast.
Sect. 1. Wexford-haven.
AFter the description of the principal Havens of Ireland, we shall come to
them of less moment, in which number we put all those, which either in their
entrance, or within, have not water enough for the bigher sort of vessels; as
likewise those, the which being deep enough, are but very little, and of a
small pourprise; and in this description we shall observe the same order as in
the former, beginning with Wexford, and so going Northward, then West,
afterward Southward, and lastly East and North-Eastward, until we have gone
about the whole Island.

The Haven of Wexford runs in West, and by North, and with her innermost
part altogether Northward. Just before this Haven lie two great shelves of
Sands by the side one of the other, of which that on the South Side is called
Hanemans-path, and the other North-grounds. There goes a chanel betwixt
Hanemans-path and the land on the South Side of the Haven, and another betwixt
the North-side and the North-grounds; but this last has but six feet of water
at full flood, and in the other eight feet with the flood of ordinary tides,
and ten at spring-tides. The chief chanel is that which goes in betwixt the
two Sands, being four and five fathom deep. Besides these Sands there is
another Shelf in the mouth of the Harbor it self; which kind of sandy-banks
lying across in the mouth of Harbors and Rivers, are usually called Bars; and
the Havens which have them, Bared-havens* With a high flood there is about
sixteen feet of water. Being past the Bar, you have for some way three fathoms
of water, three and a half, and four; but afterward for a great way but ten
feet, and ten a half, with a high flood; although under the Castle where the
Ships come to an Anchor, you have four fathoms, and before the Town three; but
because of the forementioned shallows, no vessels can go to Wexford, that draw
more than ten feet of water, but must unlade and lade in a Creek near the mouth
of the Haven on the South Side, about three miles from the Town, where is water
enough, but no shelter for the South-west winds, the which do come over the
land to this place.

Sect. 2. Dublin-haven.
Dublin Haven has a Bar in the mouth, upon which at high-flood and springtide
there is fifteen and eighteen feet of water, but at the ebb and nep^-tide but
six. With an ordinary tide you cannot go to the Key of Dublin with a Ship that
draws five feet of water, but with a springtide you may go up with Ships that
draw seven and eight feet. Those that go deeper cannot go nearer Dublin than
the Rings-end, a place three miles distant from the Bar, and one from Dublin.
This Haven almost all over falls dry with the ebb, as well below Rings-end
as above it, so as you may go dry-foot round about the Ships which lie at an
Anchor there, except in two places, one at the North-side, half way betwixt
Dublin and the Bar, and the other at the South Side not far from it. In these
two little Creeks (whereof the one is called the Pool of Clantarf, and the
other Poolebeg) it never falls dry, but the Ships which ride at an Anchor
remain ever afloat; because at low water you have nine or ten feet of water
there. This Haven, besides its shallownes, has yet another great incommodity,
that the Ships have hardly any shelter there for any winds, not only such as
come out of the sea, but also those which come off from the land, especially
out of the South-west; so as with a great South-west storm the Ships run great
hazard to be carried away from their Anchors, and driven into the sea; which
more than once has come to pass, and particularly in the beginning of
November, Anno 1637, when in one night ten or twelve Barks had that misfortune
befaln them, of the most part whereof never no news has been heard since.

Sect. 3. The Havens of Drogheda and Dundalk.
The Haven of Drogheda, or, as the word is pronounced in common use, Tredagh,
is very troublesome to be got into, as having not only a Bar lying across before
its mouth, over the which vessels cannot pass but at high water, but also very
narrow in the mouth: This Haven not being an Arm or Bay of the sea, but only a
River which keeps her own bigness until the end, without receiving any
notable enlargement of the sea about her mouth, as other Rivers use to do. Upon
this Bar is as much water as upon that of Dublin; and the Ships which can pass
the Bar, may go up to the Key of Tredagh; which Town is seated about two miles
from the month of this River, which is called the Boine.

Sixteen miles to the North of Tredagh stands Dundalk, where a wide open Bay
(made by the giving back and retiring of the coast) growing narrow, and
receiving a little River, which above Dundalk is but a small Brook, makes a
kind of Haven, where never is much water, and with the ebb may be passed over
a foot; wherefore, and because there is not any shelter for the winds coming
from the sea, nor any usual Trafique, this Road is very little fr^quented.

Sect. 4. The Havens o^ Dondrom, Arglas, Oldfleet, Belletree, and the Band.
A few miles on this side of Strongford, are the Havens of Dondrom and Arglas,
the one not far from the other, both little, and not very deep, but safe: And a
little way beyond the Northern point of the Bay of Knockfergus, is
Oldfleet-haven, a Harbor of the same sort as those two last mentioned.

Port Belletree, six or seven miles to the West of Fair-foreland (the
North-Easterliest point of Ireland) is as little as any of those three, less
defended of the winds, and the ground sharp and foul.

Some miles further is the Haven of Colrain, called Band-haven, the which is
nothing else but the mouth of the River Band, the which here falls into the
sea, keeping her own narrowness until the end, in the same manner as we said
above of the Haven of Tredagh. This River passing through Lough Neaugh, the
greatest Lake of all Ireland (the which receiving several Rivers, has no
other outlet into the sea but the Band) carries a mighty deal of water, the
which being enclosed in a narrow chanel, powers it self into the sea with
great violence: for which reason, and because of the narrowness of the mouth,
this Haven is very hard to enter, having also but little depth, so as vessels
which draw eight feet of water, must at least have three quarters of the flood
before they can enter.

Sect. 5. Tellin-haven, Mackswins-bay, the Havens of Balleshanon, Slego,
Endrigo, Moy, and Niffadoy.
Upon the West coast of Ulster, about half way between Cape Tellin and Kilbeg,
is Tellin-haven, a round Bay, with good sand ground, which will contain about
thirty Ships: West, and South-West winds blow directly into it, but off all
other winds one is there defended.

Two or three miles Eastwards from Kilbeg is Mackswins Bay, where a Ship may
ride safe without Cable and Anchor: but the entrance being every where beset
with Rocks, it is dangerous to go into it.

Some miles to the South-West of Dungal-haven, is Balleshanon, being the mouth
of that short River, by which Lough-Earn, one of the greatest Lakes of Ireland,
discharges it self into the sea; which River runs just on the borders of
the two Provinces of Ulster and Connaught, dividing the same; this having a Bar
before it, by reason whereof no bigger vessels than of thirty or forty tuns can
enter into it.

Slego and Endrigo are two little Harbors, situated near the one to the other,
in the North part of Connaught, very much encumbred with Rocks and Sands in the
entrance, but otherwise reasonably deep; for a Ship of two hundred Tons may
come and ride before the Town of Slego.

About half way between Slego and Broad-haven is Moy, being the innermost of a
great Bay, divided from the rest by a little Island somewhat long, the which
lies cross in that manner, that only one chanel remains, whereby to go out
of the great Bay into the lesser, or the Haven, which chanel is twelve feet
deep; but in the Haven it self, being nothing else but two little Creeks,
divided asunder by some sands lying betwixt them, it is about fifteen or
sixteen feet deep; but in the little channel which passes into the inmost
creek, being nearest to the Village Moy, there is but nine feet of water at
full flood with an ordinary tide.

Some miles to the South-East of Sline-head, (a famous Cape in Connaught, and
situated about half way the length of that Province) is Port Niffadoy, a
reasonable good Harbor, but very dangerous to get into, the sea there round
abouts being full of Rocks both blind ones and others.

Sect. 6. The Havens of Trailie, Youghall, and Dungarvan: item of Wickloe,
Arckloe, Malahide, etc.
At Trailie, half way between Smerwick and the mouth of the Haven of Limmerick,
is a fair Haven but none of the biggest.

About the middle way between Cork and Waterford is the Haven of Youghall,
before the which lies a Bar, not to be passed but at high water.

Twelve miles Eastwards from Youghall, is Dungarvan, being a narrow Tide-haven,
whose mouth is full of Rocks, many of which do not appear, and so more
dangerous, and at low water it falls dry, so as one must go into it at high
flood, and pass amidst the Rocks.

As for the Havens of Arckloe (where with high water it is but six feet deep)
of Wickloe (where at full flood you have but ten feet of water) Malahide, a
little to the North of the Bay of Dublin; Coldach-haven, and Red-haven, the
first betwixt Loughsoile and Loughsuillie, and the other betwixt Loughsuillie
and Sheeps-haven; Milk-haven, not far from Slego; Mablin-haven, betwixt
Waterford and Wexford; and some others of the same nature: They are so little,
that they will hardly serve for other than Fisherboates, and therefore scarce
merit the name of Havens.

Sect. 7. Roads upon the Coast of Ireland, from Waterford to Fair-Foreland.
Be^ides this great number of Havens in Ireland, there are many good Roads,
where ships at need may save themselves, and commodiously come to an anchor,
not only upon the coast of the Main land, but also in the most part of the
little Islands, which ly round about Ireland.

To begin with those on the Main. From the point of Waterford to Carnarord,
being the space of about twenty miles, the coast is full of Bays, where one
may come to an anchor. Under Carnarord ships anchor in six and nine fathomes.
In St Margarets bay, three miles from Carnarord it is good anckoring in five
and six fathomes, sand ground. A little further is the bay of Grenore, where you
may anchor as near the land as you will, in six, five, four, or three fathomes.

Some miles from Wexford to the point of Glasearick, from which place to the
bay of Dublin, being about fifty miles, the coast is full of inlets, where it
is very good anchoring, in good sand ground, especially to the North of
Arkloe-head (in a fair sand bay every where in eight, seven, or five fathomes)
and between Arkloe and Missen-head, being the space of six or seven miles.

In the mouth of the Bay of Dublin, at this side of the Bar, is good anchoring,
as well on the South side, before the Village Dalkee (which place is known by
the name of Berton Road) as on the North-side, round about that great Cape,
named the Head of Houth.

Between Strangford-haven and the Bay of Knockfergus are diverse good
Anchoring-places; but all that Coast is very foul with Rocks, and blind Rocks.
To the North of Knockfergus are diverse inlets, where one may come to an Anchor;
there are some Rocks, but they all stand above the water, so as easily they may
be shunned.

Sect. 8. The rest of the Roads upon the coast of Ireland.
To the West of Fair-foreland the coast is flat and clean, so as there ships
may Anchor every where in eight and nine fathoms. Under the point of Eniston on
the West Side one may Anchor for Easterly winds, or to stop the tide.

Between Loughsuille and Sheeps-haven is an inlet where Ships may come to an
Anchor; but the ground is somewhat foul.

On the West Side of Cape-horn Ships may ride at Anchor for Easterly winds: And
along the whole coast between Cape-horn and the Isles of Aran is every where
good Anchor-ground; as also upon the West-coast between St. Johns-point and
Dungal-haven, being the space of five or six miles.

In the Sound of Blaskets it is good Anchoring on the South Side of the point
for Northern and Western, and on the North-side for the contrary winds.

On both sides of the Old-head of Kinsal^, by the Dutch Mariners called Cape
Velho, ships may Anchor as deep or shallow as they will.

There is also a good inlet for to Anchor in a few miles beyond the Haven of
Cork; and on the East Side of Ardimore-head is a Bay, where it is good riding
for Westerly winds in seven or eight fathoms.

There is also a good Anchoring place or two betwixt Dungarvan and the Haven of
Waterford.

Sect. 9. Roads in the Islands of Salters, Dalkee, Irelands-Eye, and Lambay.
As for the Roads in the Islands; about half way betwix Waterford haven and
Carnarord lie two little Islands, a mile or two from the land, called Salters:
the Southmost whereof, which lies furthest from the land, is much bigger than
the other: ships may pass between these two Islands in five, six, and seven
fathoms. On the East Side of the lesser Island is a good Road to come to an
anchor in seven or eight fathoms, where ships may ride in safety for
South-West, West, and North-West winds: and on the North-West-side of the
bigger Island ships may anchor in seven, eight, or nine fathoms, the Road being
defended off South-South-East, and East-South-East winds. Close by the South
point of Dublin-bay lies a small Island, called Dalkee, betwixt which and the
Main land passes a Sound seven, eight, and nine fathoms deep, in which you may
anchor under the Island. On the North-side of the head of Houth lies another
small Island, scarce half a mile in compass (where-in, as also in Dalkee, no body
inhabiteth, both serving only for to feed cattle) having a decayed ^hapell on
the West Side, over against which ships may come to an anchor.

Three or four miles beyond Irelands Ey lies the I Will of Lambry, belonging to
Sir William Usher of Dublin, who has there a fine little Castle of free stone,
and close by it a village, wherein dwell diverse families, of Fishers and
Husbandmen, who plow part of this Island, and upon the the rest seed cattle
and sheep. The whole Island, being about three miles in compass, is high land,
wherefore it may be seen a great way off. On the North-side of this Island ships
may anchor in twelve and thirteen fathoms for a Southerly wind. For a Sea-wind
the ships must ride on the West Side, over against the Castle: but that Road is
not very good, because always in that Sound, being about three miles broad,
goes a great Sea.

Sect. 10. Roads in the rest of the little Islands about Ireland.
Right against the Promontory of Fair-Foreland lies the Island Raghleens, where
ships may sail round about, as well at the out side, as betwixt it and the
land, according as the wind and tide serve. On the South-West side is a fair
Bay with very fine Sand-ground, where ships may ride defended off all winds. A
little way on this side and to the East of Brandhaven lies Skires Portrush, a
Rockie Island, the which on the South Side has a fair Bay, very good
Sand-ground, where ships may anchor in six or seven fathoms, being sheltred of
all winds, except the East-North-East wind, the which along the Coast does
directly blow upon it.

There is a good Road on the South-East-side of the I Will of Aran, situated on
the North-West-side of Ireland: and betwixt this Island and the Main there lie
three or four small Isles, where ships may anchor in diverse places, and be
secured off all winds.

There is also a good Road for some winds under Eneskie Island; the middlemost
of the three Islands situated betwixt Akill head and Sline-head, called Boche,
where is good anchoring in four fathoms; under the Northern-most Island of those
three lying in the mouth of the Bay of Galloway; under Enis Morrow, one of the
Blaskees; under Dorses I Will, lying betwixt the Bays of Maire and Bantree, in
the Sound which passes betwixt the same I Will and the Main land.

Ten or twelve miles to the East of Cork-haven lies an Island called
Balle-cotton, where ships may anchor in five or six fathoms for Westerly and
Southerly winds. There is also a good Road on the East Side of Capel-Iland, a
little I Will, lying three or four miles from the mouth of the Haven of Youghall.

CHAP. IV. Quality and fashion of the Irish Coast or Shoares. Item, a brief
description of the principal Promontories or Heads of Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the low and Strandie Shoares of Ireland.
THe Irish Coast is not every where alike, but of several sorts: In some
places the land along the Sea is low and flat, having a broad sandy strand,
with a row of sandy hills, the which does part the land from the strand, in the
same manner as it is upon all the Coast of Holland and Flaunders (where these
kind of hills are called Duynen or Downs) only with this difference, that they
are not so large nor high, as in the Low Countries, and that the rows of them
take up but a little space in breadth. This kind of Strand is in most parts of
Fingall (being a portion of the County of Dublin Northwards toward Tredagh,
and a good way beyond that, and else where. In other places ly no Downs or
Sandy hills, nor any other heights, betwixt the Strand and the land, it being
only defended from the overflowing of the Sea by an unsensible rising*

Sect. 2. Of the high and hilly Shoares of Ireland.
In other places the land is high and hilly on the seaside; part whereof does
descend by degrees toward the sea, having a Strand below; but elsewhere the
land is high and steep, being washed underneath by the deep sea, so as ships of
a great burden may sail close by it; the which may be observed not only in
the Heads or Capes, the most part whereof are thus fashioned, but in many other
places, and in great extents of the coast. For as concerning the saying of
Giraldus, that Ireland every where upon the coast is very low, Est per omnia
sui latera a marinaque littora terra valde demissa, that is evidently repugnant
to the truth. Some of these high Shoars are bare naked Rocks, covered with very
little or no earth, so as scarce any thing grows upon them but dry grass and
heath; others are stony within, but have at the top a reasonable deep mould,
and all over clothed with good grass; some of them being so exceeding steep
toward the Seaside, that it is imposible for man or beast, being come to the
further end, to go one step further, without falling down and being lost. So as
it has happened, that cattle and sheep feeding in those places, when they were
come to the top, and following the grass, suddenly tumbled down, falling
headlong into the sea, or upon the hard sharp Rocks standing at the bottom.

Sect. 3. Capes on the East Side of Ireland.
The Heads or Capes of Ireland are in great number, and many of them very
observable, to the great commodity of the Seafaring men. In the
South-Easterliest point of Ireland is the Cape of Greenore, five or six miles
to the South of the Bay of Wexford, being not very high, but steep, and flat at
the top: and three or four miles to the South-West from it is the point of
Carnarord.

Betwixt Wexford and Dublin there be five Heads: That of Glascarick, which the
Dutch Mariners call the Blew-point, and the Steeppoint, twelve miles to the
North of the Bay of Wexford, being of no great height. That of Glaskermen or
Arklo being we^-near at the same distance from the Head of Glascarick, as that
is from the Bar of Wexford. Missan head, some nine or ten miles further to the
North. The Head of Wickloe, six miles beyond Missan-head, being steep and
rocky, divided at the top into two little Hillocks. And the fifth and last of
all, that of Bray, about fifteen miles beyond Wickloe, and five or six miles to
the South of the Bay of Dublin, being a great and high Cape, shooting a good
way into the Sea, and so steep, that it is ten fathomes deep there close under
the land.

On the North-side of Dublin-bay is the Head of Houth, a great high Mountain,
three or four miles compass in the bottom, having the sea on all sides, except
the West Side, where with a long narrow neck it is joined to the land; which
neck being low ground, one may from either side see the sea over it, so that
afar off it seems as if it were an Island. This Head may be seen a great way
off at sea; for even upon the land one may very perfectly see it, not only upon
the Key of Dublin, which is six miles from thence, but nine or ten miles
further Westward.

Upon all the coast from the Head of Houth to Dondrom, being the space of about
threescore miles, is none considerable. But some miles beyond Dondrom, and
three or four miles at this side the Haven of Arglas, is St. Johns-point, a
Head and Fore-land which shoots a good way into the Sea.

The next Head beyond St. John's, is the point at the North-side of the Haven of
Strangford, which the Dutch Mariners by a notable mistake call the point of
Arglas.

All these Capes lie on the East Side of Ireland, whose utmost point Northward
is the Promontory of Fair-foreland.

Sect. 4. Capes on the North-side of Ireland.
About fifty miles to the West of Fair-foreland, and well near the middle of
the North-coast, is the Head of Enyston, which with the land next adjoining
lies much more Northward, and runs further out into the sea than any other
land upon this coast, being of a great height, so as it may easily be known by
any that once have seen it.

Some forty miles more Westward beyond this Promontory lies the Cape which is
known by the name of Horn-head, being a Hill with two hommocks at the top, in
fashion somewhat like unto two horns, from whence it has received its
denomination.

Sect. 5. Capes on the West Side of Ireland.
Upon the West Side of the Irish coast are four principal Heads, viz.
Tellin-head, lying about thirty miles to the South-West of the Isles of Aran,
the which are situated over against the North-Westerlyest point of Ireland.
Akil-head, some miles to the South of Broad-haven, being not on the Main, but
in an Island. Sline-head, which by the Seafaring men is called Twelve-pence,
because the land shows it self in twelve round hommocks, being situated well
near in the middle of the West-coast: And Lupis-head, which is the
Northern-point of the Haven of Limmerick.

As for the other Heads upon the same West Side, namely those three betwixt the
Haven of Slego and Broad-haven, by the Irish Pilots called Can-Moin,
Can-Killaloy, and Can-Jores, (Can in Irish betokens a Head in all sorts of
significations) Renilira and Clegan, between Akil-head, and Sline-head (which
last the Irish call Can-Leme) Brain and Calew, situated to the South of the Bay
of Galloway; and Can-Sanan, being the South-point of the Bay of Limmerick;
those are less considerable.

Sect. 6. Heads on the Southern Coasts of Ireland.
Upon the South-West-side of Ireland, the principal Heads are Cape-Dorses
(situated in an Island of the same name, betwixt the two great Bays of Maire and
Bantree) and Messanhead, situated betwixt the Bays of Bantree and Baltimore;
being the same, in Camdens opinion, which Ptolomie calls Notium, that is
Southern, it being the most Southerly point of all Ireland.

Upon the South-East-side is the Head of Clare, standing in an Island on the
East Side of the Bay of Baltimore; and a great way from thence, the old Head of
Kinsale, called Cape Velho by the Dutch Mariners; which Head, to those that
come sailing along the land afar off, seems to be an Island, being a point
which shoots a great way into the sea, whose utmost, or most Southerly end is
very high and steep.

Upon the same side stands the Head of Ardimore, which runs a great way
into the sea from the land on both sides, and because of its height may be seen
many miles off.

CHAP. V. Of the Sands or Grounds, Blind-Rocks, and other Rocks in the Irish
sea.
Sect. 1. Of the Grounds before the Coast betwixt Dublin and Wexford.
THe Sea which invironeth Ireland, is as free from Shelves, Sands, or Grounds,
as any in all the world, not alone upon the other sides, where the same is wide
and open, far distant from all other lands, but upon the East Side, where the
same is enclosed betwixt Ireland and Great Britain, in which whole space it
has not any other Sands than those situated along the coast between Dublin and
Wexford. These indeed are of a huge extent, but not turning and winding as most
part of the Grounds in other places, but in a straight line, North-North-East,
and South-South-West, being farthest from the land with their North-end; and as
they go Southward, so they do come nearer to the land; and near the Tuskar, a
Rock right against the point of Greenore, in which place they end, they are not
much more than two miles distant from the land; whereas the distance betwixt
the North-end, near the Island Dalkee (which Island, as before we have showed,
lies at the entrance of Dublin-bay, about threescore miles from the Tuskar) is
above eight miles. They are all of a Stoney-ground, in some places but one
fathom deep, and a fathom and a half; but in the North-end two fathoms and a
half, and three fathoms.

Betwixt these Grounds and the land lie two or three little Sands, besides
those which lie in, and before the mouth of the Bay of Wexford: one betwixt the
South-end and Greenore; another to the South of the Head of Glascarick, a good
mile from the land, called Rush and Ram; and a third one mile to the South of
Arcklohead, called Glaskermen, somewhat more than half a mile from the land,
and about two miles long.

Sect. 2. Of the Chanel betwixt the Land and the forenamed Grounds.
The Chanel betwixt the great Grounds and the land is very deep all over, so
that the biggest vessels may pass through it from Dublin to Wexford, and from
Wexford to Dublin, taking care only that they do not come too near the
Grounds, the which being very steep on the inside (as they are also without, or
on the East Side, where ships may not come nearer to them than in 24. and 25.
fathoms, because that in twenty fathomes one is close by them) it is requisite
not to go further off from the land, than in seven or eight fathoms, in which
depth ships may within a cabels length sail all along the coast, the which here
every where is very clean, and free from all danger. And even between the land
and the forenamed small Grounds, Glaskermen and Rush and Ram, the Sea is very
clean and deep, so as most ships do pass betwixt them and the land, and not
about by the out side of them.

These Sands in four several places are cut thorough with fair broad and deep
chanells, whereof the one is over against the Bay of Wexford; the other against
Glascarick, being no less than fifteen or sixteen fathoms deep; the third
right against Arckloe, in which chanel it is about seven or eight fathoms deep;
and the fourth is directly against Wickloe.

Sect. 3. Blind Rocks upon the coast of Ireland from the Saltees unto Wickloe.
There are some blind Rock in this Sea, but lie for the most part close under
the land, or near some of the little Islands or high Rocks, so as they may easily
be shunned, the rather, because most of them do at low water appear either in
part or altogether. To speak a little of these in order: the Saltees, two little
Islands situated half way between the Haven of Waterford and and the head of
Carnarord of the which has been spoken heretofore) have both at the North-side
some blind Rocks; whereof those which ly near the bigger and Southermost Island,
fall dry at low water. About three miles to the South of the same bigger Island
lies a blind Rock called Kinmore, of the bigness of a ship, at half ebb it
comes above water, and is so steep, that with the side of a ship one may ly
close against it, and have fourteen fathomes of water, so as without any danger
one may sail very close by it. To the South-East of the fore named bigger Island
do also lie some blind Rocks, called the Frailes, the which may be seen at low
water, and ships may pass through the midst of them. About half a mile from
Blackrock (a noted Rock, whereof shall be spoken anon) lies a blind Rock,
called the Barrel, of the which one must take heed very carefully. A little to
the West of Carnarord lies a small Rocky foul, close under the land. Betwixt
Carnarord and St Margarets Bay it is foul and Rocky, but the foul grounds do
not reach far into the Sea.

South-South-East from St Margarets Bay lies a blind Rock, called Caliogh, the
which at low water falls dry. From the point of Greenore a riffe of blind
Rocks and Stones runs almost the length of a mile into the Sea, the which at
low water falls dry a good way from the land. At the North-side of the Head
of Arcklo lies a little Stony row, the which is shunned very carefully by the
ships, not daring to come nearer to it than in five fathoms of water.

Sect. 4. The rest of the blind Rocks upon the coast of Ireland.
Just to the South of the head of Wickloe, a little way from the land, lies a
Rocky sand called Horse-shoe; betwixt which and the land ships may sail
thorough, if need be: but that being full of danger, it is done very seldom;
and a little further to the South lies a little blind Rock close by the land,
called the Wolf, the which at half ebb comes above water; betwixt which and
the land fishers boats do pass.

The like blind Rocks and Rockie sands lie upon the coast betwixt Tredagh and
Dundalk, as also betwixt Dundalk and Carlingford, in both places close under
the land: at both the points of the Havens of Carlingford and Strangford* under
St John's point, situated half way between those two Havens: on both sides of
those two great Rocks, a little way beyond Strangford Haven, called Southrock
and Northrock: between the Islands of Copland Isles and the land, at the
South-point of the bay of Knockfergus: round about those great Rocks over
against Oldfleet, called the nine maids: to the West of the little Island called
Sheeps-Iland: betwixt Port Belletree and Skires Portrush, which Rocks are
called the Chickens: halfway betwixt Lough-Suillie and Sheeps-Haven, a mile or
two from the land, which Rocks the flood does cover, but at ebb they come
above water; and in several other places upon the West-coast and the
South-coast the which it would be tedious all to particularise: wherefore we
will conclude this rehearsal of the Blind Rocks with that which to the West of
St John's point (a point situated three or four mile Southwards from
Kilbeg-haven) does lie somewhat more than a mile off from the land, upon which
the Sea breaks with great noise, and nevertheless one may freely and without
any danger sail between the same and the land.

Sect. 5. Rocks in the Irish Sea, upon the East Side and the North-side of the
coast.
There be also diverse Rocks that always stand above water, the which as they
are dangerous in the dark night, and in misty weather, so at other times they
are rather profitable than hurtful, forasmuch as they serve the Seafaring men
for Seamarks, and help them to discern the situation and distances of the
coasts; wherefore also the most part of them have received peculiar and proper
names. The principal of this whole number is the Tuskar, a great black smooth
Rock, of fashion like unto a ship turned the upside downwards, but as big
again, lying South-Eastwards from the point of Greenore the space of three
miles. To the South West of the Tuskar a great way, and about a mile and a half
from the bigger of the Saltees, is the Rock Kinbeg. To the North-East of the
Saltees stand two Rocks not far the one from the other, of which the one of its
situation is called North-Rock, and the Southermost The Tuns. To the East of
these two, and about three miles from the point of Carnarord, lies Black-Rock,
being clean of all sides, so as ships may freely sail round about it without
any fear or danger.

A mile or two to the North of Lambry lies a great Rock called Rock Abill,
about which ships may sail of all sides.

Two miles beyond the North-point of the Haven of Strangford are two great
Rocks, the one called North-Rock, and the other, distant two miles from it to
the South, South-Rock: The North-Rock is a number of Rocks lying close
together, diverse whereof are covered at high water. From the end of these two
shoot out riffes of foul and rocky-ground; but betwixt them goes a broad,
clean, and deep chanel, through which all manner of ships, even the biggest,
may pass.

Six or seven miles to the North of the Bay of Knockfergus, and three miles
from the land, are the Nine Mayds, being great Rocks that lie but a little
above the water, or low Rocky-Iles, with a great number of blind Rocks about
the same, so as ships may come no nearer to them than within five or six mile.

Of the same kind of low Rocks, or little Rocky-Ilands, are also those who are
called Eneste^hull-Ilands, being situated before the most Northerly-point of
Ireland, betwixt Lough-Foile and Lough-Suillie.

Sect. 6. Rocks in the Irish-sea upon the Western and the Southern-coast.
Near the Islands of Aran upon the North-West-coast of Ireland, lie several
high Rocks, called the Stags of Aran; and such other Rocks, called the Stags of
Broad-haven, lie three or four miles from the Northern-point of Broad-haven.

Three miles to the North-west of Akill-head lies Black-rock, a great high and
black Rock, with several other Rocks near unto it.

On the North-side and West Side of the Islands Blaskes, lying over against the
most Westerly-point of Ireland, are several great Rocks, some whereof are
called the Horses, and others the Bucks.

Seven or eight Leagues to the South of Blaskes lie three great Rocks, called
the Skellighs, the Easterliest about three miles, and the Westerliest six or
seven miles from the Land; the which, to those that come from the South, when
first they begin to see them, resemble the Sails of Ships.

Without the Head of Dorses lie three other great Rocks, whereof the uttermost,
or the most Westerly, is called the Bull, the middlemost the Cow, and the third
the Calf, being clean round about, so as without any danger one may sail
between them.

Five or six miles West and by South of the Head of Clare lies a high steep
Rock alone in the sea, called Fastney, the which at the first appearing looks
like the sail of a ship.

Two or three miles to the East of Baltimore, and a mile or two from the land,
lie five or six high steep Rocks called the Stags, as those of Aran and
Broad-haven, to those that come from the East along the land, when first they
begin to have them in sight, they resemble some Spires or Pointed-steeples
standing together.

Two miles Eastwards from the mouth of the Haven of Kinsale, lie two great
black Rocks, the one somewhat farther from the land than the other.

There lie also several Rocks near the little Islands of Dalkee and
Irelands-Eye, the one situated before the North-point, and the other before the
South-point of the Bay of Dublin, as heretofore we have showed: Likewise on
both ends of the I Will of Lambey, half way betwixt the same Island and
Tredagh-haven, close by the Land; near the Island Ranghlins, near Skires
Portrush, and in several other places, but the principal and most considerable
are those whereof we have spoken.

CHAP. VI. Of the nature of the Irish-sea, and of the Tides which go in the
same.
Sect. 1. The Irish-sea not so tempestuous as it is bruited to be.
THat part of the Irish-sea which divides Ireland from Great Britain, is very
much defamed both by Ancient and Modern Writers, in regard of its
boysterousness and tempestuousness, as if it were more subject to storms and
raging weather than any other, and consequently not to be passed without very
great danger: Mare quod Hiberniam and Britanniam interluit, undosum
inquietumque, toto in anno non nisi paucis diebus est navigabile: That is, The
Sea which passes betwixt Ireland and Britain, is boisterous and restless, so
as but few days in the year ships can go upon it; says Solinus: With whom
Giraldus (who several times went to and fro betwixt England and Ireland) fully
agrees, writing in this manner, Hibernicum Mare concurrentibus fluctibus
undosissimum, fere semper est inquietum, it a ut vix etiam aestivo tempore
paucis diebus se navigantibus tranquillum praebeat: That is, The Irish-sea
being very boisterous through the concourse of the waves, is almost always
restless, so as even in the summertime it is hardly for a few days quiet
enough to be sailed upon Likewise also Camden and Speed give unto this sea the
surnames of Boisterous and Tempestuous. Yea it is a common Proverb in England,
As unquiet as the Irish-sea. Nevertheless it is nothing so bad as they make it;
and the words of Stanyhurst, in his Annotations upon Giraldus, Mare Hibernicum
satis tranquillum est, nisi ventorum vi agit^tur, and non solum aestate, sed
etiam summa hyem^ vectores ultro citroque navigant: The Irish-sea is quiet
enough, except when by high winds it is stirred, so as not only in the summer,
but even in the midst of winter people do pass it to and fro, are altogether
true, and confirmed by daily experience. True it is that some ships do perish
upon this, but the same happens as well upon other seas, who are all subject
to the disaster of tempests and shipwracks.

Sect. 2. Causes of the loss of such ships as perish upon this sea.
The common cause of the casting away of ships upon this sea, and upon the
East-coast of Ireland, is this, that in the long dark Winter-nights (when this
disaster is more frequent than at other times of the year) some furious storm
arising, the ships are dashed against the Rocks, against the rocky Shoares, or
against those Grounds which extend themselves betwixt the Tuskar and the Bay of
Dublin, whilst the Steer-men and Pilots by reason of the darkness not being
able to discern the land, or any of their wonted marks, do not know which way
to steer to shun those dangerous places, and to keep themselves in the open sea.

Sect. 3. Nature of the ground of the Irish-sea.
The ground of the Irish-sea, as well in the midst, as under the land, is
almost every where clear sand; but in some places black and muddy or
oasi^-earth: In very few places rough and sharp; and scarce any where else but
in the Bay of Wickloe, so hard and stiffly compacted, that the Anchors can take
no hold of it.

Sect. 4. Of the Tides in the Irish-sea.
What concerns the Ebbing and Flowing in this sea, which invironeth Ireland:
upon all the West Side it flows against the land, and the Ebb falls back
from it into the sea; the Flood from, and the Ebb toward the West; for which
reason very great Tides, as well of Ebb as Flood go upon all this coast, not
only the open shoares, but in the bays and inlets (even those which go a
great way into the land, as the Haven of Limmerick) so as those, who have been
at Galloway, do assure us, that it does so mightily ebb and flow there, that
at high water great vessels may sail over those Rocks, the which with the Ebb
come above water.

Upon the other side of Ireland it ebbeth and flows along the land; for upon
the North-side of Ireland the Ebb and Flood falls in the same manner as upon
the West Side, flowing from, and ebbing toward the West. But upon the
East Side, from Fair-Foreland unto Carlingford, the Flood comes from, and the
Ebb falls to the North: As upon the rest of this East Side, to wit from
Carlingford to Carnarord, it flows from the South, and ebbeth from the North.
For although upon all this side the Flood runs along the land, yet does it
not take its beginning from one and the same, but two contrary points; the
which two floods coming the one out of the Main-sea in the North, and the
other out of the Main-sea in the South, do meet and stop one another before the
Haven of Carlingford.

From Tuskar and Carnarord as far as to the Head of Clare, being the whole
South-Eastcoast of Munster, the Flood falls along the coast East-North-East,
and the Ebb West-South-West. But upon the rest of the coast of Munster, beyond
the Head of Clare Westward, which coast lies West and by South, the Flood
falls Eastward, and the Ebb to the West.

Sect. 5. Strong Tides in the Sounds. Strange propriety of the Bay of Wexford
in the matter of Tides.
That which the Seafaring men do witness, that in the Sound of Blaskes, of
Dalkee, and in that of Lambey, as also in some other narrow channels of this
sea, there goes a very strong Tide, as well of the Ebb as Flood, is no other
than may be observed almost every where else in places of the like nature.

But it is much to be wondered, what the same do relate of the chanel, or
entrance of the Haven of Wexford, to wit, that it ebbeth and flows there
three hours sooner than without in the open sea; so as when it is high water
in the chanel of that Haven, and upon the bar of the same, the Flood does still
for half a Tide, or three hours after, strongly run by it to the North; whereby
it comes to pass that the end of Hanemans-path (a great Sand lying just before
the Haven of Wexford) is cast up more and more to the North; and that the
chanel which passes by the North-side of that Sand, being the entrance of the
Haven, is now more to the North than it has been formerly. And as it flows
three hours longer in the open sea than upon the Bar and in the chanel of this
Haven, in the like manner also, the Ebb in the sea falls to the South three
hours after that it is low water in the same place, but not so strongly as the
Flood.

Sect. 6. Some other strange particulars about the Tides in the I^ish-sea,
related by Giraldus, but found not to be true.
More strange it is what Giraldus writes of the Havens of Wickloe and Arckloe,
to wit, that in VVickloe-haven it ever flows, when in the sea it ebbeth; and
that it ebbeth there when it flows in the sea. And that in the same River
(this Haven being nothing else but the mouth of a little River) the water is
salt as well when the ebb is at the lowest, as at the flowing and high water:
And that to the contrary in that Riveler, which at Arcklo discharges it self
into the sea, the water keeps its sweetness at all times (never receiving the
mixture of any saltness) as well with the flood and high water, as with the
ebb. But experience shows these things to be repugnant to the truth; as also
what he writes of a Rock not far from Arcklo, at the one side whereof he says
that it always ebbeth, when it does flow on the other; and to the contrary.
Also that in Milford-haven (situated in the Southernmost part of Wales, in a
manner over against Waterford) and upon the next coasts, it ebbeth and flows
at quite contrary times to what it does at Dublin, and the coast thereabouts;
so that it should begin to ebb in Milford-haven, when in the Bay of Dublin it
begins to flow, and to flow in Milford-haven when it begins to ebb at
Dublin: Which how untrue it is, all those can witness, who having bin in both
places, have had the curiosity to observe the times and hours, at what age of
the Moon soever, wherein it does begin to ebb and to flow there.

CHAP. VII. Of the Springs and Fountains, item of the Brooks and Rivelets of
Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the Springs and Fountains.
HAving sufficiently spoke of the Sea wherein Ireland lies, and of whatsoever
belongs thereunto; we shall now, before we come to treat of the Land it self,
speak of the Waters within the Land; first of the Springs and Brooks,
afterward of the Rivers, and lastly of the Loughs or Lakes.

As for the first, to wit Fountains and Springs, Ireland is very full of them
every where, not only in the mountainous and hilly parts, but even in the flat
and Champain countries: Which Springs for the most part are all of one and the
same fashion, being like unto a small pit full of water up to the brim; at the
lower ^ide whereof the water does run forth, without making any noise or
bubling. For that kind of Fountains which forcibly burst out of the side of a
Rock, or spout their water on high, are very rarely to be found in this
Kingdom. The water of these Well-springs is for the most part cool, clear, and
pure; free from all strange smell and taste: in which properties nevertheless,
and in the wholsomness of the water, the same differences are found, and for
the same causes, as in other countries. For those which spring out of a
gravelly or sandy ground are purer than those that spring out of earth or clay;
those that rise out of a stony or Rocky ground, cooler than any of the former;
those that are exposed to the Sun, and freely receive the Bea^^ thereof,
especially of the morning- sun, have lighter and wholsomer water, although less
cool than those which are contrarily seated; and so for the rest.

Sect. 2. Spaes and Holy-wels in Ireland.
A few years since some Fountains have been discovered in Ireland, some of
them not far from Dublin, and others in other parts, whose veins running
through certain Minerals, and washing off the virtue of the same, yield a
Medicinal water, apt to open the obstructions of man's body, and to cure other
accidents thereof; which kind of Fountains are commonly called Spaes, a name
borrowed of a certain village in the country of Liege, in which there is a
Spring of that sort, absolutely the principallest, and the most effectual of
all those of the same kind, and therefore of very great renown in near and in
far countries. Besides these Spaes there are also a great number of other
Fountains throughout all the Land, called Holy-wels by the inhabitants, whose
water not differing from that of other Wels, in smell, taste, or in any other
sensible quality, neverthelese is believed to be effectual for the curing of
several diseases. But experience does show, that those virtues are not found
in the Springs themselves, but only in the vain imagination of the
superstitious people; the which also having dedicated every one of those to
some particular Saint, do expect the supposed virtue rather from the power of
them, than from any natural efficaciousness inherent in the water it self.

Sect. 3. Of the fabulous Fountains of Giraldus Cambrensis.
As for those wonderful Springs mentioned by Giraldus Cambrensis, One in
Munster, whose water presently makes them gray that wash their head or beard
therewith; One in Ulster, of quite contrary virtue, so that the persons washed
therewith never come to be gray; One in Connaught, whose water good and
commodious for the drinking, and other uses of men, is hurtful, yea deadly to
cattle, sheep, horses, and all other sorts of beasts; And yet another in the
same Province, the which being on the top of a high hill, far from the sea
side, ebbeth and flows twice a day, in the same manner as the sea, I could
not hitherto come to the speech of any, who in our times had seen those
Fountains, or observed any such thing in them: Which makes me doubt, that
that good man has been deceived herein by his credulity, as in innumerable
other things, the which being evidently untrue and fictitious, are by him
related for certain truths. As in this matter who sees not the idleness of
that fiction concerning a certain Fountain in Munster, whereof he writes, that
as soon as any body does touch it, or but look at it, it begins presently to
rain most heavily over all the Province, and continues so to do, until a
certain Priest, appointed for that purpose, and who has never lost his
Maidenhead, do appease the Fountain, in singing a Mass in a Chapel standing
not far from thence, and built expressly for that end; and in be sprinkling the
same Fountain with Holy Water, and with the Milk of a Cow of one color.

Sect. 4. Of the Brooks in Ireland.
No country in the world is fuller of Brooks, than Ireland, where the same be
numberless and water all the parts of the land on all sides. They take their
beginning three several manner of ways. Some have their source of Fountains,
the which for the most part are very small, not only those who carry the water
but of one spring (most of which are rather like unto a gutter, than a brook) but
even those into which the water of several fountains does flow together.
Others rise out of Bogs, the which besides their own universal wetness being
full of springs, and by reason thereof gathering in them more water than they
are able to drink in or contain, do necessarily send out the same in
convenient places, and so give a beginning unto Rivelets and Brooks. The third
sort take their beginning out of certain small Loughs, which brooks ordinarily
are of a reasonable bigness, and far surpass the other two sorts; although
there do not want some, even of this kind, which are very little. And there is
very few of any of these kinds, who come to any notable bigness, as long as they
continue to be solitary, and until having received the water of several other
Brooks, do thereby grow more considerable than they were in their first
original.

These Brooks, besides the great good they do the land in watering the same, and
besides the commodity they afford of drenching the Cattle and other Beasts; do
also greatly serve the inhabitants for another good use, to wit the grinding of
their corn, whereunto the Windmils are very little used in Ireland, because they
have the convenience, through the great number of Brooks, to erect watermills
in every quarter where it is necessary: which bring a great profit to the
owners, being kept and maintained with less cost and labor.

Sect. 5. Of the swelling and overflowing of the Brooks.
Some of the Brooks do flow in an equal bigness all the year long, without
receiving any notable increase or diminishing: but far the major part do
change according to the wet or dry seasons of the ye^r, and as many of them as
come out of the mountains, or run thorough hilly countries, swell so
excessively, when any great rain does fall, that they not only overflow the
next low grounds, doing many times great damage in them, but also bring the
wafering men into great distress; for it comes to pass very often, that a
brook, which ordinarily is very shallow and still, rises so mightily through
the multitude of the rain water, which from the next mountains and hills
descends into it, that a good horse cannot pass without swimming, where at
other times a child easily may wade over: and with that adundance of water is
commonly joined so strong and impetuous a current, that man and horse are often
carried away with it, to their extreme danger; and what soever we say here-in
of the Brooks, is much more to be understood of the Rivers, the which
otherwise in convenient places or foards may be passed over; wherein the
aforesaid danger is greater yet: so that few years pass in Ireland, in the
which some persons are not drowned in that fashion.

Sect. 6. Strange invention of a man to pass a Brook, greatly risen by the
abundance of rain.
It shall not be improper to insert here a particular observed by a very
credible and reverend person, Theophilus Buckwort, Bishop of Dremore, the which
he has several times related to my Brother and others, being this; The Lagon,
a little River or Brook which passes by the Town of Dremore, upon a certain
time being greatly risen through a great and lasting rain, and having carried
away the woodden-bridge, whereby the same used to be passed at that Town; a
country fellow who was traveling that way, having stayed three days in hope
that the water would fall, and seeing that the rain continued, grew impatient
of staying longer, and resolved to pass the Brook whatever the danger was; but
to do it with the less peril, and the more steadiness, he took a great heavy
stone upon his shoulders, whose weight giving him some firmness against the
violence of the water, he passed the same without harm, and came safe to the
other side, to the wonderment of many people, who had been looking on, and
given him all for a lost person.

Sect. 7. Of the Brooks of Dromconran and Rafernam by Dublin.
Of these dangerous Brooks there are two hard by Dublin, both running into the
Haven somewhat more than a mile from the City, the one at the North-side
thereof, a little below the Village Dromconran, which is seated upon the
Highway from Dublin to Drogheda; and the other at the South Side, close by the
Rings-end. This called Rafernam-water of the village by which it passes two
miles from the sea, and the same distance from Dublin, is far the worst of the
two, as taking its beginning out of those great Mountains South-wards from
Dublin, from whence after any great rain such abundance of water is descending
to it, that the same, which at other times is of very little depth, grows
thereby so deep, and exceeding violent, that many persons have lost their lives
therein; amongst others Mr. John Usher, Father to Sir William Usher that now
is, who was carried by the current, no body being able to succor him, although
many persons, and of his nearest friends, both afoot and horsback were by on
both the sides. Since that time a stone bridge has been built over that brook
(as over Dromconran-water there has been one from ancient times) upon the way
betwixt Dublin and Rings-end; which was hardly well accomplished, when the
Brook in one of those furious risings quite altered its chanel for a good way,
so as it did not pass under the Bridge as before, but just before the foot of
it, letting the same stand upon the dry land, and consequently making it
altogether useless: in which perverse course it continued, until perforce it
was constrained to return to its old chanel, and to keep within the same. To go
from Dublin to Rafernam, one passes this River upon a woodden-bridge; the
which although it be high and strong, nevertheless has several times been
quite broke, and carried away through the violence of sudden floods; although
at other times, and when that Brook does only carry its ordinary water, a
child of five years may easily and without danger wade through it; and a tall
man on horsback riding underneath it, not being able to reach it; in the great
floods the water many times rises so high, as that it does not only touch,
but flows quite over the bridge.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Rivers of Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the Shanon.
BEsides the excessive number of Brooks wherewith Ireland is watered, it has a
good many Rivers, the which being broader and deeper than the Brooks, are
consequently navigable; although the major part are not portable of any great
ships nor barks, but only of small vessels and boats.

The principallest of all is the Shanon, who taking his original out of
Lough-Allen, and in his course dividing the Province of Connaught from
Leinster, and afterward also from Munster, passes through two other great
Loughs, to wit Lough-Ree, whereout she comes just above Atlone (a mean
Market Town, but adorned with a stately and strong Castle, the ordinary
residence of the Presidents of Connaught) and Lough-Dergh, about half way
betwixt Atlone and Limmerick, and a little below the said Town she discharges
her self again into another Lough, by far the biggest of all, the which
extending it self from Limmerick unto the sea, and above fifty miles long, it
is held by the Irish as well as the English not for a Lough, but for the Shanon
it self, and consequently called with that name; whereof has been spoken in
the second Chapter.

This River is wide and deep every where, so as she would be navigable in her
whole length, not only with Boats of all sorts, but with reasonable big Ships,
to the great commodity of them that inhabit near it, were it not for the
impediment of a certain Rock, some six miles above Limmerick, the which
standing across in the chanel, and the River with great violence falling
downwards over it, all communication of Navigation betwixt the upper and the
lower parts of it is thereby absolutely hindered.

Sir Thomas Wentworth, Lord Wentworth, and afterward Earl of Strafford, he
that in in the beginning of this present Parliament was beheaded, having been
Governor of Ireland many years, first in the quality of Lord Deputy, and
afterward of Lord Lieutenant, had a design to take away that let, in causing
of a new channel to be dug for a little way, whereby the River being made to
alter her course, should have avoided that Rock; and to that purpose sent
certain skillful men thither to view those parts, and carefully to examine
whether it were feasible, who made report that it might be done, and would not
cost above seven or eight thousand pounds sterling, a sum not very considerable
in comparison of the great profit which afterward would have been reaped from
that work: Nevertheless it was never taken in hand, the intents of public
utility having been diverted and smothered by those of private profit, as
commonly it falls out.

Sect. 2. The Rivers Suck, Sure, Our, Broad-water, Barrow, and Slane.
There are several other Rivers in the Province of Connaught, but none of them
is any way comparable with the Shanon for length, breadth, or depth, and little
to be said of them, but that the Suck, the which falls into the Shanon a
little way below Atlone, is the principallest of all.

The two chief Rivers of Munster are Sure and Broad-water, the City of
Waterford being situated upon the first of those two, the which close by it
discharges her self into that arm of the sea which is known by the name of
Waterford-haven. The other passes by Lismore, and falls into the sea by
Youghall, where it makes a Tide-haven. Next to those two is the River of Cork,
and then that of Kinsale, the which is but of small moment, as also are the
rest of the Rivers of this Province.

In Leinster is the Nure or Our, the Barrow, the Slane, the Liffie, and the
Boine, besides some others of less moment.

The Our and Barrow do mingle their waters at the Town of Ross, from whence
having past a little way together, they discharge themselves into the right arm
of the Haven of Waterford, and so in a manner do meet the Sure, who falls
into the other arm: For which consideration these three Rivers were wont to be
called the three Sisters, as Giraldus witnesses. Both the Our and the Barrow
are portable many miles into the country; the Our only with little Boats, and
with Cots (they call in Ireland Cots things like Boats, but very unshapely,
being nothing but square pieces of timber made hollow) but the Barrow with good
big Boats. The Slane falls into the Haven of Wexford, being like unto the
Our for length and bigness.

Sect. 3. Of the Liffie and the Boine.
The Liffie is the Princess of the Irish-Rivers, not for her bigness (for not
only the Shanon, but the Boine, Barrow, and several others, do far surpass her
therein) but because Dublin, the chief City of all Ireland, is seated upon her
banks; a mile below which City, at a place called Rings-end, she loses her
self in a Bay of the Sea, which is called Dublin-haven. With the help of the
Flood, ships of fifty and threescore tuns can make a shift to come up to the
Key of Dublin, but when the Tide is out, and at the lowest, the smallest boats
find hardly water enough to go between Dublin and Rings-end, because the chanel
being very broad there, the water spreads it self too much, and by reason
thereof grows very shallow. But in the City it self, where she is enclosed
betwixt the Keys on both sides, and from the bridge of Dublin until the bridge
of Kilmanan, and a little further, being somewhat more than a mile (in which
space she runs between her own banks) great boats may go upon her at any
time. She would be navigable with boats some three or four miles further; but
the Weres, made in her a little way above the bridge of Kilmanan, do hinder
that. This River takes her beginning in the mountains lying to the South of
Dublin, not above ten miles from it; but fetches such a compass (bending her
coast first to the West, afterward to the North, and lastly, for seven or
eight miles, Eastward) that from her original to her mouth is the space of no
less than forty or fifty miles.

The Boine the River where-on Tredagh is seated, has her beginning in Kings
County, close by the original of the Barrow, although the place where the
Barrow falls into the haven of Waterford, is above fourscore miles distant
from the mouth of the Boine. This River is almost of an equal bigness in far
the greatest part of her course, and would be portable of good bigg boats very
many miles into the land, if that were not hindered by the Weres.

Sect. 4. Of the Band and Blackwater.
The principal River in Vlster of those that fall directly into the Sea, is
the Band, the which as in her mouth, she is encumbered with several
inconvenients, as we have declared above in the third chapter, so she is
portable but a few miles from the Sea, because of a certain Rock, the which
running across the chanel from the one bank to the other, stops all manner
of passage, not only of bigger vessels and barks, but of the smallest boats,
which dare not come near the same Rock, because it being somewhat high, and the
water from it falling downwards with great violence, it goes for some space
with a mighty current. This Rock or Cataract, called vulgarly the Salmon-leap
(for a reason hereafter to be declared) and the Fall, because of the falling
down of the water, is not above four miles from the Sea, hindering all manner of
communication between the same and Lough Neaugh, from the which this Cataract is
distant about three miles: whereas otherwise, if the passage of this River from
the sea to the Lough were open, ships might by that means go a great way into
the land, not only the whole length and breadth of Lough Neaugh (which every
where is very deep, and navigable even for great ships) but even a good many
miles farther (with good big boats) by means of some Rivers that fall into
it, especially the Black-water, which is the principallest of them all. For the
Band, although she gives the name to the River going out of the Lough, is not
comparable to the Black-water for breadth nor depth, being rather a brook than
a River, the which being very shallow at other times, does rise so excessively
upon the falling of much rain, that it is one of the most dangerous and
terrible brooks of all Ireland, in the which therefore from time to time many
men and horses have been drowned at the passing of it.

Sect. 5. Of the Lagon and Nury-water: tide-rivers.
Besides the Band and the Black-water, there is scarce any other River in
Vlster, but that which passing by Strebane and London-derrie, discharges it
self into Lough-foile. For the Lagon, hereto^ore mentioned by us, which by
Belfast falls into the Sea; the Nury-water* whereof we have spoken in the
description of Carlingford-haven; and some others of that nature, are properly
brooks, and not portable by reason of their own water, but of that which out of
the Sea flows into them; as appears clearly when the tide is out. For then
they are as small, and as little portable in those places, where the boats and
bigger vessels do pass at high water, as are they at all times in those places
unto which the tide does never reach: which kind of Tide-rivers or brooks,
which only by the coming in of the tide are made navigable for a little way,
are to be found in all the Provinces of Ireland.

Sect. 6. Of the Cataracts in the Irish Rivers.
Besides that the navigable Rivers are but rare in Ireland, and that the most
part of them are only portable of very small vessels and boats, not of any
bigger ships or barks, as appears by the former relation, there be very few
rivers, who have not some impediment or other in them, whereby it comes that
they are not portable so far, as otherwise they would be. These impediments
are chiefly three in number, Cataracts, Weres, and Foards; whereof the last two
do only concern the lesser Rivers. The first, to wit the Cataracts, are
incident to the greatest Rivers as well as to others, as may appear by what we
have said concerning them in the description of the Shanon and the Band;
whereby also fully may be conceived the manner and nature of the said
Cataracts, so as it is needless here again to delineate them.

Such a Cataract or Fall there is found in the Liffie, seven miles from Dublin,
and about a quarter of a mile above the village and Castle of Leslip, the
description of which as holding it not improper for this place, we shall here
set down as it came to our hands from those who have observed it very exactly.
The said River running there abouts along a narrow and deep valley, being
hemmed in at both sides with high hills of a long continuance, has a very
Rockie chanel, and besides that the bottom is overspread in several parts with
great massy stones, there is in two or three places, at no great distance, a
contin^all Rocky bulk reaching from one side to the other, leaving but one or
two narrow passages, through which the stream runs with a very strong
current, and a mighty noise, but the third and last bulk, like a Cataract has
the chanel close to it, a great deal lower (by far more than the other, at
least by seven or eight feet) which is the cause that the stream does not so
much run swift here, or passes with a current through narrow channels, as in
the two first bulks, but as soon as it is got over the Rock it falls steep
down with great violence, the space of three or four paces in breadth; where as
the remainder of the main chanel is altogether stopped by the said Rock. In
winter and other very rainy seasons, when the water does increase much, it
passes over all the said Rocks smoothly and without noise, where the same is
exceeding great, those times, when the Liffie runs with a small stream.

There is also a Cataract in a small tide River in the County of Cork in
Munster, the which falls into the innermost corner of the great bay Bantrie,
and one in the Haven of Balle-shanon, which haven being in effect nothing else
but the mouth of Lough-Earne, commonly is counted for a River, and called by
the name of Trowis

Sect. 7. Of the Foards in the Rivers of Ireland a second impediment of their
navigableness.
Concerning the Foardes; it is to be observed, that not every where, where the
highways meet with great brooks or small Rivers, bridges are found for to
pass them, but that in very many places one is constrained to ride through the
water it self, the which could not be done, if the Rivers kept themselves every
where enclosed between their bancks; wherefore they are not only suffered in
such places, to spread themselves abroad, but men help there to as much as they
can, to make the water so much the shallower and consequently the easier to be
passed: whereby it comes many times to pass, that a River which above and
below the foard is deep enough to be portable of great boats, through the
shallowness of the foards lying between* will bear none but of the very
smallest; or where otherwise the same would carry small boats is not portable
at all; this in most places might easily be remedied, in raising of dikes or
artificial banks, where the natural ones failing do minister opportunity
unto the Rivers for to spread themselves; and making bridges to pass over. Some
Foards, do not greatly impair the chanel of the Rivers, but leave the same
almost in her full depth, especially in the midst; but the same, as they are
more incommodious for the traveller, so they are not very frequent, but in far
less number than the others.

Sect. 8. Of the Weres, a third impediment of the Navigableness of the Rivers
in Ireland.
The Weres, a third ^et of the Navigation of the Irish Rivers, are thus
ordered: They set up very big stones in the River, close together from the one
side of the River to the other, leaving only one hole, either in the midst, or
near one of the sides, before which hole a Basket being laid, they take therein
a great quantity of fish; for coming to the Weres, and finding their way stopped
by the stones, they take their course to that place where they find an opening.
These rows of stones do not directly cross the River from the one side to the
other, but do go very much floaping, that the stream with less force may beat
against them: and the same also do stand but very little above the water, to
the end that when the floods come the water may find a ready passage over them,
without which they would not be able to subsist against the force thereof, but
easily be thrown down and scattered.

Some Weres are set up, not so much for the taking of fish, as for Mils, and
that the course of the water thereby being in part stopped in the main chanel,
may be made to go into some little by-chanel, cut expressly for to conveigh the
water to the Mill: many Weres serving for both these uses jointly.

Some Rivers have only one of these impediments, as the Shanon and the Band,
each a Fall or Cataract: The Boine, Weres; having only Foards, many miles from
the sea. The grea^^st number have Weres and Foards, and commonly each of them
in several places. Some have all three, as the Liffie by name, which has not
only Weres and Foards in several places, but also a Cataract or Salmon-leap,
as has been mentioned above.

CHAP. IX. Of the Lakes or Loughs in Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the little Loughs.
LOughs there is a very great number in Ireland, especially in the Provinces of
Ulster and Connaught, we may distinguish them into three several sorts, Great,
Middle-sort, and the Least. Under this last we comprehend all such whose parts
discover it self to the eye all over at one time.

This sort of Loughs are found in several places of the other Provinces, but
nothing near so many as in Ulster. Every one of these commonly sends forth a
Brook, and some more than one, being all of them very deep (the very least not
excepted) and well-stored with Fish: So as they are not only delightful,
especially such as are situated in some Dale or Valley, or environed round
about, or on some sides with pleasant little Hills (as it falls out in the
greatest part of them) but also commodious and profitable, affording good
opportunity to build houses and Castles upon their borders, which was done in
^any places by the English and Scotch, who had made several fair Plantations,
and would have done more, if it had not been hindered by that horrible
Rebellion of the bloody Irish; in the beginning of which many of them which
were already built have been destroyed by those Barbarians.

Many of these little Loughs have a little lland in the midst, which is both
commodious and pleasant. Some wherein little llands do float, not keeping long
any certain place, but removing to and fro as the force of the wind does drive
them.

Sect. 2. Of the Middle-sort of Loughs.
The Middle-sort of Loughs we understand to be such as far exceeding the
forementioned in bigness, nevertheless are not to be compared with the biggest
sort, of which we shall speak presently: Of this kind are Lough-Fin and
Lough-Dirg in the County of Donegal in Ulster, Lough-Mugkney in the County of
Monaghan, and Lough Sillon in the County of Cavan, both in the same Province;
Lough-Ranmore in Eastmeath: besides several others in other Counties of
Leinster, especially in Queens-county, Longford, and Westmeath, having little
or nothing worthy of observation.

Sect. 3. Of the Great Loughs, and first of those of Salt Water.
The great Loughs are of two sorts, either of Sweet-water, as all the former;
and some of Salt Water; these last being such through the mixture of the sea;
the which finding an open entrance, and twice a day with the Tide fully flowing
into them, makes the water so salt. And it would be no great error to take all
those Loughs wherein that happens, (viz. Lough Cone, in the County of Down;
Lough-Foile, in the County of Colrain; Lough-suille, in Tirconnell; and the
Lough of Cork) rather for Inlets of the Sea than for Lakes, although the
Inhabitants hold them all to be Loughs, and give them the name of Loughs: And
in this number is also to be put that great Lough betwixt Limmerick and the
sea, through which the Shanon discharges it self into the sea; of the which we
have already spoke once or twice heretofore.

Sect. 4. Of Lough-Earne, Lough-Neaugh, and the rest of the great Loughs.
Amongst the great Loughs of Sweet-water, are far the principallest Lough-Earne
and Lough-Neaugh, the first of which is situated in the confines of Ulster and
Connaught, being in effect two different Loughs, joined together only by a
short and narrow chanel; of which two, that which lies farthest within the
land, does extend it self in a manner directly North and South; but the second,
which is next to the sea, does lie East and West; so that both together they
have the fashion of a bended elbow, being both very broad in the midst, growing
by degrees narrower toward both the ends.

Lough-Neaugh lies in the North-Easterly part of Ulster, bordering upon the
Counties of Tirone, Armagh, Down, Antrim, and Colrain, being of a round, or
rather somewhat ovall figure.

Next in bigness to these two is Lough-Corbes, the same on whose neather-end
the City Galloway is seated: The two Loughs thorough which the Shanon passes,
Lough-Ree, and Lough-Dirg: item Lough-Fingarrow in Connaught, betwixt the
Counties of Maio and Roscomen.

In the last place, as the least of this sort, are Lough-Allen, out of which
the Shanon takes his original, being nine miles long, and three miles broad:
Lough-Me^ke, situated betwixt Lough-Fingarrow and the Lough of Galloway; And
Lough-Larne, in the County of Kerry in Munster, not far from the upper-end of
those two famous Bays Dingle and Maire. The least of these is some miles long
and broad, and many miles in circuit; but the biggest are of so vast a compass,
that they are more like a Sea than a Lough.

Sect. 5. Of the Islands in the Loughs.
Most of these great Loughs are very full of little Islands, and above all
Lough-Earne, in which the same are numberless. In Lough-Cone also there is so
great a number, that those who inhabit about it, affirm them to be two hundred
and threescore. Lough-Ree, and Lough-Dirg are likewise very full of them: And
there is also a good many in Lough-Fingarrow, Lough-Larne, and Suille. But
Lough-Foile is very free from them, and in the Lough of Cork there is not above
one or two, as likewise in Lough-Neaugh, in which they lie near to the ^ides,
leaving the midst altogether free.

Very few of these Islands are inhabited or planted; but the most part being
plentifully clothed with very sweet Grass, serve for pastures to sheep and
other cattle, the which do thrive wonderfully well in them, and the same
befalls also in the middle sort of Loughs, amongst which likewise there be
very few that have not some of these little Islands in them.

In some few of these Islands, especially of Lough-Earne and Lough-Ree, are some
dwellings, whereunto persons who love solitariness were wont to retire
themselves, and might live there with much contentment, as finding there not
only privacy and quietness, with opportunity for studies and contemplations,
but there besides great delightfulness in the place it self, with variety of
very sweet pastimes in fowling, fishing, planting, and gardening. In one of the
greatest Islands of Lough-Earne, Sir Henry Spotteswood had a fine seat, with
goodly Buildings, Gardens, Orchards, and a pretty little Village, with a Church
and Steeple belonging to it, which whither it is in being yet, or destroyed by
the Barbarians and bloody Rebels, I am not informed. In Lough Sillon in the
County of Cavan in a Island not far from the bank where the River Nanne^ runs
into it, is a Castle built of form four square, which covers the whole I Will,
much after the manner of the Fort Eneskellin in Lough-Earne, and so many more
to long to be rehearsed.

Sect. 6. Of St Patriks Purgatory.
One of these little Islands situated in Lough-Dirg (one of the middle-sort of
Loughs) has been very famous, for the space of some ages, over almost all
Christendom; because the world was made to believe, that there was the suburbs
of Purgatory, into which whosoever had the courage to go, and remain there the
appointed time, did see and suffer very strange and terrible things: which
persuasion having lasted until our times, the matter has been discovered with
in these few years, and found to be a mere illusion. This discovery was made
during the government of Richard Boil, Earl of Cork, and Adam Lostus, Vicount
of Elie, and Lord Chancellor of Ireland: which two being Lords Justices of
that Kingdom in the last years of King James, and desirous to know the truth
of the business, sent some persons of quality to the place, to inquire exactly
into the truth of the whole matter. These did find, that that miraculous and
fearful cave, descending down to the very Purgatory and Hell, was nothing else
but a little cell, dug or hewn out of the Rockie ground, without any
windows or holes, so as the door being shut one could not see a jot within
it; being of so little depth, that a tall man could but just stand upright in
it, and of no greater capacity, than to contain six or seven persons. Now when
that any person desirous to go that Pilgrimage to Purgatory, was come into the
Island, the Friars, some small number whereof made their constant abode there
for that purpose, made him watch and fast excessively: whereby, and through the
recounting of strange and horrible apparitions and ^antasmes, which he would
meet withal in that subterranean pilgrimage, being well preepared, they did
shut him up in that little dark hole: and being drawn out again from thence
after some hours, altogether astonished and in a maze, he would be a good
while before he came again to himself; and afterward the poor man would tell
wonderful stories, as if in very deed he had gone a great way under the
ground, and seen and suffered all those things, which his weak imagination,
altogether corrupted by the concurrence and sequel of so many causes to weaken
the brain, did figure unto him.

To prevent this delusion in future times, the said Lords Justices caused the
Friars to depart from thence, their dwelling quite to be demolished, and the
hole or cell to be broke open, and altogether exposed to the open air, in
which state it has lain ever since: whereby that Pilgrimage to Purgatory is
quite come to nothing, and never has bin undertaken since by any.

To beget the greater reputation to this sictitious Purgatory, the people was
made to believe, that St Patrick, by whom the Irish were converted to the
Christian-faith about four hundred years after the nativity of Christ, had
caused the same, and obtained it of God by his prayers, to convince the
unbeleevers of of the immortality of the soul, and of the torments which after
this life are prepared for the wicked persons; wherefore also they gave it the
name of St Patricks Purgatory. But it is very certain, that nothing of it was
known in Ireland during the life of that holy person, nor in a huge while
after, it having been devised some Ages after his death, when that the general
darkness of the times ministered a great opportunity of such like inventions, to
those kind of men that knew how to abuse the blind devotion of ignorant and
superstitious people to their own profit and filthy lucre.

Sect. 7. Of the property of Lough-Neaugh, of turning Wood into Stone.
Before we make an end of this Chapter, we must say something of the wonderful
property which generally is ascribed to Lough-Neaugh, of turning Wood into
Stone; whereunto some do add, to double the wonder, that the Wood is turned
not only into Stone, but into Iron; and that a branch or pole being stuck into
the ground somewhere by the side, where it is not too deep, after a certain
space of time one shall find that piece of the stick which stuck in the ground,
turned into Iron, and the middle, as far as it was in the water, into Stone;
the upper-end, which remained above the water, keeping its former nature. But
this part of the History I believe to be a Fable: For my Brother, who has been
several times in places not far distant from that Lough, and who of the English
there abouts inhabiting has enquired this business with singular diligence,
does assure me, that he never could learn any such thing; but that the turning
of Wood into Stone was by every one believed for certain, as having been tried
diverse times by several persons: saying moreover to have understood of them,
that the water has this virtue only at the sides, and that not every where,
but only in some few places, especially about that part where the River
Blackwater discharges her self into the Lough. He could never come to speak
with any persons, who themselves had tried this matter; but with several, who
affirmed, that to their knowledge it had certainly been done by others of their
acquaintance. For further confirmation of this particular (which in it self is
credible enough, seeing that in many parts of the world there are found waters
endued with that virtue) serves, that here and there upon the borders of that
Lough are found little stones of a pretty length, some of them round in their
compass, others flat, or flattish, and some angulous, the which being looked
on, as well near as from afar off, seem to be nothing else but Wood, and by
every one are taken for such, until one come to touch and handle them: for
then by their coldness, hardness, and weight, it appears that they are not
Wood but Stone: Whereby it may probably be conjectured, that the same formerly
having been Wood indeed, and so having kept their old shape and fashion, in
length of time have been turned into a stony substance by the virtue of that
water, wherinto they were fallen through the one accident or other.

Giraldus writes, to have heard of a Well or Fountain in the North-quarters of
Ulster, the which in seven years space turns into Stone the Wood cast into
it: But seeing that no body now adays knows of any such Well, and that with
all my enquires I could never come to hear any news of it, I will believe, that
Giraldus has been misinformed, and that they have told him that of a Well
which was proper unto this Lough.

CHAP. X. Of the nature and condition of the Land, both for the outward shape,
and for the internal qualities and fruitfulness.
Sect. 1. Distinction of Ireland into Champain-Lands, Hills, and Mountains.
THe Lands of this Island, as of most all other Countries, are of a various kind
and fashion: For some parts are goodly plain Champain, others are Hilly, some
Mountainous, and others are composed of two of these sorts, or of all three
together, and that with great variety, the which also is very great, in those
three un-compounded sorts.

Sect. 2. A necessary observation about the use of the words Hill and Mountain.
To avoid all ambiguity, and make our selves clearly understood in what we
have said, and are further to say upon this subject, we think it necessary to
forewarn our Reader, that we do use the word Hill in a narrower signification,
than what is given to it in the ordinary use of speech. For whereas all, or
most other Languages, both those which are now in vulgar use, and those which
are only preserved in books, have two several words for to signify those
observable heights which appear above the ground, calling the bigger sort by
one name, and the lesser sort by another: The English language uses one and
the same word for both, calling hills as well the one as the other, without any
other distinction, but that sometimes the word small or great is added. Now
because this word so indifferently used would cause some confusion in the
matter we treat of, that has made us restrain it to one of the sorts, and to
call hills only the lesser sort, called in Latin collis, in French colline, in
Dutch heuvel, and in Irish knock. As for the other and bigger sort, whose name
in the aforesaid four Languages is mons, mountain, berg, slew, we call them
mountains: which word mountains, although it be good English, yet in common
speech it is seldom made use of in that sense whereunto we apply it, but only
to signify a Country wholly consisting of those great Hills, especially when
the soil thereof is lean and unfruitful.

Sect. 3. Of the Mountains of Ireland, and first of the lower sort.
The difference betwixt Hills and Mountains consisting in bigness, is of two
sorts; for in the number of Mountains are counted not only those which lift up
themselves very high into the air so as they may be seen many miles off, but
also those, the which take up the more in length and breadth, what is wanting
to them in height, ascending slopinly by degrees.

The Mountainous parts of Ireland do for the most part consist of this second
part of Mountains, most of them in one quarter being muchwhat of the same
height, so as sometimes one shall ride some hours together, through the
Mountainous country, without meeting with any one Mountain that greatly
excels in height above the rest: The which in particular may be observed in
the Mountainous Country of the Fuse, betwixt Dundalk and Armagh; In that of
Mourn, betwixt the Nurie and Dondrom (each of those two being above twelve
miles long) In all that space which is betwixt Kelles, a walled-town in the
County of Eastmeath, and Kilacollie, alias Bailieborrough, in the County of
Cavan, which being ten miles long, is almost nothing else but a continuance of
hills of no great bigness, all very fruitful land both Pasture and Arable. In
the County of Westmeath, from Lough-Crevv to Lough-Sillon, and beyond it, as
far as Ballaneach, where Mr William Fleving had built a fair house and Farm
ten years before the late detestable Massacre and bloody Rebellion of the
Irish. These hills are for the most part lovv and small, yet some of a good
height and bigness; the ground lean, in many places very stony, in some rocky,
not of any one continual Rock, but-by peecemeals here and there rising and
appearing. Yet are these hills in several places wet and moorish, as well in the
Rockie as other parts. These hills serve only for pasture of sheep. In the
major part of the Mountainous country of Wickloe, the which beginning five
miles to the South of Dublin, does extend it self above fifty miles in length;
and in several other parts.

It has bin observed in many parts of Ireland, but chiefly in the county of
Mead, and further Northward, that upon the top of the great hills and
mountains, not only at the side and foot of them, to this day the ground is
uneven as if it had been plowed in former times. The inhabitants do affirm,
that their forefathers being much given to tillage, contrary to what they are
now, used to turn all to plowland. Others say that it was done for want of
arable, because the Champain was most every where beset and over spread with
woods, which by degrees are destroyed by the wars. They say further, that in
those times, in places where nothing now is to be seen, but great loggs of a
vast extent, there were thick woods, which they collect from hence, that now
and then trees are dug out there being for the most part some yards long,
and some of a very great bigness and length.

Sect. 4. Of the higher sort of Mountains in Ireland.
As for those other mountains, the which with an excessive height rise up
toward the Skies, they are not very common in Ireland; and yet some there be,
which although not comparable with the Pyrenaei, lying between France and
Spain, with the Alps, which divide Italy from France and Germany, or with
other mountains of the like vast height, nevertheless may justly be counted
among the lostie mountains. Of this number are the Mountains of Carlingford,
betwixt Dundalke and Carlingford, the which in a clear day may easily be seen
from the Mountains to the South of Dublin, the which are more than forty miles
distant from them; the Mountains about Lough Suillie, in the North-parts of
Vlster, the which may be seen many miles off in the Sea; the Curlews, that
sever the counties of Slego and Roscoman in Connaught; the twelve Mountains in
the North-quarter of the County of Tipperary in Munster, the which far
exceeding the rest of the mountains there, are known by the name of the twelve
hills of Phelim^ghe Madona; Knock-Patrick, in the West part of the county of
Limmerick, not far from the bay of Limmerick, which Mountain can be se^n by
the ships, which are a huge-way from the land yet; the Mountains of Brandon
hills, in the County of Kerry, to the East of the haven of Smerwick, the which
are discovered by the Seafaring men, when they are above fifty miles from the
land; in the North-west quarter of the county of Waterford, called Slew-Boine;
that in the mountainous country of Wickloe, which for it is fashions sake is
commonly called the sugarloaf, and may be seen very many miles off, not only by
those that are upon the Sea, but even into the land.

Sect. 5. Nature of the Ground in Ireland, and of the fruitful grounds.
Next to the foregoing division of Ireland taken from the fashion and outward
form of the land, comes to be considered that which consists in the nature
of the soil or ground; some parts of the country being fruitful, and others
barren.

The fertile soil is in some places a blackish earth, in others clay, and in
many parts mixed of both together: as likewise there be sundry places, where the
ground is mixed of earth and sand, sand and clay, gravel and clay, or earth;
but the chalke-ground and red earth, which both are very plentiful and common
in many parts of England, are no where to be found in Ireland.

These grounds differ among themselves in goodness and fatness, not only
according to the different nature of the soil whereof they consist, but also
according to the depth of the mold or uppermost good crust, and the nature of
the ground which lies next to it underneath: for the best and richest soil, if
but half a foot or a foot deep, and if lying upon a stiffie clay or hard stone,
is not so fertile, as a leaner soil of greater depth, and lying upon sand or
gravel, through which the superfluous moisture may descend, and not standing
still, as upon the clay or stone, make cold the roots of the grass, of corn,
and so hurt the whole.

There be indeed some countries in Ireland, where the ground underneath being
nothing but stone, and the good mold upon it but very thin, it is nevertheless
very fruitful in corn, and brings sweet grass in great plenty, so as sheep
and other cattle do wonderful well thrive there; which kind of land is very
common in the County of Galloway, and in some other Counties of Connaught, as
also in sundry parts of the other Provinces. But the reason thereof is in those
parts, because the stone whereon the mould does lie so thinly, is not
Freestone, or any such cold material, but Limestone, which does so warm the
ground, and gives it so much strength, that what it wants in depth, is thereby
largely recompensed.

Sect. 6. Causes hindering the fruitfulness of the ground, where the soil
otherwise is not bad.
Except in the case now by us declared, neither Corn nor Grass will grow
kindly, where the ground, though otherwise good, is not deep enough, as also
where it has a bad crust underneath: From whence it comes, that in many
places, where the grass does grow very thick and high, the same nevertheless is
so unfit for the food of beasts, that cows and sheep will hardly touch it
(especially if they have been kept in better pastures first) except that by
extreme famine they be compelled thereto; and that by reason of the coarsness
and sowerness of the grass, caused by the standing still of the water, the
which through the unfitness of the nether crust, finding not a free passage
downwards, makes cold the good mold, and the crop and grass degenerate from
its natural goodness.

For the same reason the land in many parts, where otherwise the soil in it
self would be fit enough to produce good Wheat or Barley, will hardly bear any
thing else but Oats, or Rye, and that none of the best: As in other parts, the
fault is in the soil it self, and by the leanness thereof it comes, that
nothing else but coarse grass, and the worst kinds of grains will grow there.
And unto these causes may be joined another yet, the overshaddowing of high and
steep Mountains and Hills, whereby the sides thereof, and the lands lying close
under them, being deprived of the free and seasonable access of the Sunbeams,
and so wanting convenient warmness, cannot afford to the things growing thereon
such good and well-concocted nourishment, as unto the producing of the best and
richest sorts of grains and grass is requisite.

Sect. 7. Ireland a very fruitful Country, especially for grass.
These defects are not peculiar to Ireland, but common to other countries, and
nowise general in it, but only here and there in distant parts; and where they
are, they may be amended by the means fit and usual for that purpose, whereof
by-and-by we shall speak particularly: Therefore they cannot hi^der, that
Ireland should not justly be counted among the fruitfullest countries of the
world. And although Orosius, who prefers it even before England in this
particular ( Hibernia soli coelique temperie magis utilis Britannia, are his
words) goes too far, yet fully true is the saying of Stanyhurst, in the
preface of his Irish chronicle, Cum Hibernia, coeli salubritate, agrorum
fertilitate, ubertate frugum, pastionis magnitudine, armentorum gregibus,
confer paucas, anteferre nullas valeas: that is, With Irelond for
wholesomness of air, fruitfulness of lands, great store of corn, abundance of
pastures, and numerousnes of cattle, few countries may be compared, none
preferred: as also that of Giraldus, Gleba praepingui uberique frugum pr^ventu
faelix est terra, et foecunda frugibus arva, peccore montes: that is, This
country is happy in very rich ground, and plentiful increase of grains, the
fields being fertile in corn, and the mountains full of cattle. But although
Ireland almost in every part, where the industry of the Husbandman applies it
self thereto, brings good corn plentifully, nevertheless has it a more
natural aptness for grass, the which in most places it produces very good
and plentiful of it self, or with little help: the which also has been well
observed by Giraldus, who of this matter writes thus: Pascuis tamen quam
frugibus, gramine guam grano foecundior est insula, This Island is fruitfuller
in grass and pastures, than in corn an^ grains. And Buchanan in the second
book of his History of Scotland calls the pasture-ground of Ireland pascua
fere totius Europae uberrima, the fruitfullest pasture ground of most all
Europe.

Sect. 8. More of the plenty and goodness. of the Irish pastures.
The abundance and greatness of pastures in Ireland, does appear by the
numberless number of all sorts of cattle, especially of Kine and Sheep,
wherewith this country in time of peace does swarm on all sides, whereof in
another place shall be spoken more at large: and the goodness of the same is
hereby sufficiently witnessed, that all kind of cattle does thrive here as well
in Ireland, and give as good milk, butter, and cheese (with good handling) as
in any other country.

It is true, that the Irish kine, sheep, and horses, are of a very small size:
but that that does not come by reason of the nourishment and grass, but through
other more hidden causes, may easily be demonstrated by the goodly beasts of
the forenamed kind, that are brought thither out of England, the which not only
in themselaes, but in all their breed, do fully keep their first largenes and
goodness, without any the least diminution in any respect, so that before this
last bloody rebellion the whole land, in all parts where the English did dwell,
or had any thing to do, was filled with as goodly beasts, both Cowes and
Sheep, as any in England, Holland, or other the best countries of Europe: the
greatest part whereof has been destroyed by those barbarians, the natural
inhabitants of Ireland, who not content to have murdered or expelled their
English neighbors (upon whom with an unheard of and treacherous cruelty they
fell in the midst of a deep Peace, without any the least provocation)
endeavored quite to extinguish the memory of them, and of all the civility and
good things by them introduced amongst that wild Nation; and consequently in
most places they did not only demolish the houses built by the English, the
Gardens and Enclosures made by them, the Orchards and Hedges by them planted,
but destroyed whole droves and flocks at once of English Cowes and Sheep, so as
they were not able with all their unsatiable gluttony to devour the tenth part
thereof, but let the rest lie rotting and stinking in the fields.

The goodness of the pastures in Ireland does further appear by this, that both
Beef and Mutton there, as well that of the small Irish, as that of the large
English breed, in sweetness and savouriness does surpass the meat of England it
self as (all those, who have tried that, must confess) although England in this
particular does surpass almost all the countries of the world.

Nevertheless the saying of Pomponius Mela, That the grass here is so rank and
sweet, that the cattle do burst, if they be suffered to feed too Iong,
wherefore they be fain every day to drive them betimes out of the pastures,
Iuverna adeo luxuriosa herbis, non lae^is modo, sed etiam dulcibus, ut se
exigua part diei pecora impleant, and nisi pabulo prohibeantur, diu^ius pasta
dissiliant: The which also has been repeated by Solinus, Hibernia ita
pabulosa, ut pecua ibi, nisi interdum a pascuis arceantur, in periculum agat
satias: That is, Ireland has such excellent pastures, that cattle there are
brought into danger of their lives by over-feeding, except now and then they be
driven out of the fields; is a mere fable, no ways agreeable to the truth: For
all kinds of cattle here, as in other countries, are continually left in the
pastures day and night: neither do they through their continual feeding ever
burst, or come into any danger of bursting.

CHAP. XI. Of the several manners of manuring and enriching the ground
practiced in Ireland.
Sect. 1. In some part of Ireland the ground never needs dunging.
TO amend the lean and fau^ty grounds, to enrich both them and the good ones,
and to keep both the one and the other in heart, in preserving them from being
exhausted, the dunging of the ground is usual in Ireland, as in other
Countries. It is true, that as approved Authors assure us, in the Island of
Zealand, part of the Kingdom of Denmark, the natural richness of the ground is
such, and so lasting, as it needs not the succor of any artificial helps,
but is very fruitful, and aye preserves its fertility, without putting the
Husbandman to the labor and costs of dunging. That likewise there is some part
in the Province of Munster in Ireland, where very credible person^ have assured
me, of their own knowledge, that the land never needs any dunging; so as the
inhabitants thereof never trouble themselves to keep the dung of their beasts,
but from time to time fling it into a River which runs by them. But this
happiness and richness of soil as it is very rare over all the world, so in
Ireland too, being confined to very narrow bounds, all the rest of the Kingdom
is necessitated, for the ends aforesaid, to help and improve their Lands by
dunging; the which they do several manner of ways.

Sect. 2. Of Sheeps-dung.
The commonest sort of manuring the lands in Ireland, is that which is done
with the dung of beasts, especially of Cows and Oxen, and also of Horses mixed
with a great quantity of straw, and having lain a long while to rot and
incorporate well together: Whereof, as of a matter every where known and
usual, it is needless to speak further.

Only thus much seems good to us not to pass over in silence, that if Sheep
here, as in other countries, were housed and kept up in stables for any long
time together, their excrements would make better dung, than that of any other
four-footed creatures. For the land on which sheep have fed for two or three
years together, or longer, is so greatly enriched thereby, that when it
comes to be plowed, it brings a much fairer and plentifuller crop, than if
from the beginning it had been made Arable, and dunged after the ordinary
manner. Wherefore also great Sheep-masters may set their land, where the sheep
have been feeding some years together, as dear again by the Acre, than what at
the first they could have got for it of any body.

Wherefore also it is an usual thing in Ireland, as well as in England, to
drive the sheep upon the Fallow, and to keep them there until all the herbs
which may minister any food unto the Sheep be by them consumed; which does the
ground a great deal of good, and gives it heart to bring afterward the better
increase. And the same also helps greatly for to make good grass grow upon
the Arable, when the same is turned into Pasture and Meddow; a thing ordinarily
used in sundry parts of Ireland, and many times necessary for to keep the lands
in heart: For ground being plowed, and the Sheep driven thither as soon as any
herbs grow upon it, they do not only consume the Thistles, and other useless
herbs, but cause good grass to grow up in lieu thereof, and that speedily. For
in all places where their dung lights, of the best and sweetest sorts of
grass do grow, and that within the first year, which otherwise would not have
come in much longer time, and that nothing near so good generally.

Sect. 3. An useful observation about Cows-dung.
There is a notable difference betwixt Sheeps-dung and that of other cattle, as
in the goodness and richness it self, so in the particular last mentioned by
them. For that of Oxen and Cows is no ways fit for dunging until it is grown
old, and has lain a soaking with straw a great while: Daily experience showing
in Ireland, as in England and other countries, that in those places of the
pastures where the fresh Cow Dung falls and remains, the grass the next
year does grow ranker and higher than in the rest of the same fields, but so
sour and unpleasing, that the beasts will not offer to touch it; so as
ordinarily you shall see these tufts of grass standing whole and undiminished
in the midst of pastures, that every where else are eaten bare and to the very
ground. The which as in part it may be imputed to the quantity of the dung,
the which being greater than the earth can well digest, and conveniently unite
with it self, cannot be turned into so good and sweet nourishment; so does it
also without doubt come in part through the very nature of the dung, the which
of it self, and without a long preparation and alteration, is not so fit to
nourish the ground, as that of sheep.

Sect. 4. Of Pigeons-dung.
Pigeons-dung also is very convenient for the improvement of the ground; and I
know some in Ireland, who having tried that, have found a wonderful deal of
good in it, incomparably more than in that of any four-footed beasts, and of
Sheep themselves. But the Pigeon-houses no where in Ireland being so big as to
afford any considerable quantity, and never having heard of any body there who
could dung more than an Acre or two with all the Pigeons-dung which had been
gathering the space of a whole twelve-moneth, it cannot well be reckoned among
the common sorts.

Sect. 5. Of Ashes and Mud.
Besides the dung of Beasts there are usual in Ireland, or were before this
Rebellion, five or six other sorts for to Manure and Improve the ground,
whereof some are as good as the dung consisting of the excrements of beasts,
and others do far surpass it* One of these sorts is Ashes, and Mud another.

As for the first, I have understood of Englishmen, who had lived many years in
Ireland, and all that while had exercised Husbandry, that they had used to
gather all their Ashes of their hearths, bake-houses, and brew-houses, being
Wood-ashes, and to lay them of a heap somewhere in the open air, from whence at
convenient times they would carry them upon their grounds, and there spread
them in the same manner as other dung, but nothing near in so great a quantity;
wherein they affirmed to have found as much and more good than in any dung of
beasts.

And I know several other English, who living in Ireland, did use to take the
scouring of their ditches, together with other Mud dug out of the Bogs, and
having let it lie a good while a rotting in great heaps, did afterward carry
it upon their lands in lieu of dung: the which they found very good and useful
for that purpose.

These two sorts were never yet brought into common use, but only practiced by
some few persons, especially that of the Ashes, although in other Countries
they have been known long since; so as Pliny, who lived about fifteen hundred
years ago, writes in the ninth Chapter of the seventeenth Book of his Natural
History, that in his time in that part of Italy which is situated between the
Alps and the River Po (comprehending those Countries which now are known by
the names of Piemont and Lombardy) Ashes were more used and commended for the
manuring of the grounds, than the dung of beasts.

As concerning the burning of the Heath, and other dry herbs standing upon the
ground, for to manure the land with the ashes thereof, that not properly
belonging to this place, shall be spoke of more at large in some of the ensuing
Chapters.

Sect. 6. Of Lime.
The English living in Queens-county in Leinster, having seen that in sundry
parts of England and Wales, especially in Pembrookshire, Lime was used by the
inhabitants for the manuring and enriching of their grounds, begun some years
since to practice the same, and found themselves so well thereby, that in a
short time the use thereof grew very common amongst them, so as many of them
ever after used no other kind of dung.

The manner of it was thus* Having first plowed their fields, they carried the
Lime on them, and laid it in many small heaps, leaving a convenient distance
between, in the same manner as uses to be done with the dung of beasts; and
having let them lie for some months, they plowed the land again to convey the
Lime into the ground.

This made it so rich, that in a great while after nothing else needed to be
done to it, but to let the land at a certain revolution of time lie Fallow, no
other manuring at all being requisite for some years after: And all that while
the land was very fruitful, more than it could have been made with any
ordinary dung, and very free of al sorts of bad herbs and weeds (especially for
the first years) bringing Corn with much thinner husks than that growing upon
other lands.

They found that the Lime carried upon the Land hot out of the Kiln, did more
good in all the forementioned particulars, than when they let it grow cold
first. And this they could do very easily, because Limestone is very
plentiful in that County, especially in the Town of Monrath, where there is a
whole hill of that stone, of that bigness, that if all the adjacent Country did
continually fetch it from thence for the forenamed use, it would for ever hold
out sufficiently.

The Land thus manured and improved by Lime, showed its fruitfulness not only
in the following years, but even in the first, except the Lime had been laid
on in undue proportion, and in greater quantity than was requisite; for in that
case the Lime burnt the Corn, and the first years Crop was thereby spoiled.

In some places where the land was not cold and moist enough to be able to
endure mere Lime, they mixed the Lime with earth dug out of pits, and let
that stuff lie a mellowing in great heaps for some months together, and
afterward carried it on the land, and manured that therewith.

Sect. 7. A remarkable history concerning the excellency of Lime for the
inricheng of the ground.
How incredibly the land was enriched by this kind of manuring, may be gathered
by the ensuing particular, The whole Lordship of Mounrath was thirty years
ago set by one Mr. Downings (whose it was, and who afterward sold it to Sir
Charles Coot) for fifty pounds sterling by the year, and nevertheless after a
while the Farmers surrendered it unto him, complaining that they could not live
by it but were quite impoverished: where as they who farmed it next after them
(being people newly come out of England) and gave an hundred and fifty pounds
sterling a year st^rling for it, did not only live very freely upon it, yea
grew rich and wealthy, but withal did so far forth improve the land, partly
indeed with building, plauting, hedging, and the like, but chiefly by this kind
of manuing that ^t the time when this last horrible rebellion broke forth, the
same Lordship, if it had been to let out then, mighe have been let for five
hundred pounds sterling a year: as it has been assured me by some, who
themselves had been farmers of that land.

Sect. 8. Another history, showing the ^fficacy of Lime in this particular.
Before we give over this discourse of Lime, we shall add to what has been
said already, that in some other parts of Ireland, where this manuring with
Lime was not used nor known, the virtue of Lime in this particular has been
found out by mere chance. For some persons known to me, who lived but a few
miles from Dublin, having understood that the crows (wherewith they were much
plagued, and who did use to make very great spoil of their grains) would not
touch the corn wherewith the lime was mixed, did cause unsl^ked Lime to be
mingled with water, making it as thin as if it had been for the whitening of
walls, and very well bespringled the corn therewith, before it was carried to
the fields to be sown, and that after this manner, the corn lying on a heap,
one turned it with both hands, whilst another sprinkled on the foresaid
stuff, doing so until the whole heap was thoroughly besprinkled* at other
times they mingled dry lime with the corn, and afterward besprinkled the whole
heap with fair water through and through, for the same purpose, and hereby they
did not only obtain the aforesaid end, of preserving the corn from the crows,
but had thereby a fairer and better crop, than ever before their land had
produced.

Sect. 9. Of Sea-sand.
Lime is much used in the province of Munster, as in other parts of Ireland, so
for to manure the ground withal, where the sea-sand likewise is greatly used
to the same end, not only in places lying on the seaside, but even ten, twelve,
and fifteen miles into the land, whether it was carried in some places by
boats, and in others upon carts, the charges being sufficiently recompensed by
the pro^it coming from it. For they used it for the most part only upon very
poor land, consisting of cold clay, and that above half a foot deep: which land
having been three or f^ur times plowed and harrowed (in the same manner as is
usual to be done with fallow) the sand is strawed all over very thinly, a
little before the sowing time: the which being done, that land brings very
good corn of all sorts, not only Rye and Oats, but even Barley and Wheat,
three years one after another; and having lain fallow the fourth year, for
many years after it produces very clean and sweet grass; whereas formerly, and
before it was thus manured, it produced nothing but moss, heath, and short low
furze: which herbs are fired upon the ground, and the ground stubbed, before it
be plowed the first time

It is not any peculiar sort of Sea-sand, nor out of any particular places,
which is used for this purpose, but that which every where lies on the
strands. And this manner of manu^ing the land with Sea-sand is very common in
the two most Westerly shires of England, Cornwall and Devonshire, from whence
those, who first practiced it in Ireland, seem to have learned it.

Sect. 10. Of Brine or Pickle.
The goodness of the Sea-sand consists chiefly in its Saltness, for which
reason Pickle it self is very good for this purpose: it being very well known
to several English dwelling about the Band and Colrain, that were Farmers of
the Salmon-fishing there, who used every year carefully to keep the soul pikle,
coming of the Salmons at their repacking; and having powered it among the
ordinary dung of cattle and straw they did let them ly a good while a mellow^ng
together. Hereby it was greatly strengthened and enriched, so that the land
being dunged with it, did bear much better and richer crops than that which was
manured only with common dung without the mixture of it.

CHAP. XII.
Sect. 1. Of the Marle in Ireland, and the manner of Marling the land there.
MArle is a certain sort of fat and clayish stuff, being as the grease of the
earth; it has from ancient times on greatly used for manuring of land both in
France and England, as may appear out of Pliny in the sixth, seventh, and
eighth Chapters of his seventeenth Book. The same also is still very usual in
sundry parts of England, being of an incomparable goodness: The which caused
the English, who out of some of those places where Marle was used were come to
live in Ireland, to make diligent search for it, and that with good success at
last; it having been found out by them within these few years, in several
places; first in the Kings-county, not far from the Shanon, where being of a
gray color, it is dug out of the Bogs; And in the County of Wexford, where
the use of it was grown very common before this Rebellion, especially in the
parts lying near the sea; where it stood them in very good steed, the land of
it self being nothing fruitful. For although the ground (for the most part) is
a good black earth, yet the same being but one foot deep, and having underneath
a crust of stiff yellow clay of half a foot, is thereby greatly impaired in its
own goodness. In this depth of a foot and a half next under the clay, lies the
Marle, the which reaches so far downwards, that yet no where they are come to
the bottom of it. It is of a blew color, and very fat (which as in other
ground, so in this, is chiefly perceived when it is wet) but brittle and dusty
when it is dry.

Sect. 2. The manner, charges, and profit of Marling the ground.
The Marle is laid upon the land in heaps, by some before it is plowed, by
others after, many letting it lie several months ere they plow it again, that
the Rain may equally divide and mix it; the Sun, Moon, and Air mellow and
incorporate it with the earth. One thousand Cart-loads of this goes to one
English Acre of ground; it being very chargeable, for even to those who dig it
out of their own ground, so as they are at no other expenses but the hire of
the laborers, every Acre comes to stand in three pounds sterling. But these
great expenses are sufficiently recompensed by the great fruitfulness which it
causes, being such, as may seem incredible; for the Marled-land, even the very
first year, fully quitteth all the cost bestowed on it. There besides it is
sufficient once to Marle, whereas the ordinary dunging must be renewed
oftentimes.

Sect. 3. The usage of the Marled-land, practiced by them of the County of
Wexford.
The good usage of the Marled-land, to keep it in heart for ever after, does
consist, in the opinion and practice of some, in letting it ly Fallow at
convenient times, but the ordinary manner, commonly practiced by the
inhabitants of the County of Wexford, and counted the best by them, is, that
having sowed it five or six years together, with the richest sorts of Corn, to
wit, Wheat and Barley (especially that sort which in some parts of England, and
generally in Ireland, is peculiarly called Bear, being a much richer Grain than
the ordinary Barley) it being afterward turned to Pasture, whereunto it is
very fit, forasmuch as it brings very sweet grass in great abundance: For the
Marle is also used on Meddows at the first, with very good success, improving
the same most wonderfully.

If the Marled-land be thus used, and by turns kept under Corn, and Grass, it
keeps its fruitfulness for ever; where to the contrary, if year after year it
be sowed till the heart be drawn out, it is quite spoiled, so as afterward it
is not possible to bring it again to any passable condition by any kind of
Dunging, or Marling. This would ordinarily be done in the space of ten years;
for so long together the Marled-land may be sowed, and bring every year a rich
crop of the best Corn.

Nevertheless this is not general, but takes place only in the worser kind
of ground* for where the land of it self is better and richer, there after
Marling, Wheat and other Corn may be sowed, not only for ten years together,
but longer: For very credible persons have assured me, that some parts of the
County of Wexford having bo^n very good Corn for thirteen years together, and
afterward being turned to Pasture, it was as good and fertile as other
Marled-grounds that had been under Corn but five or six years.

Sect. 4. Of the Marle in Connaught.
The Province of Connaught (by what has been discovered) is much more
plentiful in Marle, than Leinster, as in other Counties, so in those of
Roscoman, Slego, and Galloway, almost in every part of it. It is there of three
several colors, some being white as chalk, other gray, and some black; but
none blew, as that in the County of Wexford. It lies nothing deep under the
upper-ground, or surface of the earth, commonly not above half a foot; but its
own depth is so great, that never any body yet dug to the bottom of it.

The land which they intend to Marle in this Province, is commonly plowed in
the beginning of May, and lying five or six weeks (until it be sufficiently
dried and mellowed by the Sun and Wind) they harrow it, and then having brought
the Marle upon it, five or six weeks after it is plowed again, and a third time
about September: After which third plowing they sow it with Wheat or Barley,
whereof they have a very rich crop the next year.

Sect. 5. Property and usage of the Marled-lands in Connaught.
Land Marled in that manner as we have said, may be sowed ten or twelve years
together; the first eight or nine-with Wheat, and Bear, or Barley, and the
remaining three or four years with Oats, afterward the land is turned to
pasture, and having served some years in that kind, it may be Marled anew, and
made as good for Corn as at the first.

For the observation of those of the County of Wexford, that land may not be
Marled more than once, does not take place in Connaught, where it is an
ordinary thing, having some space of years to make it again. I know some
Gentlemen who have caused some parcels of land to be Marled thrice in the space
of twenty years, and have found very good profit by it. But whether this be
caused by the difference of the ground and Marle (appearing also hereby, that
in Connaught they scarce lay the fourth part of the quantity of Marle on the
ground of what they do in the County of Wexford) or by the carelessness or want
of experience of those of that County, I am not yet fully informed. But thus
much is known as well in Connaught as other parts, that those who sow the
Marled-land until it can bear no more, and be quite out of heart, will find it
exceeding difficult, if not altogether impossible ever to amend or improve the
same again by any means whatsoever.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Heaths and Moors, or Bogs in Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the Moory, or Boggy-heaths.
HAving spoke of the fruitful lands of Ireland, it follows that we treat of
those which are neither fit for the bringing of Corn, or feeding of Cattle;
some being such for want of good soil, and others through superfluous moisture.

Of the first sort are those places where the ground consisting of mere rock,
sand, or earth, naturally unfruitful has no good mold at the top sufficient
for Corn or Grass to root, and to draw convenient nourishment out of it, the
ground being bare, or overgrown only with Moss, Heath, Furze, Brakes, Thorns,
Rushes, and the like.

The places whose ground is bare, are nothing frequent, nor of any great
bigness in Ireland, and rather on the Seaside than within the land. But the
other are very common throughout the whole Kingdom, not only in the Mountains
(many whereof do for the most part consist of nothing else) but also in the
Hilly-quarters, the Plain-countries, and in many places of great extent, taking
up some miles in length and breadth. Most of these Wastes in the Plain-countries
and Valleys, as also some on the Mountains and Hills, are Moory and Boggy, fit
for to dig Turf out, to the great commodity of the inhabitants, in places where
other fuel is wanting. So that these parts of Land, although barren and
producing no kind of thing for the food of man or beasts, may not be reckoned
in the number of those which are altogether unprofitable, being of good use in
the parts far distant from the Sea, where they can have no Sea-coales, and
where Woods are wanting, nor well live. Some of these dry, or red Bogs, as
commonly they are called (the first, in comparison of those whereof presently
shall be spoken, the other, because the earth in them for the most part is
reddish, and overgrown with Mos^ of the same color) are in some parts of a
vast extent; instance that by the Shanon-side, beginning hard by Atlone, and
following the course of the River down toward Limmerick, which being two or
three miles broad in most parts, is said to be upwards of fifty miles in length.

Sect. 2. Of the dry Heaths.
There are some dry Heaths in Ireland, for the most part on the mountains, and
very few in the plain countries; to the contrary of England, where, as well as
in Netherland, Germany, and other countries, those Heaths on plain ground are
very common in sundry parts of the land, and many of them of a great extent,
having very many miles in compass; and where any such dry Heaths are in
Ireland, the land for the most part is not altogether barren, but gra^sy
between and at the bottom of the heath; so as the heath being burnt (a thing
much used in Ireland both by the English and Irish) the land brings
reasonable good and sweet grass, fit for sheep to feed on; and with a little
extraordinary labor and costs brought to bear corn.

Others of these Heaths are grassie, having the grass growing not all over
among the heath, but in spaces by it self: as upon the Heath between the town
of Kildare and the Liffie; which is famous over all Ireland by the name of the
Currogh of Kildare, being a hilly ground, at its highest near the said town,
from thence toward the Liffie descending by degrees, about three miles long,
and two or three broad, divided into rows, of heath and grass; which being of
no great breadth, and many in number, do ly by the ^ide one of another
throughout the whole earth, each of those rows extending it self in length
from the one end of the Currogh to the other, The rows of Heath are about a
stone cast over in some places, in some more, in others less: but those of
grass a good deal narrower than the others, being always alike green and dry,
in the winter as well as the summer, and clothed with short grass, but very
sweet and good, very convenient for sheep to feed on; of the which always in
time of peace, a very great number is grazing here, the whole Currogh being a
Commons.

Sect. 3. Of the Wet Bogs
The places barren through superfluous moisture, are bogs called by the Irish
Moons, whereof Ireland is full. There is three or four different sorts of
them; grassy, watery, muddy, and Hassocky, as appears more largely by the
following description. But the English Irish have given the name of Bogs, not
only to the wet, of which we are now to treat, but as well to the turf moors of
all sorts, not excepting the red bog, which in most places is firm enough to
bear a man, or unshod nagge going over it, but is not for any great weight. But
we shall in the following chapters speak in order of the four sorts of wet
bggs, which above we have mentioned, and afterward in its due place treat of
the turf and red moors, as occasion shall require.

Sect. 4. Of the Grassie Bogs
The grassy Bogs are all over covered with grass, looking fair and pleasant, as
if they were dry ground and goodly meadows; whereby many, who not knowing the
nature of those places, and because of the greeness suspecting no evil, go
into them to their great trouble, and many times to the extreme danger of their
lives, for the earth being very spongy can bear no weight, but as well men as
beast, as soon as they set foot on it do sink to the ground, some knee deep,
others to the wast, and many over head and ears: for all or most bogs in
Ireland having underneath a hard and firm gravel are not of an equal depth,
which in some is only of two or three feet, in others five, six or more, in
so much that those who fall into the deepest places of these bogs, can hardly
escape, but for the most part do perish, being pitifully smothered.

Some of these bogs, do so dry up in the summer that they may be passed
without danger; the which in particular falls out in the great Mountains in
Munster in the county of Kerry, called Slew-Logher, upon which all kind of
cattle do grase the summer long being every where full of good and sweet
grass, knee deep in most places; whereof not the tenth part being eaten (for if
all the cattle of that Province were driven thither and left all the summer
upon the place it would hardly be consumed) the rest is spoiled when the wet
weather comes in, and stays the rainwater from descending; through which
the ground rotteth in that manner, that all winter long it is unpassable for
men and beasts.

But the deepest bogs are unpassable in the summer as well as in the winter,
yet most of them have firm places, in narrow paths, and in some larger parcels;
by the means whereof those, unto whom they are known, can cross them from one
side to another, where others who are not used to them do not know in what
part to set one step; in which nimble trick, called commonly treading of the
Bogs, most Irish are very expert, as having been trained up in it from their
infancy.

The firm places in passing, or but lightly shaking them, tremble for a great
way, which has given them the name of Shaking-Bogs; and where they are but of
a small compass, Quagmires.

Sect. 5. Of the Watery-Bogs, and of the Miry-Bogs.
The Watery-bogs are likewise clothed with Grass, but the water does not sink
altogether into them, as into the former, but remains in part standing on the
top (in the same manner as in some of the Grassie-bogs, and in all the low
Pastures and Meddows of Holland) by reason whereof these Bogs are not
dangerous; for every one at the first sight may easily discern them from the
firm ground.

These two sorts are in many parts found apart, and in others mixed and
interlaced; and likewise parcels both of the one and the other are found up and
down in the Moory-heaths and Red-bogs.

Both these sorts, as well the watery as the Green-Bogs, yield for the most
part very good Turf, much better than the Red-Bogs, whereof more shall be
spoken hereafter.

The Miry-Bogs do consist of mere Mud and Mire, with very little or no grass
upon them. These are commonly of a very small compass, whereas most part of the
other two are of a notable extent, and some of several miles in length and
breadth.

Sect. 6. Of the Hassockie-bogs.
Hassockie-bogs we call those, whose ground being miry and muddy is covered
over with water a foot or two deep, in some places more, in others less; so as
one would sooner take them for Loughs, were it not that they are very thick
overspread with little Tufts or Ilets, the which consisting of Reeds, Rushes,
high sower Grass, and sometimes with little Shrubs, for the most part are very
small, and have but a few feet in compass; some of them being of the bigness of
a reasonable big chamber. These little Ilets or Tufts being so many in number,
and spread over all the Bog, there remains nothing between them but great
Plashes of water (in regard whereof these Bogs might well be called
Plashy-Bogs) in some places wider, in others narrower, so as from the one men
may well step or leap to the other; that which those who are expert in it know
how to do very nimble, and so to run from one part of the Bog to another: For
the roots of the Rushes, Reeds, and other things growing on those Tufts, are so
interwoven, that they can easily bear a man who lightly treads upon them,
although they have very little earth, and are wondrous spungy; so as they, when
the water being drained, the Bog is dried round about, may easily be plucked
from the ground.

The English inhabiting in Ireland have given these Tufts the name of Hassocks,
and this sort of Bogs, Hassocky-bogs: Of which Bogs Munster and other Provinces
are not altogether free, but most of them are found in Leinster, especially in
Kings and Queens-county, where also the othtr sorts of Bogs are very common;
whereas otherwise Connaught is generally fuller of Bogs than any of the other
Provinces.

CHAP. XIV Original of the Bogs in Ireland; and the manner of Draining them,
practiced there by the English Inhabitants.
Sect. 1. Of the original of Bogs in this Country.
VEry few of the Wet-bogs in Ireland are such by any natural property, or
primitive constitution, but through the superfluous moisture that in length of
time has been gathered therein, whether it have its original within the place
it self, or be come thither from without. The first of these two cases takes
place in the most part of the Grassie-bogs, which ordinarily are occasioned by
Springs; the which arising in great number out of some parcel of ground, and
finding no issue, do by degrers soak through, and bring it to that rottenness
and spunginess, which nevertheless is not a little increased through the rain
water coming to that of the Springs.

But the two other sorts, viz. the Waterie and Hassockie-bogs, are in some
places caused by the rainwater only, as in others through brooks and rivelets
running into them, and in some through both together; whereunto many times also
comes the cause of the Grassi-bogs, to wit the store of Springs within the
very ground: and all this in places, where or through the situation of them,
and by reason of their even plainness or hollowness, or through some other
impediment, the water has no free passage away, but remains within them, and
so by degrees turns them into Bogs.

Sect. 2. Retchlesness of the Irish, cause of most of the Bogs. Of trees found
in Bogs.
So that it may easily be comprehended, that whosoever could drain the water, and
for the future prevent the gathering thereof, might reduce most of the Bogs in
Ireland to firm land, and preserve them in that condition. But this has never
been known to the Irish, or if it was, they never went about it, but to the
contrary let daily more and more of their good land grow boggy through their
carelessness, whereby also most of the Bogs at first were caused.

This being otherwise evident enough, may further be confirmed by the whole
bodies of trees, which ordinarily are found by the turf-diggers very deep in
the ground, as well of other trees, as of Hasels: likewise they meet sometimes
with, the very Nuts themselves in great quantity, the which looking very fair
and whole at the outside, as if they came but newly (...) have no kernel
within the same, through the great length of time being consumed and turned
into filth.

And it is worthy of observation, that trees, and truncks of trees, are in
this manner found not only in the Wet bogs, but even in the Heathy ones or Red
bogs, as by name in that by the Shanon-side, whereof has been spoken above: in
which bog the turf diggers many times do find whole Firr-trees deep in the
ground; whether it be that those trees, being fallen, are by degrees sunk
deeper and deeper (the earth of that Bog almost every where being very loose
and spungy, as it is in all such Bogs) or that the earth in length of time be
grown over them.

Sect. 3. Draining of the Bogs practiced by the English in Ireland.
But as the Irish have been extreme careless in this, so the English,
introducers of all good things in Ireland (for which that brutish nation from
time to time has rewarded them with unthankfulnes, hatred, and envy, and
lately with a horrible and bloody conspiracy, tending to their utter
destruction) have set their industry at work for to remedy it, and having
considered the nature of the Bogs, and how possible it was to reduce many of
them unto good land, did some years since begin to go about it all over the
land, and that with very good success; so as I know Gentlemen, who turned into
firm land three or four hundred acres of Bog, and in case that this detestable
rebellion had not come between, in a few years there would scarce have been
left one acre of Bog, of what was in the lands and possessiion of the English;
except only those places whose situation is altogether repugnant to draining,
because that the water either through the hollowness of the place, as in the
enclosed valleys and deep dales between the hills and mountains, or through
the too great evenness and plainness of the ground, not inclining to any one
part more than another, cannot be drawn away at all; and except such parcels as
needs must have been kept for turf, and Red bogs who are very unfit for
draining, for the trenches being made, the earth on both sides will sink into
them again, and choke them up.

Sect. 4. Profit reaped by the draining of Bogs.
This draining of the Bogs as it tended not a little to the general good of
the whole land, by amending of the Air (whereof we shall have occasion to say
more in some other place) and otherwise, so it brought great profit unto the
Authors, for the land or soil of the Bogs being in most places good of it self,
and there besides greatly enriched by the lying still and the soaking in of the
water for the space of so many years, the same being dried through the
draining of the water, is found to be very sit either to have corn sowed upon,
or to be turned into pastures; making also excellent meadows: so as those, who
have tried that, do affirm, that the meadows gained out of the Bogs might be
compared with the very best of their other meadows, yea many times surpassed
the same in goodness: and this took place chiefly in the Grassie bogs or
Shakking bogs, whose fruitfulness in this particular, and in the plentiful
production of very sweet and deep grass, after the draining off the water, was
very wonderful; and all this without any other trouble or costs bestowed upon
these Meddows, than that they dunged them the first year, to warm them the
better, and the sooner, and more thoroughly to amend the remainders of that
coldness and rawness contracted through that long and constant continuance of
the water upon them; after which once dunging, afterward for a good many
years nothing else needed to be done to them.

Sect. 5. The manner of draining the Bogs.
This draining of the Bogs was performed in the manner following. On that side
of the Bog, where the ground was somewhat sloaping, they cut a broad deep
Trench, beginning it in the firm ground, and advancing it unto the entrance of
the Bog, into which Trench the water would sink out of the next parts of the
Bog in great abundance, and that many times so suddenly, as if a great sluice
had been opened, so as the laborers were constrained to run out of it with all
speed, lest the ^orce of the water should overwhelm and carry them away. Some
part of the Bog being by this means grown reasonable dry within a short space
of time, opportunity thereby was ministered to advance the Trench further into
the Bog; and so by little and little they went on with it until at last they
carried it quite across the Bog, from the one side to the other: And having
done this, they made a great many lesser Trenches out of the main one, on both
sides of the same; the which bringing the water from all the parts of the Bog
unto the main Trench, did in a little while empty the Bog of all its
superfluous moisture, and turn it into good and firm ground.

Sect. 6. Observation about the falling and settling of the Bogs at their
draining.
The Green or Grassie-bogs, the which having all their moisture and water
inwardly, are thereby wonderfully swelled and pust up, use by means of this
draining to fall very much, and to grow a great deal lower, and that not only
apparently, so that the ground which before the drayning was five or six feet
high, comes at last to be not above two or three feet high; but sometimes
also suddenly, and within the space of four and twenty, or eight and forty
hours; whereas ordinarily that uses to come to pass in greater length of
time; and although the ground by falling in this manner, may seem thereby to
have been subject to return to its former boggy condition on the least
occasion; nevertheless there was no danger of that, as long as the Trenches
were kept open, and thereby the passage kept free for the water, which from
time to time would from all parts of the drayned Bog be sinking into them. This
water, as at the first draining, so ever after, was by the main Trench carried
unto some Brook, River, or Lough, according as one or other of them was next at
hand, and the situation of the land would give opportunity.

CHAP. XV. Of the Woods in Ireland.
Sect. 1. Woods in Ireland are reckoned among the barren lands, and the reason
thereof.
AMongst the barren parts of Ireland the Woods must also be counted, according
to the usual division of the lands of that Kingdom, whereby reckoning for
fruitful only the Meddows, Arable-grounds, and Pastures, they count all the
rest for barren, comprehending them under these three general heads, Bogs,
Barren-Mountains, and Woods. Which division as it is in the mouth of all them
that have any insight into the matters of that Land, and do, or have lived
there, so it is further confirmed by a number of Writings and Monuments, both
of ancienter times, and late ones, in the which it is very common and familiar:
As for instance may appear by those several Acts, which since this last
Rebellion of the Irish have been made by the Parliament of England in the
behalf of the Adventurers who have laid out their monyes for the reconquering
of the revolted parts of that Kingdom.

For although the land which the Woods do take up, is in it self very good in
most places, and apt to bear both Corn and Grass plentifully (whereof more
shall be said by and by) yet as long as the Woods remain standing, it is unfit
not only to be made either Arable or Meddow (as in it self is most evident) but
even for Pasture, by reason of the overmuch moisture, the roots of the trees
staying the rainwater, so as it has not the liberty to pass away readily, and
their stems and branches hindering the free access of the Wind and Sun,
whereunto comes in many parts the grounds own wateriness, occasioned by
Springs there arising, and by its situation apt for the gathering and keeping
of water, which makes them for the most part so muddy and boggy, that cattle
cannot conveniently feed in them.

Sect. 2. Woods much diminished in Ireland since the first coming in of the
English.
In ancient times, and as long as the land was in the full possession of the
Irish themselves, all Ireland was very full of Woods on every side, as
evidently appears by the writings of Giraldus Cambrensis, who came into
Ireland upon the first Conquest, in the company of Henry the second, King of
England, in the year of our Savior a eleven hundred seventy and one. But the
English having settled themselves in the land, did by degrees greatly diminish
the Woods in all the places where they were masters, partly to deprive the
Thieves and Rogues, who used to lurk in the Woods in great numbers, of their
refuge and starting-holes, and partly to gain the greater scope of profitable
lands. For the trees being cut down, the roots stubbed up, and the land used
and tilled according to exigency, the Woods in most part of Ireland may be
reduced not only to very good Pastures, but also to excellent Arable and Meddow.

Through these two causes it is come to pass in the space of many years, yea of
some Ages, that a great part of the Woods, which the English found in Ireland
at their first arrival there, are quite destroyed, so as nothing at all
remains of them at this time.

Sect. 3. Diminishing of the Woods during the last Peace.
And even since the subduing of the last great Rebellion of the Irish before
this, under the conduct of the Earl of Tirone (overthrown in the last years of
Queen Elizabeth by her Viceroy Sir Charles Blunt, Lord Mountjoy, and afterward
Earl of Devonshire) and during this last Peace of about forty years (the
longest that Ireland ever enjoyed, both before and since the coming in of the
English) the remaining Woods have very much been diminished, and in sundry
places quite destroyed, partly for the reason last mentioned, and partly for
the wood and timber it self, not for the ordinary uses of building and firing
(the which ever having been afoot, are not very considerable in regard of what
now we speak of) but to make merchandise of, and for the making of Charcoal for
the Iron-works. As for the first, I have not heard that great timber has ever
been used to be sent out of Ireland in any great quantity, nor in any ordinary
way of Traffic; but only Pipe-staves, and the like, of which good store has
been used to be made, and sent out of the Land, even in former times, but never
in that vast quantity, nor so constantly as of late years, and during the last
Peace, wherein it was grown one of the ordinary merchandable commodities of the
country, so as a mighty Trade was driven in them, and whole ship-loads sent
into foreign countries yearly; which as it brought great profit to the
proprietaries, so the felling of so many thousands of trees every year as were
employed that way, did make a great destruction of the Woods in tract of time.
As for the Charcoal, it is incredible what quantity thereof is consumed by one
Iron-work in a year: and whereas there was never an Iron-work in Ireland
before, there has been a very great number of them erected since the last
Peace in sundry parts of every Province; the which to furnish constantly with
Charcoales, it was necessary from time to time to fell an infinite number of
trees, all the lopings and windfals being not sufficient for it in the least
manner.

Sect. 4. Great part of Ireland very bare of Woods at this time.
Through the aforesaid causes Ireland has been made so bare of Woods in many
parts, that the inhabitants do not only want wood for firing (being therefore
constrained to make shift with turf, or sea-coal, where they are not too far
from the sea) but even timber for building, so as they are necessitated to
fetch it a good way off, to their great charges, especially in places where it
must be brought by land: And in some parts you many travel whole days long
without seeing any woods or trees except a few about Gentlemen's houses; as
namely from Dublin, and from places that are some miles further to the South of
it, to Tredagh, Dundalk, the Nurie, and as far as Dremore; in which whole
extent of land, being above threescore miles, one does not come near any woods
worth the speaking of, and in some parts thereof you shall not see so much as
one tree in many miles. For the great Woods which the Maps do represent unto
us upon the Mountains between Dundalk and the Nury, are quite vanished, there
being nothing left of them these many years since, but one only tree, standing
close by the highway, at the very top of one of the Mountains, so as it may be
seen a great way off, and therefore serves travelers for a mark.

Section. 5. Many great Woods still left in Ireland.
Yet notwithstanding the great destruction of the Woods in Ireland, occasioned
by the aforesaid causes, there are still sundry great Woods remaining, and that
not only in the other Provinces, but even in Leinster it self. For the County
of Wickloe, Kings-county, and Queens-county, all three in that Province, are
throughout full of Woods, some whereof are many miles long and broad. And part
of the Counties of Wexford and Carloe are likewise greatly furnished with them.

In Ulster there be great Forests in the County of Donegall, and in the
North-part of Tirone, in the Country called Glankankin. Also in the County of
Fermanagh, along Lough-Earne; in the County of Antrim; and in the North-part of
the County of Down; in the two Countries called Killulta and Kilwarlin; besides
several other lesser Woods in sundry parts of that Province. But the County of
Louth, and far the greatest part of the Countys of Down, Armagh, Monaghan, and
Cavan (all in the same Province of Ulster) are almost every where bare, not
only of Woods, but of all sorts of Trees, even in places which in the
beginning of this present Age, in the War with Tirone, were encumbred with
great and thick Forests.

In Munster where the English, especially the Earl of Cork, have made great
havoc of the Woods during the last Peace, there be still sundry great Forests
remaining in the Counties of Kerry, and of Tipperary; and even in the County of
Cork, where the greatest destruction thereof has bin made, some great Woods are
yet remaining, there being also store of scattered Woods both in that County,
and all the Province over.

Connaught is well stored with trees in most parts, but has very few Forests
or great Woods, except in the Counties of Maio and Sligo.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Mines in Ireland, and in particular of the Iron-mines.
Sect. 1. All the Mines in Ireland discovered by the New-English.
THe Old-English in Ireland, that is, those who are come in from the time of
the first Conquest, until the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, have been
so plagued with Wars from time to time, one while intestine among themselves,
and another while with the Irish, that they could scarce ever find the
opportunity of seeking for Mines, and searching out the Metals hidden in the
bowels of the Earth. And the Irish themselves, as being one of the most
barbarous Nations of the whole earth, have at all times been so far from
seeking out any, that even in these last years, and since the English have
begun to discover some, none of them all, great nor small, at any time has
applied himself to that business, or in the least manner furthered it.

So that all the Mines which to this day are found out in Ireland, have been
discovered (at least as for to make any use of them) by the New-English, that
is, such as are come in during, and since the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Several whereof having begun to give their minds to it during the last Peace,
have in a few years found out a great many Iron-Mines in sundry parts of the
Kingdom, and also some of Lead and Silver; which greatly confirms the opinion
of many knowing persons, who hold that the Mountains of Ireland are full of
Metals, and that if the same industry and diligence had been used by the
inhabitants of that Country in former Ages, as there has been since the
beginning of the present, many more Mines might have been discovered, not only
of the same Minerals as have been found out hitherto, but of others also, and
perhaps even of Gold it self.

Sect. 2. Grounds to believe that there are Gold-mines in Ireland.
I believe many will think it very unlikely, that there should be any
Gold-mines in Ireland; but a credible person has given me to understand, that
one of his acquaintance had several times assured him, that out of a certain
rivelet in the County of nether-Tirone, called Miola (the which rising in the
Mountains Slew-galen, and passing by the village Maharry, falls into the
North-west corner of Lough-Neaugh, close by the place where the River Band
comes out of it) he had gathered about one dram of pure gold; concluding
thereby, that in the aforesaid Mountains rich Gold-mines do lie hidden.

For it is an ordinary thing for rivers, which take their original in
gold-bearing mountains, to carry Gold mixed with their sand; the which may be
confirmed by many instances, and to say nothing of several Rivers of that
kind, mentioned by Staabo, Pliny, and other old Geographers and Historians, nor
of Pactolus and Hermus in Lydia, and Tagus in Spain, whereof all the old Poets
are full; it is certain, that in our very times several rivers in Germany, as
the Elbe, Schwarts, Sala, and others, do carry gold, and have it mixed with
their sands; out of the which by the industry of man it is collected.

Sect. 3. Three sorts of Iron-mines in Ireland: and first of the first sort,
Bog-mine.
But to let alone uncertain conjectures, and to content our selves with the
Mines that are already discovered, we will in order speak of them, and begin
with the Iron-mines. Of them there are three sorts in Ireland, for in some
places the Oar of the Iron is drawn out of Moors and Bogs, in others it is
hewn out of Rocks, and in others it is dug out of Mountains: of which three
sorts the first is called Bog-mine, the other Rock-mine, and the third with
several names White-mine, Pin-mine, and Shel-mine.

The first sort, as we have said, and as the name it self does show, is found
in low and boggie places, out of the which it is raised with very little
charge, as lying not deep at all, commonly on the superficies of the earth, and
about a foot in thickness. This Oar is very rich of metal, and that very good
and tough, nevertheless in the melting it must be mingled with some of the Mine
or Oar of some of the other sorts: for else it is too harsh, and keeping the
furnace too hot, it melts too suddenly, and stops the mouth of the
furnace, or, to use the workmens own expression choaketh the furnace. Whilst
this Oar is new, it is of a yellowish color, and the substance of it somewhat
like unto clay, but if you let it lie any long time in the open air, it grows
not only very dry, as the clay uses to do, but moldereth and dissolveth of it
self, and falls quite to dust or sand, and that of a blackish or black-brown
color.

Sect. 4. Of the second sort of Iron-mine, called Rock-mine.
The second sort, that which is taken out of Rocks, being a hard and mere stony
substance, of a dark and rustie color, does not lie scattered in several
places, but is a piece of the very rock, of the which it is hewn: which Rock
being covered over with earth, is within equally every where of the same
substance; so as the whole Rock, and every parcel thereof, is Oar of Iron.
This Mine, as well as the former, is raised with little trouble, for the
Iron-rock being full of joints, is with pick-axes easily divided and broken
into pieces of what bigness one will: which by reason of the same joints,
whereof they are full every where, may easily be broke into other lesser
pieces; as that is necessary, before they be put into the furnace.

This Mine or Oar is not altogether so rich as the Bog-mine, and yields very
brittle Iron, hardly fit for any thing else, but to make plow-shares of it
(from whence the name of colt-share Iron is given unto it) and therefore is
seldom melted alone, but mixed with the first or the third sort.

Of this kind hitherto there has but two Mines been discovered in Ireland, the
one in Munster, near the town of Tallo, by the Earl of Cork his Iron works; the
other in Leinster, in Kings county, in a place called Desert land, belonging to
one Sergeant Major Piggot, which rock is of so great a compass, that before
this rebellion it furnished diverse great Iron-works, and could have furnished
many more, without any notable diminution; seeing the deepest pits that had
been yet made in it, were not above two yards deep. The land, under which this
rock lies, is very good and fruitful, as much as any other land thereabouts,
the mold being generally two feet and two and a half, and in many places three
feet deep.

Sect. 5. Of the third sort of Iron-mine.
The third sort of Iron-mine is dug out of the mountains, in several parts
of the Kingdom; in Vlster, in the County of Fermanagh, upon Lough Earne; in
the County of Cavan, in a place called Douballie, in a dry mountain; and in
the County of Nether-Tirone, by the side of the rivelet Lishan, not far from
Lough Neaugh; at the foot of the mountains Slew-galen mentioned by us upon an
other occasion, in the beginning at this Chapter: in Leinster* in
Kings-countie, hard by Mountmelick; and in Queens-countie, two miles from
Mountrath: in Connaught; in Tomound or the County of Clare, six miles from
Limmerick; in the County of Roscomen, by the side of Lough Allen; and in the
County of Letrim, on the East Side of the said Lough, where the mountains are
so full of this metal, that thereof it has got in Irish the name of Slew
Neren, that is, Mountains of Iron: and in the Province of Munster also in
sundry places.

This sort is of a whitish or gray color, like that of ashes; and one needs
not take much pains for to find it out, for the mountains which do contain it
within themselves, do commonly show it of their own accord, so as one may see
the veins thereof at the very outside in the sides of the mohntains, being not
very broad, but of great length, and commonly diverse in one place, five or six
ridges the one above the other, with ridges of earth between them.

These Veins or Ridges are vulgarly called Pins, from whence the Mine has the
name of Pin-mine; being also called White-mine, because of its whitish color;
and Shel-mine, for the following reason: for this stuff or Oar being neither
loose or soft as earth or clay, neither firm and hard as stone, is of a middle
substance between both, somewhat like unto Slate, composed of shells or scales,
the which do lie one upon another, and may be separated and taken asunder very
easily, without any great force or trouble. This stuff is dug out of the
ground in lumps of the bigness of a man's head, bigger, or less, according as
the Vein assordeth opportunity. Within every one of these lumps, when the Mine
is very rich and of the best sort (for all the Oar of this kind is not of
equal goodness, some yielding more and better Iron than other) lies a small
Kernel, which has the name of Honeycomb given to it, because it is full of
little holes, in the same manner as that substance whereof it borrows its
appellation.

The Iron coming of this Oar is not brittle, as that of the Rock-mine, but
tough, and in many places as good as any Spanish Iron.

Sect. 6. Iron-works erected by the English.
The English having discovered these Mines, endeavored to improve the same,
and to make profit of them, and consequently several Iron-works were erected
by them in sundry pats of the Land, ^s namely by the Earl of Cork in diverse
places in Munster; by Sr Coarles Coot in the Counties of Roscomen and Letrim,
in Connaught, and in Leinster by Mountrath, in Queens-county; by the Earl of
Londonderry at Ballonakill, in the said County; by the Lord Chancelour Sir
Adam Loftus, Vicount of Ely, at Mount-melik, in Kings-county; by Sir John
Dunbar in Fermanagh, in Ulster; and another in the same County, by the side of
Lough-Earne, by Sir Leonard Bleverhasset; in the County of Tomond, in
Connaught, by some London-Merchants; besides some other Works in other places,
whose first Erectors have not come to my knowledge.

In imitation of these have also been erected diverse Iron-works in sundry parts
of the seacoast of Ulster and Munster, by persons, who having no Mines upon or
near their own Lands, had the Oar brought unto them by sea out of England; the
which they found better cheap than if they had caused it to be fetched by land
from some of the Mines within the land. And all this by English, whose industry
herein the Irish have been so far from imitating, as since the beginning of
this Rebellion they have broke down and quite demolished almost all the
forementioned Iron-works, as well those of the one as of the other sort.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Iron-works* their fashion, charges of erecting and
maintaining them, and profit coming of them: With an exact description of the
manner of melting the Iron in them.
Sect. 1. The fashion of the Iron-works.
THe fashion of the Iron-works, of whose erection we have spoke in the end of
the foregoing Chapter, is such as follows. At the end of a great Barn
stands a huge Furnace, being of the height of a pike and a half, or more, and
apiece in figure, but after the manner of a Mault-kiln, that is, narrow
below, and by degrees growing wider toward the top, so as the compass of the
mouth or the top is of many fathoms. This mouth is not covered, but open all
over; so that the flame, when the furnace is kindled, rising through the same
without any hindrance, may be seen a great way off in the night, and in the
midst of the darkness makes a terrible show to travelers, who do not know
what it is.

These Ovens are not kindled with wood, nor with sea-coal, but merely with
char-coal, whereof therefore they consume a huge quantity: For the Furnace
being once kindled, is never suffered to go out, but is continually kept a
burning from the one end of the year to the other: And the proportion of the
coals to the Oar is very great: For the Mine would not melt without an
exceeding hot fire; the which that it may be the more quick and violent, it is
continually blown day and night without ceasing by two vast pair of bellow^,
the which resting upon main pieces of timber, and with their pipes placed into
one of the sides of the Furnace, are perpetually kept in action by the means
of a great wheel, which being driven about by a little brook or watercourse,
makes them rise and fall by turns, so that whilst the one pair of bellows does
swell and fill it self with wind, the other does blow the same forth into the
Furnace.

Sect. 2. Of the lesser Iron-works, called Bloomeries: Of the Hammer-works: And
of the Casting works.
There is another and lesser sort of Iron-works, much different from the
former: For instead of a Furnace they use a Hearth therein, altogether of the
fashion of a Smiths Hearth, whereon the Oar being laid in a great heap, it is
covered over with abundance of Charcoal, the which being kindled, is
continually blown by Bellows that are moved by Wheels and Watercourse, in
the same manner as in the other Works.

These Works, commonly called Bloomeries, are in use, or were so before this
Rebellion in sundry places of the North-parts of Ulster.

Besides these two sorts of Works, where the Iron-mine is melted, there is a
third sort, where the Iron after the first melting is hammered out into Bars,
of which we shall have occasion to speak more in the latter end of this present
Chapter.

There were also in some parts of Ireland yet another kind of Iron-works,
differing from all the former, where the Iron was cast into Ordnance, Pots,
small round Furnaces, and other things; of which Works Mr Christopher
Wandsworth, Master of the Rolls of Ireland, and in his latter days Lord Deputy
of the same Kingdom under the Earl of Strafford, then Lord Lieutenant thereof,
had one upon his lands by Idough in the County of Carloe; whereof we cannot
give the Reader any particulars, because we have not yet been informed thereof.

Sect. 3. Conveniences requisite to the erecting of an Iron-work.
In the erecting of these Works men seek to make them as near to the Mine as
may be, to get the more profit by them: for the greater the distance is, the
greater are the charges in having the Oar brought from the Mine to the
Furnace, especially where all must be carried by land, the which does fall out
so in far the most places.

But many times one is necessitated to make the Works a good way further from
the Mine, than otherwise one would, because of the Watercourse, the which
being of very great consequence in the well-settling of a Work, and absolutely
necessary (the wheels being all moved by water) those places must be made
choice of, where one may have the convenience of Watercourse. And besides all
this, regard must be had to the nearness of the Woods, partly by reason of the
Timber, a great deal whereof is necessary for the erecting of one of these
Works, and chiefly for the Charcoales sake, of which a vast quantity
continually is requisite, as before we have showed.

Sect. 4. The charges of erecting and maintaining an Iron-work.
It is to be observed, that although there be Wood enough upon ones land, and
that not very far from the Mine, together with the conveniences of
Watercourse, so as the water needs not to be brought from very far off,
nevertheless the charge is very great, both of erecting and stocking one of the
Iron-works, and of maintaining it and keeping it afoot, and that by reason of
the great number of Workmen* and Laborers of several sorts, which thereunto
is requisite; a list of whose names and offices here follows: Wood-cutters,
who fell the timber; Sawyers, to saw the timber; Carpenters, Smiths, Masons,
and Bellow-makers, to erect the Iron-works, with all the appurtenances thereof,
and to repair them from time to time; Water-leaders, or Water-course-keepers,
to steer the Watercourse, and to look to them constantly; Basket-makers, to
make baskets for to carry the Oar and other materials; Boat-men, and
Boat-wrights to make the Boats, and to go in them; Diggers, who work in the
Mine, and dig the same; Carriers, who carry the Oar from the Mine; Colliers,
who make the Char-coal; corders, who bring the Char-coal to the work; fillers,
whose work it is from time to time to put the Mine and the coals into the
furnace; keepers of the furnace, who look to the main work, rake out the ashes
and cinders, and let out the molten metal at convenient times; finers, who
look to the works where the Iron is hammered; hammerers, whose work it is to
see the Iron hammered out: besides several other laborers, who having no
particular task, must help to put their hand to every thing: of all which sorts
of men Sir Charles Coot the elder, that zealous and famous Warrior in this
present war against the Irish Rebels (wherein having done many memorable
exploits, he lost his life in the first year thereof) did continually keep at
work some five-and-twenty or six-and-twenty hundred, at his Iron-works, being
three in number. Whereby may easily be gathered the greatness of the expenses in
erecting and maintaining of Iron-works: and for all this the owners thereof did
greatly gain thereby, ordinarily no less than forty in the hundred per annum.

Sect. 5. Of the profit of the Iron-works instanced in those of Sir Charles
Coot by Mountrath
To speak somewhat more particularly both of the charges and the profits of
these Iron-works, we shall instance the matter in one of the works of the said
Sr Charles Coot, namely that which he had in the Lordship of Mountrath, in
Queens-county. At that work the Tun (that is twenty hundred weight) of
Rock-mine at the furnace head came in all to stand in five shillings six pence
sterling, and the Tun of White-mine, which he had brought him from a place two
miles further off in seven shillings. These two were mixed in that proportion,
that to one part of Rock-mine were taken two parts of White-mine: for if more
of the Rock-mine had bin taken, the Iron would not have bin so good, and too
brittle; and being thus mixed, they yielded one third part of Iron: that is to
say, of two Tuns of White-mine, and one of Rock-mine, being mingled and melted
together, they had one Tun of good Iron, such as is called Merchants-Iron,
being not of the first, but second melting, and hammered out into bars, and
consequently fit for all kinds of use

This Iron he sent down the river Our (by others called the Nure) to Rosse and
Waterford in that kind of Irish boats which are called Cots in that country,
being made of one piece of timber: which kind of ill-favored boats (mentioned
also by us above) are very common throughout all Ireland, both for to pass
rivers in, and to carry goods from one place to another; and not only upon
shallow waters, such as the aforenamed River is in the greatest part of its
course, but even upon the great Rivers and Loughs.

At Waterford the Iron was put aboard of ships going for London, where it was
sold for sixteen, otherwhiles for seventeen pounds stering, and sometimes for
seventeen and a half; whereas it did not stand Sir Charles Coot in more than
betwixt ten and eleven pounds sterling, all charges reckoned, as well of
digging, melting, fining, as of carrying, boat-hire, and freight, even the
Custom also comprehended in it.

Sect. 6. Some other particulars about the same subject, of the prosit of the
Iron-workes.
In most of the other places did a Tun of the Iron-mine or Oar come to stand in
five, five and a half, and six shillings sterling at the furnace head; and it
was an ordinary thing, as well where they used White Wind, as where they mixed
Rock-mine with it, to have a Tun of good Iron out of three tuns of Oar: in some
places, where the Mine was richer, they would have a Tun of Iron out of only
two Tuns and a half of Oar. Nevertheless few of them gained more or as much as
Sir Charles Coot, because they had not the same conveniencie of transportation:
And he himself did not gain so much by his Iron works in Connaught, as by that
near Mountrath, although the Mines there afforded a richer Oar, and that the
Tun thereof did cost him but three shillings at the furnace, because that
Lough-Allen, whereunto the same Mines and Works are contiguons, gave him the
opportunity of carrying the Oar by water from the Mine unto the Work, and that
in boats of forty tuns.

The Earl of Cork whose Iron-works being seated in Munster, afforded unto him
very good opportunity of sending his Iron out of the land by shipping, did in
this particular surpass all others, so as he has gained great treasures
thereby: and knowing persons, who have had a particular insight into his
affairs, do assure me, that he has profited above one hundred thousand
pounds clear gain by his said Iron-works.

Sect. 7. The manner of melting the Iron-oar.
The manner of melting the Iron, usual in Ireland, is thus. The furnace is not
filled to the top, but some space is left empty; and to put new stuff into it
they do not stay until the former be quite consumed, but only until it be
somewhat descended, and then they cast into it some charges or basketfuls of
Coals, and at the top of them the same quantity of Mine: and thus they do
from time to time, so as the furnace is in ^ manner alwaie^ in one and the same
estate; where is to be observed, that in most furnaces they add unto the Oar
and Coals some quantity of Iron-cinders, and in others of Limestone, whereby
the melting of the Iron is greatly furthered, and the furnace made to work more
mildly.

Within the barn, at the bottom of the furnace, stand constantly two men, one
of each side, the which with long iron hooks, through holes left for the
purpose, do every quarter of an hour draw out the unburnt coals, ashes, and
cinders; which cinders are great lumps of a firm substance, but brittle, of a
blackish color, shining, but not transparent; being nothing else but the
remainder of the Iron-oar, after that the Iron which was contained in it, is
melted out on it

The Iron it self descends to the lowest part of the furnace, called the
Hearth; the which being filled, (so that, if one stayed longer, the Iron would
begin to swim over through the aforesaid holes) they unstop the Hearth, and
open the mouth thereof (or the Timpas the Arts-men call it) taking away a
little door, of fashion like unto that of a bakers oven, wherewith the same was
shut up very close. The floor of the barn has a mold of sand upon it,
where-in, before they open the furnace, a furrow is made, of sufficient breadth
and depth, through the whole length of the barn, from the bottom of the furnace
until the barns door: into which furrow, as soon as the furnace is opened, the
molten Iron runs very suddenly and forcibly, being to look on like unto a
stream or current of fire. It remains a long time hot, but does presently
loose its liquidness and redness, turning into a hard and stiff mass, which
mas^es are called Sowes by the workmen.

Sect. 8. Of the different Bigness of the Iron Sowes
These Masses or Sowes of Iron are not always of one and the same weight and
bigness, but there is them of all sizes, from one hundred weight until thirty
hundred: which difference does chiefly depend on the different bigness of the
furnace and hearth, and partly on the will and discretion of the workmaster or
founder, and according as he either stays until the hearth be full, or
lets out the Iron sooner; but ordinarily they do not use to cast, or to
open the hearth, under less than twelve hours, nor to stay much longer than
four-and-twenty.

And here is to be observed, that even in furnaces of the same biguess, yea in
the self-same furnaces, the same quantity of Iron is not always cast in the
same space of time: but that varieth both according to the nature of the Oar,
and according to the different seasons of the year. For within the same
compass of time you shall cast a greater quantity of Iron out of a rich Mine
or Oar, than out of a lean one; and in the summer time, when the Coals come in
dry and fresh, than in the winter.

Sect. 9. Of the refining of the Sow-Iron, and the hammering it into Bars.
The Sowe^ are with teams of Oxen drawn to the Hammer-works, where being put
into the fire again, they melt them into the finerie, the Finer turning the
melted stuff to and fro, till it come to be a solid body, then he carries it
under the hammer, where it is hammered out into such flat narrow and thin bars,
as are to be seen every where: the hammers being huge big ones, and never
ceasing from knocking day nor night, as being kept at work by the means of
certain wheels, turned about by Watercourse in the same manner as the wheels
of the Bellows.

By means of this second melting, and of that mighty hammering, the Iron is
freed from a mighty deal of dross and dregs which it kept sticking to it,
thorough its whole substance, in the first melting; and so of impure called
Sow-Iron, becomes to be useful, such as is accustomed to be delivered unto
Merchants, being therefore called Merchants-Iron; one Tun whereof is usually
had out of a Tun and a half of Sow-Iron; but if that be of the best sort, and
cast of the best Oar, two hundred pounds, less of it will yield the aforesaid
quantity of a Tun of Merchants-Iron.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mines of Silver and Lead in Ireland: and occasionally of
the pestiferous Damps and Vapors within the Earth.
Sect. 1. Of the several Mines of Silver and Lead, and in particular that of
Tipperary*
MInes of Lead and S^lver in Ireland have to this day been found out, three in
number; one in Ulster, in the County of Antrim, very rich, forasmuch as with
every thirty pounds of Lead it yields a pound of pure Silver; another in
Connaught, upon the very Harbour-mouth of Sligo, in a little Demy-Iland
commonly called Conny-Iland; and a third in Munster. The first two having been
discovered but a few years before this present Rebellion, were through several
impediments never taken in hand yet; wherefore we shall speak only of the third.

This Mine stands in the County of Tipperary, in the Barony of Upper-Ormond,
in the Parish of Kilmore, upon the Lands of one John Mac-Dermot O-kennedy, not
far from the Castle of Downallie, twelve miles from Limmerick, and threescore
from Dublin. The land where the Mine is, is mountainous and barren; but the
bottoms, and the lands adjoining, are very good for Pasture, and partly Arable;
of each whereof the Miners had part, to the value of twenty pounds sterling per
annum every one. It was found out not above forty years ago, but understood at
the first only as a Lead-mine, and accordingly given notice of to Donogh Earl
of Thomond, then Lord President of Munster, who made use of some of the Lead
for to cover the house which he then was building at Bunrattie: But afterward
it has been found, that with the Lead of this Mine there was mixed some Silver.

Sect. 2. The manner of digging this Mine: the nature of the Oar, and what
proportions of Silver and Lead it yields.
The Veins of this Mine did commonly rise within three or four spits of the
superficies, and they dug deeper as those Veins went, digging open pits
very far into the ground, many fathoms deep, yea Castle-deep; the pits not
being steep, but of that fashion as people might go in and out with
Wheel-barrows, being the only way used by them for to carry out the Mine or
Oar. The water did seldom much offend them; for when either by the falling of
much rain, or by the discovering of some Spring or Water-source, they found
themselves annoyed by it, they did by Conduits carry it away to a brook
adjoining, the Mountain being so situate, as that might be done easily.

This Mine yields two different sorts of Oar; of which the one, and that the
most in quantity, is of a reddish color, hard, and glistering; the other is
like a Marle, something bl^wish, and more soft than the red; and this was
counted the best, producing most Silver, whereas the other, or glistering sort,
was very barren, and went most away into litteridge or dross.

The Oar yielded one with another three pound weight of Silver out of each Tun,
but a great quantity of Lead, so as that was counted the best profit to the
Farmer.

Besides the Lead and Silver the Mine produced also some Quicksilver, but not
any Alome, Vitriol, or Antimony, that I could hear of.

Sect. 3. Profits of this Mine. It hach been destroyed by the Irish Rebels.
The silver of this Mine was very fine, so as the Farmers sold it at Dublin for
five shillings two pence sterling the ounce; as for the Lead, that they sold on
the place for eleven pounds sterling the Tun, and for twelve pounds at the city
of Limmerick. The King had the sixth part of the silver for his share, and the
tenth part of the Lead, the rest remaining to the farmers, whose clear profit
was estimated to be worth two thousand pounds sterling yearly.

All the Mil^, Melting-houses, Refining-houses, and other necessary
workhouses, stood within one quarter of a mile at the furthest from the place
where the Mine was dug, every one of them having been very conveniently and
sufficiently built and accommodated by the Officers and substitutes of Sir
William Russell, Sir Basil Brook, and Sir George Hamilton, which three persons
successively had this Mine in farm from the King, but in the beginning of this
present Rebellion all this has been destroyed by the Irish under the conduct
of Hugh O-kennedy, brother of John Mac-Dermot O-kennedy, on whose lands the
Mine was situated: which Rebels not content to lay wast the Mine, and to
demolish all the works thereunto belonging, did accompany this their
barbarousness with bloody cruelty against the poor workmen, such as were
employed about the melting and refining of the Oar, and in all offices
thereunto belonging* the which some of them being English, and the rest Dutch
(because the Irish having no skill at all in any of those things, had never
been employed in this Mine otherwise than to digg it, and to do other labors)
were all put to the sword by them, except a very few, who by flight escaped
their hands.

Sect. 4. This Mine free from deadly vapors, the which otherwise in Ireland
are bred within the Earth, as well as in other C^untries, as is instanced in a
very remarkable History.
I have not heard that any of the Miners has been stifled in this Mine, a
thing ordinary enough in other countries: the reason whereof I conceive to be,
because the work was done in wide and open pits, wherein the like noxious
vapors can neither be so easily engendered, and when they arise find a free
passage into the open air, to the contrary of those close and narrow vaults
usual in the most part of other Mines.

For else that the Earth of Ireland is subject, as well as that of other
countries, to breed dangerous damps within her self, is undoubted, as evidently
it appeared in the year sixteen hundred thirty seven, by this following
accident.

A Maulter living in the suburbs of Dublin in St Francis-street caused a Well
to be dug three yards deep, which yielding but little water, and that not
very sweet nor clear, resolved to have it made deeper; and enjoined a servant
of his, to work at it at spare times, which he doing, and having dug a yard
and half lower, the water of it begun the 24 of August to bubble up in a
strange manner, making great noise; which having continued two days, without
any notable increase, hardly coming halfway the knees; he went down again
into the Well, to dig there according to his custom. But having wrought but
a little while, and being taken with a sudden giddiness in his head, and
faintness at his heart, made have to get out, and being revived, returned to
fetch away his spade and other instruments; but coming to the bottom he fell
into a deadly sown, which being s^en by those that were present, one of them
went down to help him up; unto whom the same accident happened. All the
spectators being greatly astonished, and their tumult having drawn-on a great
concourse of people, the place were the Well was being an open yard, looking
into the main street; a certain man, newly come to town, and casually passing
by that way, not affrighted by the example of those two, had the courage to go
down to fetch the former out, but with as ill success as they themselves. The
wonder and amazement being hereby increased among the people, there was
nevertheless a Butcher (a bold robustuous man) who having drunk somewhat
liberally, would notwithstanding these sad accidents go in, which at the first
not being suffered, and he continuing in his resolution, was at last permitted
on condition that he let a strong cord be tied about his wast to pull him out,
if he found himself ill; the which to signify he was to hold up his right
hand. But being come to the bottom, and suddenly taken with a deadly
faintness, that he had neither time nor power to give the appointed sign,
falling from the ladder; and being haled out with all possible speed, found to
be in a deep trance, but with perfect signs of life: wherefore being carried
to his own house, put into his bed, and care taken of him, it was nevertheless
24 hours before he came to himself.

The dead bodies being drawn out of the Well it was filled with earth by order
of the Magistrate of the said City.

Sect. 5. Relation of an accident like the former happened at London.
The like accidents have at several times been seen in other Countries,
whereof we could allege many instances, but passing by all other we shall make
mention of one lately befaln here at London. Without Aldesgate, there is a
little court called Carpenters-yard, in the midst of which there stood a Pump;
the water whereof not being good for to dress meat, was used by the neighbors
only for the washing and cleaning of their houses, and the like. But in length
of time being grown so thick and muddy that no use could be made out, it was
resolved that the Well, whereout the Pump drew its water, should be made clean,
to which purpose the Pump being taken down, in the latter end of July anno
sixteen hundred forty four, a laborer was let down with a cord into the Well,
being little and narrow, to take out the mud by pailes full, which as soon as he
came to the bottom presently fell stark dead. Those that had let him down,
seeing this, and suspecting nothing else, but that a sudden faintness had
overcome him, let down another to see what he ayled, and to bring him out. But
he sped no better than the first, which when the people perceived, no more went
into the Well* until three or four hours after, in which middle-space of time
a great Iron pan or plate, heaped up with burning charcoal, had been let down
into the Well, and several times as the fire did slaken, renewed, that through
the heat thereof that mortiferous vapor might be overcome and dispersed, the
which accordingly fell out; so that the person afterward went down to fetch
away the dead bodies, got no hurt at all. A great covered or vaulted gutter,
whereby the ordures of the streets are under ground conveyed into the City
ditch, passes under the yard where-in the said Well, (dammed up since this sad
accident) did stand; so as it may be probably believed that that deadly
infection of the air within the same Well had partly been caused through the
neerness of the same sewer.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Freestone, Marble, Flints, Slate, and Seacoles which are
found in Ireland
Sect. 1. Of the Freestone,
HAving in the precedent Chapters treated of the Metals and Minerals, which are
found in Ireland, we shall now go on to speak of several other substances,
raised out of the ground there, of a less noble nature, but nevertheless
profitable and serving for several good uses.

To begin with Freestone, there is two sorts of it, the one being gray or
ash-colored, and the other blew; which both for the most part lying in the
uppermost parts of the ground, covered over with very little earth, are raised
with small labor and charge, whereas in most other countries it is as much
labor to dig Freestone as the metalls themselves, The blew Freestone is
not very abundant, and as little in request, as unfit for great buildings; it
lying for the most part in small unshapely pieces; and when they are bigger
commonly broke in the raising and hewing, partly through the unskilfullness of
the workmen there, and chiefly because they are exceeding hard, and cannot well
endure the Iron. The gray freestone which is found very abundantly in most
parts of the land is of a contrary nature; and may easily be cut out into
stones of all bigness or fashion, wherefore also this sort has been used by
the English, to all the Churches, Castles, and Edifices, which since the
Conquest have been builded by them; For the Irish themselves, never had the
skill nor industry to erect any considerable buildings of Freestone, Brick, or
other the like materials, their dwellings being very poor and contemptible
cottages. True it is, that the English at their first coming found several
Maritine-townes in Ireland with stone-walls and houses, the Churches also, not
only in those, but in many other Towns being of the same. But built by
strangers, who being come out of the Northern parts of Germany, and other
neighboring Countries, had settled themselves there, inhabiting several parts
of the Seacoasts, some Ages before the English-Conquest; which people called
themselves Oastmans, or Easterlings; all those Countries of the which they were
come being situated to the East of Ireland.

Sect. 2. Certain evil properties of the Irish Freestone.
This sort of Gray Fre^-stone in Ireland has a bad quality, that it draws
the moisture of the air continually to it, and so becomes dank and wet both
in and outside, especially in times of much rain. To mend this inconvenience
the English did wainscot those walls with oak or other boards, or line them
with a thin crust of brick.

Sect* 3. Of the Marble.
Besides the Freestone, which is almost in every part of the land, there is
Marble found in many places of several sorts; one is red, straked with white
and other colors, such as with a peculiar name is called Porphyre; other
black, very curiously straked with white, and some all of one color.

The first two sorts are found but in small quantity, especially the second. But
the last is very abundant in some places, but most about Kilkenny, where not
only many houses are built of the same, but whole streets are paved with it.

Sect. 4. Description of the Marble-quarrie at Kilkenny.
The Quarrie out of which they have their Marble at Kilkenney, is not above a
quarter of a mile distant from the Town, and belongs to no body in
particular, lying in common for all the Townsmen, who at any time may fetch as
much out of it, as seems good unto them, without paying any thing for it: It
is in fashion like unto Quarries of Freestone, to wit, a wide open pit,
whereout stones and pillars of great thickness and height may be dug. This
Marble, whilst it is rude, and as it comes out of the ground, looks grayish,
but being polished it gets a fine bluish color, drawing somewhat toward
the black.

Sect. 5. Of the Flint.
Although Flints are not dug from under the ground, yet shall we give them a
place next to the Freestone and Marble, because of the affinity which they
have with them. They are found in every part of Ireland in great abundance near
the seaside, within the land, upon the hills and mountains, and in the rivers,
many of which have not only their banks covered with them, but also the bottom
of their channels, and that for great spaces togeth^r, which as they are o^ all
sizes and fashions, so of very different colors.

Sect. 6. Of the Slate.
In sundry parts of Ireland Slate is found in great abundance, and that nothing
deep within the ground, just in the same manner as the Freestone, so as it may
be raised with little charge and labor; wherefore at all times it has been
much used by the English inhabitants for the covering of their houses and other
buildings. Nevertheless some years since in places near the sea, especially at
Dublin, that kind of Holland Tiles, which by them are called Pannen begun to be
used generally, the Merchants causing them to be brought in from thence in
great abundance, because in Ireland they had neither convenient stuff to make
them of, nor workmen skillful in that business: although the common Tiles
usual in many parts of England and other Countries, were made and used in
several places within the land.

Besides these there was another kind of covering in use, both for Churches and
houses, to wit, a certain sort of wooden Tiles, vulgarly called Shingles; the
which are thight enough at the first, but do not many years continue so, it
being necessary to change them often: which thing properly not appertaining to
this Chapter, we nevertheless for affinities sake have thought not amiss here
to mention.

Some years ago another kind of Slate has been discovered in Ireland, which
for the colours-sake is called Black-slate, being of a blackish color, which
is come into great esteem, not so much for the ordinary use of covering houses,
for which they are no better than common Slate, but because it has been found
by experience, very good and medicinal against several diseases, especially
to stay all kind of bleeding, and to hinder that after falls and bruises the
blood do not congeal within the body.

Sect. 7. Of the Sea-coal.
The Trees and Woods having been so much destroyed in Ireland, as heretofore we
have showed, and consequently wood for firing being very dear in great part of
the land, the inhabitants are necessitated to make use of other fuel, viz. of
Turf, and of Sea-coals. Of the Turf we shall speak in the next Chapter. As for
Sea-coals, they are the ordinary firing in Dublin and in other places lying
near the sea, where the same in time of peace are brought in out of England,
Wales, and Scotland, in great abundance, and therefore reasonable cheap; which
is the reason, that the less care has been taken to find out Coal-mines in
Ireland it self, whereas otherwise it is the opinion of persons knowing in
these matters, that if diligent search were made for them, in sundry parts of
the land good Coal-mines would be discovered. This opinion is the more
probable, because that already one Coal* mine has bin found out in Ireland, a
few years since, by mere hazard, and without having been sought for. The Mine
is in the Province of Leinster, in the County of Carlo, seven miles from Idof,
in the same hill where the Iron-mine was of Mr. Christopher Wandsworth, of whom
has been spoken above. In that Iron-mine, after that for a great while they
had drawn Iron-oar out of it, and that by degrees they were gone deeper, at
last in lieu of Oar they met with Sea-coal, so as ever since all the people
dwelling in those parts have used it for their firing, finding it very cheap;
for the load of an Irish-car, drawn by one Garron, did stand them, besides the
charges of bringing it, in nine pence only, three pence to the digger, and six
pence to the owner.

There be Coals enough in this Mine for to furnish a whole Country;
nevertheless there is no use made of them further than among the neighboring
inhabitants; because the Mine being situated far from Rivers, the
transportation is too chargeable by land.

These Coals are very heavy, and burn with little flame, but lie like
Char-coal, and continue so the space of seven or eight hours, casting a very
great and violent heat.

In the place where this Mine stands, do lie little Smith-coals above the
ground, dispersed every where in great quantity, from whence the Smiths
dwelling in the parts round about did use to come and fetch them even before
the Mine was discovered.

CHAP. XX. Of the Turf, Lime, and Brick, and the manner of making those things
in Ireland; item of the Glass made in Ireland.
Sect. 1. Of the two sorts of Irish-turf.
TUrf being very much used throughout all the land (as we have said before) is
of two sor^s, according to the difference of the Bog^ out of the which it is
taken. That which is taken out of the Dry-bogs, or Red-bogs, is light, spungy,
of a reddish color, kindles easily, and burns very clear, but does not last.

The other to the contrary, which is raised out of the green or wet Bogs, is
heavy, firm, black, does not burn so soon, nor with so great a flame, but
lasts a great while, and makes a very hot fire, and leaves foul yellowish
ashes.

It is the observation of women, that the linen which is dried by a fire made
of this last sort of Turf, gets a foul color, be it never so white washed
and bleeched, and grows yellowish in that manner as that it can hardly be got
out again.

Sect. 2. The manner of making the Turf.
The first sort of Turf costeth but little pains in the making; for being
dug, and having ^yen some days a drying (first spread out thin and single
upon the ground, and afterward piled up in little heaps) it is brought into
the Barn.

But black Turf cannot be made without more trouble. First they mark out
convenient places; for only those are fit for it to which some paths do lead,
and which in themselves are not too mirie, and too deep, but have a firm and
sandy ground underneath, within the space of four or five feet, or thereabouts.
Having found out such a place, if it be too watery, they make some trenches,
into which the water descending out of that part of the Bog wherein they intend
to work, may by them be carried to some place fit for to receive it; to the end
that the Bog being thereby grown somewhat dryer and firmer, may the better bear
the Laborers without s^nking too deep into it. Then they fall to the business,
dividing it so among the Laborers, that one part of them do dig out the earth,
or rather the mud (for all the earth whereof this Turf is made, is thin and
muddy) and by spade^-full cast it on a heap, either by the ^ide of the pit, or
some where within the same, where others stand, who very well work it, turning
it to and fro, and then with their shovels fill it into certain wooden trayes,
amongst the English in Ireland peculiarly called Lossels; the which being full,
another part of the Laborers draw the same, with great cords fastened to them,
to some dry place within the Bog, or by the side thereof, where having poured
out the mud, they go back to fetch more, and so go to and fro all day long. On
that dry place where the mud is poured forth, sit certain women upon their
knees, who mold the mud, using nothing else to it but their hands; between the
which taking a part of it, they press them together in that manner, that their
hands meeting above, the turf is fashioned flat and broad beneath, growing
narrower toward the top; which being done, the Turf is let lie upon the ground
the space of a week or more, according as the weather is, and being reasonably
well dried, it is piled up in little heaps, leaving every where empty spaces
between, that the air and the wind passing through them, they may dry the
sooner.

Sect. 3. The charges of making Turf.
Ireland is so full of Bogs, that every man almost has Bog enough upon his own
land to make Turf for his family and for all his Tenants; so that the Turf does
cost most men no more than the hire of the Laborers who are employed about it.
Those that begun early in the year, whilst the Laborers had but little
employment, gave ordinarily, besides meat and drink, three pence sterling a day
to every man, and two pence to every woman; four pence a day being the ordinary
price, and when it was was at the dearest, five pence. Twenty men made in two
or three days as much Turf as was sufficient for the whole years firing of a
great family; of which number five men did dig and cast up the mud, five
wrought it and filled it into the trays, and ten were busied in drawing the
trays to the place where the Turf was molded by the women; who went so nimbly
to work with it, that only two of them were sufficient to keep twenty men at
work.

Sect. 4. Of the Lime, and the manner of making it of Limestone.
All the Lime in Ireland is made not of the shells of all sorts of shel-fish, as
in Holland, and some other Countries, but only of stone; and the gray
Freestone, whereof we have spoken in the precedent Chapter, is very fit for
it, especially when it is not newly come out of the Quarrie, but taken off old
buildings. But a peculiar sort of stone properly called Limestone, is best for
it. This stone is of a gray color, tending to a dark blew, which being broke,
a white dust out of it does fly abroad; and it is very common throughout all
Ireland, but especially in the Provinces of Munster and Connaught, lying not
deep within the ground, but very near to the surface of it, and in many places
above ground.

The manner of burning it into Lime, usual over all Ireland, is this; In the
side of some little height they make a great pit, round or square according as
conveniencie is offered; of that bigness as may hold forty or fifty barrels, and
of that fashion that being many feet wide at the top, it does by degrees grow
narrower toward the bottom, in the same manner as the Furnaces of the
Iron-works. The inside of this pit they line round about with a wall built of
Lime and Stone, at whose outside near the bottom a hole or door is left, by
which to take out the ashes; and above that an iron-grate is laid, which comes
close to the wall round about: Upon this they lay a lay of Limestone (being
first knocked asunder with a great Iron hammer, and broke into pieces of the
bigness of a f^st, or thereabouts) and upon that a lay of wood or turf, or a
certain sort of Sea-coal, the which being wonderful small, and peculiarly
called Comb, is hardly used for any other purpose. Upon that they lay another
of Limestone, and so by turns, until the whole Kiln be filled, ever observing
that the outmost lay be of wood, turf, or comb, and not of Limestone: which
being done, the Kiln is set afire until all be burnt.

Sect. 5. Another manner of burning Lime used in Ireland.
There is another manner of burning Lime used in Ireland, in Kilns built
altogether above ground, and incomparably bigger than the others, insomuch as
to the quantity of three hundred Barrels of Lime at once is made in them. In
these Kilns they burn whole stones, without breaking them into pieces as the
others, and that only with wood (turf or comb not being fit for it) whereof
they consume a huge deal, it being necessary from time to time to put new wood
into them, to which end three or four men day and night do stand by the Kiln to
keep the fire from decaying or slackning.

These (called French-kilns, because the us^ of them was first received from
thence) have ever their walls made of Limestone, the which in the same manner
are turned into Lime, so as there remains nothing standing of these Kilns
after that the work is accomplished, and the Lime taken away.

Now albeit that in these kilnes a very great quantity of Lime is made at a
time, nevertheless it has been found by experience, that they are much more
unprofitable than the others, because they consume much more firing in
proportion, through the continual renewing of the fire, and require the
constant labor of several men all the while they are burning, which commonly
is the space of three days and nights. For these reasons was the use of these
kilnes, which never had been very general in Ireland, more and more left off
in these last years, and the others almost only made use of; in the which the
Lime came to stand them, who burnt it, in no more then four pence the barrel
at the most, all manner of expenses being reckoned; and but three to them who
had the best conveniences.

Sect. 6. Of the Brick.
In every part of Ireland there is found a kind of clay very fit for to make
bricks, and all sorts of Potters-ware, although the Irish never had the wit or
industry to make use of it for either of these two ends; yea they have ever
been so far from making any earthen vessels, that even the use thereof has
been very rare amongst them, and to the most part unknown, not only before the
coming in of the English, but also since, yea even until these very last
times; although a great number of English Potters in several parts of the land
had set up their trade, so as all kind of earthen ware was very common, and to
be had at very easy rates.

And as for the Brick, they have been little used in Ireland even among the
English themselves for a great while; but of late years they begun to be very
common, as well in the country, as in the Cities, especially Dublin, where all
the new buildings (the which not only in handsomness, but also in number, do
surpass the old) are all made of Brick. But that which is made in Ireland, for
the most part is not so good, as that of other Countries, not so much for any
unfitness in the clay it self, as for want of handling and preparing it aright;
as may easily be conceived by the following description of the manner they use
to make it.

Sect. 7. The manner how they make their Brick in Ireland.
They dig a great square pit, taking away all the uppermost earth, until they
come to a good clay (which commonly lies one or two spits deep) This they
dig up throughout the whole pit, and having broke it very small with the
spade, they do by degrees power a great deal of water amongst it, working and
laboring it together with the spade and their feet, till the whole mass become
uniform, firm and tough like stiff dough; the which then in wheel barrowes is
carried out of the pit to a place where certain long tables are set up, to each
of which tables is allotted one man, one woman, and one boy. The woman takes
up the clay by handfulls, from the heap lying upon the ground, and reaches it
unto the man, who thrusts it into a little wodden form without bottom,
strawing now and then some sand upon the table, that the clay may not stick to
it: and so having given them their due fashion, the boy does carry them from
thence to a place, where he lays them all upon the ground, not under any
covert, but in the open air. After they have lain some days, and are somewhat
dried, they are piled up in small heaps, twenty or thirty in a heap, making the
heaps transparent in the same manner, as we have showed above of the Turf,
Some days after those little piles are made into greater, which are many feet
long, and five or six feet high, but not above two feet, or two and a half
broad (making the lays transparent, with some empty space between brick and
brick, even so as in the small piles) the which at the top are covered over
with straw, laying upon the straw broad green sods, to keep off the rain.
Having lain so until they be quite dry, they make great ovens or Kilnes of
them, filling them within with the same, strawing betwixt them of that small
sort of Sea-caol, whereof we have spoke heretofore, called Comb or Coome, and
having covered over the kiln with the same clay, whereof the bricks are made,
the thickness of two hand-broads or there-abouts, they set it afire with wood
underneath, and continue the fire until not only all the bricks piled within
the Kiln, but all the walls quite through, and at the outside as well as at
the inside, be perfectly burnt, and turned into good brick: wherein
oftentimes, through the unskilfulness or neglect of those who make and fill
these Kilns, and of those that govern the fire, there is great loss, and that
two manner of ways. For sometimes great part of the Bricks is found not to be
sufficiently nor uniformly burnt; and on the other side it falls out
oftentimes, that great quantities are reduced into one, being burnt, or
half-burnt into great unshapely masses or lumps, which are good for nothing.

They do commonly burn in those Kilns two or three hundred thousand Bricks at a
time; the which for the most part, all charges being reckoned, come to stand
betwixt six and eight shillings sterling the thousand.

Sect. 8. Of the Glass made in Ireland.
We shall conclude this chapter with the Glass, there having been several
Glass-houses set up by the English in Ireland, none in Dublin or other cities,
but all of them in the country; amongst which the principal was that of
Birre, a Market Town, otherwise called Parsons-town, after one Sir Laurence
Parsons, who having purchased that Lordship, built a goodly house upon it; his
son William Parsons having succeeded him in the possession of it; which Town is
situate in Queens county, about fifty miles to the South-west of Dublin, upon
the borders of the two Provinces of Leinster and Munster: From this place
Dublin was furnished with all sorts of vvindovv and drinking-glasses, and such
other as commonly are in use. One part of the materials, viz. the Sand, they
had out of England; the other, to wit the Ashes, they made in the place of
Ash-tree, and used no other. The chiefest difficulty was, to get the clay for
the pots to melt the materials in; this they had out of the North.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Temperature and Qualities of the Air, and Seasons in
Ireland, as for Heat, Cold, and Moisture.
Sect. 1. Of the Cold weather, and the Frosts.
ALthough the climate of Ireland is somewhat Northerly, the Land extending it
self from the beginning of the one and fiftieth degree of Latitude, until the
end of the five and fiftieth, nevertheless is the Air there very temperate, and
nothing subject to violent Colds (not only in Munster, Leinster, and
Connaught, but even in the most Northern-part, to wit the Province of Ulster)
much less than any other Land lying in the same height or latitude, yea than
many Countries of a much more Southerly-climate.

True it is, that the Cold-weather does commonly begin here somewhat soon,
namely in the beginning of October, and sometimes in the middle or latter end
of September, continuing ordinarily the space of five or six months, until the
midst or latter end of March, and sometimes also good part of April; during
which whole space of time all such persons as are chilly and cold of nature,
and do sit still much, can hardly be any long while without a fire.

But again on the other side, it is very seldom violently cold there, and
freezeth but little: there are commonly three or four Frosts in one Winter; but
they are very short, seldom lasting longer than three or four days together,
and withal at their very worst nothing near so violent as in most other
Countries; so that some all Winter long hardly come near a fire once in a day;
and that not only in the ordinary cold weather, but even whilst it is a
freezing.

Yea many times the cold is so slack even in the midst of the Winter-moneths,
that by walking only, or doing some other moderate exercise, you shall find
your self as warm, and the Air as sweet and pleasant, as if it were in the
month of May.

There has been some Winters, wherein it has frozen ten or twelve days
together, so as the Liffie, and other the like Rivers were quite frozen, and
might be gone upon by men and beasts: But those are altogether extraordinary,
and do come very seldom, hardly once in the space of ten or twelve years.

But how mild they ordinarily be, and how little subject to excessive cold, may
appear hereby, that all kind of beasts and cattle, as cows, horses, and sheep,
do there all Winter long remain abroad, and do ^eed in the fields, where they
are left in the nightime as well as in the day, and that many herbs, which in
England and Netherland do^ dye every Winter, here continue all the year long.

Sect. 2. Of the Warm-weather.
And as the cold in Winter is very moderate and tolerable, so is also the heat
in Summer; the which is seldom so great, even in the hottest times of the year,
as to be greatly troublesome. And it falls out often enough in the very
Summer-moneths, that the weather is more inclinable to cold than to heat, so as
one may very well endure to come near a good fire. And this comes to pass only
during the Wet-weather, for else, and whilst it is fair, it is very warm all
summer long, albeit seldom over-hot: And so it is many times also even on the
rainie days, whereas for the most part it is very cool in them, and the heat
much less than the season does require.

Sect. 3. Of the Rain and We^-weather.
The Rain is very ordinary in Ireland, and it raineth there very much all the
year long, in the Summer as well as in the Winter. Commonly in the Spring of
the year it is very fair weather, with clear sunshine from morning till night,
for the space of five or six weeks together, with very little or no
interruption; which fair weather begins commonly in the mon^th of March,
some years in the beginning, other years in the midst, and sometimes in the
latter end of it. But the same being once past, it raineth afterward very much
all the Summer long, so as it is a rare thing to see a whole week pass without
it; and many Summers it is never dry weather two or three days together. Which
inconstancy and wetness of the weather is not only troublesome to men, but also
hurtful to all things growing out of the ground for man's behoof. For the heat
never being very great, and there besides often interrupted by the intervention
of the foul weather, has neither time nor strength enough to ripen them so
well and so soon, as otherwise it would; whereby it comes to pass, that as
well the fruits of trees, as the corn and grass, here commonly much ^ater do
come to perfection, than in the most part of other neighboring Countries. And
as the ripeness of the fruits and other increase of the earth is greatly
retarded by the abundance of unseasonable rain; so it does also fall out
oftentimes, that the same being come to ripeness, it is difficult to get them
in, by reason of the exceeding store of rain which does come down during the
Hay-time and the Harvest. Wherefore it behooves one here to be wonderful
diligent, and not to lose any part of the fair weather: For else one would run
great hazard to sustain great losses, and to have all spoiled. But those that
are vigilant and careful, and that lose no occasion at all, do commonly in the
end get in their increase well enough, notwithstanding all those great
hindrances; so that there be as few years of dearth in Ireland, as in any
other Country of Christendom; and most years there is not only Corn enough got
for the sustenance of the Inhabitants, but a great deal over and above, for the
sending out of great quantities of Grains into other countries.

Sect. 4. Of the fair weather in the latter end of Autumn. In the foul weather
the nights are often fair.
In the latter end of Autumn weather is commonly fair again for some weeks
together, in the same manner as in the Spring, but not so long; which as it
does serve for to dry up, and to get in the Corn and Hay, which till then has
remained in the fields* the too much wet having hindered it from being brought
away sooner; so it gives the opportunity of plowing the ground, and sowing the
Winter-corn; the which otherwise would very hardly be done.

For that season being once past, you have very little dry weather the rest of
the Autumn, and during all Winter. And although it does seldom rain continually
for many days together, yet is the wetness very great, and few weeks do pass,
wherein are not two or three rainy days. And it is to be observed, that
ordinarily it raineth in Ireland much more by day than by night; and that many
times when it does rain two or three days together, the nights between are
very clear and fair; the which also many times falls out in other foul
weather, and when all day long the Sky is overcast with Clouds and Mists.

Sect. 5. Some dry Summers in Ireland, but hardly ever any too dry.
But although it is ordinarily thus in Ireland; yet the same inconstancy and
variablenes of years and seasons, which is observed in most other Countries,
does also here occur, and that more in regard of the Summers and dry weather,
than of the Winters and cold. For it is mavelous seldom to have there a hard
Winter and long ^rost; but Summers have been which were full of very dry, and
fair, and pleasant weather. But as Winters cruelly cold, so likewise over-dry
Summers do in this Island hardly come once in an Age; And it is a common saying
in Ireland, that the very dryest Summers there never hurt the land: For
although the Corn and Grass upon the high and dry grounds may get harm,
nevertheless the Country in general gets more good than hurt by it: And when
any dearths fall out to be in Ireland, they are not caused through immoderate
heat and drought, as in most other Countries, but through too much wet, and
excessive rain.

Sect. 6. Amendment of the wet Air in Ireland how to be expected.
So that the Irish-air is greatly defectuous in this part, and too much subject
to wet and rainy weather; wherein if it were of somewhat a better temperature,
and as free from too much wet, as it is from excessive cold, it would be one of
the sweetest and pleasantest in the whole world, and very few Countries could
be named, that might be compared with Ireland for agreeable temperateness. And
although it is unlikely, that any revolution of times will produce any
considerable alteration in this (the which indeed in some other Countries has
caused wonderful changes) because that those who many Ages ago have written of
this Island, do witness the self same things of it in this particular, as we
do find in our time: There is nevertheless great probability that this defect
may in part be amended by the industry of men, if the country being once
inhabited throughout by a civil Nation, care were taken every where to
diminish and take away the superfluous and excessive wetness of the ground, in
all the watery and boggy places, whereby this too great moystness of the Air is
greatly increased, and partly also occasiond

This opinion is not grounded upon some uncertain speculation, but upon assured
experience; for several knowing and credible persons have affirmed to me, that
already some years since good beginnings have been seen of it; and that in
some parts of the land well inhabited with English, and where great extents of
Bogs have been drained and reduced to dry land, it has been found by the
observation of some years one after another, that they have had a dryer air,
and much less troubled with rain, than in former times.

Herewith agrees what we read in that famous Writer Pliny, in the fourth
Chapter of the seventeenth Book of his Natural History, concerning that part
of Macedonie, wherein the City Philippi was seated; where the Air formerly
having been very rainie, was greatly amended by the altering the wetness of the
ground: His words are these, Circa Philippos cultura siccata regio, mutavit
coeli habitum: That is, word for word, The Country about Philippi being dried
up through tillage, has altered the quality of the Air.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Dew, Mist, Snow, Hail, Hoar-frost, Thunder and Lightning,
Earthquake and Winds.
Sect. 1. Of the Dew.
THe Naturalists and Geographers do assure us, that it deweth exceedingly in
the hot and dry Countries, and that the less it uses to rain in a Country, the
Dew does fall there the more ^bundantly; whereby it should seem to follow, that
in the wet climate it deweth very little, and consequently that in Ireland,
where it raineth so very much, the Dew must be very scanty. But there is as
much Dew there, as in other Countries that are a great deal hotter and dryer.
Only thus much experience does show in Ireland (and it may be as well in other
Countries, whereof I have not yet informed my self) that when it is toward any
great rain, little or no Dew does fall; so as in those times going forth early
in the morning into the green fields, you will find them altogether dry, and
that even in that season, wherein the Dew in Ireland, as in other neighboring
Countries, uses to fall more abundantly, than in any other time of the year,
to wit in the months of May and June: This is a certain sign to the
inhabitants, that great rain is to fall suddenly; and commonly after such a dry
and dewless night it uses to rain two or three days together. But the
preceding rain does not hinder the Dew in that manner, as that which is
imminent; and it is found ordinarily, that in a clear night follovving a rainy
day (the which is very ordinary, as we have said in the preceding Chapter) the
Dew comes down as liberally as if it had not rained the day before.

Sect. 2. Of May-dew, and the manner of gathering, and preserving it.
The English women, and Gentlewomen in Ireland, as in England, did use in the
beginning of the Summer to gather good store of Dew, to keep it by them all the
year after for several good uses both of physic and otherwise, wherein by
experience they have learnt it to be very available. Their manner of collecting
and keeping it was this. In the month of May especially, and also in part of
the month of June, they would go forth betimes in the morning, and before
Sunrising, into a green field, and there either with their hands strike off
the Dew from the tops of the herbs into a dish, or else throwing clean linen
clothes upon the ground, take off the Dew from the herbs into them, and
afterward wring it out into dishes; and thus they continue their work until
they have got a sufficient quantity of Dew according to their intentions. That
which is gotten from the grass will serve, but they choose rather to have it
from the green corn, especially Wheat, if they can have the convenience to do
so, as being persuaded that this Dew has more virtues, and is better for all
purposes, than that which has been collected from the grass or other herbs.
The Dew thus gathered they put into a glass bottle, and so set it in a place
where it may have the warm Sunshine all day long, keeping it there all the
Summer; after some days rest some dregs and dirt will settle to the bottom;
the which when they perceive, they pour off all the clear Dew into another
vessel, and fling away those setlings. This they do often, because the Dew
does not purge it self perfectly in a few days, but by degrees, so as new
dregs (severed from the purer parts by the working of the Dew, helped on by the
Sunbeams) do settle again; of the which as often as those good women see any
notable quantity, they st^ll power off the clear Dew from them: doing thus all
Summer long, until it be clear to the bottom.

The Dew thus thoroughly purified looks whitish, and keeps good for a year
or two after.

Sect. 4. Of the Mists and Fogs.
We have showed how much Ireland is subject to Rain, and so it is likewise to
dark weather, and overcasting of the air even when it raineth not, which
continues sometimes many days together, especially in Wintertime.

But as for the Fogs and Mists, Ireland is no more troubled with them than
other regions, especially in the plain country, for in the mountains they are
much more frequent, so that oftentimes they are covered with them for a great
way, the space of some hours together, when at the same time there is none in
the neighboring plain country; and in the high mountains it comes many
times to pass that in a fair day the top thereof for a long time together is
covered over with a thick Mist, when not only the adjacent country, but even
the lower part of those mountains do njoy a clear Sunshine. And sometimes it
befalls the tops as well as the lower parts being free from them, the middle
parts are quite covered therewith: as my brother in his travels has many
times observed in several parts, especially upon those high mountains between
Dundalke and Carlingford, as well in the midst of the summer, as at other times
of the year.

And in many places it is found by experience that the like Fogs upon the tops
of the mountains is a forerunner of rain in the next conntry: whereof all
those who have lived any time at Dublin, may have good knowledge. For seldom a
mist appears upon the top of the Wickloe-mountains, situated some five or six
miles to the South of Dublin, or of the head of both, without being followed
with rain at Dublin and the adjacent parts within 24. hours: wherein is
observable, that a Fog quite covering those mountains all over is not so sure
a sign of Rain, as when it is only upon the top: and that those general Mists
upon the mountains are often seen without any following Rain, the which very
seldom or never happens in the others.

There be two sorts of Mists or Fogs in Ireland: the one is uniform and
constant, quite filling the air of all sides, whereby all manner of prospect is
taken away, and continuing after the same fashion, until it vanish by degrees,
either ascending up into the Air, or falling to the ground; whereofhere, as in
other countries, the first is commonly followed with Rain, and the second with
fair weather

In the other sort are great parcells or flakes of foggie vapors scattered up
and down the Air, with clear spaces betwixt: the which flakes do not keep one
place, but fly to and fro, according as they are driven by the wind, and that
sometimes very swiftly; this kind of Fog does arise not only upon the seaside,
but also within the land, and upon the mountains: oftentimes turning into a
general mist.

Sect. 4. Of the Snow, Hail, and Hoar-frost.
For the most part there falls no great store of Snow in Ireland, and some
years none at all, especially in the plain countries. In the mountains there
is commonly greater plenty of Snow, than in other parts, So that all kind of
cattle, do all winter ^ong remain there abroad, being seldom troubled with
very great frost or snow, and do feed in the fields night and day, as we have
related more amply above; yet it has happened that in a winter, one of many,
abundance of snow has fallen, instance that of the year 1635 where about the
latter end of January and the beginning of February great store of snow did
fall to the great damage of the cat^le, chiefly in the Northern parts (where it
did snow most excedingly) so as the People were put to hard shif^s to bring
their cattle in safety to their folds and other covered places, One history
among the rest by reason of the strangeness of it, I think will not be
improper to relate as it has been asser^ed to me by very credible persons, A
Gentleman living about Ballaneah in the County of Cavan, took great pains to
save his sheep, yet missed eleven of them; some days after being come forth to
course, his man saw from a ^arre off upon a hill, in a hollow place of a rock,
part of it being covered with the top hangging over it, something alive and
stirring, they thought it had been a Hare or a Fox, but coming near they found
it was the lost sheep, the which had sheer eaten away all the wool from one
another back (being destitute of all other food, all ^ound about being covered
with deep snow) and which is more wonderful one of them being dead, the rest
did eat her flesh, leaving nothing but the bar bones.

It does also longer contiune there: so as it is and ordinary thing in those by
Dublin, and all other high mountains throughout the Land, to see the Snow
lying upon the tops of them many days, yea weeks, after that in the nether
parts and plain country it is thawed and quite vanished.

It Haileth there but seldom, and in thin short shoures, the hailstones
also being very little.

As for the Hoar-frost, that is as common here, as in other countri^s, and that
not only in the coldest months, and during the frost, but even in the Spring:
so as commonly during all the fair weather of that season, of some weeks
togethet, whereof we have spoke heretofore, every morning all the green herbs
of the gardens and fields are quite covered over with it.

Sect. 5. Of the Thunder, Lightning, and Earthquakes.
Ireland is as little subject to Thunder and lightning, as any other country in
the world, for it is a common thing, to see whole years pass without them, and
in those years, where-in any are, one shall seldom have them above once or
twice in a Summer, and that with so weak noise of the thunder, and so feeble a
shining of the Lightning, that even the most fearful persons are hardly
frightened at all there-by, much less any harm done to men or beasts.

From Earthquakes this Island is not altogether exempt; but withal they are so
seldom, that they hardly come once in an age: and it is so long ago since the
last of all was, that it is as much as the most aged persons now alive can even
remember.

Sect. 6. Of the Winds.
With Winds it is in this country almost as with Rain, Ireland not only having
its share in them, as other countries, but being very much subject to them,
more than most other parts of the world. For the Winds blow very much at all
times of the year, especially in the Winter months, when also there are many
storms, which sometimes do continue several days together.

And it is worth the observation, that not only storm-winds, but others also,
do in Ireland much seldomer blow out of the East, than out of the West,
especial in the winter; so that commonly there is no need of a wind to be
wafted over into England: where to the contrary, those, who out of England will
come over into Ireland, very ordinarily are constrained to wait two or three
weeks, and sometimes five or six weeks, yea it has fallen out so more than once,
that in two whole months, and longer, there has not been so much East Wind, as
to carry ships out of England into Ireland: notable instances whereof the
History of the first conquest of Ireland, and that of the Lord Mountjoy,
subbuer of Tirone's rebellion, does afford.

But in the Summertime, and chiefly in the Spring, and in the months of March,
April, and May, one is not so much subject to that incommodity, as in the
other times of the year.

And as the West-winds are much more common in Ireland, especially upon this
coast lying over against Great Britain, than the East; so likewise the South
winds are much more ordinary there, than the North: which two winds there do
seldom blow alone, but for the most part do accompany one of the two other,
especially the North Wind, the which also does oftener join it self with the
East than with the West-wind.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Healthfullness of Ireland, and what Sicknesses it is free
from, and subject unto.
Sect. 1. Many old and Healthful people in Ireland.
ALthough Ireland is obnoxious to excessive wetness, nevertheless it is very
wholesome for the habitation of Men, as clearly does appear by that there are as
few sickly persons, and as many people live to a great age, as in any of the
neighboring Countries: For both men and women, setting those aside who through
idleness and intemperance do shorten their days, attain here for the most part
to a fair age, very many living to be very old, and to pass not only the age of
fourscore, but of fourscore and ten; and several there are found at all times,
who do very near reach an hundred yea^es, some out-living and passing them.
And the most part of those aged persons are in very good disposition, enjoying
not only their health, but also the use of their limbs, senses, and
understanding, even to their utmost years. Among the women there are several
found, who do retain not only their customary purgations, but even their
fruitfullness, above the age of fifty years, and some until that of sixty: my
Brother has known some, who being above threescore years old, have not only
conceived, and brought forth children, but nursed them, and brought them up
with their own milk, being wonderful rare and almost unheard of in other
Countries.

Sect. 2. Ireland free from several Diseases.
Irelands Healthfullness does further appear by this particular, that several
diseases, very common in other countries, are here very rare, and partly
altogether unknown. For the Scurvy, an evil so general in all other Northerly
countries consining upon the Sea, is until this day utterly unknown in Ireland.

So is the Quartan Ague, the which is ordinary in England, and in several
parts of it does very much reign at all times.

As for the Tertian Ague, it was heretofore as little known in Ireland as the
Quartan: but some years since, I know not through what secret change, it has
found access into this Island, so that at this time some are taken with it, but
nothing near so ordinarily as in other Countries.

The Plague, which so often and so cruelly infecteth England, to say nothing of
remotes countries, is wonderful rare in Ireland, and hardly seen once in an
age.

Sect. 3. The immunity from certain Diseases consists in the Air, not in the
bodies of the people.
It is observable concerning the forementioned particular, that this
privilege, of being free from several Diseases, does not consist in any
peculiar quality of the bodies of men, but proceeds from some hidden property
of the Land and the Air it self. This is made manifest two manner of ways,
first, in that strangers coming into Ireland, do partake of this same
exemption; and as long as they continue there, are as free of those evils,
from which that climat is exempt, as the Irish themselves. Secondly, in that
the natives, born and brought up in Ireland, coming into other countries, are
found to be subject unto those diseases as well as other people, and I have
known several of them, who being come hither into England, have fallen into
the Quartan Ague, and have as long and as badly been troubled with it, as
ordinarily any Englishman uses to be.

And credible persons have affirmed unto me the same of Scotland, namely that
the Quartan Ague never having been seen there, the Scotchmen nevertheless in
other countries are as obnoxious to it, as people of any other Nation.

Sect. 4. The most part of all kind of Diseases are found in Ireland as in
other Countries.
True it is, notwithstanding that privilege of being exempt from certain
evils, that the most part of diseases and infirmities, whereunto man's body is
subject in other Countries, are also found in Ireland, as well outward as
inward; and in the number of the inward not only the sudden ones, and those
that in a few days or weeks come to an end, being called Morbi Acuti by the
Physicians, as namely Fevers, Casting of blood, Apoplexies, and others of that
nature; but also those of long continuance, as the Falling Sickness, the
Pal^ie, all sorts-of Gout, Coughs, the Consumption of the Lungs, the Stone of
the Kidneys and of the Bladder, the Colic, the laundis, the Dropsy, the grief
of the Spleen, and several sorts of Loosnesses, with all which Evils it is
here as in other Countries, some of them being very common here, and others
happening but seldom, and in few persons: the more particular relation whereof
we will leave for the books of Physic, and for those Observa^ions, which
perhaps my Brother some time or other will publish, of what he has found
concerning the^e matters, in an ample and flourishing practice of eight years,
which he has lived in Dublin.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Diseases reigning in Ireland, and whereunto that country
is peculiarly subject.
Sect. 1. Of the Irish Agues.
AS Ireland is subject to most diseases in common with other Countries, so
there are some, whereunto it is peculiarly obnoxious, being at all times so
rife there, that they may justly be reputed for Irelands Endemii Morbi or
reigning Diseases, as indeed they are generally reputed for such.

Of this number is a certain sort of Malignant Fevers, vulgarly in Ireland
called Irish Agues, because that at all times they are so common in Ireland, as
well among the Inhabitants and the Natives, as among those who are newly come
thither from other countries. This Fever commonly accompanied with a great
pain in the head and in all the bones, great weakness, drought, loss of all
manner of appetite, and want of sleep, and for the most part idleness or
raving, and restlesness or tossings, but no very great nor constant heat, is
hard to be cured, for those that understand the disease, and seek to overcome
it, do it not by purging, which cannot be used at any time without great and
present danger; for the fermentation of the humors which causes the disease,
is hereby mightily increased, and the patient weakened; and hardly with
bleeding, which seldom is used with success otherwise than in the very
beginning; but with strengthening medicines and good cordials: in which case,
and if all necessary prescriptious be well observed, very few persons do lose
their lives; except when some extraordinary and pestilent malignity comes to
it, as it befalls in some years, with so great violence, that
notwithstanding all good helps, some are thereby carried to their graves; the
same does ordinarily come to pass, that it proves deadly, if the Sick do fall
into unskilful hands, or neglect all help, or do not observe good directions;
in which cases many do perish: and others, who come off with their lives
through robustuousness of nature, or hidden causes, are forced to keep their
beds a long time in extreme weakness, being a great while before they can
r^cover their perfect health and strength.

Sect. 2. Of the Looseness.
The Looseness does also greatly reign in Ireland, as well among those of the
country as among the Strangers, wherefore the English inhabitants have given it
the name of The country-disease. Many are a great while troubled with it, and
yet get no other harm: and those that betimes do make use of good medicines,
are without any great difficulty cured of it. But they that let the Looseness
take its course, do commonly after some days get the bleeding with it, whereby
the disease does not only grow much more troublesome and painful, but a great
deal harde^ to be cured; and at last it uses to turn to the Bloody flux, the
which in some persons, having lasted a great while, leaves them of it self;
but in far the greatest number is very dangerous, and kills the most part
of the sick, except they be carefully assisted with good remedies.

That this disease, as also the other, viz. the Malignant Fevers, are so rife
in Ireland, does partly come through the peculiar disposition and excessive
wetness of the Air; but partly also through the errors which people do commit
in eating and drinking, and other particulars: as manifestly does appear by
that a very great number, not only of the Natives, but also of the Strangers
coming thi^ her, who t^ke careful heed to themselves in abstaining from
hurtful things, never are troubled with either of these infirmities.

Sect. 3. Of the Rickets.
Among the reigning diseases of Ireland the Rickets also may with good reason
be reckoned, a disease peculiar to young children, and so well known to every
body in England, as it is needless to give any description of it; and yet to
this day never any Physician, either English or of any other nation, made any
the least mention of it, no not in those works which are expressly written of
all manner of diseases and accidents of little children.

In Ireland this disease is wonderful rife now, but it has nothing near been
so long known there as in England, either through the unski^fullness or neglect
of the Physicians (the most part whereof in both kingdoms to this day are
ignorant not only of the manner how to cure it, but even of the nature and
property thereof) or that really it is new there, and never before having been
in Ireland, has got footing in it only within these few years, through some
strange revolution or constellation, or Gods immediate sending: which kind of
changes several times have befaln in diverse Countries, and in Ireland it self
we have already showed some such matter in another sickness, namely the
Tertian-Ague.

This evil being altogether incurable, when it is gone too far, is hard
enough to be cured even in the beginning, except it be very carefully looked
unto, and use made of the best remedies; nevertheless this grief, as well as
mo^^ others, has its peculiar medicines, the which being applied betimes, and
with convenient care, do with Gods blessing for the most part produce the
effect desired.

Sect. 4. Of the Lepros^e
The Rickets are of late very rife in Ireland, where few years ago unknown;
so on the contra^y it has been almost quite freed from another disease, one of
the very worst and miserablest in the world, namely the Leprosy, which in
former times used to be very common there, especially in the Province of
Munster; the which therefore was filled with Hospitals, expressly built for to
receive and keep the Leprous persons. But many years since Ireland has been
almost quite freed from this horrible and loathsome disease, and as few Leprous
persons are now found there, as in any other Country in the world; so that be
Hospitals erected for their use, having stood empty a long time, at length are
quite decayed and come to nothing. The cause of th^s change is not so obscure
nor unknown, as it is in most other changes of that nature. For that this
sickness was so general in Ireland, did not come by any peculiar defect in the
Land or in the Air, but merely through the fault and foul gluttony of the
inhabitants, in the excessive d^vouring of unwholesome Salmons. The common
report in Ireland is, that boiled Salmons eaten hot out of the Kettle in great
quantity, bring this disease, and used to be the cause why it was so common:
and some famous Authors have not stuck to relate as much for a truth. But that
is a fable, and Salm^ns have not that evil quality, which way soever they be
eaten and prepared, but when they are out of season* which is in the latter end
of the year, after they have cast their spawn: upon which they do not only
grow very weak and flaggie, but so unwholesome, that over their whole body they
break out in very filthy spots, just like a scalled man's head, so as it would
loath any man to see them; nevertheless the Irish, a nation extremely barbarous
in all the parts of their life, did use to take them in that very season, as
well as at any other time of the year, and to eat them in very great abundance,
as easily they might, every river and rivelet in most parts being very full of
them, and by that means that horrible disease came to be so common amongst
them. But the English having once gotten the command of the whole Country into
their hands, made very severe laws against the taking of Salmons in that
unwholesome season, and saw them carefully observed; whereby hindering those
barbarians against their will to feed on that poisonous meat, they were the
cause that that woeful sickness, which used so mightily to reign amongst them,
has in time been almost quite abolished: which great benefit, with so many
others, that hateful people has rewarded with seeking utterly to exterminate
their benefactors.

Sect. 5. Of the League^-Sicknesses.
In the English A^mies, which since this bloody Rebellion went ov^r into
Ireland to fight against that murdering Nation, were not only the Looseness and
the Malignant Fever, whereof we have spoke above as of Irelands reigning
diseases, very common, but there-besides several other infirmities, viz.
violent Coughs and of long continuance, Stopping of the Breath, called in latin
Dispnoea, Lameness of the thighs or Sciatica, painful Stranguries, all which
griefs seized on so many persons, that they might well have been taken for
sicknesses reigning in that land; as I have many times understood of my
Brother, who at that time not only dwelling and practicing at Dublin, but being
Physician general of the English Forces, had but too much occasion to know
that perfectly.

But withal he has assured me, that those diseases had their original not
from any defect of the climate, but of the cold, and other hardship, which the
soldiers suffered in their marches; for they many times going to the fields in
cold and foul weather, and sometimes marching whole days long, yea several
days together, in very dirty and wet ways, where their feet and legs were
continually cold and wet, besides that they were sometimes constrained to pass
through the water up as high as the knees and waste, and after all that
hardship endured in the daytime, to lie in the night upon the wet ground in
the open air, this caused the aforenamed diseases, and several others amongst
them, in so great number, it being to be wondered at, that many more did not
fall into them. And without doubt in any other country of the world, where all
the same causes did concur, and where an Army endured the like hard-ship,
the same effects, if not worse, would follow: so that in this behalf the Land
it self i^ not at all to be blamed.

A Table of the principal Heads contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. Of the situation, shape, and greatness of Ireland: its division into
Provinces and Counties: of the English Pale: The principal Towns of that
Nation. page 1. CHAP. II. Of the principal Havens of Ireland. page 10. CHAP.
III. Of the lesser Havens, and the barred Havens of Ireland, also of the Roads
and Anchor-places upon the Coast, and in the little Islands near the coast. p.
24. CHAP. IV. Quality and fashion of the Irish Coast or Shoares; Item, a brief
description of the principal Promontories or Heads of Ireland p. 35. CHAP. V.
Of the Sands or Grounds, Blind-Rocks, and other Rocks in the Irish Sea. p. 40.
CHAP. VI. Of the Nature of the Irish Sea, and of the Tides which go in the
same. p. 48. CHAP. VII. Of the Springs and Fountains; Item of the Brooks and
Rivelets of Ireland. p. 54. CHAP. VIII. Of the Rivers of Ireland. p. 61. CHAP.
IX. Of the Lakes or Loughs in Ireland. p. 71. CHAP. X. Of the nature and
condition of the Land, both for the outward shape, and for the internal
qualities and fruitfulness. p. 78. CHAP. XI. Of the several manners of
manuring and enriching the ground practiced in Ireland. p. 91. CHAP. XII. Of
the Marle in Ireland, and the manner of Marling the land there. p. 100. CHAP.
XIII. Of the Heaths, Moors, or Bogs in Ireland. p. 105. CHAP. XIV. Original
of the Bogs in Ireland, and the manner of Dra^ning them, practiced there by the
English Inhabitants. p. 112. CHAP. XV. Of the Woods in Ireland. p. 118. CHAP.
XVI. Of the Mines in Ireland, and in partic^lar of the Iron-Mines. p. 123.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Iron-works, their fashion, charges of erecting and
maintaining them, and profit coming of them: with an exact description of the
manner of melting the Iron in them. p. 131. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Mines of Silver
and Lead in Ireland: and occasionally of the pestiferous Damps and Vapors
within the Earth. page p. 141. CHAP. XIX. Of the Freestone, Marble, Flint,
Slate, and Sea-coles which are found in Ireland. page 148. CHAP. XX. Of the
Turf, Lime, and Brick, and the manner of making those things in Ireland; item
of the Glass made in Ireland. p. 154 CHAP. XXI. Of the temperature and
qualities of the Air, and Seasons in Ireland, as for Heat, Cold, and Moisture.
p. 163. CHAP. XXII. Of the Dew, Mist, Snow, Hail, Hoar-frost, Thunder and
Ligthning, Earthquake and Wind. p. 169. CHAP. XXIII. Of the hea^thfulness of
Ireland, and what sicknesses it is free from, and subject unto. p. 177. CHAP.
XXIV. Of the Diseases reigning in Ireland, and whereunto that Country is
perculiarly subject.p. 180.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. l. 6. r. coas^. p. 12. l. 1. r. miles. l. 3. r. breadth. p. 31* l. 9.
r. is the. p. 99. l. 11. dele s^. p. 128. l. 11. r. of this. p. 137. l. 8. r.
white mine.


