THE CHARACTER OF A TRVLIE VIRTUOUS AND PIOUS WOMAN, AS IT HAS BEEN ACTED BY
MISTRESS MARGARET DVNGAN, (WIFE TO DOCTOR ARNOLD BOAT,) In the constant course
of her Whole life, Which she finished at Paris 17. Aprilis 1651.

PARIS, Printed by STE. MAVCROY for the Author, 1651.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD THOMAS SINSERF, Lord Bishop Gallovvay.
MAy it please your Lordship,
Having perpetually before my eyes the aymable and commendable qualities of my
most lovelie and most beloved consort, of whom it pleased God lately to
deprive me in the prime of her age (to my unspeakable grief, and irreparable
discomfort) and having found some consolation in reducing in vvriting part of
what my memory did suggest unto me of her, for to serve me instead of a
pourtrait, upon which I might often pass my vieuvv, thereby in some sort to
mitigate the excess of my tormenting sadness, much better than others in the
like case use to do with less livelie and more corporeal representations: I
thought good, what I had so set down at first with no other intention, than
to remain with myself, and to serve only for mine own use and
consolation, to publish the same unto the world; partly for to acquit what
is due to her virtues, deserving a far statelier monument; and principally
for the advantage and edification of others; hoping that her example may serve
as a powerful motif, whereby many will be stirred up to the practice of true
virtue and piety, in the same manner as these lines (free from all
amplifications and rhetorical ornaments, and consisting of a bare and plain
narration without all artifice) will hold forth to have been done by her. And
as all those, who have known her, can bear me witness, that I have said
nothing her, but the naKed truth; so in particular your Lordship, who having
lodged with us under the same roof, and come to the same board with us, for
the space of well near three years, have seen in her conversation all those
qualities verified, which here I relate of her: which has encouraged me, to
dedicate these lines unto your Lordship, thereby to put them past all
contradiction with such, as have not at all been acquainted with her, and
who upon my bare record might co^ceive, that my pen had not been so much
guided by unbiassed truth, as by an over-favourable and pre-occupated
affection.

And forasmuch as some passages of this treatise will receive some light by
the knowledge of the accident that has taken her away, and of the manner
that it made an end of her; it will be good to give a compendious relation of
the same, before I come to the maine matter. Having been married to me at
Dublin on christmas day in the year of our Lord 1642. and brought me three
children (the youngest vvhere-of, being a girl, borne here in Paris on the
13. of September 1646. is only alive) she miscarried last year on the 27. of
April, without any evident cause* and having conceived again about the 12. ^
14. of August, she vventon happily till the first of March, without any
other acommoditie, than that she was excessive big, more than with any
former child she had been, very un-able to walk or stir, and subject to
frequent faintings; for which last accident having been let blood in the arm
on the 19. of November, she was some vveeks the better for it. For the rest,
she had her health vvonderfull well and a far better appetite, than she had
had with any of her former children; the which did so fill her veins, as it
caused the aforesaid excessive bigness* and nature being overburdened with
blood, discharged itself on the first of March in the evening, of a sudden,
and without any the least preceding commotion of mind or body, of part of
it, in that impetuous manner, as in the space of less than half an hour she
lost more than two ^ound* and having continued to loose some more blood for
the space of an hour longer, and begun to bleed afresh the next morning, she
had nine ounces of blood dravv^e from her out of her right arm; which
presently stayed her bleeding. But she had another fit the 13. of March,
though nothing so copious as the first; and ^ third on the 22. of the same
month, much more moderate yet, and such was also the fourth, which came on
the first of April. The tenth of April she had a fifth shed much what of the
same quantity as the second: and the 12. of April at night of sixth, a very
great one, the blood for a great while running from her just like a spiggot.
The 15. of the same month, being saturday, she had a seventh fit, far more
furious than any of the former, so as in less than half an hours time she
lost 10. or 12. pound of blood; continuing also to bleed some what for two or
three hours after; by the end vvhere-off the bleeding was stanched, she
having been let blood in the arm, and many good remedies given her
invvardlie, and applied outvvardlie, by me and the midvvife, with the joint
advice of Doctor Sarrasin, an ancient and famous practioner. Yet she had
another little shed the same day about ten of the clock at night, a second
about the same hour the next morning, being sunday; and a third at one the
clock in the afternoon* and from that time the blood having stayed on her till
the next day, monday the 17. of April, at seven a clock at night, then again,
notvvhitstanding a great many of most excellent remedies, both outvvard and
inward, that had been administered to her eversince saturday at noon, (during
which time also she had not stirred out of her bed, and been plied with such
exquisite nourishments, as are fitting and usual in the like cases) the blood
burst down in as great an abundance as ever: whereby her veins, so much
emptied already, having been utterlie exhausted, it so abated her strength, as
casting her from one fainting fit into another, without any thorough throvvs,
for to bring-on labor, but only some vveak beginnings of it (to the contrary
of what the midvvife with us had hoped and expected) she never came to
herself again but gave up her ghost some three hours after the beginning of
this last fit, and about ten of the clock at night having kept her senses
till within a quarter of an hour before she died, and her speech till within
less than half an hour. And this last half hour she was vvonderfull calm
and quiet, vvhere-as for the space of somevvhat more than half an hour before
she had grievouslie tossed; her heart being loath to yield to the approches of
death, because not at all abated by any sickness. For after every one of those
sheds, that she had had from the beginning, even after that late and grievous
one on saturday, and after the subsequent ones on sunday; she did still recover
herself again within a fevv hours, and would be very hearty, eating her
meat with as good an appetite and digestion, as if she had ailed nothing. And
having got a great deal of good sleep the last night of her life, that
betwixt sunday and monday, she was so cheerful and light some, not only in
the morning, but all the day aster, as if she had had no harm at all* and
vvhere-as she had company most part of the afternoon, she talked and was
merry with them in the same manner, as any well body might have done.
Insomuch as Doctor Sarrasin, who went not from her till a little before
seven of the clock at night (having been upvvards of an hour with her) went
away full of most comfortable hopes, and assured me at parting, that there
was nothing at all to be feared for her. For although she had not felt the
child stir at all since saturday at noon, we made the less matter of that,
because that it having lain still aster several of the former fits in the same
manner for the space of 24. hours, and longer, it was still come to itself
again: so as there was cause to hope for as much at the time. As for what she
said and did in those last hours of her life, and how she concluded it in
relation to God and her soul, that will find a place in some part of the
follovving Discourse; the which let us begin now.

I.
SHe feared God most truly, and with a most upright heart, endeavoring in
all her actions, thoroughout the whole course of her life, to observe his
holy commandments, and to abstain from all evil: insomuch as she would not
have committed any thing willingly, that she was convinced to be contrary
to his holy will, expressed in sacred Writ, for an earthly advantage what
so-ever; the preserving of a good conscience in a things, being the chief of
her cares. And (...) she was vvonderfull religious, so she was very devout,
never missing of performing her morning and evening prayers, of reading every
day some portion of the holy Scripture, of duly observing the Lords day, of
assisting at Gods public worship on the same, (without ever absenting
herself from it for any small hindrances) and of receiving frequentlie the
holy communion; before which she ever prepared herself the evening before
very reverentlie with fitting prayers and meditations, and with the like
closed up that sacred action, at her coming home from the same* and in that
exercise, as in other parts of her devotion, she helped herself much with the
forms set down in the Practice of Piety vvhere-off she was a great lover*
and she did l^kevvise greatly affect a^ other books of devotion of
meditations, and (...) moral instructions, provided that they were written
feelinglie, s^lidlie, and gravelie, for those that were either dull, flat, and
livelesse or stuffed with word rather than with matt^^ and puffed up with
empty rhetoric, she did not at all care for, as on all other subjects, so
principally on this.

Having been bred a Protestant by her father, and by her mother (a mere saint
of a woman) she was very firm in that profession, and very averse from all
the errors of the contrary: for the confuting vvhereoff, and for the asserting
of the truth, she would uphold a dispute so handsomelie, and produce such
solid and pertinent arguments, as was not a little to be admired in her sex
and age and having been several times tampered vvithall since her coming to
Paris, by Priests and Friars, especially of the Irish nation (who, because of
her belongins to that country by her father, pretended to be particularly
obliged, to have a care of converting her to their belief) she ever sent them
away hopeless of effecting any thing upon her; so closing their mouths, upon
what point so ever they attaqued her, as she left them destitute of all solid
replies* and this she did with so much calmenes, as she never entered into the
least heat in any of those disputes.

She was altogether addicted to the constitution of the church of England,
both for the government, and for the forms practiced in the same; being very
much in love with the common prayer, and greatly admiring many particulars of
it, as of the rest of the Liturgy, especially the manner of administering the
Lords supper, and of burying the dead* yet she was very far from being of
their opinion, who looK o^ the French Protestants as being of a different
Religion; not thinking a fevv differences, in circumstantiall matters of
government and ceremonies, a sufficient ground of making so great a distance
betwixt two churches so unanimous in all essentials* and this made her very
vvilling to go to Charenton, and to find much comfort and satisfaction, not
only in assisting at their sermons and prayers, but in receiving the Lords
supper with them; as she has done very osten.

She could in no wise endure any expressions, that had any thing of
prophanenes in them, though otherwise a great lover of witty and merry
sayings: but (...) the contrary she singularly relished all discourses of
goodness and piety, and would often fa^ on them herself, when that good
occasions were offered, and when she thought the company would be delighted
or edified by it: being very far from affectation in this, as in all other
matters, and from desiring to appear religious, rather than to be so. She
greatly hated all singularities in Religion, either in matters of opinion, or
of practice; being a great lover of conformity. She had perfectly those
two qualities of David, of loving the godly, and of hating the wicked: and
as she greatly abhorred all lewd and profane persons, so she did no sooner
perceive true goodness and piety in any body, but she presently conceived a
great friendship and affection toward them.

And the fear of God bore so absolute a sway in her soul, as it was the
chief ground of a^ her other virtues and good qualities, for su^ of them, as
she was naturally inclined unto, other by the frame of her mind, or the
temperature of her body, or both (which were many, and of the chiefest) in
then she was greatly consumed and strengthened by this consideration, that
they were pleasing to God Almighty, and commanded by him; oftentimes making
that reflection* and as for the others, vvhere-unto her nature was not so much
disposed of it self, or from which it had some aversion, (as humility,
long-suffering, contemt of the splendor and advantages of this world) she did
in them so strive with herself, out of a mere desire or making herself
acceptable (...) God, and of performing his blessed command^ments; as she did
not only now and then by way of a temporary violence upon herself perform
some actions (...) those virtues, contrary to her own inclination only
because she knew them to be required (...) God; but by her con^nuall study and
practi^ labored to maKe the habitual to her, and (...) a great measure
attained there-unto.

II.
She was most exactlie just, so as she would not have done any body the
least vvrong in the world, though it had been to benefit herself never so
much by it; and would rather have exposed herself to any incommoditie, than
be vvanting in giving every body their due to the full. which also make her
very punctual paying all kind of del^ as soon as ever they vv^ ovving, and
called for never using nor en^ring to make any bo^ call twice for what v^ to
be paid to them; a^ so far from takin^ pleasure in keeping (...) her hands
moneys that were due, as she v^ rather displeased vv^ them, who were s^ in
coming to dem^ them. And as she was severe an observer of this virtue
toward others, so she was very remiss in exacting it from others to
herself; being of a vvonderfull yielding nature, and rather choosing at any
time to go from her right, than by standing too preciselie upon it, dravv-on
any obloquie or strife upon herself. It was from the dictates of Justice,
that she greatly condemned all insurrections whatsoever, as being
persuaded, that absolute obedience is due to the legitimate supreme Powers
and all forcible resistance against them forbidden, though they acq^ themselves
never so ill^ the trust committed (...) them by God and me^ and commit never
(...) many and so great e^rours against equity and reason, and against the
fundamental laws (...) their countries. In which persvvasion, mainly
grounded on conscience, she did also greatly strengthen herself by a
prudentiall consideration (frequentlie insisted upon by her in her discourses)
of the great evils, that many times come to pass by reason of the like
stirs; whereby the people, gulled by the cunning of a fevv factious and
ambitious leaders (zealouslie pretending the public interest, but reallie
making that altogether subservient to the accomplishing of their ov^
unvvarrantable desi^ and desseins) do co^monlie, instead of m^ding their
condition fight themselves into much more grievous ^verie, than that vvhi^
before they suffered (...) apprehended. It vv^ from Justice also, the she was
vvonderfull r^pective to all decay persons, being very ^refull to defer as
mu^ unto them, and to (...) them with all the sa^ civilities, in their present
lovv condition, that were given or due unto them in the days of their best
fortune* and this she observed not only toward others of that kind, with
whom she had not any particular commerce, but even unto them, who in some
sort depended on her, and who often tasted of the fruits of her bounty: she
thinKing it very hard and unreasonable, that what was truly due to a body
for some in (...) rent quality, should (...) denied them because (...) their
misfortune; gri^vous enough to (...) borne, without a^ such aggravation.

III.
As she detested all i^ justice to all kind of persons, so especially the
which was exercise against infirm ones vvanting means an friends for to
help an right themselves; of whose condition she was vvonderfull sensible,
and vvonderfull prone to comfort and releeve them to the best of her power; as
likewise all other persons distressed with any calamities, unto whom she
was exceedingly tenderhearted and compassionate. This made her very
charitable and openhanded to all such, as far as her own abilities would
any vvayes give her leave: the enlarging vvhere-off sl^ desired for nothing el^
so much, as that there^ she might be enabled (...) do the more good unt^ the
needy; whereas els^ setting that consider^tion apart, she h^ brought herself
to an a^solute contentednes vvi^ that mediocrity of fo^tune, which the Lo^
was pleased to affo^ us. And as her com^passionate nature man her to have a
very de^ fellovv-feeling of oth^ folks want and poverty, and to be very
free in imparting her own unto them, vvherevvithall to releeve their
necessities; so she had a very livelie sense of all their other sufferings,
and consequently did exceedingly detest all kind of cruelty. For her heart
was so vvonderfull tender, as her compassion extended itself not only unto
all christians, and unto all mankind, even unto such who by their own
misdoings h^^ brought upon thems^ves the evil they suffer (except only thos^
who being guilty some very heinous ^mes, were unto her ^ objects of mere
horro^ she obdurating her h^ against them out of me^ strength of iudgeme^^ but
it reached also to (...) very dumb and unr^sonable creatures: u^ whom she
could (...) only not find in (...) heart to do any (...) least harm, or
endure others to do it; but if casuallie any hurt was befalne them, it
would very much trouble her, and she would not omit any endeavors for to
help them out of their pains. and I have several times observed with
vvonderment, how her mind would be disquieted, if but a bird, or any other
domestic creature, had any harm come to them, and how tenderly diligent
she would be in seeking to ease (...) to releeve them.

IV.
As her charity (...) very great in the af^ said particulars, so it (...) no
less in maKing (...) best of other fol^ actions* and instead (...) being the
first in de^ting them, or putt^^g an evil construct^^n upon them; she vvo^^d
ever taKe their part, v^^o were so dealt with (...) being so far from
taking any delight in backbiting, and in detracting from others (a vice so
common now adays amongst all kind of persons, as in most companies,
especially of women, it is the principal subject of peoples discourses) as
she would ever resist them that did so: and that not only in the behalf of
persons, to whom she had any relation, or obligation, but even to mere
strangers, yea and to persons who had dealt unKindli^ with her, or any vvay^
offended her; and to suc^ also many times, vvh^ by their own depor^ments had
given the world just cause of su^pecting the vvorst (...) them. It is true,
that a^ such deportments vve^ condemned by her vvi^ much severitie; her
ch^ritie being no vvay^ blind, nor at all ove^ clouding her iudgeme^^ and her
inbred hatred vice and all vicious actions. But she could not give her assent
to those consequences, which usuallie are drawn from them, except the matter
were vvonderfull evident* neither did a common report, or general rumor,
sway her belief much in this particular: she persuading herself, and that
not without good ground, that many have suffered injustlie in their
reputation, without being reallie guilty of the crimes or follies, when
with common fame h^^ branded them. And (...) this her charity vv^ common to
all sorts (...) persons, so she did i^ peculiar manner app^ it to them of the
supr^ me degrees: in vvh^ nevertheless, as in (...) others, she did very mu^^
condemn not only ^ such carriage, as had a^^ thing of indiscretion (...) of
loosnes in it, a^^ thereby gave some p^^bable grounds of suspecting and
speaking the vvorst of them; but even those actions, which being in
themselves innocent, and of an indifferent nature, were known to themselves
to be looked-on with scandal, and to the continuance vvhere-off no necessity
at all obliged them: which to have been the case, some years since, of some
persons of greatest eminency, in this and other neighboring countri^^ is
obvious to every man knowledge, who is n^ a mere stranger to (...) passages
of the times.

V.
Her charity was lik^vvise singular in fo^giving all manner (...) wrongs and
offence^ though never so gross^ or so malicious; and th^^ not only upon
endeavors of reconciliation but before any satisfaction given. And so far
she was from harboring any spleen, or any thoughts of revenge, toward
them that had done her any injury; as she did not only pardon them from all
her soul, and heartily prayed God to do the same; but was very vvilling
and ready, to do them any good offices, not only in that nature, of which
we have spoKen in the foregoing article, but on all other occasions, tha^
presented themselves unto her. And her charit^ was so complete in the
particular, and accomp^nied with so much gen^rositie, as nothing cou^^ have
rejoiced her more than to have it in h^ power, to do so^^ great courtesy
un^ them, who had des^ved the the quite contrary (...) her; and she would
(...) sure to do it, if the o^portunitie offered itself

VI.
She was vvonderfull liberal of her nature, which quality as it well
helped-on her charity, in being communicative of relief to the poor, so it
made her come-off very handsomelie, according to her own condition, with
all other matters of expense; loving much rather not to do at all such things,
as might convenientlie be omitted, than not to do them compleatlie. yet was
she very far from being a prodigal: and as her own inclination did
altogether exemt her from niggardlynes, and from all things that might in any
wise savor that way, so her judgment gave a svveet mixture of frugalitie to
her liberality, making her exactlie wary of spending any thing on vanity,
or pleasures: as on the other side she would alvvayes much ^ther have chosen
to in^^mmodeate herself, than ^ot to fulfill the utmost, ^f what decency,
yea and generositie too, did ^^quire. And as in the ^atter of apparel,
fur^iture, and attendaunce, ^^e could have been con^ent to go to the most
expensive magnificence, that any vvayes might ^ute with her quality; (...)
grace and vvisdome ^ade her overruled vvhat^ver there was too much of this in
her natural inclination, and acquiesce with a full contentment of mind in a
comely mediocritie; yea and to rest satisfied with less too, when that
either the public calamities, or some of our own private emergencies, did so
require it. And in this, as in other particulars, her mind was of that svveet
and happy temper, as she ever kept her desires within those limits, that
reason and goodness did prescribe unto her; and when she ^ad attained to what
^vith their approbation ^he had propounded unto ^erselfe, she rested there,
^vith an absolute conten^ednes; no vvayes like unto most persons, who (...)
^lilating their lon^ (...) to what is remote, (...) little or no taste in
what they do enjoy for the present, though formerlie the utmost of their
vvishes, aspiring still after new inlargements.

VII.
She loved all kind of summerfruit exceedingly, as most young folks,
especially of that sex, use to do: and she could never frame herself to an
absolute and constant forbearance of it, although her he^rs did seem so to
requi^e it, and that the plentyfull use of the same did from time to time
subject her to several little accidents and infirmities. But for all other
things, never man or woman less loved their bellies, than she did; she
taKing-up most contentedlie at any time with most ordinary food, so it were
but good and wholsome; and neither longing for more exquisite dishes, when
she had them not; nor taking any singular delight in them, when that at any
time for my saKe, or for the reception of some friend, she had provided any;
or that abroad, either at a friends house, or in the country upon a journey of
pleasure, she met with any* and she would let the whole year pass,
without so much as once cooking any thing for herself, or having any
particular dish prepared for her. And yet she was not so indifferent, nor her
mouth so out of taste, but that she did perfectly well relish the finer and
delicater meats ^bove the more common ones, and in her own inclinations like
several kinds of food before many others* but to buy that little pleasure,
which she took in them, at the expense of any great cost or trouble, that she
could never find in her heart to do. As for wine, or any strong drinks
vvhatso ever, she never knevv what it was to love them: and when she took
any (as she did vvonderfull seldom, and in very small quantities) it was
meerlie in the nature of a medecin. And as to confitures, and all kind of
svveet-meates, she cared not at all for them, nor could endure any more than
to taste of them, and scarce that neither, even when they cost her nothing.

VIII.
Her chastity was altogether extraordinary; and as with a singular care she
ever kept her reputation most absolutely unspotted, never having committed
any action, that might have afforded any the least ground or color of
obloquie to the most malicious slaunderers: so she never knevv, what it was
to have any the least inclination or temptation of sinning that way. And
indeed, besides the prevalencie of grace and goodness in her, the very temper
of her body made het so absolute a stranger to all sinful lusts, as she never
knevv what it was to take any the least pleasure in our very conjugall
embraces, or in all that time, that we were married together (being
upvvards of eight years) so much as once to yield unto the performance of the
same, without some reluctancie, nor otherwise than in maKing some effort upon
herself for the paying of a bounden duty. And this her natural coldness as it
made her very apt to judge the best of other women, whose public
misbehaviour did not openly speak them guilty, and to misbeleeve all or most
part of what was said of their contrary disposition (as not able to conceive
that easily in others, so much the contrary vvhere-off she found in herself)
so it gave her cause oftentimes to say, when in our private discourses we
would freely speak our minds one to another, that chastity was no virtue at
all in her, and that she did not deserve any commendations for possessing it;
no more than a man, who naturally cares not for wine, does merit ani^
praises for being no drunkard. And as she was chaste in this high degree, so
she was no less modest and shame fast; which quality, a^ well as the
dictates of grace, made her that she ^ould not endure any vvanton and
lascivious expressions, not only not foul and broad ones, but even such as
but darkly or glauncinglie tended that way: at the which, if it were her
fortune to be in company where any such thing was spoken, she would blush
as much, and be as much displeased, as could be expected of a little maiden of
the best nature and education. And indeed at the very first aspect one might
readily read this quality in her face, her ordinary countenance holding forth
a most svveet and a most perfect modesty.

IX.
But the aforesaid coldness of her temper did no vvayes hinder her of being
most fervent in her affection toward me nor of bearing me so sin^ere and so
entire a love, as I believe to be equalled but by fevv wives: and sure I am,
it can be exceeded by none. This made her to desire to have very much of my
company, never being better pleased, than when she had me near her; to be
vvonderfull sollicitous in procuring me all manner of contentment, and
preventing all causes of displeasure; to comply with my inclinations, and
applaud my resolutions, except she savv or apprehended some great cause to the
contrary (which then very svveetlie and prudentlie she would lay open to me)
and endeavor to the utmost of her power to further and effect them; and to be
so vvonderfull tender of me, that if any the least thing ailed me, and if but
my finger aked, she was all out of order, and could not quiet her self, till
she knevv (...) was better with me. And not only at other times it was so
with her, but even when she was nothing well herself, and when she was
troubled with any pain or accident vvhat-ever; the feeling vvhere-off could
not in the least wise hinder that her tenderness over me: which made me very
wary at all times how I did complain before her of any slight matter; for
fear of disquieting her more than the matter was vvorth. And in that sickness,
vvherevvith it pleased God to visit me in the beginning of the year 1646. (the
only that I had, since we were married together) and which, by reason of
a relapse, Kept m^ betwixt two ana thro^ vveeks in my bed, she was so
assiduous about me, took so much pains with me, (although she was then some
months gone with chil^ and needed not to have done any thing herself, we
having more servants than one about us) and did so lay my case to heart, as
none but a most excellent wife would have done the same. And vvithall she
used so much discretion and circumspection, that as often as her grief, out of
the apprehension of my danger, came to that height, that she could no longer
keep it in, but that she must needs vent it in tears and sobs (which befell
her very often) she would be sure to retire to a corner, where I should
neither see nor hear her, for fear of aggravating my indisposition by her
grieving.

X.
And as to me, so t^ her children, her affection was vvonderfull great^ and
tender, which mad^ her take her principal^ delight in them, vvhile^ she
enjoyed them, and heavilie to mourn after them, when the Lord took them from
us; as he did the second, being a boy, on the 15. of May 1649. being then
seven months old: and the eldest, which was a girl, on the second of
October 1647. she then being come to the age of three years compleatlie* and
the loss of this child did not only afflict her extremely for the present,
(as that of the boy did too) but for a great while, and many months after:
during all which time she shed abundance of tears for her. Indeed the girl
was a most lovelie one, being of most exquisite features, and of a most pure
complexion: and therebesides (which was much more to be valued, and
accordingly valued by the mother) there appeared in her, as much as could
appear in that tender age, not only a vvonderfull good wit, but all the
signs of a svveet disposition of mind, and of a good and virtuous nature;
whereby she had got the love of all that knevv her: so as it was no vvonder,
if the Mothers heart was extremely set upon her. And the Lord having given a
good share of the same advantages, both of body and of mind, to our last girl
too; the mothers affection, ever guided as much by judgment as by instinct,
was not only as excessive to her, as it had been to the other, but she took
yet greater joy and contentment in her, than she had done in the former:
Because that the indovvments of the mind, the chief object of the Mothers
affection, shevved forth themselves more manifestly and fully in her than
they had done i^ our eldest girl, forasmuch as she was com^ to some greater
ripen^ of age, than the other had lived unto; being four years and a half
old, when the Mother dyed. And my Love finding every day more and more, that
besides the sweetness of her nature, free from all vicious and perverse
inclinations (some or other vvhere-off do appear in most children) a great
flexibilitie toward all good instructions, and an extraordinary avvfulnes of
all corrections, so as a word and a threate would do^ more with her, tha^
blows with others; she was also very capable and vvithall not oneli^
vvilling, but greatly desirous of learning, an^ consequently most su^ceptible
of all good education: she took so great a felicity in her, that s^ she had
but the chil^ near her, she nev^^ found the miss of ani^ other company;
vvhic^ otherwise, her natu^^ being very sociable she loved vvonderfull
well. And as before, so much more during the time that she altogether Kept her
chamber (as she did for the space of seven vveeks, ever since that first
accident on the first of March) she spent the greatest part of her time with
her; partly in teaching her to pray, and making her repeat often the Lords
prayer, and several other good prayers, as likewise the Creed, and the
Commandments; partly (...) catechizing her about the principal points of
christian Religion, making her every day repea^ what she had learned before,
with some ne^ additions still from tim^ time; partly in teachin^ her the
beginnings (...) reading, which she di^ with so much succes, (...) in a fevv
vveeks the chi^^ had perfectly learned (...) her letters, and the sp^^ling of
all single syllabl^^ with good progre^^ toward the spelling of the more
compounded ones, and of some whole words; and lastly in answering the
child's questions (most of which were vvonderfull pretty and witty) and in
taKing all occasions, both by them, and otherwise too, of begetting and
confirming in her the knowledge and love of virtue, piety, and civilitie. And
finding all the pains, which she took with the child, vvonderfull
effectuall^ that did so inflame h^^ affection toward h^^ more and more, an^
add so much to the great pleasure and ha^pynes, which she shape^ unto
herself in havin^ her near her, as s^^ would needs dress the child every
morning he^selfe, and spend an hou^ or two about it, inste^ of letting one of
h^ maids do it, as they us^ to do, when the chi^^ was younger yet: a^^ she
would never have lost her out of her sight, if she would have looked only
to her own contentment. But her judgment overruling her inclination in this,
as in other particulars, she would every day for a great while deprive
herself of her, not only when she had company, but even at other times
too; for fear of making the child mopish, and to give her time to recreate
herself with play, the moderate use vvhereoff she knevv to be absolutely
necessary for children. But although her love and her indulgence toward her
children was thus excessive, yet it was no vvayes (...) fond one, but
tempered with so much severitie as she would never vvin^ at any of their
faults nor let them go unco^rected, vvhen-ever the^ had done some thin^
amiss; as no children^ though of never so goo^ a nature, are alvvayes exempt
from committing some childish fault, or other.

XI.
Her love and affection, which was thus fervent to her husband and children,
was nothing remiss to her other relations, especially to her parents and
two btothers, but as entire and as great, as could be expected of a person of
so much grace and goodness. This made he^ lay very much to hear^ the death of
her eldest brother, William Dungan, who having had the command, for the space
of a year and (...) half, of a company (...) two hundred fire-loc^ in the
kings service, i^ the late vvarres of England, and shevved mu^ gallantrie and
coura^^ on all occasions, vv^^ one of the princip^^ actours in the taking (...)
Leicester, a fevv days before the battle of Nazeby; where having led on the
soldiers the third time to the assault, after that they had been twice
beaten-off, he was at his very entering into the town shot thorough the body
with a musket-bullet, of which he died within a fevv hours after; being
very much lamented by all them that knevv him, especially by his General,
Prince Rupert, who in a particular manne^ affected him for his valor,
diligence, and sobriety. This loss, of ^ brother in the flovver o^ his youth
(for he vva^ not above 23. years old when he dyed) whom she had ever loved
mos^ tenderly, and whom s^^ esteemed highly for h^^ brave qualities; havin^
been redoubled vvit^ the loss of her mothe^ one of the best mothe^ that ever
was; vvh^ had taken her sons dea^ so much to heart, as it put her into a
consomtion, whereof she died within a fevv months after: she was ready to
be overvvhelmed with grief, if the confort, which she took in me and her
child, had not sustained her, till other and sublimer considerations, of
submitting to Gods will, and taking all patienlie at his hands, could take
place in her distressed mind. But as it had afflicted her very much, that the
desolate estate of Ireland, and the exigence of my affairs, had necessitated
me to bring her away from Dublin in the beginning of the year 1644. and
thereby to separate her at a great distance, as from the rest of her friends
and kindred (who all were exceeding sorry to part with her) so from her
dear Parents, vvhere-unto nevertheless she submitted willingly, and
without repining, as knovving that my resolution to be ^^ounded on
unansvvere^^le reasons: so she did ^^cessivelie long, after ^^e death of her
brother ^^d mother, more yet ^^an ever before, to re^rne into Ireland, for
(...) be a comfort to her ^ood father in that sad ^^nelynesse, vvhere-unto that
grievous double ^osse had reduced him. ^or she loved him as much, as ever child
loved a father, not only ^ut of a natural instinct, as he was her father,
but upon the consideration, that he had ever been a most loving and most
indulgent father to her; and that as he had put her into the world, so he had
had a singular care, together with the mother (a woman of a most sanctified
mind and conversation) to bring her up in the fear of God, and in the true
Religion: and vvithall had never spared any pains or costs on her, for to
^^ve her the very best ^eeding, that the coun^^e could afford, and to ^ave her
thoroughlie in^^ructed in all those qua^^ties, that are any vvayes ^^quisite
for the making-^p of a most complete ^entlevvoman, viz per^ect skill in all
kind of ^eedlevvork, the french ^anguage, dancing, mu^ick; the lute, and other
^nstruments. And her desire, of returning to her father on the said ^rounds,
being so full of piety and reason, I would long since have accomplished it,
if the Public condition of Ireland, and the convenience of mine own
affairs, would in any wise have given way to it. Which she perfectly
well knovving, and that it was not want of good will, that hindered me from
giving her satisfaction in this particular; she strove to content herself the
best she could, and to console her ^nging with these ho^es, that the same
lets, ^vhich hindered us for ^he present from retur^ing to Dublin, would ^ot
last alvvayes; but that ^he times mending, she would yet go back to ^reland,
and there be a stay and comfort to her good father all the remainder of his
days. But it has pleased God to dispose otherwise of it, and in her to
deprive him, as well as me, of the chiefest joy that we had in this world.

XII.
As she esteemed it her greatest happiness, that God had done her the grace to
call her to the knowledge of his saving truth, and to the assured hopes of
everlasting bliss, by making her a christian, of the Reformed Religion, and
that reallie and sincerely, not in outvvard profession only; for which she
gave daily most hearty thanks unto his Divine Majesty: so she accounted it
one of her greatest temporal blessings, to be of a good extraction. And that
indeed was as good, as any could be under the degree of nobility: the
Dungans (of which house her father, Thomas Dungan, Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas at Dublin, is a younger brother) being of the auncientest and
best gentry of Ireland, and allied not only with most of the prime gentry
of the Pale, as the Talbots, the Rocheforts, the Ashpooles, the VVogans, etc.
but even with several Noble houses. And as for her maternall line, that was
no vvayes inferior to the other: the Palmers of Nottinghamshire (of which her
mother, Grace Palmer, was borne) although but a younger branch of the Palmers
^f Lemingthon, in the ^ountie of Gloucester, having alvvayes subsisted very
honorably, and been reckoned among the best houses of that country. And she
set so high a value upon this quality, that if it had been possible for her to
forgo what nature and her birth had given her, she would not have accepted
of the wealth and splendor of a Princess, on condition of not being borne a
gentlevvoman. Yet for all this no body did or could more, than she, despise a
gentleman or gentlevvoman, whose qualities and actions were not correspondent
to their extraction* and not only vice and wickedness made her loose all
esteem in their behalf (as to the contrary she greatly valued even the
meanest persons, in whom she perceived true goodness and virtue) but also
ill-bred carriage, and all incivilitie and ^udenes: using to say oftentimes,
that in vain they stood upon their gentry, though descended of never so good
houses, whose behavior and manners were gross and plebejan; and being
herself not only very civil, after the exactest and compleatest manner,
but vvonderfull gentill in all her actions, by nature as well as by education,
and so without all affectation* and she would come-off vvo^derfull
hand-somelie with all Kind of complements, having naturally a great vein
and copiousnes that way, both in vvriting of letters, and in discoursing; and
yet being very judicious in not making use of them but very seasonablie, and
as was most fitting and requisite according to the diversity of the several
occasions.

VVithall she was a great hater of all proud and haughty deportments: ^eing
herself so cour^ous and affable, not ^nelie to her equals, but ^lso to her
inferiors, those of the very meanest ^rt not excepted, that ^ad any occasion
to ^ome at her, as she vvon their hearts extremely. wherefore also not only
her friends, but also all those mechanic and ministerial persons, who either
used to come constantly to the house, and to be employed by her, or had at
any time had any dealing at all with her, were extremely grieved at her
decease; there being very fevv of that whole number, who did not witness
their sorrovv for it with abundance of tears. And yet her carriage toward
this Kind of people was ever very free from all meanenes, she behaving
herself with an exact mediocritie betwixt scornful contemt and an
over-^opular familiarity.

XIII.
Being of a very so^iable nature, she loved good company very much, and to
spend some hours at convenient times in making or receiving visits. And as she
was fit for all kind of discourses, and could not only be content, but took
great delight in entering and dwelling on serious matters, whether of
state-affaires and the passages of the times, or of things belonging to
Morality or Divinity, when that the gravity of the company, or other good
occasions made them necessary or seasonable; she acquitting herself very
vviselie and solidlie of them, to the great satisfaction of them that she
discoursed vvithall: so naturally she was very much taken with all kind of
witty conversation, having herself a very ready wit, and a very quick
apprehension; by reason vvhere-off also she was ever very apt to learn* and
as she attained very soon, being yet a child, to all those things, that she
was instructed in, even to admiration; so since our coming to Paris she
perfected herself in the french tongue in much less time, than what is
usual unto most others. And for the same reason she bore also a great love to
all other productions of wit, especially to good verses and poemes, and to
elegant well contrived Romants, or fained histories, such as Sidneys Arcadia,
Astrea, Ariana, the Illustrious Bashavv, and above all those two late ones of
Monsr de Calleprenette, so much admired universallie, Cassandra and Cleopatra;
on the reading of which choice Romants she did with much contentment bestovv
some part of her time now and then: being vvonderfullie pleased, as with the
beauty of their language and conceptions, so with the characters off all kind
of heroical virtues, which therein are held forth most livelie in the persons
of both sexes. But as great a lover as she was of wit, and of all the
productions of it; the least mixture of prophanenes, obscenenes, or
lasciviousnes, did so sovvre them unto her, as she did not only loose all
pleasure in them, when so tainted, but she did perfectly loath and detest
them.

XIV.
She was also vvonderfull discreet in her conversation, and ever used a
singular care and circumspection in not giving any offense to any body;
avoiding not only all kind of taunts reproaches, and bitter jests and scoffs
(the which she also very much condemned in others, who used them before her)
but all contention and contradiction, even where the argument maintained was
no vvayes to her mind; except the matter was of that importance, as she
thought herself bound to express her disliKe or contrary judgment abour it;
which so itself she would do with much vvarynes and mildnes. And although
that in them, with whom she conversed, she could in no wise away with
vanity and bragging, nor with lying or unlikelie tales, those two faults
being point blanck contrary to her own disposition and practice; as not
neither with stupiditie and dulnes, a defect so extremely remote from her
nature: yet out of mere strength of judgment (vvherevvith God had indovved
her in a great measure, although for the most part wit and judgment do not
use to go together) she had brought herself to so absolute a habit of
patiently enduring those and other impertine^cies, as she would not in the
least manner express her dislike there-off unto them, that she found guilty
of the same, nor in any wise take notice there-off, by her words or actions.
And as in these, so in all other particulars, she studied to render herself
altogether complaisant, or complying, unto them, with whom she did converse,
though many times greatly against her own liking: never breaking the rule,
which here-in she had prescribed unto herself, but where by decency,
honor, o^ conscience, she found herself indispenseabli^ obliged to the
contrary

XV.
She that was thus circumspect in giving no offense by her words and
conversation, may easily be conceived to have been very far from being
offensive in her actions. And so she was indeed, having a perpetual vvatch
over herself, not to do any thing, where at any body might justly be
offended: but to the contrary omitting no occasions of doing every body all
the good offices, that any vvayes lay in her power, and taKing a singular
pleasure in obliging others. And this she did with so much generositie, that
vvhere-as she never lost the memory of any good turns, that had been done
her by others, but would us^ all possible means for t^ requite them, and on
all occasions express he^ sense and thankful acknowledgement of the same; so
on the contrary she never thought much of the good she had done to others, and
could not endure to speak of it, or to have it spoKe off, any kind of way,
much less by way of upbraiding; even not in case of unthankfulnes, and where
the parties obliged were altogether unmindfull of the benefits received, or
furthermore so far forgate themselves, as to requite good with evil.

Neither could any such provocation at any time prevail with her, for to
discover other folks secrets, not only such as had been confided to her by
the parties themselves; but even those that otherwise and accidentally were
come to her knowledge. And as she was thus exact and conscientious in the
concealing of secrets; so never any body gave less^ way to that curiosity
so ordinary in the world, of inquiring into the condition and affairs of
other people: being so far from seeking to pry into them, as she would not
give any the least encouragement unto such, who upon occasion, and of their
own accord, did happen at any time to make any such thing known unto her.

XVI.
What I have said of her great complying in conversation, even to the
enduring patiently of the faults, defects, and impertinencies of others, is
the more to be admired, because that naturally, and by the temper of her
body, she was much inclined to be choleric, and to be vexed at any thing,
great or small, that was not to her mind. But never any body of that
constitution did more earnestli^ and more effectually strive to overcome it:
whereby as she had made a great progres toward the acquiring of a contrary
habit, insomuch as many times she would put-up not only small matters, but
even great and sensible offenses, without being much moved at them, and
very ordinarily, for to avoid all occasion of putting herself into any
heat, dissemble the faults and misdoings of her servants, and of others, if
she was not absolutely necessitated to take notice of them: so at the vvorst,
and even when that the suddainnes of some un-expected provocation or
indignity wrought on her natural disposition, and stirred her up to anger;
the vvorst effects of it were no other, than some sharp expressions. For she
never knevv what it was to use injuries, or opprobrious language, much less
any further effects of choler, no not to her own servants, though never so
much moved. And as her anger was thus gentle, so it was vvonderfull short,
passing away in a moment; especially if those, with whom she was offended,
did not by their obstinacy and offensive replies minister any new fevvell to
it. And no sooner was she come to herself, but she would be the first in
condemning, herself, if she found that she had at all overshot herself, and
spoke any thing more harshlie or tartlie, than she thought she ought to have
done.

XVII.
She was a great lover of Peace: and as the desire of preserving it to
herself, made her extreme wary of offe^ding others in the least manner,
either by word o^ deed, which might minister any cause or pretext unto them
of falling-out with her; and to dissemble any such offense given to herself
by others, if the nature of it, or the manner of committing it, dit not make it
altogether incapable of being dissembled: so she was ever very studious, of
preserving it also among others. For to tell tales, whereby to make people
have an evil opinion one of another, and to set them by the ears together,
was a thing utterlie unknovvne to her, as to her own practice, and
extremely detested by her in them that were guilty of it. And if it fell out
so, as some times it did, that two persons of her acquaintance, being either
openly fallen-out among themselves, or bearing some secret grudge on^ to
another, told he^ things to the prejudic^ of their adversaries: she would be
so far from giving the parties interested any full or clear knowledge of
the things that had been so vvhispered unto her, or making any direct relation
thereoff to them, as she would not so much as give them the least hint of any
such matter. And whereas her good mother had ever observed, not to suffer her
children to come and tell her her stories of the servants, even when that
reallie they had done something amiss; least they should get a habit, if
countenanced there-in, of tale-telling so my dear Love was resolved, and had
begun to observe the same rul^ toward our children that vveaning them from
their infancy of that vi^ so hateful to her, (...) being maKe-bates, an^
sovvers of discord and d^vision; she might forr^ them to the contrary v^^tue,
consonant to l^ own constant practi^^ of rather excusing ot^ folks actions,
and ^^king ever the best of the same, whereby to preserve peace and quietness.

XVIII.
God having indovved her with a very large share of handsomnes, and given her
with a middlemost stature (somvvhat inclining to the less, but vvonderfull
neatlie timbred, with a most exact shape and proportion of all her limbs) a
very lovelie face, made-up of singular good fe^tures, an excellent eye, most
fine skin, and very pure complexion she was very vvilling a^ careful to
preserve tho^ advantages, that God h^ bestovved on her, bo^ by some particulars
of h^ diet, and by all oth^ lavvfull means: but ve^ much detested to man use
of any thing, t^ was a fard, or in the l^^ manner approached of (...)

And as she could (...) chufe but be conscious (...) herself of those
advantages, that she possessed in this, and in other particulars, and was
heartily glad of them: so she made no other use thereoff, than to thank God
for having given her them; being very far from taking any pride or vanity
in them, and from despising others for vvanting them. And vvhere-as very fevv
women are handsome in the eyes of those of their own sex; it being a very
general infirmiti^ in it, so to be blinde^ with envious emulatio^ as either
not to see at a^ those advantages, vvhic^ others do possess in the and other
particulars, ^ to see them with great diminution: (as on t^ contrary very
fevv (...) them are deemed oth^ than handsome by themselves, though never s^
far from it) my Lov^ was so much of a diff^rent a disposition, as (...) man
could be more f^vourable in judging of vvomens handsomnes, and of their other
good qualities; nor more vvilling and forvvard to profess as much, and with
greatest candor to give unto every one, upon all occasions, the commendations
they deserved.

XIX.
She was vvonderfull neat about herself, and about her house, and a great
lover of decency and comelynes about both, loving fine and fashionable
apparel well and handsome furniture likewise; but neither o^ them with
excess. For although she would have taken a very large sco^ in them, if she
vvoul^ have meerlie follovv^ her natural inclination which would have
ca^ried her to the utmo^ that could have sto^ with her purse and q^^litie: yet
reason and g^ were so prevalent with her, as made her very much abate of
those desires, and made her much more moderate in them, than most other
persons, even such as are otherwise both good and gracious, would have been
in the same case. And every day she grevv visiblie to a greater perfection in
this particular, and to have her heart less and less set upon those outvvard
ornaments; often expressing her dislike of those, who minds being altogether
fixed on the ado^ning and setting out (...) these te^porarie lodgin^ and
perishable bodie^ which within a lit^ while must be relinq^shed, and reduced
to d^ and corruption, have (...) thoughts of adorni^ their souls with true
v^^tue and piety, the one^ true ornaments of ch^^^tians, that are to last
(...) ever, and to be revvar^^^ with eternal happyn^^, and blessed
immortality.

XX.
She was a great lover of truth, and by reason there-off did not only
detest all Kind of lies, especially such as were any vvayes malicious, or
prejudicial to others, and tended to the detorting and depraving of their
sayings or actions; but was vvonderfull exact in keeping her word, and in
making good her promises, though made ^^ver so cursorilie or sup^^ficiallie,
and that even the smallest matters, well as in those of g^^^ter moment. For
was fully persvvad^^ that people are as m^ bound, both in hon^^ and in
conscience, to ^complish a bare and ^luntary promise, as a^^ formal contract,
con^med with an oath, (...) with all other bind^^g solemnities. And as (...)
ever conformed her o^^ practice there-unto, so she labored to induce all
others, in whom she had any interest, to do the same, and rather to suffer
any inconvenience, or loss, than to find-out a pretext of going from their
word: representing unto them, as unto herself, that one ought to promise
nothing inconsideratelie, but to thinK well of it, before one engage ones
self: but having once passed ones word, that then there remains nothing
else but performance, if the matter promised be lavvfull and possible. An^ as
in all other parts of h^ life, so in this too, s^^ had a singular care ^
vvalking by that gold^ rule, to deal so vvi^^ others, as she did des^^^ to be
dealt vvithall h^^selfe. Love to tru^^^ made her also very i^^ partial, not
only in (...) behalf of strangers, (...) even of herself, and ^f all her
nearest relatio^^ judging of all with the same unbiassed equity and
equality, both in questions of interest and of concernment, and in those
concerning the nature of actions, and of qualificatio^s of the mind and of the
body.

XXI.
She was extremely fearful of her nature, insomuch as she would figure
unto herself and apprehe^d dangers, where there was none at all; especially
upon the water: and not only upon the sea, where all things at the best
appeared veri^ terrible unto her, bu^ upon the very rivers: s^ as it was
death to her (...) London, to come into boat, though the vvat^ was never so
calm* a^ even here at Paris, in tho^ boats used upon the Sei^ (incomparably
bigg^ and surer, than those (...) the Thames) she thoug^ herself every jot as
un^fe* and though she vvo^ now and then be persv^ded with much ado, to go
by water to Charenton, or to Chaliot, yet her mind was at no ease nor quiet,
as long as she was upon the river, even in the fairest and stillest vveather.
Yet grace and reason did so oversvvay this her natural timourousnes, as
notvvhitstanding the great excess of it, there was nothing so terrible, but
she could resolve to undergo it, either for the maintaining of a good cause,
or any other way called t^ it by God; and nothin^ so hazardous, but s^^ could
be induced to (...) upon good grounds, an^ at the appearance of an^ necessity,
or great co^veniencie. This was t^^ reason, that she, who (...) trembled and
quaked (...) the least apprehension (...) death, and at the l^ shaddovv of any
dang^ though but an imagi^^rie one, thorough the ^cret and sudden mori^^^ of
her natural infirm^ in that particular; could in a settled mind think on death,
and that under any shape, with as much quietness of mind, and undauntednes, as
more could not be expected of a most valourous warrior, or of a man
consummate in courageous wisdom. And that this was not a delusion, has well
appeared by the effect, she having looked death in the face, without being in
the least manner appalled at it, during this last period of he^ life, and ever
since thos^ great and frequent losse^ of blood, which at lengt^ have carried
her away gave her just cause t^ conceive herself in danger of it; as she did
to the full, from the beginning^

For although that aft^ every fit, except the ver^ last of all, she came st^
very well to hersel^ again, (as has been mo^ at full declared at t^ entrance
of this treati^ yet ever since the first (...) them her mind gave her, that she
would not outlive them, but that assuredly they would make an end of her.

Wherefore, for to prepare me for her death, which she knevv would be most
grievous to me (according to the excessive love I bore her) she would often
Talk of it, not only about the time of those fits, and when she was
nevvlie come out of them, but even at other times, and far from them. And
althoug^ every foot I would fai^ have hindered her of sp^king of it, the
thoug^ of loosing her being (...) unsupportable to me, (...) I could not
endure the least mention of it; y^ she would still go o^ notvvhitstanding all
n^ opposition, and freque^ interruptions, telling (...) that it was good
alvvay^ to think of the vvor^ and that it would be ^ver the more, for talKi^
of it. Now the sum^ of those her discourses, tending ever to the same purpose,
was, That she nothing at all apprehended death, but was most vvilling to
undergo it, if it pleased God so to dispose of her; finding nothing in it to
trouble her, but the thought of the sorrovv, which that separation would
cause unto me: beseeching me, if so it fell out, to use my whole strength for
to hinder me from succombing under it, and for to make me bear that aff^^ction
patiently* and (...) make this her couns^ sink the deeper into (...) mind, she
would ma^^ use, as of other consid^rations, so of that of o^ girl, whose
loss vvou^ be too great, if with (...) mother she should al^ come to loose
her fath^, and that in a stra^^^ country, far from (...) her friends and
kindr^: wherefore I ought (...) do all I could for to p^^serve me for her*
and t^^t was all she ever said of her to me on that occasion. For knovving
full well, that next to herself I loved her most perfectly, as much as a
child can be beloved by a father; she knew it superfluous to talk to me, of
being careful and tender of her, and of making much of her.

And these same things (of her finding nothing in her death to trouble her, but
the grief it would cause unto me; with the wonted adjurations, that I would
strive to moderate it for Gods sake, an^ for her sake, and to preserve myself
for our gi^le) she repeated to me s^verall times in that sho^ space, that was
betvvi^ her last fit, and her en^ the abundance of tear^ which her imminent
d^^ger, frequent faintin^ and great pains and t^ sings, drevv from (...),
giving her occasion to (...) new that counsel so ^^t unto me, vvhere-off ^^e
savv I had so much (...) already, and would have much more shortly after.
And she continued to express this christian resolution, accompanied with so
much tenderness of love toward me (of not apprehending death at all in her
own regard, but only in mine) to the very last, as long as she was able to
express any thing, and when that she was now at the very point of death,
and had it even within her, and upon her lips. For a little before she lost
her speec^ after one of her grievo^sest and last tossing (...) when the sight
and sen^ of what she endured, a^ the most evident signs (...) the
inevitablenes of (...) loss, had caused me, i^ transport of sorrovv, (...)
throvv myself upon (...) bed by her side with ab^^dance of tears, she (...)
in french (the langu^^e she had only sp^^^e all that night, beca^se that all
the persons in ^^e room understood it, ^^d most of them understood no other)
Viola tout le mal, that is, Lo there all the evil: the meaning of which
words, very intelligible to me by what so often before she had expressed
more at large unto me, was, That she was sensible or apprehensive of no ill
to herself in her death, but only of the evil and grief it did and would
cause unto me. And she spoke this thus shortly, because that speaking begun
now to be somevvhat troublesome a^^ difficult unto her. Neith^^ do I know,
that (...) spoke any thing else a^^^ it, but that she gave (...) blessing to
her chi^^, whom she savv st^^d most sadly at the ^^^s foot (the poor lamb
^aking the mothers cal^ ^o heart much beyond v^^at is usual in so youn^ ^n
age) and gave and as ^^d, with sweetest expre^^^^s, accompanied with ^ost
svveet and tender l^^^s, an assurance of of a ^^fect forgivenes of any
displeasure, that at any time might have been caused by the one of us to the
other. For after that being risen, for to give the midvvife and the
nurce-keeper way to change her to another place, as she had desired: I found,
when that was done, and that I came again to her, that she had lost her
speech, though not yet her fences. For a mess of broth, with some medcinall
thing in it, which Dr Sarrasin and the Midvvife judged proper for her, and
desire^ her to take, having bee^ refused by her; as tire^ by the great
variety o^ cordials and other things that had been given to h^^ since the
beginning of t^^ fit, and finding it no^ althogether bootlesse, (...) take any
thing vvha^soeuer: as soon as I h^^ tendered it unto her, a^^ prayed her to take
it f^^ my sake, she took it ve^^ readily, and took-dov^^ every drop of it. And
having not long after also lost her senses, she continued in that estate the
matter of a quarter of an hour longer: and having been very quiet and calm
this last half hour of her life (all her pains and pangs having quite left
her, and her tossings being quite ceased with them) she vvent-out like a
candle, and gave-up her ghost most quietly: going herself to taKe possession
of heavenly bliss, but leaving me f^^ of most grievous a^^ mortal sorrovv,
to (...) as long as my days; th^^ being nothing on t^^s earth, that can make
(...) unto me that joy (...) comfort, which I h^^e lost by loosing her (...)
rest company.

XXII.
Her great resolut^^n against death, and (...) courageous contemt^ ^f all the
terrors of it, to the very last moment; as it was altogether contrary to her
natural disposition, so it proceeded wholy from divine grounds, and from
the gracious assistaunce of Gods blessed spirit, Quickening and strengthening
her faith in the mercy of God, thorough the merits of Christ's precious blood,
and of his bitter death and passion: her heart being anchored in an unshaken
assurance on those infallible promises of our blessed Saviou^ That vvho-so-ever
beleeve^ in him, Ioh. 3.14. and 5.4.24. and 6.51. etc.
shall not perish, (...) have everlasting life, and (...) come into
condemnation, (...) pass from death unto life, (...) live for ever. Which
(...) faith she expressed f^^quentlie, as in for^^r times, so during these
(...) last moments; especia^^e after that the continu^^ce of her bleeding,
^^^ger than it had been (...) in any former fit, her ^^^quent faintings, the
^^rplexitie of the midv^^^e, and of the rest of her friends and people about
her, their whispering together, and the sending-for of Mr Drelincourt, one of
the french Ministers of Charenton, had made her comprehend cleerlie, that she
was now come to the last period of her life. And having expressed great joy
and contentment at the sight of Mr Drelincovrt, it being betwixt eight and
nine of the clock when he came; she presently composed he^selfe for to hear
his e^hortation, and to pr^ with him. His exhort^tion was indeed a mo^^
heavenly one, the sum^^ of it being, that (...) should absolutely re^^gne
herself into the hands of God, either f^r life or for death; that ^^e should
cast herself in^o the arms of Christ Ies^^, and in his name, and ^^r his
merits sake, ask ^f God forgivenes of all ^^r faults and transgressi^^s, with
a certain assurance of obtaining it* that be in reconciled to God by the blood
and mediation of our Savior, death was not all to be feared by her, because
it would be no death to her, but a passage from this vale of misery to life
and joy everlasting: with many other most excellent expressions, fitted to her
present condition, and for to make her quit this life with alacrity* and
after that follovved the prayer, tending to the same purposes: durin^ both
which, though the^ were of a great length and that her pain^ and unquietnes
vve^ growing on her before they were begun, she la^ very still, giving great
attention to them, a^^ follovving the^ all alo^^ with up-lifted hands a^ eyes,
as likewise with h^ voice upon all the m^^ pregna^t, passages of the^^. And
after that they vv^^ done, she assured me, that her heart too had fully gone
along with them from the beginning to the end, and that she had found a great
deal of singular comfort and co^solatio^ in them. Wherefore also when that
Mr. Drelincourt, after he had done, vvithdrevv himself into the next room,
for to give way to me, to Dr Sarrasin, to the midvvife and keeper, and to the
rest of the women, to come about her, for to give her something, and to afford
her other necessary accommodations she thinking, that he ha^ gone away for
good an^ all, sent after him, for (...) pray him not to leave he^ but to stay
with her (...) the end, for to renev^ unto her from time (...) time that
spiritual comfort, which he had beg^ so effectually to minist^ unto her. And
he ^^ving sent her word, the he had no other inte^tio^ came presently back
in^ the chamber again: a^ from that time he never quit her to the last,
conforting her from time to time (as the intermissions of her faintings, and of
her anguish and tossings, ministered opportunity) with short exhortations, and
with ejaculatorie prayers; the which were still most cordiallie received and
follovved by her. And in all those pains and anxieties she never spoke an
impatie^t word, but that sometimes she exclaimed, Ce jeune coeur ne se veut
render, that is, This young heart will not yield. For her heart being in its
full strength and vigor, as not at all abated by any sickness, struggled hard
with death, caused by meer^ emptynes, and the loss^ of blood; which thin^
also she had apprehended she having told you Lordship but the day before, that
as she fear not death at all, so the pains, which she exp^cted to endure
before (...) did somevvhat terrify her. Yet neither the expectation of them,
when yet absent, nor the sense of them, when she now suffered them, did in
the least manner shake her resolution and vvillingnes to dye, nor her affiance
in the goodness and mercy of her Savior, as not neither her tender care of me:
but having continued constant in them all, and the Lord having done her the
grace, to give ner ease, and to free her from those disquieting pains, before
he took her away, she concluded her life with a most blessed end, to the
great edification, yea and admiration, of all the standers by, even such a^
were of a contrary Religion.

Now, My lord, let a^ the world judge with yo^ Lordship, whether havin^
lost such a wife, so good, gracious, so loving, so lovel^ so accomplished
every vv^ and that in the very flow of her age, when she was but five and
twenty years old; I can grieve moderately; and whether my sorrovv can be
justly condemned, though very excessive and lasting. I know the Lord has
done me no vvrong, in taking her from me, who was his own, and in using that
right over her, which he has over all his creatures, as Souverain Lord and
Master, whereby it is free for him, to dispose of them at any time as he
pleases: and I know also, that J have given his divine Majesty cause enough,
to send me this cross, and any other that I am capable off. But these
considerations as they are of force for to make me take thi^ cross at his
hands vvithou^ murmuring (the which trust to have done exactli^ not having had
the least temptation of calling his just^ into question, for having de^ thus
with me) so I find the not sufficient for to hinder (...) of being sensible to
the full ^f the evil, that he has in^^cted on me* neither do I ^^leeve, that
when he sen^^h any grievous calamity to his servants, he is offended with
them, for seeing their sorrovv proportionable to the bitterness of what he
makes them suffer. For in this very particular, which is now my case, my
vvoefull and deplorable case; J find, that when he thought good, in taking
from the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 24.15. and seq.
the desire of his eyes (as he has done mine from me) to forbid him, for some
mysterious signification, all outvvard expressions of mourning, even the very
shedding of tears: yet he no vvayes forbid him t^ grieve reallie and
invvardlie but rather gave him a command, or at the least an express
permission, for doing s^ by the first words of the 1^ verse, if they be taken
in the right sense, as has been do^ of S. Hierome, and some other of the best
Interpreters. F^ as for that high degree of her^ call virtue and vvisdome, not
only not being ve^ deeply touched with a^ cross or affliction, though
^ver so bitter and cruel, but (...) finding even matter of joy (...) it, and
of giving God thanks for it: as I admire it in them that possess it, so I
confess to be very far from it, and to see little ground of hoping ever to
attain to it; especially in this particular, which has lighted upon the
tenderest and least armed part of my soul.

And my case is the more to be pittyed, because that having lost in my dearest
Consort that which J most loved, and vvhere-in I most joyed in this world,
and thereby my life being become burdensome and hateful to me; yet there lies
upon me a cruel necessity, not only of not abandonning or vvilfullie
neglecting i^ (which I would not do hovv-ever, because absolutely forbidden
by him, vvhos^ holy will and commandment must be the rule of all o^ actions)
but even of desirin^ and striving with all possib^^ care to uphold and to
prolo^^ it, for to preserve myself f^ that dear pledge of our m^tuall love,
which she has l^ me; both because mine ovv^ affection, agreeable to the
dict^tes of God and Nature, lead me strongly there-unto; and because that
that bless soul has in her latter days, even to the last moments of her
life, made it so often her most serious request to me, and her only request:
the which not to seek to fulfill to the utmost, as far as any vvayes lies
in my power (though nothing else obliged me to it) I would account a crime of
the next nature to sacrilege. So as J must resolve to live many years yet, if
God so see it fitting, yea and vvish and endeavor to do so, though all the
sweetness of my life be taken from me, an^ that I see nothing but thic^ clouds
of dismal draknes before me; which make death unt^ me, as to myself,
infiniteli^ preferable before life. For even the memory of her virtues, as on
the one side it ministers some kind of contentm^^ and comfort to me,
especiall^ when I consider the bless revvard there-off, which she now
reapeth in heaven, vvherin the presence of God she in joyeth the fulness of joy,
all te^res being vviped-off from h^^ eyes: so on the other side it do^ mainlie
aggravate my sorrovv, because that the greater they were, and the rest of her
most desirable and lovelie qualities, the greater is my loss, in being
deprived of her. But be her dearest Jdea matter of comfort to me, or matter of
sorrovv, it shall ever and incessantly be present to my soul, and therein to
the end of my days take-up that whole room, which a christian, without
offense to his Creator and Savior, and with a due sub-ordination to that
love, which is ovving to him in the first place, ca^ lavvfullie afford to any
thin^ created; just in the same manner, as she did possess it duri^^ that
time, that J was bless^ with that great happyn^^ of enjoying her most amia^
company. I should nev^ have done, My lord, if (...) would take that scope
(...) dwelling on this theam^, which my affection and gr^^f does prompt unto
me. (...) fear of importuning y^^r Lordship constrains m^^^ break off: and
so with ^y most hearty thanks for ^ll those friendly and pious pains,
which ever since this fatal blovv you have taken, and do still take daily,
in endeavoring to heal this deep and incurable vvound, and to minister all
spiritual comfort to me, I reamaine

Your Lordships most obliged and humble, but desolate and disconsolate servant,
ARNOLD BOAT.
Paris this 24. of May 1651.
D. O. M. S. LECTISSIMAE FOE MINAE MARGARITAE DVNGAN: ANIMI PIETATE ET
PROBITATE; AMORE AC FIDE IN DEV^ PVRIORIS RELIGIONIS ZELO, CHARITATE IN
PROXIMO^ PHILOSTORGIA IN MA^^TVM, LIBEROS, PARENTE^ MODESTIA, CASTITAT^
BENIGNITATE, LIBER^LITATE, COMITAT^ EXIMIE ORNATAE: ETIAM IVSTITIAE (...)
VERITATIS AMOR^ PRVDENTIA; GEN^ ROSITATE; RELIQVIS VIRTVTIB^^, SVPRA SEXVM ET
ANN^^, PRAEFVLGENTI: INDOLIS QVOQVE ET ^GENII FOELICITA^; FORMAE PRAESTANT^A,
ET VENVSTATE, ORIS-QVE DECORE ET GRATIA; MORVM SINGVLARI SVAVITATE, ET
ELEGANTIA; VNICE CONSPICVAE: VXORI TOT NOMINIBVS SIBI CHARISSIMAE: MOESTISSIMVS
MARITVS ARNOLDVS BOOTIVS; IN IPSO IVVENTAE FLORE, CVM TANTVM 25. AETATIS ANNVM
AGERET, SIBI EREPTAM, 17. APRILIS 1651. IN CONSOLABILITER LVGENS; POSVIT HOC
MONVMENTVM AMORIS EXIMII, ET INDIVIDVI, ATQVE AD SVPREMAM DIEM EODEM TENORE
DVRATVRI.

Lectissimam Matronam, and sibi ch^rissimam, Margaritam Dung^nam, D. Arnoldi
Bootij, sibi etia^ amicissimi, Coniugem, vere fle^ deflebat sibi morte ademtam,
eff^ ex tempore carmine, Th. Sinsersi^ Candidae Casae apud Scotos Epis^^ pus
indignissimus:
VERE Debemus morti nos nostraque, V^^
Ignarus causae, dixerat ille nimis.
Quod saepe expertus, iam sentio, dum mibi cha^
Dunganam, ab nimium mors violenta rapit.
Mors violenta rapit Dunganam in flore iuveni
Prae cunctis alijs quae mihi chara fuit.
Sed mihi solamen, quod Vati non fuit illi, est
Spes, quod per Christum vita redibit ei.
Sic est, peccatum morti nos subjicit omnes:
Christus at ex ipsa morte redemtor erit.
Sic tibi, sic certo fiet, Dungana, beata
In Christo moriens, dum tibi vera fides.
Vera and viva fides; quae vita^ expressa per om^
Morte etiam in media te comitata fuit.
Hanc quoque tu in mente^ revoca, charissime (...)
Quae fuit erepta in conjuge viva fides:
Ereptae quae tanta premit, ne ^eopprimatorbu^
Moestitia. In viva coniuge, viva fides
Vitam animae in coelo post mortem praestat: ean^
Corporeae parti reddet and illa suae.

