Ass upon Ass*

BEING A COLLECTION OF Several Pamphlets written for, and against the Author of
the Asses Complaint against Balaam, or the cry of the Country against Ignorant
and Scandalous Ministers.

Together with some choice Observations Upon them all.

By Leonard Blunt Esquire

LONDON, Printed for the Author, MDCLXI.

THE Asses complaint against Balaam; Or the Cry of the COUNTRY AGAINST
Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
To the Reverend Bishops.
YE mitred Members of the House of Peers,
The Kings Churchwardens, and Gods Overseers,
Fathers in Christ, we your poor children cry*
Oh give us Bread of life, or else we die.
For we are burd'ned with our old Sir John's,
Who when we ask for Bread do give us stones;
And only cant a Homily or two,
Which Dawes and Parrots may be taught to do;
Drunkards Canonical, Unhallowed Bears,
That name God oftener in their oaths then prayers.
Into what darkness will our Church be hurled,
If such as these be called The light of the World?
These that have naught to prove themselves devout,
Save only this, That Cromwell turned them out.
Mistake us not we do not mean those loyal
And learned souls, who in the fiery trial
Suffered for King and Conscience sake, let such*
Have double Honor, we shall never think much;
But this our tender conscience disapproves,
That Ravens should return as well as Doves;
And croak in pulpits, once again to bring
A second Judgment on our Church and King.
Though England does not fear another loss,
'Cause God has burned his Rods at Charing Cross;
Yet Clergy sins may call him to the Door
Even him who whipped and scourged them out before.
Oh therefore ye that read the sacred Laws
Eject their Persons, and disown their cause:
God and the King have both condemned this crew,
Then let them not be patronized by you.
It Is not their Cassocks, nor their Surplices,
We quarrel at, there is no hurt in these;
We own their Decency, yet every Fool
Cannot be called a Monk that wears a Cowle;
Were grace and learning wanting, (by your leaves,)
We would not pin our faith on your Lawn Sleeves;
' It Is Aarons breastplate, and those sacred words
Become a Churchman best, THAT THAT my Lords,
Which pious Baxter makes his livery,
Would all our Curates were but such as he!
Pardon my Lords, we do not make this stir,
To vindicate the factious Presbyter;
We hate his ways, and equally disown
The zealous Rebel as the Idle Drone;
And beg as often to be delivered from
The Kirk of Scotland, as the Sea of Rome;
We pray for Bishops too, Oh may ye stand
To heal the sad distractions of the Land;
Then give us Priests, Loyal and painful too,
To give to Caesar, and to us our due.
God save King Charles our Christian faiths Defender,
And bring Religion to its wonted Splendor.
ADVERTISEMENT.
LOyal and Orthodox Reader, Judge charitably, I am neither presbyterian nor
Phanatick, but as true a Son of the Church of England as thy self; for thy
further satisfaction. I shall (God willing) present thee with another paper, to
clear my honest intention in this.

Lewis Griffin.

OBSERVATION.
THis Gentleman begging our Charity, in this place we shall say little of him,
nor charge him with being that which he desires to be excused from; but whoever
seriously considers this copy of verses as they are in themselves, (let him
pretend to be never so true a Son to the Church of England, thereby to take off
the Aspersion of a Phanatick) shall find him to verify the old English
Proverb, that he is neither flesh, nor fish, nor good red herring: any thing,
or nothing.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE ASSES Complaint against BALAAM, Or the Cry of the COUNTRY
AGAINST Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
AVaunt ye smooth-tongu'd flatterers of the age;
Praesto ye mealy-mouthed Prophets, clear the Stage;
Enter the Ass again, who (though he Kneel
Unto the Higher Powers) lifts up his Heel
Against all those who make Gods house a Den
Of Clergy Thieves; Have at them once again.
-- But hark; I hear a Country parish cry,
Were ever Christians in such slavery?
Must we be taught by an Illit'rate Bear?
He preach? He Will only teach our boys to swear.
-- Is then your priest a swearer? Hah -- must he
That taunts a Bishop, taste a pillory?
And it is but Just and Right; Yet who controules
Him who blasphemes the Bishop of our Souls?
What? Is an oath less paenal than a word?
Or is the servant greater then his Lord?
No; He that swears commits the fouler sin,
And more deserves to loose his ears then --
-- It Is true, seditious spirits, that Deny
Obedience to the sacred Hierarchy,
Merit severe Correction, let them have it;
They are Disrtubers both of Church and State;
Yet Prelates Zeal would be much better shown
In striking Gods offenders then their own.
-- Nay, Gods are theirs; for he that wears lawn sleeves*
Like Christ is murdered 'twixt a brace of Thieves,
Both show their enmity, but diverse ways,
The Presbyter Denies, but This betrays;
Now tell me (gentle Reader) which were Greater,
The sin of Judas, or the crime of Peter?
-- Then let the Bishops cast them out, for thus
They do but Justice to themselves and us;
Like the wise Mariners, who, to appease
The fury of the Raging winds and Seas,
Threw Jonas overboard; such was his sin,
There was no Cannon Law to keep him in.
Nor is it Reason all should be maintained
In The Church, who took Degrees, and were Ordained;
For he that after proves a Drunken beast,
Degrades himself from Man, much more from priest.
And such they were who caused our Bloody War,
When Levy's Tribe were kicked by Issacar;
For though Men speak with a not so my Sons,
Yet God reproved them with the voice of Guns.
Phanaticks, those Philistims, wan the field,
Whilst our poor Israel was forced to yield;
For Eli's boys had lost the Ark of God,
Each Phin^has begat an Ichabod.
Then Oh ye Bishops, heal these sad disasters,
We do not call for Rectors but for Pastors.
A Priest should lead his parish as a guide,
Not leap upon their galled backs and ride,
For it is our Mother Churches grand disgrace,
That these black patches stick upon her face.
Written by Lewi^ Griffin.
OBSERVATION.
AFter his promise of this paper, to show his honest intentions in the former;
he would have you to believe (if there be any man so credulous) that he has
been a constant lover of Episcopacy: and no great wonder; for indeed he is a
subtle Ass, and for a maintenance would easily be brought, not only to kiss a
Common Prayer book, (or cant a homily, as he calls it) but willingly to embrace
the Turkish Alcoran; and for a new suit or cloak, shall unsay all his former
belief in his old Father Cromwell; such is his establishment in his principles.
In sum, whoever reads over both his papers, shall see him not only like
Balaam's Ass complaining against Balaam; but like the Ass in the Lions skin,
supposing himself the Lion, braying forth nothing but scandal and sedition,
thinking thereby to affright those that hold not the same opinion with him: and
all under a pretense of zeal to holiness of life, which he himself does
seldom practice.

Balaam's ASS Cudgelled. Or the Cry of TOWN and COUNTRY AGAINST Scandalous
and Seditious Scriblers.
WHat ailes the Ass? How comes the Beast to whine?
Has a been bred among King Pharaohs Kine?
Has the wet spring spoiled all the Corn and Grass?
That all the Country cannot keep an Ass?
He cries for bread, as if Duke Humphreys Ghost
This twenty years and more had been his host;
Will no man tie him up, but let him range,
Thus to disturb the City and the Change?
But this is a Religious Ass, and cries
O give him Bread of Life, or else he dies.
A subtle Ass, for well it is understood
He even thinks as much of Heavenly food
As the poor Tailor, when he wants a Roll
To fill his belly, thinks upon his Soul.
You Ass in boots, if Cromwell or the Rump
Had given thee but a Living, had been plump,
Thou would have blessed 'em, and have been the man
For maintenance to kiss the Alcoran.
I know not where a Homily is read
But, friend, a Homily is dainty bread.
The Brewers grains out of a nasty Tub,
Is fitter food for such a swine or Cub.
Lawn sleeves and Cassocks cannot please the Gizard
Of this seditious scandalizing Wizard;
Yet he pretends Canonical to be,
But Bell and Dragon is as much as he*
It Is not the soul of this seditious sinner,
That makes him bite, his belly wants a dinner;
And there is a reason for it I can tell ye,
Sometimes ill manners makes an empty belly*
To throw Seditious scribles to the view
Of such a sick and giddy-headed crew
As we have now amongst us, who by flirts
Change their Religions oftener than their shirts,
Does argue one that does employ his pate
To bring confusion on the Church and State.
The naked Indians would have scorned to be
So rudely barbarous to their Bramini.
The Ass that State malevolence does brew,
Deserves a bridle, and a Halter too.
Are these the men of God? Does this behavior
Adorn the Gospel of our God and Savior?
Religious Renegadoes! Who to patch
Their broken desperate fortunes daily watch
Another opportunity, to bring
A second ruin on the Church and King.
You closely jerk at learned Laud, but see
All Laud is given to God, all shame to thee:
Had he but seen thy Crocodilian tears,
The Hang-mans Cat had eat thy Asses ears.
God save King CHARLES, and keep him from the sleight Of such Reformers as in Forty Eight.
Rob. Chamberlain.
OBSERVATION.
REader, Perhaps you may as well as I wonder that men of almost all sorts, as
here you find them, should have such small employment, as to busy their brains
in cudgelling a poor silly Ass from one to another: and in my opinion render
themselves all such; and more especially the Author of this, (Sexton or
parish-Clark, call him which you please*) Sure his Parish is very small, he is
so needy, that he will Papist like, sell you prayers for sixpence a dozen; or
his Burials and Christnings not many in the year, that he must Poet-like, write
a Pamphlet, for money to by food for the Ass, and cloak it over with zeal.

Cur Percussisti? OR BALAAM REPROVED For Cudgelling the Ass.
ALas! the Ass is Cudgel'd in good sadness*
Why so I Pray? To show the Prophets madness.
Patron of scandal and of ignorance;
From which we prayed a deliverance.
This was the sum of the Petition,
Which guilty Balaam terms sedition
Who, but a soul empty of grace, and reason
Would think this cry preparative to treason?
At vices orthodox the poor Ass greives:
Not at the Cassocks or the reverend sleeves,
These, are by Canon decent, yet I shall
Think constant preaching more Canonical.
Are Miters, Cassocks, of so near a kin
To sloth and drunkenness that beastly sin,
That who the Clergy warnes these sins to flee,
Does mean, Bishops and Priests there, must not be?
The Crown and Mitre are so happily twisted,
The last infringed, the first is then resisted.
But both with equal zeal disown they do
Factious Preachers, and bibbing Readers too.
Where Is the sedition then? it is in a dish
Cook't up, yes the water turns Pork to Fish.
^ll manners it is sure, soft, the man's well bred,
His belly is not empty, but his head.
Foul Patriot, scandal and vices support,
Kicked by an Ass, thou put'st him into Court.
A Priest well drench't, the Constable did seize on,
'Twas cried, hold factious Officer, it is treason.
At length the Prisoner swears, 'twas said, swear on,
This Parish is full of sedition.
It Is an Essay to Church and States confusion,
To show the Laics grief or Priests collusion,
There needs no Cham, these secrets to betray,
Darkness cannot hide what is done in the midday.
Is this the man of God? or is he sent
To drink and swear, for the Gospels ornament?
Revived impieties, Black mouthed debaucherie,
Never can be whit'ned with thy Poetry,
Unhappy solecisme, when was it true
That Sins ruin would make the State to rue,
Or Church? whose noble growth and lasting age,
Decay of vice increase of grace presage.
Arm then (ye Mitred Lords) be clothed with power,
Full charge your Canons and then let them Roar
' Against Scandal, Ignorance, and Laziness,
' Against sancy pride, and factious peevishness.
Hophni and Phinehas, their fatal doom,
Should startle those that succeed in their room*
The Sacrifice was then abhorred, they are slain,
Eli falls too, 'cause he did not restrain.
Long live King Charles, prosper in grace and glory,
Let Us Name be written in Eternal Story.
By H. G.
OBSERVATION.
THis Author writing a paper of verses which he is ashamed to own; sets two
letters of a name (we know not whether his own or no) that we should not know
where to find him; but yet we may well guess at him, if we observe the
character formerly given of their faction, that he is of the tribe of Adoniram;
-A zealous R --, who to save his Bacon shall make twenty recantations; and for
preferment, change his Religion oft'ner than his shirt; and is almost as near a
kinsman to a K -- as a Cavenanter to a Scotchman.

The Ass beaten for Bawling; OR, A REPLY FROM THE CITY TO The Cry of the
Country.
To Smectimnuus, the Club of Divines, or Divines of the Club.
TO you, because you are one manifold,
A twisted Halter, and because we are told
You understand the nonsense of the Cryers,
As they do yours, send we that are Replyers.
Take up your Colts, you know them by their mark,
Bid them give audience, that is stand and hark.
Fleabitten Gray with your out-lying ears,
The KINGS Disturbers, and Gods Pillagers,
Baule not, but hear the Cries of millions dead,
Our blood has been your drink, our flesh your bread.
And are your maws too tender for the stones
Of the now Priest? that could eat Churches once
Complain ye now of Canting ye Jack Daws
That set Religion to a tune The Cause;
Ye wolves Synodicall, self-Hallowing Cast,
If ye could pray ye should, so ye would fast.
Our Church is like to fall into the Mire
If she must follow such a fatuus fire,
Dark Lanthorn lights, such whose well-shadow'd sin
Begun the Dance that Cushind Cromwell in.
Mistake us not, we do not mean those zealous
And tender souls, that fearing still, were jealous:
Who set the Kingdom all o'fire, and made
No conscience what CHARLES suffered, how betrayed.
Let such have double honor, Capitol Geese,
'Cause they' be gagling, Pulpits two a piece,
But this we like not that ye stand and bark
To keep the wearied Dove out of the Ark:
And that your tender conscience brooks not giving
The Priest his Church, now you have had his living,
For he poor Man shall not injoy't he fears
So many months, as ye have had it years.
I but the Ravens come too, and they will croke
So that a second judgment they will provoke.
'Twas the first turned them out, what follows then?
The next must be your coming in again.
Where are your wits? get you again to School
There Is a scourge for you, and a pretty tool
With a Chris-cross in it, There when you have been
Well whipped and scourged for this your modern sin
Of simple railing at the Men of God,
I Will take a care for burning of the Rod
Till then be not so mad I pray thee Smec.
To let such Coxcombs break the Church's neck;
God and the King's a book that does concern,
The Preacher, that would others teach, to learn;
It Is not their splaymouth nor their hoboy nose
Their hums and haus, and such like forms as those
We quarrel at, nor black Caps set in print
On the notch'd Poll, there may be nothing in it
These fooleries we allow but yet a Saint
Is not cut out of every one does cant;
Were Arrogance and Faction wanting, how
Should Ignorance take blockheads from the Plow
And arm them back and breast against their King?
These graces are thy Saints Smec. That Is the thing
Which blooming Peartree makes his Livery
Mouth indefatigable, were all such as He!
Now pardon us good Smec. we do not this
To make the Presbyter seem as he is
A zealous R -- nor do we disown
Or hate his ways that level at a Throne
But as we would, Rome should not tyrannize,
And be our selves a Rome put in disguise:
And every Man a Pope in his precinct,
Nor shall the Scotch Kirk think to be distinct
But truckle under us; duly we and truly.
For Bishops pray, that they would be unruly.
And to our holy work put their own hand,
Promoting the distractions of the Land.
For to speak truth, we cannot wear a bridle,
And suffer others preach and we stand idle:
Nor is it possible we should agree
Unless we can have Bishops, such as we
That would Priests railing make and factious too,
With whom good Caesar knows not what to do.
Men free from charity, and love of peace
Smec. if thou leave us any, leave us these
That robbing Peter, and not paying Paul
We may get, what? why even the Devil and all
But now, this very hour the world must end,
Take no more care for Sunday Pudding friend.
Nor as was done in days of the Protector
Ninteen probationers preach for one Lecture
The deep Soraction snow must now turn black
Dark be ye dazzling Lamps, Phoebus go back
And fetch thy mourning Cloak, the Moon bow die
Fire cannot burn, nor Roundheads cannot lie.
Earth shift thy Poles and thaw the Muscovites,
In the Armenian planes. And now the Lights
Are out, let all things to confusion tumble,
And rudely like the family conjumble.
They may beget an Ass, Styx will so arm,
And freeze, that he shall feel L^wd but lukewarm.
Of whom the Brethren that conformed not
All in his time, cried out he was too Hot.
God save K. CHARLES and keep him from the clutches
Of him that at the KING'S Religion grutches.
POSTSCRIPT.
NOw, to this railing Ass more shall be spoke,
When he has got a Living or a Cloak,
Only this Country's mouse feeds in our Cubboards,
And brings his Cry no further then the Suburb.
Advertisements and Supplements w'ave read,
He looks to's Ears, we must look to our Head.
Now no more Mumming sirrah, d'off your Vizzard,
Know we have eyes can pierce into your Gizzard.
By stroaking of our Beards you are not like,
To make us be secure and let you strike
He that calumniates the meaner sort,
Looks ill on all, and ought to suffer for it.
BY EDM. COOPER Of Limestreet, Doctor of Physic.
OBSERVATION.
THE Doctor thinking himself an honester man than the rest, must be seen in
Print too; but we suppose the main end of his publishing this, was, having
lived long in obscurity, and not having much practice, to let the World
understand that there is such a Physician, (like a Quacksalver that sets up his
Bills on Posts) writes The Ass beaten for bauling, by Edmond Cooper of
Limestreet Dr. of Physic; that thereby he may gain Patients, and become
famous, and so when his names up, he may lie in Bed till noon.

WORK FOR COOPER, Or a Bone for the Doctor to pick.
Being an Answer to a Scurrilous Pamphlet, Entitled The Ass beaten for
Bawling.
To Dr. Edm. Cooper.
TO you Sir, 'cause you're of those shallow brains,
That prize a Gem below two barley grains,
That like the Dunghill cock, rather confine
Your Spirits to a Jakes, then seek a Mine,
Who breath naught else but an opinion Nursed
By Echoes then your selves far more accursed.
Degenerate Race! does vice find pleaders then,
England breed those will vindicate a sin?
Is piety? Is all Religion fled,
Swearing and Drunkenness come in their stead?
And can there Advocates for them too be?
Sad world! but pray Sir who gave you your fee?
We know you use to take it, and perhaps,
Promise the Cure, but breed an After-lapse;
'T has been the Empericks Trade: but how you vail
Your plot? how cunningly you seem to rail
Against Smectimnuus, that you might Excuse
Two horrid Sins, God and your self abuse.
An Easy Judgment might have led you Sir,
To have understood the Ass without this stir;
But now I find he has more wit than you,
Indeed I Have known Asses been Doctors too.
Had not your Violent love too ill restrained
Your Sense: You might have found that he declaimed
Not against Things but Vices: Church and State
I know he honors, 'twas his zealous hate
To wickedness, that gained him your ill will,
Oh may he gain it, and increase it still.
But Sir to clear that Judgment is so weak,
It understands not what an Ass does speak.
Pray let me tell you, and it is what I know
The Church of England does to such men owe,
Such men as writ that Ass: whose pious souls
Although they cannot digest your full brim'd bouls
Nor Thunder out your Ranting Oaths, yet be
As Faithful to the Church, the Liturgy,
Honors the Bishops, and the Hierarchy,
Pray they in truth, may the Churches Fathers be*
And tell me Sir if you would count him rather,
Of a loved child, the more Indulgent Father,
Who gives his ill-inclining Son a free
Swinge in Vice, till he kiss the Gallow-tree:
Or he gives due Correction, who though less
Loving he seems, yet leads to Happiness.
But Mr. Doctor, since you have showed your wit,
And cause you are come in print think you have hit
On a fine cunning pretty nibling strain.
Pray give me leave to tell you some things plain:
First, you are an Ass; but that I think you know,
And therefore let the World know so much too,
Else thus much Ignorance you had never betrayed,
Nor publicly your Folly had displayed.
There Is something worse behind which I should tell,
But may conceal it since it is seen so well,
Yet it shall out, for I Will never be a slave
To my own thoughts, I think too you are a Knave:
Or else you do belly your self, for he
That pleads for Vice smells rank of Knavery.
But Sir, in some part we may you excuse,
For whilst men bestially themselves abuse
By Gorging, till they belch it up again,
Th'advance your trade, and thus you plead for gain.
In sum, Sir, know, the time will one day come,
The Ass may freely speak when Balaam's dumb.
Such Balaams as your self, by wealth made bold,
Who strangely hording up your heaps of gold,
Grow proud, imperious, scurrilous, and then
Count poverty a crime in virtuous men.
God save King Charles, and keep him from their Claws,
Who pray for him, yet plead against his Laws.
John Dauncey.
OBSERVATION.
THis Dauncey would have us to believe that he is a brother as holy, and as
pious as any of the rest: but, Reader, before you pass your verdict, I would
entreat you to take this short character which I hear of him along with you,
and then censure what he writes accordingly. First, he is a man of so giddy
hairbrain'd a nature, and so shallow of apprehension, that without fear or wit,
he runs headlong, and takes hold of the Asses Author's sleeve, and there he
will pin his faith; so much does he understand what Religion is. His learning,
wit, and manners agree very well in consort, they are all so small. He is a
ballad Poet, having for his pay ten groats a ballad, and a pot of Ale: a fellow
of no reckoning. To conclude, he is the Common Sponge to the Society of
Stationers, who seed him with a bit and a knock; yet is he better fed then
taught, for he would make you believe that his impudence is pure piety and
holiness.

A DOSE FOR CHAM BERLAIN, AND A PILL FOR THE DOCTOR, Being an Answer to two
Scurrilous Pamphlets, written against the Author of The Asses Complaint, etc.
WHat ailes this bawling puppy thus to prate?
I think the Genius of Billings-gate
Has lately crept into his soul; Alas!
That City Dogs should bait the Country Ass?
And does the beast stand silent whilst this Proctor
For Baal and Balaam, with the busy Doctor
Jerk his dull sides; and not so much as Kick
The Sexton, nor the Piss-pot Emperick?
It Is strange he speaks not, Is his back so strong
To bear abuses, that he holds his tongue?
Come, I Will bee's Orator, for in some cases
The Lawyers use to plead for none but Asses.
Now what says Chamberlain, that pamphlet-monger,
What do thou tell the silly Ass of Hunger?
Should he (like thee turn parish Clerk, and cozen
Poor souls, and sell his prayr's six pence a dozen,
Dine upon Midwifes fees, and grease his chaps
With Gossips charity and Female scraps,
Then would his panch like thine, be quickly fraught,
And men would say, he is better fed then taught.)
Thou Priest in Gingerbread, should he but plead
For Drunken sots that cannot preach but read,
Such as thy self, O then the foul-mouthed whelp
Would fawn upon the Ass, and cease to yelp.
Then peace thou Journyman o'th Reading pew,
Tell us not of a giddy-headed crew
Of sick-brain'd Sectaris, for all men know
'Twas such as Chamberlain that made them so;
Dumb dogs drive out their parishes, to Roam;
He needs must beg that has no bread at home,
But stay, I know what Sir John does intend;
He Would have the Bishops take him for their friend;
Devils pretenses, always were divine;
A Knave may have an Angel for his sign;
But Reader, take it on a Christians word,
When such men kiss, they will soon beray their Lord;
But stay, what means the Doctor? has he left
His Legal murder and his Venial theft,
His plotting with his Druggest and the Nurse,
Not for to purge the body, but the purse.
And turned a Satyrist? I Would thought the man
Had been confined unto a Close-stool pan,
But it is a mad world when Hell breaks loose, and he
That is a Quack, talks of Divinity;
Than leave your scribbling sirrah, send your verses
Into your patients to wipe their A --
The Asses Author scorns to stroke your beard,
He Will foul his hands that meddles with a T --
Heaven keep this City from Quacksalving knaves
That send sound men to their untimely graves.
Here did I think to make an end, but hark,
(...) have one word more to the Parish Clark;
Let preachers say God save King Charles, and then,
*Twill be your Cue Sir Clark to say, Amen.
William Cook*
OBSERVATION.
ACcording to this Gentleman's own confession, we must believe him to b^ a
Lawyer, (alias Lawyers Clark) who having of late too frequently used that most
renowned part of the Gity, called Ram Ally* and there consumed the greatest
part of the ^ees he gained last Term; betakes himself this long Vacation to
write Pamplets* thinking thereby to recruit the vacancy o^ money which his
pockets have long endured by reason of his extravagancy. And being now in a mad
mood, he resolves with might and main, and with as much impudence a^ ever his
Namesake at Westminster Hall had, to scandalize honester men then himsel* and
with open mouth vilifies those men, wh^ do scorn that such polluted lips should
have the honor to kiss their posteriors.

Doctor Cooper at WORK UPON DAVNCEYS BONES, AND Cook licking his FINGERS AFTER
HIS DOSE AND PILL.
O For the Doctor's lines, or Cleveland's, Dauncey
To truss thee in, how bravely would I haunse thee,
Then like a Jack of Lent the first of March,
In Cuerpo thou should hang under some Arch,
There to be played on by the wind, and noise
Of Fish-wives, Orange-wenches, and the Boys.
Was It not enough the brethren felt his whip
So smart and keen, but he must make thee skip
Thou Jackanapes? think thou, thou piteous elf,
To draw his auger on thy single self,
And rescue so a number? foul-mouth no,
You are beneath him, he is more worth than so.
Lord, what a holy thing is want of clothes,
How it keeps Balladers from drink and oaths!
When there is no more to pawn, an oath were vain,
Your words will go as far in Chart'r'ouse lane.
Thou seem boy to have taken his advice
And gone to school again, and thou art wise
In doing so, thou may be of his stables,
Thou Art at the Dunghill now in Aesop's Fables.
Your mine is Hell deep, we give a guess what is in it,
Poets we are sure send nothing to the mint.
We Are pleased to see you wince, you have a gauld hide,
Your own breath stinks when it is to you applied.
If your own words resounded be accursed,
Your meaning was not wholesome at the first.
Mark how this saucy Rascal 'gins his prate,
As though the Doctor were an advocate
Of foul debauchery: when in no man's hearing
He ever spoke of drunkenness or swearing;
Nor thinks there can be such a ^in in fashion
In The Clergy, 'ts hatched in your Imagination:
There it is ye slanderous villains that ye frame
An odious abuse, and then declame.
So I have seen a Coward draw his sword
Against a Post, and every blow a word;
Now if thou were a man, I Would have thee there,
And then again he cries I Would have thee there.
Bring forth your swearers, and your drunkards too,
Or on my word this Knight o'th post are you.
I a've a Physician that without perhaps
Shall cure your mouth secure of after claps.
Down of your knees, thank God, and thank me too,
It Is well, it is well, now Gallows claim thy due;
And when the Surgeons chest has brought you sir
Back from that tree, into their Theater,
The Doctor for a Lecture shall not stick,
To send your bones unto the Devil to pick.
You might have seen, had you been so inclined,
(But as the saying is, hasty Currs are blind)
The Doctor knew your Asse's meaning sir,
And needs not you for an Interpreter.
We like no coxeing friend, nor ever will,
Joa^ and Judas both did kiss and kill.
Had Griffin brayed against a man or two,
Or on a County where such things they do,
His Libel might have gone untax'd: but now
To write at random thus, and to allow
A roving Kite with full spread wings to fly
Over the Nation, carrying infamy
Thus undetermined; Dauncey it is too much,
Ill minds conclude the Clergy all are such.
This mischief he has done, and as we mention,
We had but's own word for his good intention.
This has your pious soul done, that cannot drink
You say, but shall I tell you what I think?
What I have heard? Dauncey I will take leave,
For all your affidavit, t'undeceive
My silly Countrymen, who live in doubt
Some Minister of worth set this Cry out;
Whose spirit bleeds within him for the sin
That yet the people, and the Clergy's in.
But come cheer up my hearts, it is no such matter
This fellow in Divinity does but smatter,
Hangs on the Press, and as his learning's small,
His pay's ten groats a ballad, and some Ale:
Which not one Stationer alone does pay for
But all the Crowd, which he goes first to stay for;
The Common sponge, a fellow of no reckoning,
Shall follow you to an Alehouse but for beck'ning.
And be brought out again perhaps. But How!
What do I see, Dauncey, the grizly brow
Of Goblin Truth, Fathers in Truth, the thing
Undid the Church, and cut the throat o'th King?
Choke us no more you R -- with your minced meat,
Fathers, feed's at discretion, we will eat,
I and give thanks too for your institution,
And call you fathers without diminution,
Conservers of Gods Oracles, bring these fellows
Truth to confess, where they should do it to the Gallows.
And mark it Dauncey, see how thou art caught,
As if thine own lie to betray thou had watched;
When with comparison thou would up-cry
The faith of Griffin, As has no reply.
But Mr. Dauncey, now you have showed your lack
Of wit and art, let me again go back,
And view the subject of your declamation
Not against things, but vices O this Nation.
Are vices nothing? and's all this ado
Made about nothing, by you Puppies two.
Now you begin to belch up your disgrace,
And spit foul Language in the Doctor's face;
What are you proud of, that you thus be- Ass us,
And knave us bluntly, is it Land in Parnassus?
Who would not swear you are drunk? it is no ruth
To conscience for a man to swear the Truth.
Would thou know what thou art? thou can not miss't,
In the first Chapter of the Alchymist,
Where Subtle, Doll, and Face do seem to me
Railing, to conjure for a name for thee.
There read thy self, they are thine all, and if it be
Thy chance to escape a sadder destiny,
When with the Stationers thou have sucked so long
Scot-free of Ale, as the other has, whose tongue
Thou now defendest, may thou by good prayers
Rise by degrees, from Link-boy, to the Players;
To be their book-keeper, and then grown bold,
Upon thy parts, when thou art blind and old,
Presume to write a play in thy last age,
And have it basely hissed off of the stage,
For which thy heart must break, if it break not
This minute, for thus having played the Sot.
We are ingenuous, and do not deride.
Your poverty, you Knaves, no, but your pride;
And cannot choose but laugh, to see the Saints
Have drunken Atheists to defend their plaints.
So exit Dauncey. -- Now comes Cook in fury,
Lick-spit o'th Law: speak sirrah to the Jury,
There you may find a dozen of the name
You give the Doctor, (Caterpillar of fame:)
Beat me this Buckram Rogue, Falstaff, to seven,
Nay if thou will, beat him into eleven,
And if they have no better manners then,
Send them to me, I Will beat them all again.
Knaves that do naught but quirk upon his Calling,
And quit their cause; it is time the Ass left bawling.
Martial. Ep. I Dic tandem aliquid de tribus Capellis
POSTSCRIPT.
I Thought I'ad finished William now, but hark
I'ave commendations to thee from the Clark*
Fogg in Rye dough, thou image of a Lawyer,
Fitter to make a Carman, or a Sawyer,
Much more then ordinary appears in you,
Plead you for Asses, and are Asses too?
Must Readers preach; has the Church no degree;
Nor order? Scribes go take the Lawyers fees.
Hell's where confusion is, and rotten speech,
The Lawyer took's own pill, and spoke at's breech.
The journey-pew supplies his need, as it is,
Pray get your Ass a pulpit to serve his.
He will not be the first Ass that e're spoke
Out of one, and got by it a suit and cloak.
I wish thy libel might have pleased where't came,
And that thou would had a more auspicious name,
At Westminster Hall Gate, he will see that looks,
What Is to be thought of disaffected Cooks.
God bless King Charles, so that he never again
Be troubled with such Rogues, speak Clark, Amen
Now stroke the Doctor's beard, ye Libel flingers
And if ye foul your hands, Cook lick your fingers.
By Not. Wildoe.
OBSERVATION.
THE Doctor fearing that his Name would not be far enough spread by his former
paper; and being altogether unwilling to lay down the bucklers, and acquiesce
under the calumnies cast upon him by Dauncey and Cook, enters again, though not
himself, yet by proxy; and endeavors to clear himself by characterizing them;
and although he seem to do it never so well, yet let him know, that he was not
possessed of over much wisdom when he beat the Ass for bawling; for if he had
had but patience, in short time he might have seen the Asses Author recant, and
Cudgel himself for his Foolery.

FINIS.

