ANIMAD VERSIONS UPON Sr RICHARD BAKER'S CHRONICLE, AND It Is CONTINUATION.

Wherein many Errors are discovered, and some Truths advanced.

By T. B. Esquire

Cicero de Orat. Prima est Historiae Lex, ne quid falsi dicere audeat, deinde
ne quid very non audeat.

OXON.

Printed by H. H. for Ric. Davis.

1672.

The PREFACE.
SInce Cronicles are the public Records of a Nation, I wondered not a little to
see Sr Rich: Bakers twice Printed by it self, and three times with a
Continuation, and no person learned in our History of England, or concerned in
the actions of the late Rebellion, or in the adulteration of his own, or his
Ancestors Name or Title should impugn it; being stuffed with so many
contradictions and repetitions, so many mistimings and mistakings, as of other
things of moment; so especially of the Pedegrees, Names, and Place of our
ancient Nobility, Bishops, Baronets, Gentry, etc. For.

-- Non ego paucis.
Offender maculis.
And yet the wonder increased* to see the Continuator (a person, as it appears,
of incompetent parts for so great an undertaking) presume to dedicate a Work so
many ways imperfect to the Kings most excellent Majesty, of whom (as Cicero
said to Caesar) nil vulgar dignum videre possit.

As I am conscious this Age affords many more knowing in our English History
then my self, so doubtless the publishing their Notions had been very
necessary, that the public Cronicle of our Nation might have had the true
properties of a Record, which are, Vetustatis and veritatis vestigia.

But finding in all this time no stop put to so great a stream of Error by any
better Hand, I thought my self obliged to lay these few Animadversions in the
way, lest such muddy waters should at last totally overflow the land of Truth.

Nor have I presumed herein to intermeddle with the affairs of State and those
great revolutions in the reign of King CHARLES the first of ever blessed
memory; Though I am well assured the Continuator has in many passages neither
don right to His sacred Memory, nor to those of his subjects, who most
faithfully served Him.

For the Errors which slipped Sr Rich. Bakers pen, some Excuses may be assigned,
as old Age, and the confinement of a Prison etc. but none for that his
confident Assertion, (upon which the Continuator builds much in his Preface)
That this Cronicle was collected with so great care and diligence, That if all
other of our Cronicles should be lost, this only would be sufficient to inform
posterity of all passages memorable and worthy to be known.

Sr Rich: acknowledges his Work to be a Collection out of other Author;
wherein he took up some Coin upon content, which was not sterling, and that
wherein he only excelled, was the digesting the whole into a better Method;
yet he confesses some Passages (he might have said many) are omitted in the
reign of King James, which was the time he lived in, and had bin fit for the
Continuator to have supplied; who, instead thereof has sweld the Continuation
into such a Bulk of indigested matter, as is not at all suitable to the rest of
the History.

Besides the many failings both of the Author and Continuator, the Printer has,
with supine negligence, added a gross number of Errata's, without any
advertisement of them, but leaving all upon the Authors account, yet the
understanding Reader will, for the most part, discern, which ought to be laid at
the Authors Study door, and which at the Printers Case.

If particular information may be relied on, we may ere long expect a
compleater Cronicle of the Kings of England, with a more exact and impartial
account of the late Rebellion, and the happy restoration of his Majesty, from
a Hand better qualified for such an undertaking.

Mean time these few leaves (not taking in a Third of what is justly liable to
exception) may help to rectify some of the Errors already printed, and may
contribute in some measure, toward the observing a greater care and exactness
in publishing Books of so general a concern in time to come.

Errors Committed in the printing.
Page 6. lin. ult. Auther for Author.

p. 10. l. 8. praefix'd for prefixed.

p. 12. 25. l. 1. Barker's for Baker's.

p. 41. l. 9, where for were.

p. 57. l. 5. Eale for Earl.

p. 63. nu. 50. l. 7. Abbanets for Albanets.

p. 85. l. 3. Continua -- for Continuator.

p. 88. nu. 73. to Mr Woolfs add at.

p. 89. nu. 74. l. 5. acscended for ascended.

p. 99. l. 7. perticularly for particularly.

ANIMADVERSIONS On the Catalogue of Writers.
THe first thing we meet with, after the Dedication and Preface, is

A Catalougue of Writers both ancient and modern, out of whom this Cronicle
has been collected.

Gildas Britanicus, Sir named the Number. 1.
wise, the first Writer of our English Nation --

When as there were no less then threescore before him, as Leland, Baleus, and
Pitseus attest. And (I take it) this Gildas (for there were two of them) was
called Badonicus; because born in the same year the great Battle was fought
between the Britains and Saxons at the mountain Badonicus.

Ethelwardus, a Writer next to Bid 4.
the most ancient, --

This is also a mistake; for he flourished not til the year 925, which was
after Sigebert whom our Author mentions.

Radulphus de Diceto or Dicetentis, 5.
who lived about the year 685. --

He lived not til the year 1210, as may be seen in his Chronicle printed about
xx. years Since.

Asserius Menevensis, Bishop of Salisbury 9.
lived about the year 890.

A gross mistake; for no Bishops See was settled at Salisbury, til after the
Conquest. There was indeed one Asserus Bishop of Sherburne, Anno 880, and
continued so but 4 years.

Osbertus, a Benedictine Monk, wrote 11. the life of --

For Osbernus Cantuariensis, a Benedictine Monk and Chantor of Canterbury.

Culmanus Anglicus, writ a Cronicle -- 12.
and lived about the year 1040 --

He should have said Colemannus sapiens, who flourished An. 1200.

Gulielmus Gemetecensis -- lived Ao 1135. 13.


He flourished in the year 1160.

Ingulphus, Abhot of Croyland -- lived 18,
in the time of william the first --

He dyed in the year 1109, which was in the 9th year of Henry the first.

Turgotus, an English man, first Dean 19.
of Durham etc. lived in the year 1098.

This Turgotus, was not first Dean of Durham, but Prior, and is called in latin
Authors Turgotus Dunelmensis; He dyed An: 1115.

Gnalterus Mappaeus, writ a book denugis 21.
Curialium and lived about the Conquerors time.

His name is Mape Latin'd by writers Mapus; His book in MS. is in the Bodleyan
Library; He flourished in the year 1210, long after the Conquerors time; And I
think his Book affords nothing for our Authors purpose.

Raradocus, born in Wales -- 25.
for Caradocus Lancarvanensis --

Gervasius Derobernensis -- lived about the year 1120. 26.


Which should be 1200.

Johannes Fiberius commonly called de Bever -- lived about the year 1110. 27.


This Johannes Fiberius, was otherwise called Castorius, and flourished not til
the later end of Edward the first's time, about the year 1306.

Radulphus de Rizeto. --

Which should be Radulphus de Diceto, 45.
and is mentioned before number. 5. but this is the more proper place for him, in
point of time.

Thomas Spottey, a Benedictine Friar 48.
of Canterbury --

His name was Sport or Spot, a Benedictine Monk.

Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis -- lived 49.
about the year 1307 -- for 1377,

Matthew Paris, -- wrote a History -- 51.
from Will: 1. to the last year of Hen.

3. and lived about the time of K. Edward. 3.

Mistakes enough -- Math. Paris dyed many years before Edw: 3. time, viz. Ao
1259. To which year he brought down his History, and after his death it was
continued for some years by another.

Bartholomeus Anglicus -- wrote a 53.
Cronicle of the Scots --

His right Surname was Glanvile; he did not write a Cronicle de Scotis, but a
History de Sanctis.

Alex. Essebiensis, Prior of the monastery 55.
of Regular Canons -- lived in the year 1360. --

By the word (the) we are to believe there was but one Monastery of that Order,
of which there were many; this Auther flourished in the year 1220.

John Froyssart, born in the Low Countries, writ a Cronicle -- ending 56.
with Henry the 4th --

He was born at Hennault in Flanders; His History ends in the year 1400, which
is the first year of Hen. 4th.

Thomas Rodburn, an English man 58.
and a Bishop, wrote a Cronicle -- and lived 1412.

He was Bishop of St David's; but the Cronicle our Author aims at, was written
by another Thomas Rodburn, a monk of Hide Abbey, who lived Ao. 1480. and is
extant in M.S. in Lambeth Library.

John Trevisa, born in Glocestershire -- 59.


He was born in Cornwall.

John Capgrave, born in Kent, a Hermit 61.
Friar-

He was an Augustine Friar of Canterbury.

John Lydgate, Monk of St. Edmunds 62.
bury -- lived in the year 1470. in the time. of King Edw. the 4th.

He dyed in the year 1440 tempore Hen. 6.

Doctor Goodwin, Bishop of Hereford 78.
wrote -- and lived in the time of Q. Eliz.

He means Doctor Francis Godwin Bishop -- who lived in the time of K. James.
and K. Charles 1. and dyed Anno 1633.

Doctor Heyward, writ the History of -- 79.


This was Sr John Heyward Knight Doctor of Law.

Thomas Cowper, Bp of Winchester 83.
, writ Chronicle notes of all Nations --

These notes were written by Tho: Lanquet, and only continued for some years
by Cowper.

Nicholas Harpsfeild -- has written 88.
a Chronicle of all the Bishops of England. --

He wrote an Ecclesiastical History of England in folio, but no such Cronicle
of Bishops was ever before heard of.

John Speed, a Londoner wrote -- 90.


He was born in Ches-shire:

William Abington Esquire has 91.
written --

His name was Habington. etc.

These Notes have been with some pains collected out of Leland, Bale, Pits, and
other Authors of good authority, to show the mistakes and anticronisms of our
Author, even in his first Effort; who thinking to give a greater reputation to
his Book, has (not without much suspicion of vanity) praefix'd a Catalogue of
93. Authors Ancient and Modern, out of whom he says his Chronicle is
collected, of which number it may justly be suspected he never saw above the
one half; otherwise he could not, without great inadvertence, so grossly have
mistaken what is here noted; Besides if his wine had bin good, it would not
have needed such a Bash.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the Catalogue of the Nobility, Bishops, Baronets, etc.
BEfore we come to the Book it self, the Continuator has thought fit to
entertain the Reader with an Antipast, consisting of a Catalogue of the
Nobility, Bishops, and Baronets of England, which is so ill cooked, that it
must needs offend the understanding Readers stomac, especially that dish of the
Baronets.

Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk Baron John Howard his Ancestor created Duke of
Norfolk by King Rich. 3d July 4. 1483. whose ancestor Sr John Howard Knight was
created a Baron in 1461. by King Edward (4.) and afterward by Richard 3. was
created Duke June 28. 1483.

If this were true, there should be two Dukes of Norfolk, and both Howards
created by the same K. Rich: within 7. days one of another. But this Baron
John Howard, and Sr John Howard was one and the same person, not created Baron,
but made so by Writ of Summons. For thus Camden, John Lord Howard (who was
summond Brit. fol. 483.
a Baron to Parliament by Edw. 4) was created Duke of Norfolk by Rich. 3d. and
his son Thomas created Earl of Surry. It is an ill proof of the Continuators
skill in Heraldry, thus to mistake the Pedigree of the Primier Peer of the Realm.

William Cavendish, Duke of -- Baron Bolsomer, twice -- for Bolsover.

Edward Fines, -- Earl of Lincoln -- for Fiennes --

His true name is Clinton.

William Ley Earl of Marleburgh -- whose father James was created Earl --

James Ley was the first Earl, Henry his son the 2d, and James the 3d, who was
slain at Sea, in the late war with the Dutch, and leaving no issue, the title
went to his uncle William yet living.

Henry German, Earl of St Albans, and Baron German of St Edmundsbury --

should be Iermyn in both places.

Archbishops and Bishops.
Gilbert Shelden, for Sheldon. John Couzens, for Cousin. William Fuller --
consecrated Bishop of -- in Ireland add Limerick -- Ao 1663.
-- Davies Bishop of Landaff. add Francis.



BARONS.
Nevil Baron of Abergavenny, created by King Harold the second --

A gross mistake. The rise of the Lord Bergavenny's honor was by writ of
Summons, and not by Patent of Creation. William Beauchamp de Bergavenny was
first called by writ, in 16. Ric. 2d. And Edw. Nevile de Bergavenny was first
Summond to Parliament in 29. Hen. 6.

James Barfue, Baron Norris --

for Bertue.

-- Smith, Baron Carington of Worton in England, and Viscount Carington of
Barefore in Ireland.

which should be Baron of Wotton-VVawen in England, and Viscount Berisford in
Ireland.

William Widdington, Baron Widdington --

for VViddrington.

John Freshville, Baron Freshville -- and elsewhere Fretswell.

for Freschevile.

Thomas Windzor -- Baron Windzor --

for VVindesor.

The Lord Howard of Estrich (for Escrick) in several places of the
Continuation.

BARONETS.
In the Catalogue of Baronets, about twenty, are totally omitted, diverse are
postpon'd from their true place, whereby disputes have arisen touching
precedence; For (say some) what more obliging authority can you have in that
behalf, Then the English Cronicle; not considering that these Catalogu's are
published without any license or authority from the Kings at Arms, the proper
Registers, Approvers, and Judges herein. Again many of these Baronets names are
so grossly mistaken that, the Reader had need be a little skilld in Divinails,
to raise a conjecture who are meant by them; for Example. number:

number: 137 Sr. John Hornet. 184 Sr. Will: Skerington. 323 Sr. John Rarisly. 468
Sr. Hugh Smithford. 558 Sr. Charles Koyde. etc.

Then we find Sr Francis Eaglesfeild, for Englefeild; Sr William Therrold, for
Thorold; Sr Henry H^rn* for Hen; Sr John Husband for Huband, Sr John Wray, for
Kay. Sr Henry Green of Sonpford, for Sr Edw: Green of Samford. Sr Anthony
Archer, for Aucher, Barker for Baker. Clare for Clear, with a number more;
Besides the mistake of many of the names of their chief Dwellings and ancient
Seats; In so much as of 704 Baronets contained in the List, I noted above 100
mistakes of some of the kinds here mentioned.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon Sr Richard Baker's Cronicle.
I
OUr Author says, The eleventh King of Kent was Withred who Fol. 5. 6.
founded the Priory of Merton at Dover.

I do not find any such Priory founded by that King at Dover or elsewhere;
Camden says Dover had a fair Church consecrated Britan. f 344.
to St Martin, founded by Withred, (Wightred, son of Egbert) King of Kent, and
an House of the Knights Templars, -- without mention of any Priory of Merton
there. And Bishop Parker (in his Antiq. Britan.) agrees in effect with Camden.
Howbeit there was a Priory at Merton in Surry founded by King Henry the first.

II
The ninth King of the East Saxons f. 6. a
was Sebba, who after 30 years peaceable reign, relinquished the Crown and took
upon him a Religious habit in the Monastery of St Paul, London.

There was never any Monastery (properly so called) of St Paul in London;
Howbeit Bid says, That this holy King took the habit of religion, brought
Waldhere then Bishop of London a great sum of money to be distributed to the
poor, and was buried in St Paul's Church.

III
That King Edmund was slain at his f. 10. b
Manor of Pucklekerk by interposing himself to part a fray betwixt two of his
servants --

This is otherwise related by Mr Hist. of Engl. fo. 231.
Milton out of the Saxon Annals; viz. That King Edmund received a mortal wound
in the breast with a dagger by one Leof, a noted Theif whom the King had
banished, yet finding him at the Table among his Nobles at a Feast, the King
was so much moved, that by offering to attach him, the Villain gave Him his
deaths wound.

IV
That King Canutus set himself to the f. 26. a
making of good Laws in a Parliament at Oxford --

And soon after he says, That King fo. 40.
Henry the first did first institute the form of the high Court of Parliament
--

And neither true, For the word Parliamentum, to denote a Parliamentary great
Council, was never used in any of the ancient great Councils, Synods, Laws,
Charters or Records, nor yet in any of our old Historians, living in the raigns
of our Saxon or Danish Kings before, or of our Norman or English Kings, after
the Conquest, til the reign of King Henry the 3d; as you may read in Sr Henry
Spelmans Glossary, verbo, Parliamentum. The first Record wherein the word is so
used, is Claus, 28 Hen. 3d. mem. 12. dorso, according to Mr Prin, in his
Animadversions. Before which time, it was called Concilium magnum, Commune
Concilium Regni, Magnatum Conventus, and the like.

V
Our Author, after he has laid blemishes f. 18. b
on Edward the pious King and Confessor, of severity to his Mother Queen Emma,
and unkindnesse to his wife Editha; concludes -- So as what the virtues were,
for which after his death, he should be reputed a Saint, does not easily appear.

My thinks this is irreverently said of so great a King of this Nation, and a
Confessor, as our Author himself calls him. Though his Mother had been unkind
to him; yet her pious Son was in a manner enforced to permit her to pass the
severe trial of Fire Ordeal, by the importunity of Robert a Norman Bishop and
other her enemies, who bore great sway in the government. But when the pious
King saw her innocence cleared, he, with many tears and sighs, begged her
pardon, and not content to restore her and Bromton fo. 942.
Alwin Bishop of Winchester (accused with her) to their liberty and
possessions, he moreover, in punishment of his credulity, obliged them both to
inflict on him a discipline on the bare back: Besides this, in penance, for
having permitted his Mother to be Camd. in Dor. set.
so unjustly accused, he bestowed on the Church of Winchester the Isle of
Portland, with other possessions etc.

Next his unkindness to Editha his Queen Consort, is assigned to his not
conversing with her as a wife, only at board, but not at bed, or if at bed, no
otherwise then David with Abishah etc. For clearing this, you may read Capgrave
and other ancient Authors cited by him, who affirm, It was by mutual agreement,
that they both consecrated their Virginity to God.

Then for his Sanctity, he is recorded to have been full of Devotion, humility
and Charity. He rebuilt that most magnificent Spel. in Council. ^ f. 636
Church at VVestmister dedicated to St Peter; a Church, which that Age could
not parallel, either for the august Majesty or excellent contrivance of the
building; for that Church afforded to posterity a pattern of framing Churches
in the figure of a Cross, as Sr Henry Spelman says. Having thus built the
Church, he most liberally endowed it with possessions, and adorned it with
privileges, exemptions, a most famous Sanctuary and many other royal gifts.
During this pious Kings reign all the Houses of God (says another Author)
prosper'd wonderfully, for he himself spared not his Treasure in adorning them
and encouraged others to do the like. It Was this pious King that first
miraculously cured the Kings Ealred in vita S. Edwardi
evil, and left that royal virtue hereditary to his successors Kings of
England; which yet at this day (our Author says) is ordinary with Kings, but
cannot show where any other King pretends to the like, Except the Kings of
France, who (as Dupleix the French Historian observes) never had that virtue,
til King Philip the first and his son Lewis's time; wherein they are posterior
to the Kings of England. He also founded (says our Author) the College of St
Mary Ottery in Devonshire, and gave unto it the village of Ottery. And was just
in his government, which lasted 23 years and six months. These, to omit other
virtues, works of piety and miracles, recorded by some Authors, might
reasonably (if well considered) have wrought in our Author a disposition of the
word Saint.

Besides we read at the end of f. 761
our Authors book, that St Edwards Staff, St Edwards Scepter, and St Edwards
Crown were born before his Majesty at his Coronation 23 April. 1661 And in
another place our Author says, That to carry St Edwards Crown, before the King
at a Coronation, is the greatest honor that can be given a subject. Which
surely argues some more then ordinary estimation and reverence for this pious
King; in whose memory (by the decree of a Synod, held at Oxford Ao. 1162) a
festival day was ordaind on the 13th day of October, being the day of his
Translation, but the 5th of January was that of his death.

At Westminster, we find this Epitaph of Him.

Omnibus in signis virtutum laudibus Heroes
Sanctus Edwardus Confessor, Rex venerandus,
Quinto die Jani moriens super aethera scandit.
Sursum Corda. Moritur 1065.
He says William the firsts sons f. 29. b
were Robert, Richard, William and Henry -- And soon after f. 32. a
Says William Rufus was second son to William the Conqueror.

VI.
-- The Castle of Sherburne in Norfolk. f. 23. b
For when Sherburne, who was owner of it --

This should be Sharnborn in both places. The name of a very ancient Family.

VII.
-- A Hide of land containing, as some f. 26. b
account it, twenty acres, but, as Mr Lambert proves, one hundred acres.

There is no Author I ever read, accounts it so little as xx. acres. Beae says
it is as much as will maintein a Family; many others agree it to be a
Plough-land, Tanta fundi portio quanta unico per sannum coli poterit aratro,
says Hen. of Huntingdon. But Sr Edw: Coke says expressly, That a Knights Fee, a
Hide or Plough-land do not contain any certain number of acres. on Littleton.
fol. 69.

VIII.
By a Law of King Edward (the f. 27. a
Confessor) all matters in question were upon special penalty, decided in their
Gemote or Conventicle, held monthly in every Hundred --

Where he most improperly expounds Gemote by Conventicle, which are of very
different significations; For Gemote signifies in the Saxon tongue, a Court or
Convention, where Causes of Debate were tried and determined; As the Saxons had
their Sciregemot, Hundredgemot etc. Their County and Hundred Court. And
Conventicle (a word in those times not in use) is a little private meetting for
the exercise of Religion, well known in these days, and first taken up in those
of Wicklif.

IX
In William the first's time, he says, f. 29. a
Waring Earl of Shrewsbury built two Abbyes, one in the Suburbs of Shrewsbury
and another at Wenlock.

And in William the second's time, f. 36. a
That, Warren Earl of Shrewsbury built two Abbyes, one in the Suburbs of
Shrews bury, and another at Wenlock.

Doubtless this Waring and Warren are intended for the same person; but there
was never any such Earl of Shrewsbury, there was indeed one Warren, who came
in with the Conqueror, and was advanced to the Earldom of Surrey by K. Will.
Rufus. The Abbey of Shrewsbury was founded by Roger de Mountgomery Earl of
Arundell and Shrewsbury, Anno 1081. and that of Wenlock by the same person.

X.
-- Appeals had been seldom used, til f. 35. b
Anselm, in William Rufus Reign, appealed to the Pope. --

And in the same breath, he says, In this Kings time was the first Appeal f.
36. a
to Rome, made by Anselm, that ever before had bin made in England.

In this contradiction, the first part has most affinity to truth -- For Mr
Pryn (no friend to Rome) Animad. on Cokes 4. Inst. fo. 238.
says, The first Appeal out of England to Rome I meet with, was that of
Wilfrid, Archbishop of York -- which was in the year 678. above 400. years
before William Rufus Reign.

XI
He says, The Abbey of Hide was founded f. 41. b
by King Henry the first.

Whose Founder was King Alured or Alfred long before.

XII
In the reign of Henry the first, -- He says -- This Lady Juga, Lady of f. 42.
a
little Dunmow and late wife of Baynard, that first built Baynards Castle in
London -- And in the reign of Henry the 2d, he says Barnard Bayliol, of whom
Baynards Castle in f. 54. b
London took name -- And, in the reign of Edward 1. was laid the foundation f.
101.
of Baynards Castle; strange contradictions?

Camden, in his Britan. says, we f. 424
term Baynards Castle, of William Baynard, a noble man, Lord of Dunmow, who
built it. For it is improbable it could take name from Bernard Bayliol; who was
great Grandfather to John Balliol (not Bayliol) King of the Scots, and built
Bernard Castle f. 736
in the Bishopric of Durham, from whence arose our Authors mistake.

XIII
-- Stephen Harding, a Benedictine fo. 45.
Monk, who was founder to the Cistercian Order. Tempore Hen. 1

A great mistake; For that Order was instituted by Robert Abbot of the
Monastery of Cisteaux i^ Burgundy, whence the Order took denomination, and this
was in the year 1088, before Henry the first came to the Crown.

XIV
He speaks of Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and in the same page calls f. 46. ^
him Robert and fo. 49 he calls him Raph --

It seems, so they all begin with the same letter, it matters not whether it
were Roger, Robert or Raph -- The first was his name, who was also chief
Justice of England Anno 1107. and afterward Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer
of England.

XV
The King (Stephen) replied by his Lawyer Alveric de Vir -- For Albericus f.
50. a
or Awbrey de Vere. And in the same page -- The Abbey of Bury in Norfolk -- for
Suffolk.

XVI
The Abbey of Garradon in Leicestershire, he says, was founded in King f. 50. a
Stephens time -- And afterward, That Robert de Boscu, Earl of Leicester f.
58. b
, in Hen. the 2ds time, founded the Monastery of Garradon, and that of
Leicester, called St Mary de Pater (for de pratis) --

The foundation of this Abbey of Garradon ought to have no place in King
Stephens time; For it was founded by the said Robert de Boscu, Earl of
Leicester, in Henry the 2ds time, and that of Leicester in King Stephens.

XVII
He says, The four Knights that slew f. 57. b
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury; 30 December, Anno 1172. were Reynold
Fitzurse or Bereson, Hugh Morvile, William Tracy and Richard Britton --

When as it is recorded in Monastichon par. 2. folio 607 a.
Anglicanum (a surer Author) That Robertus filius Ranulfi, was one of the four
Knights that slew Thomas Becket; in expiation of which fact he founded the
Priory of Beauchef in Derbyshire. And for Rich: Britton I have seen, in an
ancient Manuscript, Rich: le Brut. And instead of 30 December, he should have
said 29.

XVIII
That Robert Harding, a Burgess of f. 58. b
Bristow, built the Monastery of St Austins in Bristow.

Which was the foundation and work of King Henry the 2d according to
Monastichon Anglicanum.

XIX
King John gave the Citizens of fo. 74.
London liberty to alter their Mayor and Sherifs every year, which before
continued during life. -- And after says -- To this time the City had bin 75.
governed by two Bailifs -- and at their suit King John granted them a Mayor
and two Sherifs to be yearly chosen 9 days before Michaelmas.

This is a contradiction in it self, but a greater to the truth of History; For
'twas King Rich. the first, who by his Charter Anno 1189, changed the Bailifs
of London into a Mayor and Sherifs.

XX
The title of a Chapter, viz. Of f. 91. a
King Henry the 3ds Personage and Conditions, with two lines of the subject
matter, are wholly omitted, The Chapter beginning confusedly thus -- of his
eyelids hanging down -- an unpardonable fault in the Printer.

XXI
Leolyn Prince of Wales surprises f. 95. b
the Castles of Flint and Rutland --

This makes some Readers wonder, How that Prince should march from Flint to
Rutlandshire; when as that Castles name in Welsh is Ruddlan, in our Records
Rotholan and Rodolan and is seated in Flintshire.

XXII
Edward the 1. (in his 17th year) f. 100. a
Finea all his Judges for corruption; Sr Raph Higham, chief Justice of the
higher Bench, in 7000 Marks; Sr John Loveton, Justice of the lower Bench in
3000 Marks etc.

These were Sr Raph de Hengham and Sr John Lovetot. And where does our Author
find those Courts ever called the Higher Bench and Lower Bench; but Bancus
Regis or Aula Regis, and Bancus Communis.

XXIII
In the 12th year of Edward the 1* in fol. 101. a
the Quindenes of St Michael, the Justices Itinerants began to go their general
Circuit.

This is a mistake; for Camden says, King Henry the 2d sent some Came. Brit. f.
179.
of his Judges and others yearly into every County of the Realm, who where
called Iustiees Itinerant and commonly Justices in Air; which is confirmed by
Mr Dugdale, who In Orig. Juri. dic.
names certain Justices Itinerant, that were sent into Kent, Middlesexs, Berks
etc. Anno 16 Hen. 2.

XXIV.
He places the degrading and execution ^. 115 a.
of Sr Andrew Harkley, Earl of Carlisle, in the year, 1321.

Which Sr Edward Coke in his Institutes says was in Hillary Term 18 Edward 2d
four years after. And our Author omits a memorable part of the story, That Came.
writes his name Harcla. and that more truly.
when Judgment was pronounced against Sr Andrew, his sword broken over his
head, and his spurs hewn of his heels, Sr Anthony Lucy the Judge said to him,
Andrew, now art thou no Knight but a Knave.

XXV.
In Edward the 2ds time, digging the foundation of a work about Paul's, f. 117 b
were found more then one hundred heads of Oxen and Kine; which confirmed the
opinion, That of old time it had bin the Temple of Jupiter, and that there was
the Sacrifice of Beasts. --

St Paul's Church had of old been the Temple of Diana; For See Came. Brit. f. 426
in Doctors Commons, (anciently an appurtenant to that Temple) there was a
Chamber, which retained the name of Diana's Chamber, even til the late dreadful
Conflagration. And our ancient Historians write of Tauropolia, Beef-head
Sacrifices, which were immolated to Diana in that Temple.

XXVI
The Book called Domus Dei -- ib.
which should be Domesday, (liber judiciarius) as the learned Spelman asserts,
with good reason.

XXVII
King Edward 2d was buried without any funeral Pomp in the Monastery f. 118 b.
of St Peter at Gloucester, by the Benedictine Friars.

Monks he would have said; For there never were any Benedictin Friars.

XXVIII.
Our Author tells us That John Sconer, Justice of the Bench, among f. 122. b.
others, was committed to Prison by Edward 3. sub Ao 1339.

This was John Stonore, who was constituted Iusticiarius ad Pat. 1. 1. 14 Ed.
m. 15.
Placita coram Rege, 16 Oct 14. Edward 2d and was made chief Justice by Edw 3d
Sept. 3. Ao 1330. He lies buried in the Abbey Church of Dorchester in Com.
Oxon. and has a Monument over him with his effigies in its robes cut in stone.
He was one of the Ancestors of the Stonors of Stonor in the same County.

XXIX.
Speaking of David King of Scots, f. 123 b.
being with an Army in the Province of Durham, he says, from thence he passed
to the Castle of Salisbury. --

He should have said to the Castle of Werk, then belonging to William
Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, and now the Lord Gray of VVerk.

XXX.
The next year after all the goods f. 131 b.
of 3. Orders of Monks, Lombards, Cluniacs, and Cistercians, were seized into
the Kings hands --

These Lombards were an Utopian Order of Monks, which all the diligence of the
most industrious Dugdale could never discover.

XXXI.
Richard Aungervil, Bishop of f. 137 b.
Durham, and Lord Chanceler of England.

Our Records call him Richard de Bury, and say, he was both Lord Chanceler, and
Lord Treasurer of England about the year 1333.

XXXII.
Sr John Dimmock, for his Manor f. 140 a
of Scribolvy claims the Office of the Kings Champion -- And in the Index it is,
the Manor of Scriveling.

And neither true; for it is the manor of Scrivels by in the County of Line. To
which the Office of the Kings Champion, has bin appurtenant ever since the
Coronation of K. Ric. 2.

XXXIII.
About this time Sr John Annesley Knight accused Tho: Katrington f. 142 a. Anno
1382
Esquire, for betraying the Fortress of St Savior to the French, which Katrington
denying, a solemn Combat is permitted between them, wherein through the
justness of his cause the Knight prevailed, and Katrington the day after the
combat dyed; Fabian says he was drawn to Tiburn, and there hanged for his false
accusation.

Whereas it is plain, that Annesley was the accuser; and so the Story is
nonsensical.

XXXIV -- till this time (viz. Rich. 2d) women used to ride a stride as men f.
157 b*
do --
This I conceave to be unwarrantable; For I have seen in Sr John Cottons famous
Library a deed of the Lady Iohanna de Stuttevile made in Henry 3d time, with a
fair Seal, whereon the Lady is sculped sitting sidewaies on horseback, with her
shield or Coat of arms in her hand.

XXXV
-- he says, New-College in Oxford f. 168 a An. 1379
was built where Noetus College stood --

Which should be St Neots hall; built by K. Alfred at St Neots entreaty, if Mr
Fox may be credited.

XXXVI.
In the sixth year of Henry the 4th, f. 168. b
the King called a Parliament at Coventry, and sent Process to the Sherifs,
that they should choose no Knights nor Burgesses that had any knowledge in the
Laws of the Realm, by reason whereof it was called the Laymens Parliament.

This is repeated three times in less then two leaves.

And shortly after another Parliament Ibid.
was called, and named the Unlearned Parliament, either for the unlearneaness
of their persons, or for their malice to learned men.

This which our Author divides into two Parliaments, was but one and the same,
improperly by him called The Laymens Parliament: which Walsingham and the
Parliament Rols of 6. Hen. 4. call Parliamentum Indoctorum, by reason the
Lawyers were excluded.

XXXVII.
That Queen Katharine (wife to fol. 175. b Anno 1421.
Henry 5th.) was Crowned at Westminster upon St Mathews day the 4th of
February. -- and so I find it in former Impressions.

Every Almanac would have told him, that neither is St Mathews day in February,
nor St Mathias on the 4th, but the 24th.

XXXVIII.
Our Author tells us of an unkindness fol. 184. b
which brake out between the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, and the Duke of
Burgoigne. A time and place (says he) was appointed for them to meet, to
compound some differences; The place agreed upon was St Omers, a Town in
Burgoigne: when the time came they stood upon this nice point, Which of them
should first come to the place, as thinking he that did so, should thereby
acknowledge himself to be the meaner person. The Duke of Richmond thought he
had no reason to do it, seeing he was Regent of France, and therefore superior
to any subject in the Kingdom. And the Duke of Burgoigne thought he had no
reason to do it, seeing it was to be done in his own Dominions, where he was
himself the Sovereign Lord. Upon this nice point they parted without meeting
-- This Duke of Bedford on the 14th of Sept. 1435. ended his life at Paris --
and was buried in our Ladies Church at Roan, where as the nobility of Normandy
much repined, who would have had their own Territory honored with his Sepulcher
etc.

Here are not a few mistakes. 1. St Omers is in Artois, and so no part of
Burgoigne 2. He varies the Duke of Bedfords name into Duke of Richmond, and in
the same page says he was Earl of Richmond, which confounds an unknowing
Reader, For though Earl (not Duke) of Richmond were one of his many Titles,
yet Bedford was the first and most known. Suppose we had occasion to mention
the present Duke of Buckingham, and in the same Paragraph should say the Earl
of Coventry; This would seem absurd, though it be also one of his Titles, but
not the principal, and that by which he is usually styled. 3. They parted
without meeting, -- is an incongruous expression, but let it pass. 4. He dyed
not on the 14th but 13th of Sept. as appears by this his Epitath, yet to be
seen in Nostredame Church at Roan.

Cy gist feu de noble memoire haut and puissant, Prince Iean en son vivant
Regent du Royaume de France, Duc de Bethfort; Pour lequel est fond un Mess
estre par chacun iour perpetuellement celebre en cest Autel par le College des
Clementines incontinent apres Prime. Et trespassa le 13 Septembre 1435. Au quel
13 iour Semblablement est fond pour luy un Obit en cest Esglise. Dieu face
pardon a son Ame.

5. That He was buried in our Ladies Church at Roan (the chief City of
Normandy) yet the Nobility of Normandy repind at it, because not buried in
their Territory, seems a contradiction.

XXXIX
Among men of note in Hen. 6. time, Our Author puts down Peter f. 201. a.
Clerk, a Student in Oxford -- and within eight lines Peter Pain, an earnest
professor of Wicklifs Doctrine etc.

This was one and the same person, whose name we find written Peter Clerk,
alias Pain.

XL
Among men of note in Edward f. 218. b.
the 4th time our Author puts down Julian Bemes; a Gentleman (says he) of
excellent gifts, who wrote certain Treatises of Hawking and Hunting etc.

A wonderful Conversion. This was a woman and her name Juliana Barnes; her
works are yet extant.

XLI
He says, Richard Fox (Ao 1485) f. 237 b.
was made Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Bishop of Winchester -- and so far
he is in the right; But in the very next page, he says -- Richard Fox, lately
made Bishop of Exeter. Besides he mistimes it; For Richard Fox was not made
Bishop of Winchestter til the year 1502. according to Dr Godwyn's History of
Bishops.

XLII
And upon the matter was to be disloyal to King Henry; but for f. 242. b.
want of better: and withal it struck upon a string, which, --

Here we have not tactus Physicus, neither Grammar nor sense.

XLIII
This Edward Bohun, Duke of f. 267. Anno 1520.
Buckingham, was the last High Constable of England, the greatest place next
the High Steward in the Kingdom.

Here are as many errors as lines; This Edward Bohun should be Edward Stafford;
the Bohuns were Earls of Essex and Hereford, and Humfry the last Eale of that
family dyed Anno 1371. according to Dr Heylin. 2. He had several High
Constables since, as the Earl of Lindsey, for the intended Trial between the
Lord Ree and Ramsey; the Earl of Northumberland at the Coronation of his
Majesty that now is etc. But he might have said and truly, that this Edward
Duke of Buckingham was the last Hereditary High Constable of England, and that
he was decended from an heir female of Bohun. 3. The Lord High Constables place
is before the Lord High Steward.

XLIV
That St Austin gave credit to many f. 282. b.
lying Miracles --

It Is boldly said; for fo. 5. a. he says, Ethelbert was the first Saxon
Christian King of this Island, converted by Austin the Monk etc. Why does he
call him St Austin since he thinks he had so weak a Judgment, or so little
Faith, as not to discern Miracles from lies. And we read in Doctor Fullers
Church History fo: 57 and 68. of the Miracles done by f. 140.
St Austin. And even Milton says King Ethelbert was converted by Miracles.
Besides our Author imposes upon our belief diverse later Miracles, one in
particular f. 310. b.
relating to the body of one Arden murderd in Kent in Edward sixt's time,

XLV
But we shall do him (Henry 8.) f. 299. a.
extreme wrong to think that all the blood shed in his time, was of his
shedding; they were the Bishops that were the Draco to make the bloody Laws,
the Bishops that were the Phalaris to put them in execution.

It seems our Author was no friend to the Bishops; else he might have remembered
that that King did not spare even the Bishops themselves, as Rochester and
others; and needed no other incentives to severity, then his own Nature.

XLVI
The Duke of Somerset at the Battle of Muscleborough made three f. 302. a.
Bannerets, which is a dignity above a Knight and next to a Baron, and these
were the last that from that time to this did ever receave this dignity.

Baneret is not properly a dignity above a Knight but an addition of honor to a
Knight, nor is it next in place to a Baron; since Knights of the Garter in
those times did, and Baronets in these do precede them, that is, such Banerets
as these, made by a subject, but such Banerets, as are made sub vexillis regijs
in exercitu regali, do take place of all Baronets, according to the decree of
King James. And 10 and 14. Jac.
in contradiction to the last part, The Continuator says, Sr John Smith, for
rescuing the Kings Standard Royal at the Battle of fo. 543. a
Edgehill, was made a Baneret; when as he was only a Knight Bachiler, dubbed
Honorably in the field, and lies buried in Christ's Church Cathedral at Oxford.,
where there was a Monnument lately laid over his body by one of his Relations.

XLVII
Our Author, speaking of a mutinous f. 303. a.
Commotion at Exeter in Devonshire, says -- All this while, the Lord Russel
Lord Privy Seal, who had bin sent down to suppress the Commotion, lay at
Huntington, expecting more forces --

As if Huntington were the ready rode from London to Exeter. Perhaps he
intended Honnyton.

XLVIII
Sr Thomas was instituted Lord of St John's of Jerusalem -- f. 320. b.


He leaves us to ghess, who this Sr Thomas was and to believe he intended to
say Lord Prior of St John's --

XLIX
King Edw. 3. made Kerry (in f. 374. b.
Ireland) a County Palatine and granted to the Earls of Desmond all Royol
libertyes, excepting Wreck by fire, Forestall and Treasure trove.

This Wreck by fire, is a pretty word; yet Wreck by water had bin better. But
there is nothing of Wreck in the Case; if you will believe Camden, who says,
Brit. tit. County of Kerry
That King granted to the Earl all Regal Liberties, except four Pleas, namely
of Burning, Rape, Forstal and Treasure trouve. --

L
About this time Henry Fitz f. 380. a.
Alan Earl of Arundel dyed, in whom the Surname of a most noble family ended,
which had flourished in this Honor for above 300. years, from Richard Fitzalan,
who being descended from the Abbanets (ancient Earls of Arundel and Sussex in
the reign of King Edward 1.) obtained the title of Earl, by reason of the
possession of Arundel Castle, without Creation. He had 3 daughters by his wife
Katherine, Daughter to Thomas Gray Marquis Dorset, all whom he out lived; Henry
a young man of great hope who dyed at Brussels, Jean Wife to the Lord Lumley,
and Mary, who being married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, brought forth
Philip in her right, Earl of Arundel.

Here the Albanets is mistaken for Albeneys or D'aubeneys; and the reign of
Edward the 1. for Henry 1. And when he comes to particularize the 3. Daughters
of Richard Fitzalan, he names Henry, a young man -- Joan and Mary -- Of which
thus Camden.

Sr John Fitz Alan, Lord of Clun Came. Brit. f. 309
- who having married one of the sisters and heyrs of Hugh de Albeney, fifth
Earl of Arundel and Sussex his great Grandson Richard (by reason of his
possession of the Castle of Arundel) was by Parl. adjudged to be E. of Arundel.
11 Hen. 6.


LI
-- Soon after him dyed Sr John Crofts, who had don good service in f. 400. a.
Scotland in Edw: the Sixths time.

This was Sr James Croft of Croft Castle in Herefordshire, great Grandfather to
Herbert Croft at present Lord Bishop of Hereford; a Family of very ancient
extraction, and this Sr James was by Q. Eliz. made Governor of Berwic, and soon
after Comptroller of her House.

LII.
19 February 1594 Henry Prince of Scotland was born, to whom the f. 403 a.
Queen was Godmother, and sent Robert Earl of Sussex for her Deputy --

-- Which should be Robert Earl of Essex.

LIII
It was now the year 1596 (says our f. 406. b.
Author) when Thomas Arundell of Warder returned into England from the war in
Hungary against the Turk, whom, for his good service don there, the Emperor by
his Letters Patents, had created Earl of the sacred Empire etc. And afterward
he says, King James made f. 428. b.
Thomas Arundell of Devonshire, Lord Arundell of Warder.

This to a common Reader will seem to be two several Thomas Arundells; For
VVarder is in Wiltshire, and his principal Seat, and to Devonshire he had no
relation. Besides our Author makes not that honorable mention of a Person of
that singular valor and Desert; who had gained so much honor abroad to the
English Nation, as he justly deserved; For among other examples of his
Gallantry, he threw down with his own hand, the Turkish standard at the seige
of Strigomium in Hungary (now called Gran) and encouraged his Ensign Rook
Church to advance the Christian Colors in its place. Which, with much more in
his due praise, will best appear by Quen Elizabeth's commendatory Letters of him
to the Emperor Rudolphus; and his Imperial Majesty's Letters Patent of
Creation; a true Copy of the first, and an abstract of the other (which is vere
long) are here exhibited, and deserve a place in the best of English Cronicles.

Elizabetha, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc.
Serenissimo and Potentissimo Principi ac Domino Rudolpho, divina favente
Clementia Romanorum Imperatori semper Augusto, Fratri, Consanguineo and amico
nostro charissimo, Salutem and rerum prosperarum foelicissima incrementa.
Serenissime Princeps,
Frater and Consanguinee noster charissime, Is, qui has perfert, Thomas
Arundelius, Consanguineus noster perdilectus, Adolescens in melioribus liter is
probe institutus, ad rerum usum colligendum, and nobilium Provinciarum mores
perdiscendos, in Germaniam hoc tempore, aliasque nonnullas Europae regiones
proficiscitur. Ideoque suppliciter a nobis discedens petiit, ut se Imperatoriae
tuae Majestati literis nostris commendaremus. Quod nos pro nostra in optimae
spei Adolescentem, and nobis sanguinis propinquitate conjunctum charitate
fecimus perlibenter; orantes summopere Majestatem tuam, ut Thomam hunc non
solum in Imperio clementer protegas, and principali favore juves, verum etiam
literis (si Italiam, Regnumve Neopolitanum petere volet) de mulieri nota
commendare velis. Hoc ut nobis pergratum erit, sic nos vicissim Imperatoriam
tuam Majestatem sororiis omnibus officiis demereri studebimus: Quam Deus Opt.
Max. in omni florente foelicitate diutissime conservet.

Dat. ex Palatio nostro VVestmonasterii die decimo Februarii. Anno Domini
M.D.LXXIXo. Regni vero nostri vicesimo secundo. Vestrae Sertis bona soror and
Consanguinea ELIZABETH R.


Rudolphus secundus Divina favente clementia Electus Romanorum Imperator semper
Augustus etc. Illustri sincere nobis dilecto Thomae Arundelio nostro, and sacri
Romani Imperii Comiti gratiam nostram Caesaream and omne bonum.

Considerantes itaque perantiquam and illustrem generis tui originem, in
inclito Angliae Regno ex stemmate Regio q^emadmodum antehac ex Serenissimae
Principis and Dominae Elizabethae Reginae Anglia, Franciae, and Hibereiae,
sororis and consanguineae nostrae clarissimae literis ac testimonia accepimus,
due is: insignes etiam virtutes, quibus illustre genus tuum magis ac magis domi
ferisque illustras; at liberalibus primum disciplinis pectus imbueris;
peregrinas provincias adieris; multorum mores, multorum and urbes videris,
magnum rerum usum acquisieris, ut denique tandem in hoc sacro, quod contra
communem Christiani nominis Hostem Turcam gerimus, bello, raro ac singulari
zelo excitus tam longinquis ac remotis ex partibus in Hungariam propriis
stipendiis nobis militatum veneris, teque in apertis praeliis and in Civitatum
and Castrorum oppugnationibus ita fortiter ac strenue tegesseris, ut omnibus
Nationibus admirationi Nobisque and a Serenissimo Principe Archiduce Mathia
Fratre nostro charissimo, and a primariis Exercitus nostri Fraefectis majorem
in modum commendatus fueris, insigni hoc inter alia fortitudinis exemplo
spectato, quod in expugnatione oppidi agnatici juxta Strigonium vexillum Turcis
tua manu eripueris, and in principiis tempore pugnae te spectandum praebueris
etc. Motu itaque proprio etc. te supradictum Thomam Arundelium, qui jam ante
Comitum consanguin itatem a Majoribus acceptam in Anglia obtines, omnesque and
singulos liberos, haeredes posteros, and descendentes tuos legitimos natos
utriusque sexus, aeternaque serie nascituros, etiam veros Sacri Romani Imperii
Comites and Comitissas creavimus, fecimus, and nominavimus, etc.

Datum in Arce nostra Regia Pragae die 14. mensis Dec. An. Dom. 1595. RUDOLPHUS.

At the bottom of the Patent are found these words: Erectio in Comitem Imperii
pro Thoma Arundelio.

LIVE.
-- And two Fosters, brothers of the Earl of Kildare, whose death -- f. 408. b.


How could these Fosters be brothers to the Earl of Kildare, whose name was
Fitz-Girald. But we must lay the fault on the Printer, and guess he intended to
say Foster brothers.

LV.
-- In the Town of Ossestry in Wales f. 419. b.
200 houses consumed with fire --

By this he intends Oswestre or Oswaldstre in Shropshire; It taking Came. Brit.
f. 597.
name from Saint Oswald, King of the Northumbers;

LVI.
In the first year of King James, in f. 44^: b.
a Parliament then holden, it was enacted, That neither Archbishop nor Bishop
should alienate, grant or demise, or in any sort convey, no not to the King
himself any of their Houses, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, being percels
of the possession of his Archbishopric or Bishopric.

By this Act of Parliament (as it is here misrecited) the unknowing Reader will
judge that neither Archbishop nor Bishop has power to demise or let Leases of
any of their lands etc. to any person whatsoever. Whereas this Act of 1 Iac. 3.
recites that of 18. Eliz. whereby they are enabled to demise or let Leases for
XXI years or 3 lives, and disable them only from alienating, giving, granting,
or demising any of their Manors, lands etc. to the King, his heirs or
Successors,

LVII.
Under the title of Works of Piety f. 443. b.
our Author tells us that, Where K. James at his coming found only four Judges
in the Courts of Law at Westminster he added a fifth with the like allowance
as the former had.

By this expression he would insinuate as if there never had bin but 4 Judges
in each Court; Whereas our Records testify, that both in Edward the thirds,
Hen. See Orig. juridic. in the Cron. Series!
6. and Edwards the 4th time, there were usually five Judges, sometimes 6. or
7. in the Court of Common Pleas.

LVIII
In the year 1609, so great a Frost, as f. 445. a.
much herbage in gardens were destroyed, especially Artichokes and Rosemary.

This had been fitter for an Almanac then a Cronicle; since winter scapes us
without such lamentable disasters.

LVIII.
The Isles of Bermudas are above f. 448. a.
three thousand three hundred Leagues distant from England.

This out-goes Truth full two thirds, it being but 930 Leagues or there abouts.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the Continuation.
LIX.
THat the Lords Justices in Ireland f. 473. a.
delivering some Priests and Friars into the hands of Pursuivants, seized their
Houses of Religion into the Kings hands -- two Priests hanged themselves at the
apprehension of this (as they then called it) persecution.

This the Continuator places in the year 1631. and probably many persons are
yet alive who might remember it, had it been a truth. But I can meet with none
that own it for such; Therefore it must at best pass as apocryphal.

LX.
-- This year (1634) General Alldringer f. 474. b.
was slain at Lansbut, and the whole Army totaly routed by the King of Hungary
and the Cardinal Infaule at the Battle of Norlington.

This General Aldringer was not slain at Lansbut but near Lanshut, and before
the Battle of Nortlinghen (not Norlington) which was 6 Sept. 1634. where the
King of Hungary and Cardinal Infant (not Infaule) were victors.

LXI
-- The French, by their insolences f. 475. a.
at Diet and Tellemont, inflamed and encouraged the peoples hearts against them
--

Here Diet, being false written for Die and the Character not changed, a
common Reader would think he meant the French were insolent at their meat --
but Die and Tellemont are two Towns in lower Germany.

LXII
Our Continuator tells us that in f. 532. a.
the year 1640, the Parliament passed a Pole Bill, therein the whole Kingdom
was assessed, and among others, Knights Bachilers at 201, Esquires at 10l and
every Gentleman dispending 100l Per An. 15l --

Which last is doubtless a mistake, though the Act is not Printed among our
Statutes; for 'twere very unreasonable a Gentleman of 110l a year should pay
more then an Esquire, who seldom has less that 500l Per An.

LXIII.
The Religion of the Scots is founded f. 532. b.
on more pious Principles then that of the Irish.

I hope our Continuator does not think it was any branch of their pious
Principles to sell their own native King. Besides he says in the very next
page, It was generally said, the late Insurection (we must not call it
Rebellion) in Scotland gave the first encouragement to that in Ireland, and the
pretenses were many of them the same, namely Liberty of Conscience.

LXIV
The King, having set up his Standard f. 540. b.
at Nottingham, moved on slowly with those forces he had through Darby shire,
Staffordshire, Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire, and so on to Shrewsbury.

Our Continuator it seems is but meanly skild in the Geography of his own
Country; For, if he were to go from the Royal Exchange to Westminster, he
might in like order go to Ludgate, Longlane Cateaten street, Threadnedle street
and so on to Westminster.

LXV.
He tells us of the surrendry of f. 567. a.
Oxford, in pursuance of a Trinity, wherein, among other Commissioners for the
beseiged, he names Colonel Gosvell and Thomas Chrisly, Esquier --

Two strange names; mistaken I believe, for Colonel Gosnel or Gosnold, and
Thomas Chichley.

LXVI.
-- Cromwell and Ireton (who yet wished well to the King) did what they f. 574.
b.
could to oppose --

I think few but the Continuator himself do believe they ever wished well to
Him, I Am sure we could never hear or see any visible tokens of it.

LXVII.
Our Continuator puts down among f. 593. a.
those ever to be detested Judges of King Charles the first of blessed memory,
Thomas Adams, Alderman of London.

Which is an unpardonable injury to the virtue and loyalty of that worthy
person, who suffered both imprisonment and sequestration for his fidelity to
his Sovereign; And when his memory should deservedly live with honor it is
most injuriously blackened with this cloud of infamy.

LXVIII
Among men of Note in King Charles the firsts time, As some are deservedly
nominated, why are others of at leastequal desert omitted? such were Spencer
Earl of Northampton. f. 603. b.
The Earl of Litchfeild and his two brothers. The Lord Francis Villier. Sr John
Smith, who rescued the Standard royal. Col: Charles Cavendish, brother to the
Earl of Devonshire. Col: Thomas Howard, two of them. Sr John Digby -- Sr Henry
Lingein etc.


Its strange also the Continuashould forget to name Sr Bevil Greenvile Elder
Brother to Sr Richard, a Person of Known and Eminent Loyalty and who did
gallantly in His Majesty's service.

LXIX.
The Earl of Eglington, the Father of the Lord Mountgomery, with one f. 622. b.
l. ult.
of his brothers, were taken at Dunbarton by one Captain Crook of Col: Berrys
--

And so it is left imperfect, and a new Section follows.

LXX.
Speaking of the Battle of Worcester f. 626. b.
(3. Sept. 1651) and the Rebels entering and plundering that City; he says,
There was not an inhabitant in Worcester; friend or foe, left worth a Shilling
of what they had in the Town. --

Which is strangely hyperbolical and beyond all likelihood of truth, though the
Conquerors were never so rapacious and severe.

LXXI
At Newport in the pursuit, there ibid.
were taken (among others) the now Earl of Shrewsbury etc.

Here our Continuator is again mistaken; For the Earl of Shrewsbury was not
taken at Newport nor was at all there, but from Boscobel escaped to his house
at Longport in Shropshire, where the Rebels searched narrowly for him, but
missed him, and from thence he made a shift to pass over Sea.

LXXII.
It was resolved by my Lord of Derby, f 627. a.
that they should make what speed they could and recover a place called White
Ladies before morning --

My Lord of Derby advised the King first to go to Boscobel, where himself had
been concealed after the Battle of VViggen; but Mr Charles Giffard (the Kings
chief guide in that sad night) prevailed to conduct Him first to White Ladies.

LXXIII
His Majesty, being at Mr Woolfs Madeley, understood, that the f 627. b. t
passes over the water and the river Wye were so guarded, that it was
unseasonable for him to adventure into Wales --

Here our Continuator is out again in his Geographics, For there is no part of
the river Wye (or Wey) within 24 miles of Madeley, but Severn runs near it,
which was the River His Majesty designed to pass over.

LXXIV.
That, his Majesty by Ladders ibid. ascended into the top of that most
celebrated Oak --

There were no Ladders in the Case, for the King aescnded the Oak, by the help
of Col: Carlos and two of the Pendrels, and his own agility.

LXXV
George Yates, for Francis Yates Ibid.
, that's more venial --

So is -- Col: Windhams house at Trent in Dorsetshire, for Somersetshire --

LXXVI.
Having finished (though imperfectly) the relation of his Majesty's miraculous
f. 628. b.
. Escape from Worcester he concludes with no less then 52. persons being privy
thereto.

I have nothing to object against the number, believing it could not be less;
but doubtless there were many which did act Gallantly in that honorable and
loyal undertaking which he has not mentioned, whose loyalty ought to have its
due.

LXXVI.
This year (1652) dyed the Lady f. 635. a.
Elianor Davys who was the Fifth Daughter of the Lord George Audley, Earl of
Castlehaven, and was married to Sr John Davys, the Kings first Sergeant at Law
in England etc.

Our Continuator endeavors by many Encomiums of this Lady, to raise her to the
reputation of a Prophetess; when as she was generally reputed little better
then a mad Woman, and was actually in Bethlem Hospital; by order (if I mistake
not of King See Heylins life of Archb Laud.
Charles the first) For I remember, whilst she was yet living, this Anagram
passed of her, and is printed in Camdens Remains. Dame Elianor Davis.
Never so mad a Lady.


Then he mistakes her Fathers name, For we read not of any Audley to be Earl
of Castlehaven, but Touchet, at least he should have said George Lord Audley.
And, by the Kings first Sergeant at Law in England, an unwary Reader will
possibly misunderstand he was the first Sergeant at Law, that any King of
England ever had; whereas most men know they are of great antiquity. We read,
indeed that, Sr John Anne. 1606.
Davis fut primier Sergeant Del Roy, (K. James) where primier ought to be
understood, as eldest or principal.

LXXVIII.
An Army having been sent under f. 644 a.
the Marquess of Piaenella and the Earl of Quince, Commander of the French
forces in Italy, by Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy against his Protestant
subjects in the valleys of Peidmont, upon occasion of some high displeasure
taken against them, and the soldiers left to their own unbridled license,
having committed many outrages and massacres upon the poor miserable people;
Cromwell taking this opertunity -- appointed a solemn day of humiliation, and
caused a large contribution to be gathered for them throughout the Nation, etc.

Here the Continuator describes the Duke of Savoys punishment of his subjects,
but does not express their crime; a course that may condemn all the Tribunals
in the world of barbarousness, and injustice. About the time that Mr Stouppe
(Agent for these Piedmontois) came hither to address himself to Cromwell in
their behalf, which was in the year 1655, There was published in London, A
faithful Account of the late commotions in the valleys of Piedmont -- wherein
we read, That the Duke of Savoy had given his Protestant subjects an absolute
toleration of Religion; which grace they so much abused, that they reviled the
Catholic, especially their Mass and religious people, as at Tour they dressed
an Ass in a Monks habit, and afterward in a rage fell furiously upon two
Priests at Fenil in the lower vale of Lucerne, and slew them at the Altar, as
they were saying Mass. This with much more of their tumultuous carriage, and
the Dukes lenity first, and then Justice, toward them, you may read at large
in that printed paper, which seems, in a great measure, to justify the Dukes
proceedings in that affair. He omits the sum that was collected here upon that
account, which was

38097l -- 7s -- 3d

20233 -- 17 -- 0 paid out by Bills of Exch.

17863 -- 10 -- 3 remaining in ready money at the death of Oliver.

LXXIX.
The Continuator speaks of a Plot f. 646. b.
against Olivers person, the criminals said to be of this Plot were Miles
Sindercom, a cashierd and dissatisfyd Army man, Toop, one of Cromwels
lifeguard, Cecil and Bois, the last of whom a Priest belonging to Don Alonso de
Cardenas (once Leigir Ambassador here from Spain) and by him instructed as it
was given out, to hire and set those other his Agents a work, comes off himself
with a non est inventus, etc.

That Ambassador (as I am credibly informed) had never any such Priest, as
Boys, belonging to him; Therefore that part of the Story must pass as a
fiction, the rest of it may be true, for ought I know.

LXXIX.
The next that were tried by the high f. 651. b.
Court of Justice, were Mr Robert Woodcock, Captain Henry Mallory, and Sr
Humfrey Bennet --

The first was Mr Thomas Woodcock, since Deservedly Knightted by his Majesty,
for his eminent service and fidelity to Him.

LXXX.
Cromwell in all have sends for f. 651. b.
the Lord Mayor (Tichburn was then the man) and Aldermen -- and this was in the
year 1658. And in the Catalogue of Mayors and Sherifs at the end, Robert
Tichburn is placed Mayor in the year 1656.

Which last is the truth; for in 1658 Ireton was Mayor.

Now come we to the year 1659* f. 657.
which takes up near thirty leaves of paper, and conteins more words, though
less substance, than the seven Kings Reigns next after the Conquest, of which
the two first Henryes Reigned 70. years. It Is true, that year comprehends
several great Actions, and in particular that greatest, most happy, and most
memorable, the restoring His sacred Majesty to His Crown and Dignity, by the
faithful endeavors of the neverenough honored General Monk, after deservedly
created Duke of Albemarle, with the concurrence and assistance of many loyal
subjects; But that the relation of this Noble design, and atchievment should be
stuffed with so many particular conferences, placing and displacing petty
Officers, Letters, Messages, and Debates of private persons, seems in most men's
judgments very superfluous, and not agreeable to the nature of a Chronicle,
which requires a more compendious method, and properly admits of nothing common
and trivial. I shall endeavor (says a late ingenious Historian) with plain and
Milton f. 3.
lightsom brevity, to relate well and orderly things worth the noting, so as
may best instruct and benefit them that read. For allowing that prolix way of
Chronologizing, if all the memorable actions since the Conquest (and there were
many such) had been thus perticularly expatiated, it is more then ptobable the
Book would have bulk'd it self into three greater volums then Foxes Martyrs,
and burned the edge of most Readers patience in its perusal.

LXXXI.
Speaking of the Lords in Parliament f. 730. a.
proclaiming his Majesty in the Palace yard, 1660, he adds Mr Bish, one of the
Heralds, and Mr Rily that officiated as King at Arms --

By this you would Judge Mr Bysshe (not Bish) to be some small pursuivant at
Arms; who was in those times Garter, principal King at Arms, and both then
and since a member of the house of Commons, a person of worth and since
Knighted by the name of Sr Edward Bysshe, and Mr Rily was but Norroy and much
his inferior, both in quality and literature.

LXXXII.
In the 4th Edition our Continuator f. 807.
says, Knights of the Bath are never made but at a Coronation; Now he has
better bethought himself and says, Likewise, in order to their attendance f.
758. a.
upon this grand solemnity (the Coronation) there were created 68 Knights of
the Holy Trinity called Knights of the Bath; they being a Society of Knights
never made but at a creation of a Prince of Wales or Duke of York.

Our Continuator has given these Knights of the Bath a new title; For they were
never til now called Knights of the Holy Trinity. And he might have found in Mr
Seldens Titles of Honor, and Camdens Brit. f. 172.
Britannia; That Knights of the Bath have also been made at Royal Marriages,
Christning, or Knighting the Prince, or other of the Kings Sons, and such like
occasions.

Note likewise, that the Foundations of the Colleges of the the Universities,
especially of Oxford, are for the most part mistaken either in the point of
time or names of the Founders, Which I attempted not always to rectify, both
in that it cxceeded my skill, but chiefly because the History of that
University, as I am informed, is now in the Press, Which will clear those
mistakes, with much certainty and satisfaction, being performed by the hand of
that Faithful and most industrious Searcher of Antiquities Mr Anthony Wood of
Merton College.

Nonsences, and false Syntax.

The last King was Oswald, after f. 6. b.
whom -- Egbert --

-- being in a sort the fountain of f. 18. a
those, which at this day we term the Common of Laws. --

Nor he kept not his word -- twice f. 34. b
in the same page.

-- such as one as in this Kings time f. 89. b
brake out most loathsome. --

-- He would come with power to f. 86. b
aid the King, take order for guarding the Ports, which intend to hinder his
landing; but finding. --

The Viscount Montacute marches f. 204. b.
toward King Henry, and by the way encountreth the Lord Hungerford at Hegley
Moor, but he, with Lord Basse, upon the charge ran away, leaving Sr Raph Darcy
alone with his own Regiment, who were valiantly fighting, dyed.

-- To utter the impoverishing Of f. 83. a
the Kingdom --

-- And here they bind the King to f. 86. a
lose to their loyal obedience, whenever he infringed this Charter.

-- But he, with Lord Basse, ran away -- f. 204. b.


-- A book of account of Empsons, f. 248. a.
that had the Kings hand almost to every leaf by way of singing.

-- He then left Q. Elizabeth seeing she would not be his, to himself -- etc.
f. 351 b.


But within two hours all these f. 431. q.
clouds were slain and dispersed. --

-- And five Companies of firelocks, f. 569. a.
for people they wanted not, a good pretense, that the people might be eased.
--

Difference, for Deference; forward, for the Foreward of a Battle. Seemless
Coat, for Seamlesse etc. with a number such like.

A List of some of those Names of our ancient Nobility and Gentry of England,
which the Author and Continuator have strangely mangled and metamorphosed.
For he writes Sharnborn Sherborne. Touchet Twitchet. Abergevenny Abergain and
Abergainy. Burnell Brunel and Burvel. Chandois Chandowes. Strangways
Strangwish. Fortescu Foskew. Ayscoughe Ascue. Huddleston Hurlston. Frescshevile
Fretswell. Trockmorton Frogmorton. Widdrington Widdington. Wenman Wainma^ and
Wayma^s Guldeford Gilford. Tildesley Tiderlsley and Tilseley. Bedingfeild
Benefeild. Sulyard or Sylyard Sulland. Trelaune Trelanny. Coningesby Conisby.
Elwes Yelvis. Salwey Salloway. Fanshaw Fanshall. Walsh Welsh. Marshal
Martial. Roos Rosse. Monthermer or de Mounthemere. Monte Hermerij Hobart
Hubbard. Perot Parret. Trigory Triegury. Wingfield VVinkefeild.

The names of some Lords and others mentioned by our Author, which are of his
own or his Printers creation.
The Lord Dangledas. The Lord Mawle. William the Lord Aldenham. The Lord Basse.
The Lord Stinton. The Lord Winson. The Lord Wandsor. The Lord Brinningham. The
Lord Burvell. The Lord Sudelly. The Lord William Carnaby. The Lord Carews -- Sr
John Meincle.
The family of Patternae in Lincolnshire.
Sr Rich: Pawle. Sr Tho: Trevon. Sr Will: Causey. Golonel Mozen.
Garrisons and Towns in England, not heard of before.
The Garrisons of Liege and Dainton. Brahan. Belgran. Nun Baton Abbey --
Yorthbrook -- Dunston Castle. Cakewish etc.
Names of Persons and places in Scotland mistaken.
The E. of Canworth for Carnwarth. The E. of Agnus for Angus. The L. Dunferling
for Dumfermlin. The L. Wimmes for VViemes.
Places.
Linlithew -- for Lithquo or Linlithquo. The C. of Candstraines for Candstrea^s
Tantallon Castle. for Timptallon.
The like in Ireland.
Adam Lofthouse Archbishop of Dublin -- for Loftus. The Lord Jinkillen for
Ineskellen. The L. Clanrickford for Clanrickard. The L. Ballimote for
Ballimore. Mack Gilparick Baron of Ebrankle* for Gilpatricke. Murrough Obrine
for Murtogh Brian. Sr Walter Dungar. for Dungan. Mnivere Okely. etc.
Foreign names of Persons and places likewise mistaken.
Alex: Furnasse Prince of Parma. The Prince of Austurgus. The Duke of Andyn.
The Duke of Lunceburg. The Duke of Guysne. Pedraca delay Syerra.
Places
Biskey. Mountpleasier. Terwin. Bullen. Landersey. Obignie. Saint yon etc. with
many such like.
The INDEX.
Neither is this of a more accurate composure, then the Book it self; For in
once casting my eye superficially over it, I met with these Bulls and
unpardonable faults.

The Bishop of Carlisles bold speech in battle of King Richard -- John Pole a
Priest wrote the life of Sir Marborail a woman -- Knighted by the Printer. In
the Book it is St Walhoraile, an English woman -- never I think reaa or heard
of but in this Author. Priests -- not sufferd to execute devine Service. Raph,
Bishop of Salisbury, how from a poor Prince, he came to his greatness. For
Roger -- a poor Priest. Through voices thought to be begd by Cecil and others.
Religius Bishop of Dorchester. Oward Bishop of Salisbury. The Abbey of St
Petroius. Hereford taken by Colonel Rich. The fight at Aldern -- I was desirous
to see what fight this was, which I never heard of before, but could find no
such thing in the place directed to; For, what through the misfolio's in the
Book and the carelessness of the Index maker, it is odds you find not above 3
things of five which the Index pretends to point at.
FINIS.

