A Just Vindication OF LEARNING: OR, An Humble Address to the High Court of
PARLIAMENT In behalf of the Liberty of the Press,

By Philopatris.

Sub bono Principe sentire licet quae velis, and quae sentias dicere. LONDON,
1679.

PROEM.
May it please you, my Lords and Gentlemen,
THis Session of Parliament is of such high Importance to these parts of the
World, that Heaven seems to have committed the Universal Fate of Christendom to
Your disposal; from whose Proceedings, both France, Spain, Germany, Holland,
and this part of the Universe, must take their Measures: Nor will it be a
Vanity in me to affirm the same thing of You, which heretosore Tacitus did of
the Battavi, Who in the time of the Romans (says he) were able to confer a
Victory upon whatever Party they adhered to.

The Parliaments of England have ever been Formidable to their Neighbors, but
You above all others seem to have been reserved by Providence, for those Great
and Weighty Affairs which are now in Agitation as well at home as abroad, and
for which purpose You are here Convened. You only are able to cast out that
Angel of Darkness, with his many I egions, who is at this time endeavoring to
destroy our best of Kings and Governments: You only are able to Center this
reeling Kingdom, which staggers and groans under the Plurise of Popery, and
which (if not now prevented) may in time attaint and corrupt the whole mass of
English Blood: You only are able to preserve that so necessary Religion, and
Sacred Property of our British Isle, by continuing (as there now is) a
Protestant Head, upon a Protestant Body; without which, our Prince would be no
other than a Father-in-law to his People, and they Sons-in-law to him: besides,
the incoherence would be as great and disagreable, as to behold a black Indian
Head, annexed unto a white Body. Neither would such a conjunction be more
Unnatural, than Inconvenient, since He that is arbitrary over the Soul, as in
Popery, has ever a coequal power over the Body and the Estate; which is
evident from the examples of France, Spain, and other Popish Governments, where
the Priest rides the Soul, and the Prince the Body: (a Tyranny as disagreable
to our Gracious Sovereign's Nature to impose upon us, as it would be
insupportable for our English Spirits to bear.)

Now the Original of these Popish Villainies (as I humbly conceive) proceeds not
more from their Sacerdotal Malice and Interest, than from their Laics
Ignorance and Servitude; without which, their Clergy would at the best be
rendered but like Wolves without Teeth. Wherefore to divest their Priests of
this power of doing ill, nothing would be more conducive than the propagating
of Wisdom and Knowledge amongst the populace; since as Ignorance renders men
obedient and susceptible of the meanest Slavery, so does its contrary put all
men upon their Guard: Omnes enim nos sumus, aut corvi qui lacerant, aut
cadavera quae lacerantur. Now for the more speedy effecting hereof, there has
never been discovered any better expedient amongst men, than that of the
Liberty of the Press, whereby whoever opposes the Public Interest, are exposed
and rendered odious to the people: as on the contrary, they who merit well of
their Country, are ever recorded with immortal Honor to posterity. So that if
Fame and Ambition (as all generous Souls must acknowledge) have so great an
influence over the minds of active men, what can be more reasonable, what can
be more serviceable to the World, than that which hurries men into a necessity
either of acting Virtuously, or of forfeiting their so-much-desired Honor for
ever? and such I take to be the consequence of a Free Press. From which
consideration, since the late Act which laid that severe restraint upon
Printing, is so near Expiring, my humble Address to Your Lordships, and to You
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, is, that before You proceed to the
Continuation of any thing of that Nature, You would condescend so far as to
look down upon these ensuing Arguments, against any such Inquisition or Embargo
upon Science, wherein You may happily find some Reasons, which (though not
founded upon private ends, like those of our Adversaries) may yet prove
sufficiently satisfactory to all, but that Dead-weight of Interest which
opposes us; and will not be converted, for that it is not for its Interest so
to be.

This, My Lords and Gentlemen, is all from him who would Sacrifice his Life and
Fortune for his King and Country, coveting no other Title of Honor whereby to
be distinguished, than that of

Philopatris.

A Just Uindication OF LEARNING, AND THE Liberty of the PRESS.
ALl civilized People, as well Ancient as Modern, have ever had that veneration
and deference for Learning, that almost no Nation, dis-engaged from Barbarism,
wants its public Donations either of magnificent Structures, or plentiful
Revenues, for the encouragement of Litelature and Learned men. Such Patrons and
Admirers of Learning were the Heroes of old, that they seem to contend about
nothing more, than to excel in their Liberality to the Muses: Thus we see
Alexander Pl. Alex
the Great presented Aristotle with 800 Talents, as also Xenocrates the
Philosopher with 50 Talents; Antiochus likewise presented his Physician
Theombro^us with 60000 Crowns; Homer for his Works received a thousand pieces
of Silver from the Candio^s; nor did that suffice, but Cities must fall
together by the ears for the honor of his Birth: so liberal were the Ancients
to all manner of Science; nor have our Modern Benefactors been inferior to
them, as our two famous Universities may testify to Posterity. Yet
notwithstanding all these Encouragements, Learning has of late years met with
an obstruction in many places, which suppresses it from flourishing or
increasing, in spite of all its other helps, and that is, the Inquisition upon
the Press, which prohibits any Book from coming forth without an Imprimatur; an
old Relic of Popery, only necessary for the concealing of such defects of
Government, which of right ought to be discovered and amended. However, as our
Government is not sick of the same Distemper, so need we not the same Cure, but
rather the contrary: for as an ill face cannot be too closly masqued, so
neither can a good one be too much exposed.

That Books are of great use to a Government, is evident, First, for that they
are the only Records of Time, which excite us to imitate the past Glories of
our Ancestors: 2ly. we owe our manner or form of Divine Worship to Books alone:
3ly. we owe our Philosophy, or contemplation of God in his Works, to the same
cause. For men's Natural Abilities, like Natural Plants, need pruning by Study:
thus we see that Histories make men wise; Poets, witty; Mathematics, subtle;
Natural Philosophy, deep; Moral Philosophy, grave; Logic and Rhetoric, able
to dispute; all which Excellencies are to be acquired only from Books: since no
Vocal Learning is so effectual for Instruction, as Reading; for that written
discourses are better digested, and support themselves better on their own
weight, than words disguised by the manner of expression, cadence or gesture,
which corrupt the simplicity of things; when also the suddenness of
Pronunciation allow not the Audience time sufficient to reflect upon what was
said. Moreover, Books flatter much less, and have more universal precepts, than
Discourse; which generally affects Complaisance, and gaining the Hearers good
will: Particularly in Morality, where great persons are better instructed, and
more plainly reprehended for their faults by Books, than by Discourses: Books
being therefore in the main so useful to Humain Society; I cannot but herein
agree with Mr. Milton, and say, that (unless it be effected with great Caution)
You had almost as good kill a Man, as a good Book; for he that kills a Man,
kills but a Reasonable Creature, Gods Image: Whereas he that destroys a good
Book, kills Reason it self, which is as it were the very Eye of God.

Having thus demonstrated how much the World owes to Learning and Books; let me
not be altogether unmindful of Faust and Guttenburg, the promoters of both; who
by their Ingenuity discovered and made known to the World that Profound Art of
Printing, which has made Learning not only Easy, but Cheap; since now any
person may accommodate himself with a good moderate Library at the same Price,
as heretofore Plato paid for three Books of Philolaus the Pythagorian, viz.
Three Hundred Gell. lib. 5. chapter 17.
Pounds. This was the Invention wherewith Cardan upbraided the Ancients,
saying, Antiquitas nihil par habet. Nay, Thuanus goes higher, when speaking
Subt. lib. 17.
of the Inventors of this Art, he says, Quibus plus debet Christianus orbis,
quam cuiquam fortissimorum belli Hist. lib. 25.
ducum ab propagatos fines patria unquam debuit. And truly so we do; but still
provided, that the Inquisition upon it be removed, without which, this Art
designed at first for the service of the Public, will prove useful to none but
the Licenser. Therefore in opposition to any such Restraint, I shall here
demonstrat the unreasonableness of any such License or Imprimatur.

1. From the Ancient usage as well of the Greeks, as Romans, who were both
highly Eminent for Learning; and whom in this particular we need not be ashamed
to imitate: We do not find amongst the Greeks, that their Vetus Comaedia (which
was so much censured for Libelling and Traducing men by Name, as to be
prohibited Acting on the Stage) was ever suppressed from being read; but rather
the contrary; for that Plato himself recommended the Reading of Aristophanes
(the loosest of all those old Comaedians) to his Royal Scholar Dyonisius.
Neither do we read any where, that either Epicurus or that Libertine School of
Cyrene, or what the Cynick Impudence uttered, with many other Sects and
Opinions, which tended to Voluptuousness, and the denying of a Providence, were
ever prohibited or questioned. Also amongst the Latins, we find Lueretius
versifying his Epicurean Tenants to Memnius, without any molestation, and had
the honor to be published a second time by Cicero the great Father of the
Commonwealth, although he himself disputes against that same Opinion in his own
Writings. Neither do we read of any Decree against the Satirical sharpness of
Lucilius, Catullus, or Flaccus. Likewise in matters of State, the Story of
Titus Livins, though it extolled and magnified Pompey's party, was not there
suppressed by Octavins Caesar of the other Faction. Nay even in the times of
Christianity, unless they were plain invectives against Christianity, as those
of Porphyrius and Proclus, they met with no interdict till about the year 400.
in a Carthaginian Council, wherein Bishops themselves were forbid to read the
Books of Gentiles, but Heresies they might read: Whereas others long before
them, scrupled more the Books of Heretics, than of Gentiles. And that the
Primitive Councils and Bishops were used only to declare what Books were not
commendable, passing no further censure, but leaving to each ones Conscience to
read, or to lay by, till after the year 800. is already observed by Father
Paul, that great unmasker of the Trentine Council: After which time, the
unsatiable Popes engrossed more and more every day, till Martin the 5th. by his
Bull, not only prohibited, but was the first that Excommunicated the Reading of
Haeretical Books; For about that time, Wicklis and Huss growing formidable,
were they who first drove the Papal Court to a stricter policy of prohibiting:
Which Course Leo the 10th. and his Successors followed, until the Council of
Trent and the Spanish Inquisition engendring together, produced these two
Monsters, an Index Expurgatorius, and a Licenser, When they enacted, that no
Book, Pamphlet, or Paper should be Printed, till it were Approved and Licensed
under the hands of two or three Gluttenous Friars: So that in fine, there was
never any such Inquisition upon Learning known in the World, till Slavery
supplanted Liberty, and Interest Religion.

2. It is the greatest Affront and Discouragement that can be offered to
Learning and Learned men: For so far to distrust the Judgment and Honesty of
one who has but a common repute in Learning (having never yet offended) as not
to count him fit to Print his mind, without a Tutor or Examiner, least he
should drop a Scism or something of corruption, is the greatest displeasure and
indignity to a free and knowing spirit, that can be put upon him. What
advantage is it to be a Man, over it is to be a Boy at School, if we have only
'scap'd the Ferula, to come under the Fescu of an Imprimatur? When a man Writes
to the World, he summons up all his Reason and Deliberation to assist him; he
Searches, Meditates, is industrious in Consulting and Conferring with his
Judicious Friends; after all which, he takes himself to be informed in what he
Writes, as well as any that writ before; if in this the most consummate act of
his sidelity and ripeness, no years, no industry, no former proof of his
Abilities, can bring him to the state of Maturity, as not to be still
distrusted, unless he carry all his considerate diligence, all his midnight
watchings and expense of Palladian Oil, to the hasty view of an Unleasured
Licenser, perhaps much his Younger, perhaps much his Inferior in Judgment,
perhaps one who never knew the Labor of Book-writing, or perhaps one
altogether ignorant of that Art or Science whereof the Author Treats. When if
he be not repulsed or slighted, must appear in Print like a Puny with his
Guardian, and his Censors Hand on the back of his Title, to be his Bail and
Surety that he is no Idiot or Seducer: This cannot but be a derogation to the
Author and to the Book, as well as to the privilege and dignity of Learning.
And what if the Author shall be of so Copious a Fancy, as to have many things
well worth the adding, come into his Mind after Licensing, while the Book is
yet under the Press, which frequently happens even to the best of Writers, and
that perhaps a dozen times in one Book? The Printer dares not go beyond his
Licensed Copy; so often then must the Author trudge to his Leave-giver, that
those his new Insertions may be viewed; and many a Journey will he make 'ere
that Licenser, (for it must be the same man,) can either be found, or be found
at Leisure; in the mean while, either the Press must stand still, which is no
small Damage, or the Author lose his most Correct Thoughts, and so send forth
his Book Imperfect. How can any man esteem himself Doctor enough to Teach with
Authority in his own Book, when he himself and all that he Writes must submit
to the jurisdiction and censure of another?

3. It Is a great prejudice even to the Book it self, to come out under the
partiality and ignorant approbation of a Licenser: Every Acute Reader upon the
first sight of a Pedantick License, will be apt to misinterpret the word
(Imprimatur) and think it signifies no more, but that, this Book is foolish
enough to be Printed; when seeing it comes out under the wardship of another,
he will be apt to say, I know nothing of the Licenser, but that I have his own
hand for his arrogance; who shall warrant me his Judgment? The State, Sir,
replies the Stationer; But has a quick return, The State shall be my
Governors, but not my Critics; they may be mistaken in the choice of a
Licenser, as easily as this Licenser in the choice of an Author: Whereunto he
might also add from my Lord Bacon, That such Authorized Books are but the
Language of the Times. For though a Licenser should happen to be more then
ordinary Judicious, which will be a great hazard in the next succession; yet
his very Office and Commission enjoins him to let pass nothing but what is
Vulgarly received already. Nay, if the work of any Deceased Author, though
never so Famous in his Life time, come to their hand for License to be Printed
or Reprinted; if there be found in the Book any one Opinion that thwarts the
Licenser's Humor, whether it be of a Vacuum, Motion, Air, or never so
inconsiderable a Subject; the sense of that great man shall for all Posterity
be lost, out of the presumptuous Rashness of a pedantick Licenser. So that if
these things be not seriously and timely resented by them who have the remedy
in their power; but that Licensers are permitted to gnaw out the choicest
periods of exquisite Books, and to commit such a Treacherous Fraud against the
Orphan remainders of the worthiest men after death, the more sorrow will belong
to that helpless race of men, whole misfortune it is to have Understanding.
Henceforth let no man care to learn, or care to be more than worldly wise; for
certainly in higher matters to be ignorant and slothful, to be a common
steadfast Dunce, will be the only pleasant life, and only in request

4 It is not only a reflection upon Books and particular men, but it is
likewise an undervaluing and vilifying of the whole Nation: I cannot set so
small value for all the Invention, the Art, the Wit, the grave and solid
Judgment which is in England, as to imagine that it can be comprehended in any
20 Capacities, how good soever, much less that it should not pass except their
Superintendence be over it, except it be sifted and strained with their
Strainers and that it should be uncurrant without their Manual Stamp: Truth and
Understanding are not such Wares as to be Monopolized and Traded in Tickets,
Statutes and Standards. We must not think to make a Staple Commodity of all the
knowledge in the Land, to Mark and License it like our Broad-cloath and
Woolpacks: What is it but a servitude, like that imposed by the Philistines,
not to be allowed the Sharpning of our own Axes, but we must repair from all
quarters to twenty Licensing Forges? Had any one written and divulged Erroneous
things, and scandalous to an Honest Life, mis-using and forfeiting the esteem
had of his reason amongst men; if after conviction, this only censure were
adjudged him, that he should never henceforth Write but under the Authority of
an Examiner; this could not be apprehended less then a disgraceful punishment.
Whence, to include the whole Nation, and those that never yet thus offended,
under such diffident and suspectful Prohibition, renders it no less then a
National disparagement; and so much the more, seeing Debtors and Delinquents
may walk abroad without a Keeper, but inoffensive Books must not stir forth
without a visible Jailer in their Title: Nor is it a less reproach to the
Commonalty; since, if we be jealous over them, as that we dare not trust them
with an English Pamphlet: What do we but censure them for a giddy, vicious,
unthinking crowd; in such a sick estate of discretion, as to be able to take
nothing down, but through the Pipe of a Licenser. Now that this proceeds from
the care or love of the Commonalty, we cannot pretend; since in those Popish
places where the Laity are most hated and despised, the same strictness and
severity is used over them.

5. It reflects upon our Church and Clergy, of whose labors we should hope
better, and of the proficiency which their Flock reaps by them; then after all
this Light of the Gospel, all this continual Preaching, they should be still
frequented with such an un-principled, un-edify'd and Laick rabble, as that the
Whiff of every new Pamphlet should stagger them out of their Catechism and
Christian walking. This may have much reason to stagger and to discourage the
Ministers, when such a low conceit is had of all their Exhortations, and the
benefiting of their Hearers, as that they are not thought fit to be turned
loose to three Sheets of Paper, without a License; that all the Sermons, all
the Lectures Preached, Printed and Vented in such numbers and such Volumes,
should not be Armor sufficient against one single Enchyridion Unlicensed: I am
confident that a Kingdom governed by the rules of Justice and Fortitude, or a
Church built and founded upon the rock of Faith and true Knowledge, cannot be
so Pusillanimous. That all freedom of Writing should be thus restrained with
the proud curb of an Imprimatur, must needs administer cause of doubt, and
discouragement to all Learned and Religious men, who may justly suspect the
Reason and Power of that cause which durst not stand a Trial of Skill. Every
Author Writes either Truth or Falsehood; If he Writes Truth, why should he be
oppressed or stifled? And if he delivers what is False, let him be confuted by
Answer, whereunto every Author is subject; since no cause ever suffered by
being answered, only by Fire and Faggot. That Liberty is the Nursery of
Science, appears in that there is nothing has so much clouded and discouraged
the Italian Wits, as their Inquisition; which restraining all manner of
Philosophic freedom, has for these many years produced nothing but obsequious
flattery: In which Country the Famous Galileo was oppressed under the
Inquisitions Tyranny, for thinking otherwise in Astronomy, then the Dominican
and Franciscan Licensers thought.

6. This Licensing of Books is one of the most dangerous and mischeivous
Monopolies and Oppressions our Government is subject to: Since, put the Case we
were under an evil Prince, (as now we are under a good one) he paying this
Licenser his Stipend, might influence him so far, as to make him License all
Books against the Interest of the Subject, or to the Defamation of any public
Spirited Lords or Commoners; and to prohibit only such Books as are in the
Vindication of such persons who are for the Liberty and Property of the
Subject: For that it is ever the Interest of a Licenser, above all, to regard
the Favor of his Prince. (though to the prejudice and almost ruin of his
Country.) Who pays him his Wages? His Prince. Who has the disposal of all
Places and Offices of Preferment? His Prince. Then who should he study to
please, right or wrong, but his Prince and Play Master? that is, if he be such
as most Licensers are, low-spirited men, who consider nothing but their own
present Interest. Why should I not have the same freedom to write, as to speak?
If I speak any thing that is evil, I am liable to be punished, but yet I am
never examined before I speak what I am about to say: So let not my Book be
Censured by one Interested man alone in private, till it has tried the public
Test; and then if there be any thing ill in it, I am ready to answer for it.
Why must no Writing, either in the behalf of such great matters, as Liberty,
Property, and Religion, or in the behalf of such small trifles, as Funeral
Tickets, Playhouse Bills, City Mercuries, Hackney-Coach Bills, Quack-Doctors
Bills, and the like, be Printed without a License? Is it for that the Subject
of these Bills or Tickets are dangerous to the Government? or rather, that this
Monopoly would be injured in its Prerogative, if the least Word or Letter be
Printed without paying Toll to this Licenser. Heaven grant that in time, there
be not the same Restraint and Monopoly over Wity Discourse, as there is now
over Ingenuous Writing: Since by the same reason, the Royal Jester may demand a
Spell of Money for every Jest that is broken in Discourse, as well as the
Licenser does expect a reward for every Ingenious Piece or Jest, that is
Printed in Books: When with more Gravity then Wit, having with great Study and
Labor, Corrected some such dangerous Author as Thomas a Thumbis; he from his
Learned Grammatical Pen, which casts no Ink without Latin, drops forth that
Lordly word IMPRIMATUR; either because he judged no Vulgar Tongue was worthy to
express so pure a Conceit; or rather perhaps, for that our English, (the
Language of men, ever famous and bold in the Atcheivements of Liberty,) will
not easily find servile Letters enough to spell such an Arbitrary Presumptuous
word, as is that of IMPRIMATUR.

7. This trouble of Licensing does very much prejudice and injure the very
Licensers themselves in the Calling of their Ministry, if they will discharge
that Office as they ought; because of necessity they must neglect either the
one duty or the other.

8. It robs us of that great Argument we make use of against the Mahometans;
and what is worse, Popish Religion, viz. That Ignorance is the Mother of their
Devotions; since how can We justly brand their Religions, for being founded
merely upon their Laics Ignorance; when we in the like manner discountenance
Knowledge our selves? How can we upbraid Papists for not daring to permit their
Common people to read the Bible, when we do the same thing in effect, by tying
all persons up to one man's Exposition and Interpretation of the same, viz. the
Licenser's; who will not permit any Exposition to come forth that thwarts his
own particular Judgment. I am confident, that if the Turk or the Pope, could be
assured to make all men Expound the Alcoran and Scriptures according to the
sense of the Musti and Conclave, they would neither of them be against the
Common peoples reading them; so that we all three aim at one and the same
thing, only by different ways; and that is our mistake: For let their falsehoods
use what artifice they can; yet we do in a manner Libel our own Truth, when by
Licensing and Prohibiting, fearing each Book, and the shaking of each Leaf, we
distrust her own strength: Let her and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth
put to the worst in a free and open Encounter? Her confuting is the best and
surest oppressing, when it leaves all standers by no room no doubt. The
punishing of Wits enhaunces their Authority, and forbidden Writing is thought
to be Lord Bacon
a certain spark of Truth that flies up in the Faces of them who seeks to tread
it out. When a man has been working at the hardest Labor in the deep Mines of
Knowledge, and has furnished himself out in all Equipage, drawn forth his
Reasons as it were in Battail-array; scatterd and defeated all objections in
his way, summons his Adversary into the Field, offers him the advantage of Wind
and Sun if he pleases, only that he might try the matter by dint of Argument;
for his opponent then to Sculk and lie in Ambuscade, to keep a narrow Bridge of
Licensing, where the Challenger should pass; this, though it be courage enough
in a Soldier, is but Weakness and Cowardice in the Wars of Truth. For Truth
needs no Policies, no Stratagems, no Licensings to render her Victorious; these
are only the shifts and defenses that Error uses against her power: So that if
it once come to Prohibiting, there is nothing more likely to be Prohibited then
Truth it self, even the very Bible; as we may see it is by the first Inventors
of this Monopoly. To justify the Suppression of Books, some may Cite the
Burning of those Ephesian Books by St. Paul's Converts; but that agrees not
with our Case, for there it was not the Magistrate, but the Owners of the Books
themselves who burnt them in remorse.

9. And Lastly, Give me leave to tell you, that Licensing and Persecution of
Conscience are two Sisters that ever go hand in hand together, being both
founded upon one and the same Principle: Therefore to Asperse the one, permit
me to Defame the other. Now although I allow no indifferency to those Religions
whose Principles destroy Government, nor those Religions that Teach ill Life
(both which Errors the Papists are guilty of.) Yet I cannot but wish, that all
men would use one another so gently and so charitably, that no Dr. Tailor
Liberty of Proph
violent Compulsion should introduce Hypocrisy, and render Sincerity as well
troublesome as unsafe. It would be hard measure for any man to blame that
Chyrurgion who refused to cut off a man's Head only to Cure a Wart or Pimple
upon his Chin or Cheek: Now the Case is altogether the same, and we may as well
decree a Wart to be Mortal, as a various Opinion in re alioqui non necessaria
to be Capital and Damnable. I would fain know why is not any Vicious Habit as
bad or worse, then a False Opinion? Why are we so zealous against those we call
Non-conformists, or Heretics, and yet at the same time dear Friends with
Drunkards, Fornicators, Swearers, Intemperate and Idle Persons? I am certain
that a Drunkard is as contrary to God, and lives as contrary to the Laws of
Christianity as any Heretic; and I am also sure that I know what Drunkenness
is, but I am not sure that such an Opinion is Heresy, nor would any man else
be so dogmatical in these matters, did he not mistake confidence for certainty.
Faction and Heresy were things unknown in the World, till the increase of
Interest, and abatement of Christian Simplicity; when the Churches Fortune grew
better, her Sons worse, and her Fathers worst of all. Why should I hate men
because their Understandings have nor been br^ught up like mine, have not had
the same Masters, have not met with the same the Books, nor the same Company,
or have not the same Interest, or are not so Wise, or are much Wiser, and
therefore do not determine their School-questions to the sense of my Sect or
Interest? I think they are in an Error, but they believe me to be in the wrong;
If they Err, they do it not through Obstinacy, but Ignorance; and if God
affords them his Patience, why should we not lend them ours? It was nobly and
bravely answered (for a Heathen) of Tamberlain the Great; who (when his High
Priest desired him to reduce all that part of the World to one Religion)
replied: No, I will not; for that how (says he) do I know but the same God,
who has delighted himself so much with the variety of all other things, as
appears in Men, Beasts, Birds, Fish, Trees, Herbs, Flowers, etc. May not also
delight himself as much in variety of Worship? Therefore I will punish none but
such as deny either a God or his Providence, and him will I put to death.
Certainly it is very unreasonable for men to press and pretend every Opinion in
matters of Religion, as necessary in so high a degree, that if they spoke
Truth, or indeed two of them in 500 Sects, which are now in the World (and for
ought I know there may be 5000.) it is 500. to one but every man is Damned; for
every Sect Damns all but it self, and yet that is Damned of 499. and it is
excellent Fortune then if that escape. All Wise Princes heretofore, till they
were overborn with Faction, gave Toleration to different Sects, whose Opinions
did not disturb the public Interest: And not without reason; for that being
restrained and made miserable, mutually endears the discontented Party, and so
begets more hearty and dangerous Confederations against the oppressing
Government.

Now how unreasonable soever such kind of Persecutions may appear to all tender
hearted Christians; yet if once a License prevails (when men shall not be
permitted to justify their Innocence to the World) it is greatly to be feared
that these mischiefs, and worse then these (if possible) will be the
consequence of it. Having therefore thus plainly and at large demonstrated the
inconveniences of a Licensing Press, give me leave to write upon the square,
and show you the Objections of our Adversaries, which without wrong to their
cause, may be justly comprehended under one head, and that is this.

Objection, If (say they) a Restraint be not laid upon Printing, and some
Supervisors assigned over the Press; how then can we be secured from Libells
against the King, the Church, the State, and private men? As also from Popish
Books of all sorts? Now this I take to be the only Material Objection,
wherewith they can have any show of a pretense to baffle and obstruct our
design.

To which I Answer: First, that to expect any assurance that no such Books
shall be written, is more then Mortal man can give; since we see that during
this late Act, and should there be even a Spanish Inquisition erected amongst
us; yet there are some Authors and some Printers so bold, that the one to vent
his Humor, and the other for the Lucre of Money, would Write and Print such
Books in spite of the strictest enquiry, and in defiance of the severest
Penalty; And these are the Authors that are most dangerous, and also most
incorrigable, being persons however that are more likely to be silence'd by
Liberty then by Restraint: For experience has already showed, that all such
Acts will prove uneffectual as to them. Secondly, supposing any such Authors
are taken and discovered; why, we need no other new Laws for the punishing of
them (as I humbly conceive) then what are already in force: As for example, if
any Audacious Villain shall Publish Treason, he is already liable to suffer as
a Traitor; or if he Writes Scandalous Reflections upon the Government, I
presume he is by the present Laws of the Land subject to a Fine and
Imprisonment. Again if he publishes any Atheism, Heresy or Schism, he is
liable to an Excommunication, and to be proceeded against accordingly in the
Spiritual Court: Or if in his Writing he Defames any particular person, he is
obnoxious to a Scandala Magnatum if he be a Peer; and to an Action upon the
Case for Slander, if he be a Commoner. And last of all for Popish Books, Quaere
whether there be not Statutes already in force for the abolishing them, made 3
and 4 of Ed. 6. For although this Statute was once repealed by the 1 M. 2. yet
that of the 1 M. 2. was likewise afterward repealed by the 1 Jac. 28. So that
I cannot apprehend wherein we have need of any other new Law of this nature,
unless it be to preserve to the poor Booksellers their just and undoubted
property of their Copies, which is their House and Land, they having the same
Title for the one, as we have for the other.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving thus therefore my Lords and Gentlemen tendered to your serious
consideration these few reasons against any such Inquisition upon the Press, I
shall presume to offer but this one Proposal to Your Judgment, and so conclude,
viz. That if these forementioned Arguments prove so unneffectual, as that your
Prudence shall think fit to take some further care, about the regulating of the
Press; then if it be Enacted, that any Book may be Printed without a License,
provided that the Printers and the Authors Name, or at least the Printers be
Registered, whether or no this will not have all the good, but none of the bad
Consequence of a Licenser? And that those which otherwise come forth, if they
be found Mischeivous and Libellous, shall be committed to the Flames, as also
the Author to Condign Punishment; but in this as in all other things I most
humbly submit my self to Your Supreme Wisdom and Judicature.

FINIS.

