QUESTIONS Propounded to GEORGE WHITEHEAD AND GEORGE FOX, etc. Who disputed by
Turns AGAINST ONE UNIVERSITIE MAN IN CAMBRIDGE. Aug. 29. 1659.
By R. B.
1. DO not you repent for your endeavoring vainly to defend Aug. 29. 1659. in
so great a Congregation these positions printed in a book writ by George
Whitehead (who profess your self to be an Ambassador of Christ and yet that
you pretend no more Commission than all Heretics have with as much color
pretended) viz. 1. Page 1,
That the Bible is not the word of God. 2. Lin. 1.
That to assert the Scripture is the word of God, is one of the deceitful
imaginations which the Priests of this generation have deceived the people
with. 3. p. 1. lin. last,
That he who asserts there be three persons in the blessed Trinity is a dreamer
and a conjurer. 4. That he who asserts there be three such persons, shall be
shut up with them, in perpetual darkness for the lake and the pit.


2. Did not you offend God by asserting there and then (at the conclusion of
your dispute) that the same thing at the same time and place might be both
visible and invisible, plainly seen by the eyes of many men (and this upon
record) and yet impossible to be seen at that time and place?

3. If you still think this true, may you not be (as your Opponent inferred) a
Quaker, and no Quaker, a Papist and no Papist, a Heretic and no Heretic, at
the same time and place?

4. Do you think it is the part of a good Disputant to deny the conclusion of a
syllogism, as you there and then did several times together?

5. Why do you slight both the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper? which
the Scripture says are necessary to Salvation. For Christ says Joh. 6.53.
Verily, verily except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. Ye say that ye have life though you do not eat, etc.
Christ says, Take, eat: do this in remembrance of me. You say do not take, do
not eat, do not do this, etc. Christ says, verily, verily except a man be
borne of water (mark water) and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God; you say, that no man need to be baptized, he may enter into the Kingdom
of heaven though he be not, etc.

6. Is it not evident that some of you (if not all more or less) are possessed
with the Devil, when John Gilpin in his book, at tested by the Major and chief
men in Kendall, confesses that he was possessed with the Devil while he was a
Quaker; and diverse of your selves confess, in Saul's errand p. 4. 5. That at
some of your meetings many men, women and little children, have been strangely
wrought upon in their bodies, and brought to fall, foam at the mouth, roar, and
swell in their bellies?

7. Do not you esteem your speakings to be of as great authority as any
chapters in the Bible?

8. Do not you hold it unlawful to expound or interpret the H. Scriptures?

9. Do not some of you say that he who preaches by a Text is a conjurer, etc.

10. That the Holy Bible ought to be burnt?

11. Do not you think it needless to pray for the pardon of your sins?

12. Do not you believe that there is no heaven nor hell, nor other world after
this life?

13. Do you believe that all these bodies which are met here this day shall
depart out of this life and that they shall rise again at the last day.

14. Do not you say that the Magistrate who makes Acts of Parliament and does
not receive them from God, as Moses did, does act contrary to the law of God?
as I read in the book called Fiery darts of the Devil quenched, printed by
Calvert 1654. and subscribed by six Quakers.

15. Do not you say in the same book that the H. Scripture is not the Saints
rule, nor the ground of his faith, p. 19. Not the Saints guide, nor the rule of
faith and patience, page 30. and 32. of the same book: and do not you by such
doctrines and refusing to take the oath of abjuration show your selves to be
Papists?

16. Is it not confessed by your selves in Saul's errand p. 4. (and attested by
several Gentlemen, Justices of peace, Ministers of the Gospel, and people in
the County of Lanchaster) that you teach doctrines that break the relation of
Subjects to their Magistrates, wives to their husbands, children to their
parents, Servants to their Masters, congregations to their Ministers, and of a
people to their God?

17. Do you who call your selves Saints sin in this life? Solomon says, there
is not a just man upon earth that sins not, Eccle. 7.20. See Prove. 24.16. 1.
Kings. 8.46. and 2. Chro. 6.36, Jam, 3.2.

18. Are you still of opinion, that to affirm if any man say he has no sin he
deceives himself, is to affirm a falsity as concerning the Saints or Quakers?
Which you affirmed in the Majors house.

19. Did not you sin last week in saying that the Universitie Man preached for
hire, and made bargains for his Ministerial offices, and took ten shillings
for a Funeral Sermon, if you cannot prove these things? You see he denies them
all and says he never took a penny for a funeral Sermon in his life, etc. I
desire you to prove them all, or tell me whether slandering be a sin in you.

20. Whereas a book entitled, Fiery darts, says p. 26. that since the
Apostles days there has been a great Apostasy and that a true Church of
Christ could not be found: are you of the same mind?

21. Do you mean that there was never a true Church to be found from the
Apostles days till now?

22. If so, what became of the Church all the while? Or do you confess 'twas
not in being?

23. If so, how was Christ true to his promise, who said he would be with his
Church to the end of the World? He could not be with a Church that was not in
being?

24. What think you became of all the Martyrs for the first three hundred Years
after Christ, or of those in England in Q Mary's days? Were they saved or not?

25. Why do you censure our Clergy, and us Christians for trying your Spirits,
when the Apostle bids us try the Spirits? Sure then there is a false and a true
Spirit, and how can we try which is true or false but by the Scriptures?

26. Do you think that Fornication in a Quaker is sin?

27. How do you know that Fornication is a sin in one that is a Quaker, but by
the Law and the Gospel?

28. How do you know there is a Spirit, or a Conscience?

29. Is the Moral Law, or the ten Commandments a rule to the Christians life,
or is it not?

30. Do you approve the doings of those Men and Women who lie together naked in
the Streets, fathering it upon the Spirit.

31. Whereas a Weaver against the mind of his Wife followed a company of you
from Coaton to Cambridge, entreating you (all the way) to tell him what your
Religion was, and how he might come to be of your Religion, and you gave him no
other answer but this, that he should follow the light within him: So he asked
you, what that was, and you would not tell him. I desire to know what it is,
that men may understand what to take heed to?

32. Is not your meaning this, that the Ambitious man should follow his
ambitious Spirit, the lascivious man his wanton Spirit, etc.

33. If you say that this is not your meaning, how can you assure me that
another public preacher of the Quakers will not tell me to morrow, that by the
Spirit he means this? Since after the Universitie man had publicly proved
diverse blasphemies to be in Whiteheads Book, you George Fox desired the people
at last to take notice, that the said book was not yours but his, with whom the
Universitie man was appointed by the Major to dispute.

34. Do you George Fox still profess your self to be the eternal Judge of the
World, and the way, the truth, and the life?

35. Did Richard Huberthorn well in writing that Christ's coming in the flesh
was but a figure?

36. Did that Quaker sin therein or not, who brought lately, on the Lord's Day,
an old Dublet into Dr. Gells Church in London, and sat upon the Communion
Table mending it, while the Dr. was preaching, the Parishioners forbidding him.

37. If the Saints need not be taught by men, (as you say) is it not needless
for you to teach one onother?

38. Do you think it a Tenants duty to pay rent to his Landlord?

39. Whereas there is some talk by some Quakers of dividing men's estates, and
having all things common, do you believe that it is lawful and fitting so to
do?

40. Do you not think that the Clergy have as much to show for taking tithes,
as any man in England has for taking rent for land left him by his Ancestors?

41. Do you not think it as lawful to bereave all men of the one as of the
other?

42. Do you think in good earnest that it is lawful for Women to preach in the
Church, as you asserted publicly last week? And that St. Paul's prohibition
concerns only married women not Virgins, and Widows if you think so, then I
ask further, why you may not say as well, that the seventh Commandment
concerns Virgins and Widows only, and not married women.

43. When you tell us that you have faith in Christ, do you mean Christ whose
person is now ascended into heaven above the Clouds or do you mean only a
Christ within you?

44. Did not Edward Borough, James Naylor, and others affirm, that he who
expects to be saved by that Jesus Christ who died at Jerusalem, shall be
deceived? See their two Books, and the brief relation of the Northern Quakers,
p. 22. etc. Billing-slyes defense of Scriptures, p. 16. The perfect Pharisee,
p. 8. and Farmers mystery of godliness.

45. Do not you George Whitehead blasphemously take to your self an attribute
of God, while you pretend ordinarily to know the hearts of men: and tell Mr.
Townsend of Norwich (in the second page of your Ishmael) that the light of God
is departed from his Conscience?

46. Do not you (to use your own words) Walk in the steps of the false
Prophets, while you ordinarily speak and print such railing language, as page
3. of your Ishmael. Thou priest Townsend, thou dreamer, thou deceiver, witch,
lier, blind guide, without Christ and his knowledge, and in Antichrist enemy of
God, etc.

47. Was it any thing to the purpose in the midst of a dispute concerning
points of faith to ask the Universitie man, what he thought of Sr. George
Booth? Was not this question a silly trap laid for him who desired nothing but
to reduce you from Heresy?

48. Do not we live in a fine age when such men as you can be permited in a
Corporation Town (in Cambridge one of the eyes of the Nation) to rail an hour
together against Christ Jesus, and the other two persons in the ever Blessed
Trinity and against the Holy word of God; In the same Month a Minister of the
Gospel, son to a Parliament man, was sent for by a company of Soldiers by the
Major, and kept prisoner some time, for praying for all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Governors, 1 Timothy 2.1.

49. What credit may the Common people give to any thing you say, while no
learned person is near; when they have heard you proved undeniably to be as
damnable an Heretic as ever was in the world, from that very place in
Scripture which was the only text you brought to prove your selves no
Heretics, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. You not answering a word for your self?

50. Why do you encourage unlearned people to preach without learning, when St.
Peter says, that in St. Paul's epistles are some things hard to be understood
which they that be unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do other Scriptures,
to their own destruction?

51. Was it the Spirit of truth or of error, that made the Quakers run after
Hen. Davill, a Tanner of Richmond, almost a mile (while he was walking to see
his ground) and tell him with open mouth, That the Spirit of God sent them to
tell him he was a seducer of the people, one of the corrupt Clergy, etc. While
it is commonly known he neither is, nor was a Clergy man, nor preacher. Did ever
the Spirit of God send, any such frivolous errands as this, and those mentioned
p. 45. of the perfect Pharisee?

52. Do you still think it an unanswerable argument to prove the University man
an Heretic, because Bishops (who built Colleges and Hospitalls gave all their
goods to the poor and their bodies to be burnt) were covetous men?

53. Do you think that Cotton Crosland, who hanged himself, or Hugh Bisbroune,
who committed buggery with a Mare, or that John Gilpin, who confesses he was
about to cut his throat, did sin or not sin in so doing?

54. Did your companion sin or not by drawing his sword in your meeting house
the other day, to cut the knot when he could not untie it, and answer the argument.

55. Lastly, I entreat you to tell me after you have given me in writing a
punctual answer to these 55. queries how I shall know that you will not give
me another answer next week quite contrary to that which you promise to give me
now (telling me that the Spirit moves you to speak contradictions as plainly
out of your meeting house as in it) so that I shall be as far to seek what your
Religion is at last, as I was at first?

FINIS.

